[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps51) 
[Next](mps53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

# APPENDIX I

### AN ENGLISH RENDERING OF THE RUSSIAN TRANSLATION BY PROFESSOR MARR OF THE INTRODUCTORY QUATRAINS OF "THE MAN IN THE PANTHER'S SKIN" ("TEKSTY," T. XII., PP. 7-9).

\[The numbers given in round brackets are those of the strophes in the
preceding translation.\]

Gon AND THE KING \[1 ([1](mps03.htm#1))\].--He who by His mighty power
created the firmament breathed a celestial spirit from heaven and made
what is; to us men He gave the earth: we own its infinite variety. And
every king is ordained by Him in the image issuing from Him.

THE GEORGIAN KING DAVID SOSLAN, CONSORT OF QUEEN T’HAMARA \[2
([3](mps03.htm#3))\].--Behold the lion! (lit., To the lion to whom is
fitting . . .). It befitted him to use spear, sword, and shield; (he is
the lion of \[lit., to the lion of\]) Queen T’hamara, the sun, whose
cheeks are like rubies, whose hair is like jet: dare I sing of him and
extol him in verse? (lit., the singing of the sermon \[for doxology\] of
verses). Of a truth, they that. gaze on him cannot but taste sugar and
milk. (For *khshiri*, which breaks the rhythm, read *sherisa;* Pers.
*shir* = milk.)

THE SUBJECT OF THE POET'S SONGS \[3 ([25](mps03.htm#25))\].--The poet
ought not to lavish his labour in frivolity. One (woman) should be the
subject of his madness, he must love but one; let him for her alone show
his art, laud her alone, embellish her alone (in song). Save her let him
need nought: let the music of his discourse sound for her alone. (*Cf*.
Prof. Marr's *Odopistsi* for another version.)

\[4 ([26](mps03.htm#26))\]--Now you shall know concerning me: I laud her
for whom Heaven has already set apart a place in Itself (more literally,
whom Heaven has made Its own, or made Its denizen, or adopted for Its
own; *ikia*, second aorist of verb derived from adverb *iki* = there, is
equivalent to "has made

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

its own," etc.). (A song to her) is great praise to me; it is no shame
to me. She is my life; she is pitiless as a Circassian (*dchiki*; cf.
Adighe, Ζηκχοὶ). Hereafter I name her name, I bestrew her (with pearls
of song), I laud her (lit., her name, bestrewing, I pronounce hereafter,
I praise).

THE ODES TO QUEEN T’HAMARA \[5 ([4](mps03.htm#4))\].--Let US sing the
Queen T’hamara while shedding tears of blood; in her honour have I
indited songs (lit., whose songs I spoke--*vst’hkveni*, aorist first
person singular, with indication of relation to plural \[*kebani*\]),
not ill-chosen are they: for ink I used a lake of jet (cf. Odes, V. 50,
xii. 8), for pen a wavering reed (*nai* \[Pers.\]; the terminal *i* in
Rust’haveli is only a mark of the nominative case, and not the Persian
semivowel <span id="img_26200"></span> ![](img/26200.jpg), corresponding
to Georgian <span id="img_26201"></span> ![](img/26201.jpg), which,
according to M. E. T’haqaishvili, had not yet come into the *mkhedruli*
\[military or civil\] alphabet from the *khutsuri* \[ecclesiastical\].
For use of *na* as musical instrument, cf. [178](mps07.htm#178).) A
spear, through-piercing, shall rend the heart of him who hears those
songs (lit., He who hears, into his heart will pierce a lance,
lacerating).

\[6 ([5](mps03.htm#5))\].--She bade me compose in her honour sweet
(-sounding) verses, (praise her) eyebrows, eyelashes, and hair, her lips
and her teeth, carved (turned) out of crystal and ruby, and firmly set.
On an anvil of soft lead even a hard stone can be broken.

NEW BEGINNING \[7 ([17](mps03.htm#17))\].--(My) eyes not enlightened by
her rays (or lightless--*i.e.*, blind--on account of her rays) again
long to show themselves to her. My heart has gone mad, there remains for
it but one thing (lit.. Behold, the heart has gone mad, to it has fallen
the lot): to flee to the wilderness. In her power it lies to set the
flesh on fire and give joy to the soul; entreat her for me (lit., For
me, *m*\[i\]-, beg her, *iadjet’h*, or, For me, *m*-, intercede,
*iadjet’h*, before her--*cf*. [816](mps27.htm#816),
[819](mps27.htm#819), [1035](mps31.htm#1035)--who is sufficient to give
burning to the flesh, comfort \[*lkhena*, cf. [300](mps08.htm#300)\] to
the soul); I fear verses will fail (me), I am about to laud three forms
(or colours--*i.e.*, three types of heroes--Tariel, Avt’handil, and
P’hridon).

\[8 ([16](mps03.htm#16))\].--This (is a) Persian tale transferred into
the Georgian language: like a rare pearl worthy of fondling (by rolling
it) from hand to hand; it came to my hands, and I shall put it into
verse (*vpove* and *gardavt’hkvi* both in the aorist, despite the future
sense), I shall perform a feat, there will be reason for pride. I await
the approval of the stately beauty who has robbed me of reason (lit.,
She has deprived me of reason, the stately and beautiful, let her give
me approval! *Cf*. Odes, xii. 15).

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

REQUEST TO THE BELOVED \[9 ([6](mps03.htm#6))\].--Thus I need for the
making of my song tongue, heart and art. Let her give me strength and
uphold me. I shall put into (the song all) my mind, which is in her
power, and then we shall help Tariel (lit., Now are needful for
composition tongue, heart and art. Let her give me power and help. From
her I have mind \[wit\] to put into, etc.; but in the printed texts
T’hamara is addressed in the second person singular in this strophe,
which perhaps the copyists thought addressed to God. The poet asks
T’hamara for mind \[wit\] because she had robbed him thereof). It is
necessary to tell in chosen language of the three stars, giant-heroes,
obedient one to another like slaves (lit., It is inherent in them to be
slaves one of another).

INVOCATION TO FELLOW-SUFFERERS \[10 ([7](mps03.htm#7))\].--Come, ye to
whom from birth the fate of Tariel is appointed (lit., who is born with
a birth exactly like his; *cf*. [852](mps27.htm#852), [4](mps03.htm#4)),
and whose tears flow undrying for him! (cf. Odes, p. 68). Let us sit
down! I, the man of Rust’havi, pierced through the heart by a lance (of
sympathy; *cf*. [5](mps03.htm#5), [4](mps03.htm#4)) for him, will sit
and expound (both "sit" and "expound" in the past tense in the accepted
text; but this is evidently a copyist's error) in verse. That which till
now was a tale will henceforth be a threaded pearl.

VARIETY OF VOCATION \[11 ([18](mps03.htm#18))\].--Let everyone be
content with that which Fate gives him, and let everyone speak of his
own lot. Let the ploughman ceaseless plough, the warrior show his
prowess, but let him that is in love cherish mad love, and be
compassionate to (lit., acknowledge) the love (of others). Neither have
others the right to censure love in him, nor has he that right over
others.

LOVE \[12 ([9](mps03.htm#9))\].--Love-madness is a wondrous fair
thought, hard to be apprehended; it cannot be compared with carnal
passion, it is something different; love is one thing, lust is another;
their bounds are separated by a vast space. Confuse them not. Do ye hear
my words? (reading *gesmist’h* for *gesmast’h*).

\[13 ([12](mps03.htm#12))\].--The highest love is to bury sufferings in
oneself: he hides them; when alone, he is always with her in thought
(lit., let him always remember at home \[alone\]), and he loves solitude
(lit., he ought to be in solitude). Away (from her) he loses
consciousness and dies; absent he burns and flames (lit., Afar to lose
consciousness, afar to die, afar to burn, afar to flame). He is ready
rather to endure calmly royal wrath, but towards her he feels fear and
reverence.

\[14 ([8](mps03.htm#8))\].--The lover must have an exquisitely fair
exterior and shine like the sun; he must be sage, rich, open-handed,

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

he must be a knight (lit., have the qualities or attributes of a
knight), he must have leisure; he must be a master of speech, a
possessor of intelligence and patience, a conqueror of all-powerful
adversaries. He who is not endowed with all these things has not the
qualities of a lover.

\[15 ([10](mps03.htm#10))\].--He who is possessed by love-madness is
constant; he is not an adulterer, no base libertine. Separated from his
beloved, his sighs and groans become stronger. His heart is satisfied
with one, though she be stern and wrathful. Hateful to me are caresses
in which the soul is not felt: huggings, kisses and the smacking of
lips.

\[16 ([11](mps03.htm#11))\].--Lovers, you must not call it love if one
easily bears the torture (lit., disease or pain, reading *lmobasa*) of
separation, if to-day he want one (woman) and to-morrow another. This
reminds me of the frivolous games of youth; (it is) childishness. The
true lover is he who checks earthly impulses.

POESY \[17 ([19](mps03.htm#19))\].--Poesy is first of all a branch of
wisdom: the divine in it must be hearkened to with reverence; it is very
instructive to the hearer. He who is prepared finds satisfaction in this
domain. A vast thought may be put into a short phrase: herein is the
beauty of poesy.

\[18 ([20](mps03.htm#20))\].--In like manner as the best trial of a
horse is a long course and an easy win, as a ball-player is judged in
the field by his unerring aim and clever stroke, so with the poet skill
to indite lengthy songs and curb (?) (the steed of poesy) if he has
exhausted the subject of his discourse and rhyme begins to dry up.

\[19 ([21](mps03.htm#21))\].--Contemplate the poet and his songs when
his tongue fails him (lit., when he cannot attain \[the perfection\] of
the Georgian \[speech\]; or, when he cannot hit upon \[the exact
expressions\] of Georgian), and his rhymes begin to grow thin! Shortens
he not his discourse? Weakens not his speech? (lit., Will he not abridge
\[diminish\] the Georgian language?). Has he heroic hardihood enough to
strike cunningly with the *chogan* (polo-stick)? (lit., Will he strike
with the polo-stick with skilful hand? Will he show the high quality of
a hero?).

\[20 ([22](mps03.htm#22))\].--He who chances to say two words in verse
cannot be called a poet (lit., He is not called a poet if somewhere he
says one, two \[verses\]); in vain he puts himself on a level with
singers of renown. He makes one verse, another (lit., of course, to make
one \[verse\], another): they are not like anything; they are
incoherent. Yet he asseverates, "Mine is better!" as stubbornly as a
mule.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

\[21 ([23](mps03.htm#23))\].--Another (form) is fugitive verse; this is
the domain of poets powerless to pour out (? mould) heart-piercing
thoughts in perfect (forms) (lit., Another versification is small
\[verse\], the domain . . . He is not able in perfection to create words
capable of piercing the heart). I liken this to the wretched bow of
young hunters: big beasts they cannot bring down; they can kill only
small game.

\[22 ([24](mps03.htm#24))\].--A third (kind of) songs is fitting for
banquets and merrymakings, for courtship, for amusement and frivolous
adventures with friends, and to these songs we gladly have recourse
(lit., we like \[the making of\] them) if the thought in them be clearly
expressed. But he who is incapable of creating something great is no
poet.

 

Professor Marr rejects the nine remaining quatrains as spurious. It will
be seen that he has rearranged the quatrains, and adopted readings which
are not in the printed editions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II. Bibliographical Note](mps53)
