[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps49) 
[Next](mps51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLVII

### HERE IS THE MARRIAGE OF AVT’HANDIL AND T’HINAT’HIN BY THE KING OF THE ARABS

<span class="margnote"><span id="1525">1525</span></span>That day
Avt’handil sits as lord and is high king; tendernesses beautify Tariel
who sits with him. Nestan-Djar, the amazer of onlookers, is with
T’hinat’hin; it is as if heaven had bent down to earth, (and) two suns
are united.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1526">1526</span></span>They began to
bring bread to plenish the armies; beeves and sheep are slain more
abundant than moss. There was made an offering of presents, fitting to
them (*i.e.*, to each after his rank) . The ray of the faces of them all
lightens like the sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1527">1527</span></span>The bowls were
of jacinth, the cups were of ruby; moreover, wondrously coloured vessels
bear passing

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

wondrous seals. The panegyrist of that wedding would be praised by the
sages. O onlooker, thou wouldst have said unto thy heart: "Be not
loosed, be bound there!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1528">1528</span></span>The (female)
minstrels approached from all sides, there was heard the sound of the
cymbal; heaped lies a hillock of gold and cut rubies; for drinkers flows
a fountain of wine from a hundred (runlets), like a canal; from twilight
to dawn there was noise, the time of morning passed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1529">1529</span></span>None remained
without a gift, neither lame nor crippled; pearls rolled to and fro,
scattered, thrown about; satin and solid gold were of none account, to
be carried away. For three days the King of the Indies was as a
groomsman to Avt’handil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1530">1530</span></span>On the morrow
the King of the Arabs again entertains; he is not listless. He said to
Tariel: "Pleasant it is to gaze on thy sun (Nestan)! Thou art king of
all kings, and she queen. It behoves us your footprints (dust of your
feet), to pierce our ears for earrings (as slaves) (?).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1531">1531</span></span>"Now, O king,
it is not fitting that we should sit on a level with you!" The royal
throne he (Rostevan) placed for (Tariel), and another couch apart; he
placed Avt’handil and his wife lower down, according to their rank First
of all they present gifts for Taria; they lie in a heap.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1532">1532</span></span>The King of the
Arabs plays the host, he does nothing but entertain; sometimes he
approaches these, sometimes those, he stands not upon his royal dignity;
he gives, and all praise his ungrudging generosity. P’hridon sits near
Avt’handil, as one accustomed to kingship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1533">1533</span></span>The king
(Rostevan) did honour to the daughter of

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

the Indies and her husband, he gave them love and gifts, as to a son and
daughter-in-law; it is impossible to tell even a tenth of what he gave,
to each a sceptre, purple and jewelled crowns.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1534">1534</span></span>Still he gave
to both gifts fitting their fate; a thousand gems born of a Roman hen;
then a thousand pearls like a dove's egg; a thousand steeds, in size
each like a hill:

<span class="margnote"><span id="1535">1535</span></span>To P’hridon he
gave nines trays full to the brim with pearls, nine steeds richly
saddled. The King of the Indians does homage with dignity; wise, not
drunkenly; he gave thanks soberly though he had drunk of the wine.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1536">1536</span></span>Why should I
lengthen (speech)? The days of one month passed. They sported, they
ceased not at all from drinking. To Tariel they presented wondrous
jewels of ruby stone. Their radiance like the sun's covers them all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1537">1537</span></span>Tariel was like
a rose, and was snowing a light snow shower; he sent Avt’handil to
Rosten to ask for leave; he gave him this message: "To be near thee is
enough for me as full joy, (but) enemies hold my kingdom, I know they
are eating up the land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1538">1538</span></span>"The knowledge
and art of the learned destroy the unlearned. I think any hurt to me
would bring somewhat of sadness into you too. I go that tarrying here
may not bring evil upon me, soon again may I see you happy, may God's
will grant it!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1539">1539</span></span>Rostevan said:
"O king, why art thou so bashful? Whatever is best for you do it, look
into it, examine it.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Avt’handil will
accompany thee, go with a great host; rend in pieces and cut up your
enemies and them that are traitors."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1540">1540</span></span>Avt’handil said
to Tariel those (same) two words (that Rostevan had said). He (Tariel)
said: "Speak not thus; guard the crystal mounds. How canst thou, O sun,
depart from the newly united moon!" Avt’handil said: "I shall not be
seduced by thee with this:

<span class="margnote"><span id="1541">1541</span></span>"Of a truth
thou wishest not to forsake me while thou goest away slandering me,
saying: 'He loveth his wife, forsooth; he hath forsaken me, ’twas like
him!' Am I to remain sundered from thee and an object of pity to myself!
For a man to forsake his friend! . . . Ugh! Ugh! he will do ill!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1542">1542</span></span>Tariel's smile
is like the sprinkling of crystal with roses. He said: "Absent from thee
I bewail myself more than thou. Since thou wishest it, come away with
me, accuse me not of flattery." Avt’handil commands troops to be
summoned to him from all sides.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1543">1543</span></span>He assembled
the armies of Arabia, no time is wasted; eighty thousand men were all
arrayed, man and horse clad in armour of Khvarazmia. The King of the
Arabs eats the gall of bitterness at their separation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1544">1544</span></span>Parting each
from other, both maidens, the adopted sisters, sworn with the oath of
sisterhood, trusting in each other's word, with breast welded to breast,
with neck riveted to neck, wept. The onlookers, too, had their hearts
consumed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1545">1545</span></span>When the moon
is on a level with the star of dawn, both shine equally; should (one) go
away, (the other also)

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

is removed; if it go not away, the sky will make it remove; to look at
them the onlooker must become a hill and a mountain (?).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1546">1546</span></span>He who created
them such, He Himself shall sunder them, though of their own will they
desire not parting. They glue together and cleave the rose, they weep
and tears flow; all those who parted from them thought their lives of no
account.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1547">1547</span></span>Nestan-Daredjan
said: "Would that I had never come to know thee! Separated from the sun
I should not now be thus melted by parting. Thou shalt know tidings of
me; let me have news of thee, speak to me in letters. As I am burned up
for thy sake, thou shalt melt for mine."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1548">1548</span></span>T’hinat’hin
said: "O sun, delight of them that gaze on thee! How can I give thee up,
or how can I endure parting! Instead of praying for days from God, I
shall desire death. Mayst thou have as many days as I shall shed tears!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1549">1549</span></span>Again they
kissed each other, those ladies parted; she who was left there could not
take her eyes away from her who was gone; she too looks back, therefore
flames consumed her. I cannot write down a tenth part of that I could
wish!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1550">1550</span></span>Rostan at their
departure was made more mad than madmen; a thousand times he says, "Woe
is me!" not merely once doth he sigh; hot flows the spring of tears, as
if a cauldron were being heated. Tariel's face is drawn, the soft snow
falls gently, it wastes away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1551">1551</span></span>The king
crushed Tariel's rose with embracing and kissing. Quoth he: "Your
presence hitherto seems like a dream to me; when thou art gone afar from
me I shall remain with my sufferings twentyfold increased. Life was
given to us by thee; by thee also shall we be slain."

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1552">1552</span></span>Tariel mounted
and parting from the king gave him a farewell greeting; all the soldiers
shed tears moistening the meadows, they said: "The sun hastes to greet
thee, haste thou too to meet him." He said: "Weeping for your sake, why
should I hasten?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1553">1553</span></span>They set out
and departed with many troops and much baggage--Tariel, P’hridon,
Avt’handil, (all) well provided; he had eighty thousand men with worthy
steeds; the three went on, helpful one to another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1554">1554</span></span>The three went
their way--God can never create their like again! They were met; none
dared withstand them. In the plain they tarried for dinner when morning
was past. As was fitting they feasted; they drank wine, not buttermilk.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1555">1555</span></span>What Tariel and
his wife had desired fell to their lot, seven royal thrones, (seats) of
joy, unassailable; this present solace makes them forget their
sufferings. A man unacquainted with sorrow cannot find pleasure in joy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1556">1556</span></span>See the two
sitting together; even the sun could not be better! They blow the
trumpet and proclaim him king, copper drums make the voices sound sweet;
they give him the key of the treasuries, they gave themselves into his
hands as subjects. "This is our king!" they cried, and they acclaimed
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1557">1557</span></span>They caused two
thrones to be prepared for Avt’handil and P’hridon, they sat royally
thereon, they extolled their majesty, what other human beings did God
create like them! They related their sorrows; they revealed them to all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1558">1558</span></span>They drank,
ate, made merry, they increased the

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

household; as befits a wedding so did they celebrate it; to each of the
four they gave presents equally. They gathered together treasure to give
to the poor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1559">1559</span></span>All the Indians
considered Avt’handil and P’hridon to be helpers (allies). "From you
every good happens to us," said they ceaselessly; they looked upon them
as lords (suzerains), whatever they willed that they did, they came
before them continually to pay court to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1560">1560</span></span>The King of the
Indians said to Asmat’h, the sharer of his sorrows: "What thou hast
done, neither upbringer nor upbrought hath done (for each other). Now I
enthrone thee over one seventh part of the kingdom of India, thine let
it be, serve us, sweet to the sweet!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1561">1561</span></span>"Whomsoever
thou desirest as husband wed him, rule the kingdom, henceforth serve us,
be subject to us." Asmat’h covered his feet with kisses. "From thee is
my power," quoth she; "what can I find, what better service can I have
than thine!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1562">1562</span></span>The three sworn
brothers tarried together a few days. They sported, they received more
incomparable gifts; what rare pearls, what excellent horses! But longing
(for T’hinat’hin) made Avt’handil to show lines on his face.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1563">1563</span></span>Tariel
perceived that longing of the knight for his wife. He said: "Of a truth
thy heart is angered against me. Now woe is me! thought hath made of thy
seven griefs eight. I shall be separated from thee; Fate grudges me my
joy."

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1564">1564</span></span>Then P’hridon
begged leave of him. "I will go home," quoth he; "my foot will oft tread
this court and land if thou wilt command me as an elder to a younger. I
shall desire thee as the deer the fountain."'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1565">1565</span></span>As presents for
Rostevan, he (Tariel) made him (Avt’handil) take with him beautiful
little mantles, also a vessel (full) of cut gems, not spoons(ful), not
ladles(ful). "Take them from me, go," quoth he, "disobey me not!"
Avt’handil said: "I know not how I shall survive without thee!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1566">1566</span></span>The lady
(Nestan) sent to the lady (T’hinat’hin) a little cloak and a veil; who
save hers was worthy of such garments! A jewel--he who carried it off
could not say: "I have carried it in vain!"--at night it gives light
like the sun; it is visible wherever thou lookest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1567">1567</span></span>Avt’handil
mounted, he departed, he said farewell to Taria, the flame of the fire
of separation burned them both; all the Indians wept, the tear moistened
the mead. Avt’handil said: "The poison of this world slays me!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1568">1568</span></span>P’hridon and
Avt’handil journeyed together for a few days; the road separated them,
each went his way weeping; the things they had planned had turned out
well for them; Avt’handil came to Arabia, he had not seen troubles in
vain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1569">1569</span></span>The Arabs came
forth to meet him, he beautified the realm; he saw his sun, the
affliction of his desires fled; he sat with her on the throne, he
rejoiced at the joy of the onlookers. The Most High from above endued
his crown with sovereignty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1570">1570</span></span>Those three
sovereigns loved one another, they visited one another, their desires
were fulfilled, they that disputed their rule were put to the sword,
they enlarged

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

their kingdoms, they were sovereign, they increased their might.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1571">1571</span></span>They poured
down mercy like snow on all alike, they enriched orphans and widows and
the poor did not beg, they terrified evil-doers; the ewes could not
suckle the lambs, within their territories the goat and the wolf fed
together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1572">1572</span></span>Their tale is
ended like a dream of the night. They are passed away, gone beyond the
world. Behold the treachery of time; to him who thinks it long, even for
him it is of a moment. I a certain Meskhian bard of the borough of
Rust’havi, I write (this).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1573">1573</span></span>For the god
(goddess--*i.e.*, king, queen, T’hamara) of the Georgians, whom David
the sun serves in his course, I have put this story into verse, for her
(pl. maj.) entertainment who strikes terror from East to West, consuming
those who are traitors to her, strengthening those who are loyal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1574">1574</span></span>How shall I
sing to David's harp, attuned and loud-sounding, these wondrous (rare)
tales of strange, foreign monarchs! Old-time customs and deeds, praises
(eulogies) of those kings, have I found and done into verse. Thus have
we chattered!

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1575">1575</span></span>This is such a
world as is not to be trusted by any; it is a moment to the eyes of men,
and only long enough for the blinking of the eyelashes. What seek you,
what do you? Fate is an insulter. For him whom Fate deceives not it is
better to be (happy) in both (worlds).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1576">1576</span></span>Mose Khoneli
praised Amiran, son of Daredjan; Shavt’heli, whose poem they admired,
praised Abdul-Mesia; Sargis T’hmogveli, the unwearying-tongued (praised)
Dilarget’h; Rust’haveli (praised) Tariel, for whom his tear unceasing
flows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](mps51)
