[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ram08)  [Next](ram10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0837115507/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Religion and Myth*, by James Macdonald, \[1883\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### CHAPTER VII

##### WITCHCRAFT

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> man reached the conception of good
and evil spirits as personal and separate existences—that is to say,
beings capable of being influenced by him and having an influence over
him—it needed but the advent of a Milton to set the gods by the ears.
But before the Miltonic conception was reached there was a long
transition period during which the gods set men by the ears. We have
seen that kings and divine priests claimed to have in their own persons:
first, the spirit of the creative and reproductive powers of nature
next, that of their ancestors and predecessors, this latter passing over
to the idea of an impersonal god. These were the beneficent patrons of
men, who gave them rain, sunshine, crops, fecundity, successful hunting,
and kindred blessings. During the world's youth the want of these was
attributed to the negligence of the king, and with the lapse of time,
perhaps to his malice or ill-will, as when the king was said "to have a
bad heart." It was no uncommon experience for the king to be called
sharply to task when the course of nature got into confusion and
disorder, and men began to feel the pinch of want or the inconvenience
of having to travel far afield for game. With the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

advent of evil spirits the blame could be laid on their shoulders for
all the ills that afflicted humanity. Evil persons were supposed to be
in league with those evil spirits, and to be their agents in carrying
out their nefarious purposes. As the good spirits acted for men's
benefit through the king or tribal priest, so other malign spirits acted
through persons whose whole object was pure mischief for its own sake,
except when bribed to do good actions by large gifts. The expulsion of
spirits had not yet occurred to man; propitiation did not always suit
his purpose; and yet the case required that drastic remedies should be
adopted. It was obviously a matter of the first importance that means
should be discovered for the detection and extermination, if possible,
of the class of persons who brought the ills from which men suffered
upon them.

In earlier times the king himself was frequently put to death when he
failed to order the course of nature regularly, and give the blessings
expected from him, and if so, there could be no hesitation or doubt
about the art of those who wilfully disturbed the course of nature being
a capital crime, or rather the capital crime beyond all others even by
comparison. For to savage man there is no crime comparable to witchcraft
in malignity of purpose and object. Here, then, we have the origin of
that system of jurisprudence and religious ritual which, projecting
itself into civilised and Christian times, pursued its victims, under
the sanction of civil law and church judicatories, as persons who ought
not to live. Primitive faith, or superstition as we call it

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

now, clung for generations to men professing to be disciples of Him who
came to show the higher and better way, so tenaciously that they could,
without pity or compunction, see their fellows amidst blazing faggots
for an imaginary crime. If the growth of thought has been so slow within
historic times, and among a people with a written language, what must it
have been among primitive men? When religion, with all the sanction it
received from the sacred books of Christianity, took so many centuries
to realise such elementary facts regarding man's relation to the
supernatural, do we wonder that millenniums pass without any appreciable
difference in custom and myth among savages?

But how were wizards and witches to be discovered when the world was
young, and before men learned to recognise the "witch's mark?" Spirits
bent on evil gave no outward token of their presence so far as that
could possible be avoided. These spirits would only be harboured by
persons of the most malignant disposition, or who for some reason had a
grudge against their kind. So the spirits sought out those who, through
neglect or ill-treatment, had been soured and rendered bitter in heart
against their fellows. <span id="fr_115"></span>[\*](#fn_115) Thus it
happened that deformed persons, and those who through any infirmity were
unable to take their place and act their part in life like their
fellows, were believed to be possessed of the devil, or, in other words,
were wizards and witches. Dwarfs, dumb persons, women who never were
sought in marriage, and those with

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

any facial peculiarities or defects which made them conspicuous, were
most frequently regarded as the incarnation of the evil spirit of the
world. From them it was impossible to expel or allure the demon as in
the case of a patient who was devil-possessed, for, unlike the sick, the
devil dwelt within the wizards by their own will and choice. They were
themselves devils incarnate as the king or high priest was incarnate
god. Such being the case, the only hope of safety, the sole means of
security, lay in the rigid enforcement of that curious Mosaic enactment:
"Thou shall not suffer a witch to live." <span
id="fr_116"></span>[\*](#fn_116)

Let us now consider how man, as he groped his way towards a higher
conception of truth and the facts with which he found himself surrounded
in the world, sought to protect himself against the malign influences
exercised by those persons who entered into league with evil spirits,
for the purpose of injuring their kind. And here it will be better to
begin with the southern portion of Africa, with the customs of which I
am familiar, and which have been studied and recorded with a greater
degree of minuteness than those of any other part of the continent. In
any study of witchcraft it must be borne in mind that the wizard's power
is unlimited, or only bounded by such limitations and restrictions as
the gods are subject to. Evil spirits are as powerful as good; hence it
follows that the good must have assistance from man himself, if they are
to cope successfully with evil. Man and the gods.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

may keep evil in check. Either of them alone would be unequal to the
task. Can the beneficent god give rain? The wizard can thwart his
purpose by the simplest of expedients. Can he make domestic animals
prolific? The wizard has but to get a hair out of a cow's tail to bring
murrain among them. Does the "father of men" give easy delivery to
mothers? The wizard causes death in childbed or blights the offspring
with a curse. Throughout the whole circle of social and domestic life
the good designs of Providence and the gods can be frustrated by the art
of witchcraft, and, indeed, the wizard may in a sense, be said to be
more powerful than the gods. To them belong the initiative; all things
are under their control and ordered by them; and the wizard has but to
lie in wait till the gods act, and then, by the practice of his art,
frustrates their intentions by marring their work. He, on the other
hand, is safe from assault by the gods, for he never initiates any
original work on his own account. His business is to watch their doings,
and when they favour men to bring calamity and death.

So the Hottentot priest, when he sacrifices for any purpose, takes the
most extraordinary precautions against malign influences. He keeps his
purpose a profound secret, lest his intentions should become known to
some "suspect person." At the sacrifice none must be present except such
as can be fully trusted. And here lies his chief difficulty. Wizards are
as cunning as are evil spirits themselves, and adopt every kind of
disguise so as to remain unsuspected. He can guard against the presence
of

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

reputed wizards and suspect persons. But these have "friends" who are
neither known nor suspected, and should one of them be present to inform
the wizard of what goes on, and convey to him as much as a single hair
from the sacrifice, or even a blade of grass from the spot on which an
important person, as the chief or priest, sat, he can accomplish all the
evil that he could have done by his presence among the crowd. For some
reason, which I never could discover, suspect persons cannot be, or at
all events are not, put on trial till specific acts can be charged
against them before a properly constituted tribunal. They cannot even be
shut up by such methods as we have often found so convenient beyond St.
George's Channel.

Under such circumstances it is necessary to have a method by which guilt
can be easily and surely brought home to those practising the unlawful
art. This is done by a class of men known as witch-doctors. These are
really magicians or priests, who, because of the dignity of their
calling, occupy a premier position among the religious teachers of
Africa. They are permitted to have armed retainers, and to rank on an
equality with heads of clans. Their places of residence are sanctuaries;
they hold court and try causes; their persons are sacred, and in virtue
of their office they are entitled to receive fees in connection with all
cases and trials. The following may be taken as illustrative of the
witch-doctor's method of procedure:—When any one, say a man in middle
life, falls ill, his friends, believing him to be bewitched, repair to
the witch-doctor's

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

house, and sit down outside in a waiting attitude. After a brief
interval the doctor appears, says "Good morning," and then sitting down,
takes a leisurely pinch of snuff. If the visitors ask for tobacco, he
knows it is but an ordinary call, and enters into conversation on
current topics. If they do not ask a pinch, he retires to his house, and
returns with a dry hide and a small bundle of sticks which he throws
down before his visitors. He then says, "You have come about a child?"

They, beating softly on the hide, reply: "We agree."

The doctor proceeds: "You are going to speak about a woman?"

"We agree," say the strangers, while they continue their gentle beating.

"The man you have come about is very ill," may be the doctor's next
remark.

"We agree, we agree," cry out the visitors, this time beating violently.

On such lines the doctor proceeds till he has learned all he wishes to
know: the man's age; whether of a strong or weakly constitution; how
long he has been ill; whether he has any known enemy, and his means.
After this he sits a long while in silence, and then says, oracularly,
"You are being killed." When asked how and by whom, he replies that he
cannot tell; they must return on the following day, and meantime the
gods may divulge to him the secret. He mentions his fee, generally an
ox, as a retainer, and this must be brought when they return next day,
otherwise no revelations will

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

be made to him. He is the servant of the gods, and what is given to him
is offered to them. The deputation then retire, and when they go home a
trusted friend receives a hint as to whom they suspect of bewitching the
patient. This neighbour goes at dead of night, and has an interview with
the doctor, who is now in a position to act. A muster of villagers is
duly called, attendance at which is compulsory on pain of confessed
guilt. The accused marches, in ignorance of his doom, with the cavalcade
On the way he may be casually asked, "What does the person bewitching
our brother deserve?" and he of course promptly replies, "He must die."

The ritual followed at the meeting varies, but the following is one
method. All the villagers give up their arms to the doctor's guard, and
then seat themselves in a semicircle. The doctor sings, dances, capers
and mutters incantations within the circle of expectant sitters; then
rushing up to the doomed man cries out, "This is the wizard who
bewitched so and so, the gods name him." He then runs in among his armed
guards, and all the people jump up, leaving the culprit sitting alone.
He must not move, nor will any one go near him. No one is allowed to
plead his cause even if they wished. His friends are disarmed and cannot
strike a blow for him. The man's doom is inexorably fixed, and his only
chance of escape is the somewhat slender one of the chief ordering an ox
to be substituted and offered as a sacrifice; this, or a clean pair of
heels, if he can show them. On crossing the border of the

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

tribal territory he is safe, there being no extradition treaty for
wizards.

As we move northwards we find the same or even greater precautions taken
against witchcraft, but the system of jurisprudence is modified. In the
Nyassa region, for example, the office of discovering persons who
practise the illegal art falls not to the priest, but to the prophetess,
who is frequently the principal wife of the chief, and one of the most
formidable and justly dreaded persons met with in Africa. It is to the
prophetess the ancestral spirits make known the will of the gods. When
she sees these face to face, which always happens at the dead hour of
night, she begins by raving and screaming, which she continues till the
whole village is astir, and she herself utterly prostrated by her
exertions; she then throws herself on the ground in a kind of trance,
during which the villagers gather round her, awe-stricken, waiting for
the oracle of the god, for she is now god-possessed. After such
possession and revelations she may impose impossible tasks on men, and
these they will attempt without question as their destiny. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[\*](#fn_117) She may demand human sacrifices, and no
one dare deny her victims. Suppose she declares a victim must be offered
to a mountain deity—for there are gods of the valleys and gods of the
hills, deities of the river and of the forest—the victim is conducted to
the spot indicated and bound hand and foot to a tree, If during the
first night he is killed by beasts of prey, the gods have accepted the
sacrifice; if not, he is left to die of

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

starvation or thrown into a pool. The slave was not worthy the god's
acceptance; he is of no further use to any one.

It is, however, as a detective of wizards and witches the prophetess is
in most constant demand. When she travels on such duty she is
accompanied by a strong guard; and when she orders a meeting of a clan
or tribe attendance is compulsory. When all are assembled, our friend,
who is clad with a scanty loin cloth and literally covered from head to
heels with rattles and fantasies, rushes about among the crowd in the
most frantic manner. She shouts and raves and rants like one demented.
After which, assuming a calm judicial manner, she goes from one to
another touching each person's hand. As she touches the hand of the
bewitcher, she starts back with a loud shriek and yells, "This is him,
the murderer. Blood is in his hand." <span
id="fr_118"></span>[\*](#fn_118) Having discovered the culprit, she next
proceeds to prove his guilt. This she does by "finding the horns" he
used in the prosecution of the unlawful art. These are generally the
horns of a small species of antelope which are par excellence "witches’
horns." She finds the horns by going along the bank of the stream from
which the family of the bewitched person got water. At intervals she
lifts water from the stream, which she pours upon the ground, and then
stoops to listen. Spirit voices direct her to the wizard's hiding-place.
Arrived there, she begins to dig with a hoe she carries, muttering
incantations as she works, and there she finds the incriminating
horns. <span id="fr_119"></span>[†](#fn_119)

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

Now, how does the prophetess find the horns? By what devil's art does
she hit upon the spot where they are concealed? The explanation is to us
very simple, but the African has not yet discovered it, or if he has, no
one has dared to say so. Wherever she is employed she must spend a night
at the village before she begins operations. She does not retire to rest
with the other villagers, but wanders about the live-long night
listening to spirit voices. If she sees a villager outside his door
after the usual hour for retiring, she brings that up against him next
day as evidence of guilty intention, and that, either on his own account
or the wizard's, he meant to steal away to dig up the horns. The fear of
such consequences keeps all persons within doors, and leaves the
prophetess free to arrange for the tableau of the next day. So far is
the fear of witchcraft carried, that whole villages have been known to
partake of the ordeal poison in order to root out evil persons. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[\*](#fn_120) If a man is guilty, he dies; if not
guilty, even if caught in the act red-handed, he recovers—he was in that
case not a thief, he was bewitched to make him steal. Such is the Wayao
philosophy of trial by ordeal.

Among the Bongo on the White Nile no communication can be had with the
spirit world except by means of certain roots which are known to the
magicians. <span id="fr_121"></span>[†](#fn_121) These are of service,
not only in holding communication with the gods, but in warding off all
evil influences. Had the secret been kept, the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bongo would have
been the happiest people under the sun, but in an evil hour some noted
wizard discovered it and made the world unhappy. With this knowledge in
their possession, old people may apparently be lying peaceably in their
beds while their spirits range the forest by moonlight in search of the
magic roots. <span id="fr_122"></span>[\*](#fn_122) These spirits assume
animal form, which remind us of the familiar stories of farmers wounding
hares, and hearing of old women in the next village having broken arm or
leg mysteriously, which they set and dressed without aid of doctor;
assured sign that the fear of his seeing the bullet-mark prevented their
seeking his aid.

The Bongo priest who has obtained the coveted roots, can only hold
communication with the gods in the approved manner by falling into a
trance and receiving their commands in dreams and visions. The wizard,
wielding equally potent spells, and restricted by no canons of custom,
can leave the visible body, as the soul does in sleep, his only risk
being the body being stolen during the spirit's absence, enter a hyæna,
and range over mountain and plain, working evil as he goes. When a
people are exposed to such dangers, to exorcise ghosts, demons, wood
goblins, and all evil spirits and persons, must ever be their chief
religious duty. When the destiny of a nation depends on guarding against
evil influences of a spiritual nature, that people must be regarded as
deeply religious, however little their rites may attract the attention
of those who visit them.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

Dr. Schweinfurth, who is one of our best authorities on the usages of
tribes living on the upper reaches of the Nile, says that some of them
have hardly any religion. The Niam-niam, he says, have no religion, and
use for divinity the word for lightning. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[\*](#fn_123) It is curious so observant a traveller
should have been so far misled as to what constitutes religious
observances. We are familiar in Zululand, Nyassa region, and in Uganda
with the use of the term for lightning—in each case a different word—for
heaven, thunder, or the god, and these peoples are among the most
religious communities in Africa. When a man cannot knock his foot
against a tree stump without attaching to it a supernatural
significance <span id="fr_124"></span>[†](#fn_124) that man is religious
whether he has a separate word for his god or not. The statement seems
all the more inexplicable when we find the doctor himself saying that
the same Niam-niam, who have no religion, "have a word for prayer"; that
they practise augury, and believe in goblins, ghosts, and witches, the
latter of which are treated by them as they have always been by persons
with properly constituted minds—that is, by getting rid of them in the
manner most approved for the extermination of the pestilent race. If the
Niam-niam have no religion, to whom do they pray? Whence came their
goblins? How do their witches attain their power except by spirit
agency? These are questions which must be satisfactorily disposed of
before we can accept a general statement that a people have

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

been found who have no religion—that is, no faith in regard to
supernatural powers or agents.

If the Nile tribes conduct their witch prosecutions, and religious
services generally, in so perfunctory a manner as to attract the
attention of travellers but slightly, their deficiency is more than made
up by the Bullom tribes of the West Coast. When they drink beer they
pour out a few drops as a religious act; when they eat, particles of
food are allowed to fall on the ground for the same purpose. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[\*](#fn_125) They can neither walk nor sit, sow nor
reap, hunt nor fish, without performing acts of devotion and dutiful
obedience to the gods. They move among divinities, and these may be
disturbed by loud laughter, by improper movements, or by words which can
imply disparagement of the gods or their works. Each day has its own
religious duties, but it is in the "witch palaver" their true devotion
and fidelity to the will of the gods is seen to best advantage.

Their three great palavers are, "sauce palaver," "woman palaver," and
"witch palaver." <span id="fr_126"></span>[†](#fn_126) In the first,
which refers to all ordinary offences, the case is conducted according
to the ordinary rules of evidence, either by witnesses or the ordeal.
The accused is held as guilty, and he must prove his innocence. If he
have witnesses, good; if not, then the poison bowl. The same remarks
apply to "woman palaver," only that in this case the accused must submit
to the ordeal. What that ordeal is we

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

shall see in another connection; our present business is with the "witch
palaver." In this case the accused can prove his innocence by no other
means than the ordeal. When the offence was committed he may have been
on a journey, at sea, asleep, sick and unable to move, on the war path;
in any condition or circumstances. None of these things can be admitted
in evidence nor in mitigation of sentence. Persons who have the power of
transforming themselves into animals or insects, feigning sleep, or even
death, so perfectly as to deceive the very elect—that is to say, the
authoritative religious guides of the community—are not to be trifled
with. So it is, when a suspect is on trial for specific acts of
witchcraft, a red hot-iron is applied to his skin, partly to jog his
memory, but principally that the brand may be examined to determine how
much skin adheres to the hot metal, whether the wound bleeds, and how
its edges "curl." <span id="fr_127"></span>[\*](#fn_127) To each of
these signs great importance is attached in determining presumption of
guilt. This ordeal may be final and satisfactory, but the probabilities
are against it. The show is too good to be over so soon, and the red-hot
poker is succeeded by a jar of oil, which is placed on the fire till it
boils. Into this boiling oil a stone, made red hot in the fire, is now
dropped and the culprit directed to fish it out with his naked
hand. <span id="fr_128"></span>[†](#fn_128) According to the condition
of the hand after the ordeal is the presumption of guilt or innocence.
If

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

these means do not conclusively prove the case, he must drink "red
water." <span id="fr_129"></span>[\*](#fn_129) This is a decoction which
is prepared by the priest in public from poisonous substances. After the
preparation is made the priest washes his hands, as well as the mortar
and pestle used, as a ceremonial act. The accused for a similar reason
must rinse his mouth with clean water. He is then given a quantity of
boiled rice which he must eat; after it he drinks the poison. If the red
water acts as an emetic, and that vomiting continues till he brings up
particles of rice, he is innocent and escapes; the red water ran away
from him. When it does not act as an emetic, even if the man does not
die from the effects of the poison, he is guilty; the red water clung to
him. Sometimes the drug causes purging. In this case the culprit has
"spoiled the red water"; the augury is doubtful, and to remove all
difficulties he is sold—out of the territory, it is needless to say.

This latter form of ordeal is common in cases of supposed adultery among
many tribes of the West Coast, as well as throughout the whole of the
Lake region of Central Africa, and is specially worthy of note because
of its close resemblance to, if not identity with, the practice of trial
by ordeal for the same offence among the Jews: "If a man's wife go
aside, and commit a trespass against him, and a man lie with her
carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close
. . . . And the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of
his wife, and she be defiled; or, if the spirit of

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not
defiled, then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest . . . . And
the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; . . . . And the
priest shall have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the curse .
. . . And the priest shall write three curses in a book, and he shall
blot them out with the bitter water, and he shall cause the woman to
drink the bitter water that causeth the curse . . . . And when he hath
made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, if she be
defiled, and have done trespass against her husband, that the water that
causeth the curse shall enter into her and become bitter, and her belly
shall swell, and her thigh shall rot, and the woman shall be a curse
among her people. And if the woman be not defiled but be clean, then she
shall be free." <span id="fr_130"></span>[\*](#fn_130) The connection
between this enactment in the Mosaic legislation and the practice among
primitive men, it is not my province to trace in the present essay, but
the resemblance is so striking that the inference seems plain enough.

Turning to the history of witchcraft among civilised peoples, we have in
it perhaps the best illustration of the persistency in popular
imagination of the belief in the supreme power of evil spirits, and in
man's power to influence the course of nature by necromancy and magic.
It would be easy to cite examples from every country in Europe to show
how the same belief in the power of evil, personified in wizards and
witches, influenced the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

whole domestic and social life of the people. In Jutland a rowan growing
out of the top of another tree is exceedingly efficacious against
witchcraft. <span id="fr_131"></span>[\*](#fn_131) This tree has the
same virtue in Scotland, and I knew a worthy farmer's wife, who died
only a few years ago, and who annually, in early summer, had a St.
Andrew's cross made of rowan twigs, which she placed in the cowhouse as
a talisman against the arts of witches. German farmers use the mistletoe
for a similar purpose. In the island of Rum it was believed that if one
of the family of Lachlin—a local family of note—shot a deer on the
mountain of Finchra, he would either die on the spot or contract a
distemper from which he could not recover. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[†](#fn_132) This may belong to the class of totems
rather than to witchcraft. Traces of clan totems are frequently met with
in the north and west of Scotland.

Confining ourselves to this country, we have ample evidence, in the
witch and fairy cult still current, of the ancient belief in man's power
to influence nature and the lives of his fellow-men. And not the least
curious thing is, that the persons accused of witchcraft often claimed
to possess the power ascribed to them, though this meant an alternative
between faggots and a deep pool. Among savage men, on the contrary,
denial is all but universal when one is accused of having communication
with evil spirits, or exercising the art of witchcraft. Among Scottish
witches and fairy folk we get glimpses of persons of different grades,
some of them holding high office and directing the affairs of the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

peculiar community to which they belong. Thus, in the confessions of
Isabella Gowdie, indicted for witchcraft at Nairn in 1662, we have a
King and Queen of Fairyland. "I was," said Isabella when in the dock,
"in Downie hill, and got meat from the Queen of the Fairies, and more
that I could eat. The queen is brawly clothed in white linen and in
white and brown cloth; and the king is a braw man, well-favoured and
broad-faced. There were plenty of elf bulls, rowting and skoyling up and
down, and affrighted me." <span id="fr_133"></span>[\*](#fn_133) Mr.
Kirk, from whom I quote, adds, that on the authority of local tradition,
fairyland is well supplied with musical instruments and books of
history, travel, plays, novels, biography, but no Bibles—the lack of the
latter owing to the fairy folk being in league with the devil, from whom
they receive their government and power.

Before our familiar fairy cult was evolved, the evil spirits of
primitive man had crystallised into a personal devil, supreme and
all-powerful, with numerous attendant angels or messengers, and it is
curious to note that something very nearly akin to this is met with in
Ashantee, where the king has a thousand "Kra," or souls. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[†](#fn_134) The Kra are the king's spies, a kind of
secret service guild, and are called the king's souls, because when he
dies they are all put to death that they may attend upon him in the land
of shades. To strike, or even touch a Kra, is not only a deadly insult,
but a serious capital crime. It is doing it to the king himself; and it
is quite consistent with savage thought to regard a powerful king and
his

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kra as still
actively engaged in connection with the world's affairs long after they
have quitted the upper air. He is chief dictator, and each of his souls
do his behests in the affairs of men. This is the common doctrine of
witchcraft as that lives in popular imagination. The black art is
something carried on under the direction of a supreme evil spirit, who
is assisted by a countless host of minor devils or angels; that is to
say, messengers, Kra, or souls. This doctrine must have been developed
when man reached the conception of a supreme spirit of good, opposed by
a supreme spirit of evil. But in tracing the growth of the idea of one
supreme spirit of good, or god, we are met by greater difficulties than
in tracing the doctrine of devils, for the latter took shape and colour
from the former. When man found a supreme spirit among the gods, he had
to account for the fact that he did not, or could not, at all times
order events for the good of man. Evil still persisted; so he concluded
there must be a supreme and personal devil, who commanded such agencies
in the unseen world as were at the disposal of the good god himself.

The difficulty of tracing the growth of the idea of a supreme god arises
from the impossibility of determining with certainty what was originally
a local or tribal deity, and what a spirit regarded generally as
supreme. We have seen that the Zulu term Mlungu, and its equivalents may
mean, great ancestor, lightning, the powers of nature generally, or god,
and we have at least one instance which seems to show how such ideas as
that of Mlungu first

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

take hold of the popular imagination, and become almost universal myth,
for myth it is when all has been said, but myth which describes a sober
fact of human faith and the progress of thought. The Rev. Duff
Macdonald, a careful observer, who lived several years in Central
Africa, says of the Wayao, that they not only worship their own
ancestors, as is common to most Africans, but also invoke by prayer and
sacrifice the gods of the country who were worshipped by the people they
expelled. The older inhabitants were compelled to retire before the
advance of the Wayao, but their great god Kangomba remained undisturbed
on Mount Socki, nor would he be displaced by the newer divinities or the
arts of magic. <span id="fr_135"></span>[\*](#fn_135) So it is that the
present chief, Kapeni, when making annual supplication and sacrifice,
asks some noted Wanyasa priest to come to his assistance. The Wanyasa
are related to the people whose god Kangomba originally was, and their
presence is acceptable to him. Such a god as this, though originally a
local tribal deity—some remote ancestor of a chief—gradually gathers
more than a local reputation. The Wanyasa priests officiating at his
annual festivals will carry his fame to their own people, and bring the
Wanyasa tribe, through association with the Wayao at his festivals, to
worship him in times of stress and trial at their own homes. If he
grants their prayer his reputation will speedily spread as both powerful
and good. Besides, every African who returns from a journey exaggerates
all his experiences, and adorns

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

his narratives with gorgeous imagery. In this way Kangomba will lose
nothing of his glory and power by distance. He will be spoken of in
every Wanyasa village as great beyond all local deities, and may, in a
few generations, occupy a place second only to Mlungu himself.

Such probably was the origin of Mlungu when first men worshipped him,
and if so, it furnishes us with the key we have been striving to find as
to how primitive men arrived at the idea of a supreme god, and from that
deduced the doctrine of a supreme devil, on which he hangs all the
traditions he has regarding witchcraft and kindred evils. It will also
help us to understand much with which we have long been familiar, though
we may not have understood the relation of facts to one another. Such
conceptions of deity and of evil are consistent with the acknowledgment
of Nebuchadnezzar, that the God of Daniel was supreme among the
gods—greater than those of the mighty empire itself.

We have now arrived at an advanced period of the world's progress in
thought. If the theory suggested is correct, the African, starting with
the crude idea that men could influence the course of nature, and that
the power to do so was vested in his king, who was god—the
personification of nature herself—advanced a long way when he conceived
his chief, whose body he had buried or burned, still living and taking
an active interest in the world's affairs. As thought progressed and man
began to differentiate more accurately, he reached the doctrine of all
human souls living in a land of spirits, thus

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

making his way towards the conception of immortality, and that instead
of the world's forces being regulated by caprice, there were good and
evil spirits at work. To secure success to the good, good men sought for
means of thwarting the evil. The evil, on the other hand, not to be
baulked of their object, sought out agents on whom they conferred
supernatural powers. This war of good and evil could not long continue
before certain of the good spirits, or evil, attained to a place of
supreme power. In tracing the history of witchcraft and the methods
adopted to eradicate its votaries, we find how naturally man came to
believe in persons possessing supernatural powers for evil. We have also
seen, casually, the growth and development of another order, magicians
and prophets; but before endeavouring to trace the history of prophecy
among primitive peoples, it may be best to consider some of their
festivals, as those of first-fruits and harvest, where magicians or
prophets are seen to best advantage in the exercise of their functions;
after which we can the better understand the development of the order
and the importance attached to the office.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[115:\*](ram09.htm#fr_115) J. Sutton, MS.
notes.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[116:\*](ram09.htm#fr_116) Exod. xxii. 18.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[121:\*](ram09.htm#fr_117) Rev. Duff Macdonald.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[122:\*](ram09.htm#fr_118) Rev. Duff Macdonald.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[122:†](ram09.htm#fr_119) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[123:\*](ram09.htm#fr_120) Rev. Duff Macdonald.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[123:†](ram09.htm#fr_121) Schweinfurth.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[124:\*](ram09.htm#fr_122) Schweinfurth.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[125:\*](ram09.htm#fr_123) Schweinfurth.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125:†](ram09.htm#fr_124) Rev. Duff Macdonald;
Dr. Elmslie, MS. notes.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126:\*](ram09.htm#fr_125) Walker.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[126:†](ram09.htm#fr_126) Winterbotham.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[127:\*](ram09.htm#fr_127) Winterbotham.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[127:†](ram09.htm#fr_128) *Ibid*.; Rev. Duff
Macdonald.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[128:\*](ram09.htm#fr_129) Winterbotham.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[129:\*](ram09.htm#fr_130) Numbers. v. 12-28.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[130:\*](ram09.htm#fr_131) Kamp.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[130:†](ram09.htm#fr_132) Martin.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[131:\*](ram09.htm#fr_133) Kirk.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[131:†](ram09.htm#fr_134) Kühne and Rameyer.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[133:\*](ram09.htm#fr_135) Rev. Duff Macdonald.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Harvest Festivals](ram10)
