[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ram03)  [Next](ram05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0837115507/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Religion and Myth*, by James Macdonald, \[1883\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### CHAPTER II

##### GUARDING DIVINITY

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> have seen in the preceding chapter
that the king or divine ruler was endowed with supernatural powers, by
means of which he was able to regulate rain and sunshine, the growth of
crops and the capture of bird, beast, and fish. His power over nature
was analogous to that which he exercised over his subjects. He had but
to will in order to have his purpose accomplished, neither nature nor
subject having a choice in the matter. But with strange contradiction of
thought, while the course of nature was dependent upon and subject to
the king's will, phenomena were often supposed to be not only
independent of him, but inimical to his interests and dangerous to his
life, as were also certain objects, should he touch or even see them.
His will was supreme in regard to all conditions of wind and weather,
sunshine and shadow; but his body occupied the anomalous position of at
once influencing the forces of nature and being liable to take harm from
the simplest elements. His divine organism was so finely balanced that a
movement of head or hand might disturb the equilibrium of the universe,
and if in an evil moment he gave hidden forces a wrong impulse, it might
entail such

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

wholesale destruction as the falling of the sky or the hurling the world
away into limitless space. Even such a simple act as drinking a glass of
wine in the presence of another was so fraught with danger that the
spectator had to be put to death. One case is on record in which the
king's son, a boy of twelve, saw his father drink accidentally. He was
seized, finely arrayed, and killed. After that his body was quartered
and sent about with a proclamation that he had seen the king
drink. <span id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23) No more was needed.

Of this class of divine rulers is the Mikado of Japan, a descendant of
Izangi, who gave birth to the god of fire. After her death, her spouse,
who was her own brother, purified himself by bathing in a stream of
running water. As he threw his garments on the bank—the gods seem to
have been familiar with the modern tailor's art in those days—fresh
deities were born from each article. From his left eye emerged the
goddess of the Sun, who was the ancestress of all the divine generations
of rulers. <span id="fr_24"></span>[†](#fn_24) The following account of
the Mikado was written about two hundred years ago: <span
id="fr_25"></span>[‡](#fn_25)

"Even to this day princes descended of this family, more particularly
those who sit on the throne, are looked upon as persons most holy in
themselves, and as popes by birth. And in order to preserve those
advantageous notions in the minds of their subjects they are obliged to
take uncommon care of their sacred persons, and to do such

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

things which, examined according to the customs of other nations, would
be thought ridiculous and impertinent. He thinks that it would be very
prejudicial to his dignity and holiness to touch the ground with his
feet; for this reason, when he intends to go anywhere he must be carried
thither on men's shoulders. Much less will they suffer that he should
expose his sacred person to the open air, and the sun is not thought
worthy to shine on his head. There is such a holiness ascribed to all
the parts of his body that he dares to cut off neither his hair, nor his
beard, nor his nails. However, lest he should grow too dirty, they may
clean him in the night when he is asleep, because, they say, that which
is taken from his body at that time hath been stolen from him, and that
such a theft does not prejudice his holiness or his dignity.

In ancient times he was obliged to sit on the throne for some hours
every morning with the imperial crown on his head, but to sit altogether
like a statue, without stirring either hands or feet, nor, indeed, any
part of his body, because by this means it was thought that he could
preserve peace and tranquillity in his empire, for if, unfortunately, he
turned himself on one side or other, or if he looked a good while
towards any part of his dominions, it was apprehended that war, famine,
fire, or some great misfortune was near at hand to desolate the country.
But it having been afterwards discovered that the imperial crown was the
palladium which by its mobility could preserve peace in the empire, it
was thought expedient to deliver

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

his imperial person, consecrated only to idleness and pleasures, from
this burthensome duty, and therefore the crown is at present placed on
the throne for some hours every morning. His victuals must be dressed
every time in new pots, and served at table in new dishes, both very
clean and neat, but made only of common clay, that without any
considerable expense they may be laid aside, or broken, after they have
served once. They are generally broken for fear they should come into
the hands of laymen; for they believe religiously that if a layman
should presume to eat his food out of these sacred dishes, it would
swell, and inflame his mouth and throat." So much for the Mikado's
habits of life.

But this guarding of kings is not confined to an advanced cult. Among
primitive peoples we find priestly persons and divine kings guarded with
equal jealousy and care. At Shark Point, West Africa, the king lives
alone in a wood. He may never leave his house. He may not touch a woman.
On no account must he quit his royal chair, even to sleep, for in that
case the wind would die down and all navigation would be stopped. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26) The supreme ruler at Congo is such
another. Regarded as a god on earth, no subject would, on any
consideration, taste the new crop till an offering of it is made to him.
Then he leaves his residence to visit other parts of his territory, all
married persons are under obligation to observe stringent laws of
continence, any violation of which would prove immediately fatal to
Chitome.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Were he to die a
natural death, the world would be annihilated. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27)

Illustrations might be multiplied, but whether in Africa, Japan, or the
South Sea Islands, the order and regularity of nature is bound up with
the life of the ruler. It is evident he must be regarded by his people
as at once a source of untold blessing and inexpressible danger to
society. The care of his person must be their first consideration in
their home and foreign policy, for any accident, through oversight or
lack of vigilance, might prove fatal to the State. If he gives them
rain, sunshine, genial warmth, successful hunting and fishing,, he can
also withhold these blessings and reverse the order of nature. When the
working of visible phenomena is so closely bound up with his person that
hurting his toe might set up such a tremor as would overthrow the
foundations of the earth, the care bestowed on his safe keeping must be
infinite. For their own safety his subjects must surround him with
restrictions and safeguards. There must be set and accurate rules for
the regulation of his conduct both public and private. So it happens
that his life is valuable only in so far as he discharges the functions
for which he exists.

When he fails to order the course of nature so as to benefit his people,
his deposition is not only a duty but a necessity. The homage and
worship he received is turned into contempt and hatred, for he is not
only useless, he is now positively hurtful. Disgraced as a ruler, he is
disgraced as a god, and

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

then put to an ignominious death. During his life, or at least his
reign, he lives hedged in by such restrictions and limitations that he
ceases to be a free agent, even when his people prostrate themselves
before him, and offer to him the most costly gifts and sacrifices,
perhaps their sons or daughters.

Of the divine King of Loango it is said that the greater his divinity
the more restrictions or taboos he must observe. These regulate all his
actions, his walking and his sitting, his eating and drinking, his
sleeping and waking. <span id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28) To the same
restrictions the heir is subjected from infancy, only that the number of
observances during childhood are comparatively few, but increasing in
number, till on his reaching manhood he is lost in the swaddling-clothes
of taboos. The kings of ancient Egypt were, and in fact all rulers now
worshipped as divine are, subject to the same life of immobility and
inaction. King Egbo, West Africa, when he went abroad was concealed in
an ark as became a divine and supernatural being. This was carried on
the shoulders of men who were set apart for the sacred office, and were
themselves sacred persons. <span id="fr_29"></span>[†](#fn_29) The
sacred bearers still remain, but when Egbo, who has left the palace to
the actual ruler, and now lives in a sacred grove that none may enter or
explore, goes abroad, the ark contains but a dummy which is followed by
the reigning monarch walking on foot. The king prefers the advantages of
substantial power to the honours of divinity, and so does homage to the
ghost of his

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

own divinity, rather than enter the sacred box himself, to be the toy of
party politicians.

When the office of ruler grew to be at once so burdensome and so useless
there could be but one result. Men of action closed up the god in a box
and went on foot. Contenting themselves with the substance of power,
they left the honour and semblance to some nerveless aspirant to the
priesthood who was satisfied with homage and honour in his sacred
retreat, while his rival ruled the kingdom. This in course of time would
lead to a separation between the offices of ruler and high priest, and
so we gradually reach a farther stage in the development of human
thought and the evolution of deity as that presented itself to primitive
man. So burdensome did the office of king become, in the days when kings
were divine, that we find in West Africa, when a king dies, a family
council secretly held to elect his successor. The hapless victim is
seized, bound hand and foot, and then thrown into the fetish-house till
he consents to accept the kingly honours thus forced upon him. The
Gallas of the East elect their king once in eight years. They are
selected from five families who are royal, and through whom the
succession to the throne is carefully kept up. They have a custom called
Rab which compels the four families out of office to destroy all their
children; those reigning for the time being allowed to rear
theirs. <span id="fr_30"></span>[\*](#fn_30) It is doubtless from such
examples being common, that facts such as those recorded in the Book of
Exodus regarding

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the drowning of infants became possible as a political precaution.
Powerful kings like those of ancient Egypt, or of Dahomey and Ashantee
in modern times, may succeed in combining a vigorous policy with sacred
functions and the idea of a man-god, but the tendency is towards
degeneration and extinction. When a man ceases to move from his royal
chair, to see any of his subjects except those whose interests it is to
tell him only what suits their own purpose; when a movement of hand or
head is dangerous to the stability of the world, and that he must give
all needed blessings while carefully wrapped up in the swaddling-bands
of taboo, his final disappearance cannot be long delayed. His memory
lasts, but it becomes a shadow merging into ancestor worship, or kept in
a closed ark in the fetish-house.

There was another, and perhaps a more powerful, reason among primitive
men why those who were men of action should decline the honours of
divinity, and that was the practice of killing the god. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_31) Ancient mythology has made us familiar
with the idea of the death of the gods, and if divine and spiritual
deities were subject to decrepitude, decay, and death, how much more the
human gods of primitive man? It was natural that men in faraway times
should bestow the greatest care on their divinities, and surround them
with taboos and restrictions calculated to keep them out of harm's way.
But no care could make human gods immortal, and the worshippers had to
take account

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

of the stern fact and meet it as best they might. If the course of
nature depended on the god, what might not old age and imbecility bring
upon the nation? Should his powers decay and his perceptions become
dimmed, he might in a second precipitate calamities which would prove
disastrous to himself and his subjects. The world itself might be thrown
out of place, and projected no one knew where, for in those days the
powers of divine persons were not restricted to "projecting" bits of
flimsy French paper in the form of letters with indifferent spelling.

There was only one way open by which the danger could be met, and that
was by putting the god to death while still in the full possession of
his faculties or on the first appearance of outward symptoms of decay,
as a grey hair or hollow tooth, and thus secure the entrance of his soul
or divinity into his successor. <span id="fr_32"></span>[\*](#fn_32)
Should he die a natural death, even in his prime, and before the dangers
of decay appeared, his soul might be stolen, or stray away into winter
and night to wander for ever. If the world were to collapse on the King
of Congo dying a natural death, such a contingency could only be averted
by dispatching him to the land of shadows by violent means. So it was
that when a king fell ill his heir and successor entered his house with
a rope and club, and either strangled or clubbed him to death. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[†](#fn_33) "The King of Quiteva, in Eastern Africa,
ranked with deity," <span id="fr_34"></span>[‡](#fn_34) and this
continued till one of the kings lost a tooth, and feeling no disposition
to

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

follow the practice of his predecessors by quitting the upper air on the
appearance of the first bodily defect, published to his people that he
had lost a front tooth, in order that "when they might behold they might
yet be able to recognise him." The historian continues: "He declared at
the same time that he was resolved on living and reigning as long as he
could, esteeming his existence requisite for the welfare of his
subjects. He at the same time loudly condemned the practice of his
predecessors, whom he taxed with imprudence, nay, even with madness, for
condemning themselves to death for casual accidents to their persons;
and abrogating this mortal law, he ordained that all his successors, if
sane, should follow the precedent he gave, and the new law established
by him." <span id="fr_35"></span>[\*](#fn_35)

This man, whose name is not given, was as bold a reformer as was
Ergamenes of Meroe. There the kings were worshipped as gods, but
whenever the priests sent a message that the king must die, he
voluntarily submitted to be put to death. When the summons came to
Ergamenes he replied to it by putting the priests themselves to the
sword, thus reversing the order, and putting an end to the practice once
for all. In Unyoro the king is killed by his own wives when seriously
ill.

Nor is the custom of killing the divine king confined to Africa. The
King of Calicut could only rule twelve years, after which he must
publicly commit suicide according to an approved method; a method only a
little less suggestive of the shambles

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

than the Harakiri of the Japanese. The first modification of the Calicut
law of succession was made towards the end of the seventeenth century,
when at the end of the twelve years a tent was pitched, and the king had
a great feast lasting ten or twelve days, at the end of which any one
might kill him and gain the crown. <span id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_36)
To do so he must cut his way, sword in hand, through the king's
bodyguard to reach him in his tent. The desperate attempt was at times
made but never with success.

They were bold men who ventured on drastic reforms in far-away days;
bolder still were those who ventured to curb the power of the priests
after the offices of ruler and high-priest cane to be separated, as not
a few European monarchs discovered to their cost when kept standing,
barefooted and bareheaded, waiting the pleasure of an arrogant
ecclesiastic. But limitations were not put to the power of the
priesthood without a long period of transition, during which many
expedients were adopted to preserve time-honoured usage, and adjust that
to the inevitable, as represented by a truculent ruler who wished to
enjoy the upper air as long as nature permitted him to do so, and who
acquired awkward habits of answering the arguments of philosophers with
sword-cut or gallows. To only one of such expedients can we refer, that
of temporary kings or substitutes.

Where kings were put to death at the end of fixed periods or on the
appearance of the first signs of

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

decay, rulers would anxiously endeavour to discover a means of evading
the letter of the law while giving such obedience to its spirit as would
satisfy their subjects and worshippers. Some boldly set the law at
defiance by refusing to submit to its requirements. Others sought out
substitutes, and introduced to men's minds the idea of one taking, in a
grave crisis, the place of another, and being regarded as the person he
represented; his own individuality being lost in the act of
self-surrender and substitution. He became the king, the very man-god
whom people worshipped, in his office and act. The real king in fact
died, and in resuming the government it was a new king who ascended the
throne to reign for another stated period. At first a relative of the
king would act as substitute, but this could not continue long without
the sense of justice inherent in man revolting against such a barbarous
practice, and a slave or condemned criminal would be substituted for a
brother or son. This substitute, whether son or slave, was for a time
clothed with kingly authority and lived in regal state, while the king
retired into private life. Even the royal harem might be invaded by the
temporary king, a fact, when we consider the extraordinary jealousy with
which they were guarded, which shows clearly that only for the most
weighty reasons could such a thing be permitted. It could only be in
order that the temporary king should be invested with full regal
authority without restriction or limitation. At the end of the time
allowed, the temporary king was put to death—killed as a god—the king
resuming office. The

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

custom is in some places softened down still more, and the substitute is
not actually put to death, a mock execution being sufficient. This
latter custom is observed in Cambodia, where the temporary king receives
the revenues during his three days of office, as is also done by the
same functionary in Siam, only the latter seizes ships entering harbour,
and holds them till redeemed. At the end of his term of office he goes
to a field and draws nine furrows, where seed is sown by old women. When
the ninth furrow is finished, the spectators rush to pick up the seed
just sown to mix with their own, and so secure a plentiful crop. This
temporary king is known as "Lord of the Heavenly Host." <span
id="fr_37"></span>[\*](#fn_37) These customs, and especially the killing
of the king or his substitute, introduce us to the earliest form of
human sacrifice, a system which developed to such gigantic proportions
as men's conception of the supernatural advanced from the ideas of human
divinities to personal spiritual existences, whether as the spirit of
corn or vegetation generally, the powers of nature or the souls of
departed ancestors. To the development of this form of religion and
worship we shall now turn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[21:\*](ram04.htm#fr_23) J. G. Frazer, *Golden
Bough*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[21:†](ram04.htm#fr_24) Chamberlain; *Things
Japanese*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[21:‡](ram04.htm#fr_25) Kaempfer, "History of
Japan," in *Pinkerton's Voyages and Travels*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[23:\*](ram04.htm#fr_26) J. G. Frazer, *Golden
Bough*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[24:\*](ram04.htm#fr_27) J. G. Frazer, quoting
Labat.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[25:\*](ram04.htm#fr_28) Bastian.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[25:†](ram04.htm#fr_29) Waddell.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[26:\*](ram04.htm#fr_30) Krapf.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[27:\*](ram04.htm#fr_31) Frazer, *Golden Bough*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[28:\*](ram04.htm#fr_32) J. G. Frazer, *Golden
Bough*.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[28:†](ram04.htm#fr_33) Labat.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[28:‡](ram04.htm#fr_34) Dos Santos.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[29:\*](ram04.htm#fr_35) Dos Santos.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[30:\*](ram04.htm#fr_36) Hamilton, quoted by J.
G. Frazer.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[32:\*](ram04.htm#fr_37) J. G. Frazer, quoting
Pallegoix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Evolution of Deity](ram05)
