[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ram09)  [Next](ram11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0837115507/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Religion and Myth*, by James Macdonald, \[1883\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

##### HARVEST FESTIVALS

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> festivals and ceremonial acts of any
people give a clue to the original form of their institutions, and when
these can be compared with what still exists, in its original form,
among untutored nations, it affords evidence which is of the first
importance in tracing the development of religion and the growth of
civilisation.

The Yam festivals, as observed in Ashantee, were referred to in
considering substitutionary sacrifice, and we saw how closely bound up
with the religious life of the people are all the facts relating to the
ripening of crops and the gathering in of the harvest. Nor is this
peculiar to Ashantee. Everywhere the feasts of first-fruits are
intimately associated with the religious observances of the people and
the homage which they render to the gods. Among savages this homage is
to the powers of nature, whose efforts are crowned with success when the
creative and reproductive spirit of vegetation yields its increase to
man. When a Pondo chief is to hold the feast of first-fruits, some of
his people procure a ripe plant of the gourd family, pumpkin or
calabash, from another tribe. This is cooked; the inside cleaned out,
and the rind made ready for use

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

as a vessel. It is then presented to the chief with much ceremony. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[\*](#fn_136) The first-fruits are now brought
forward, and a sacrifice, generally a young bull, is offered, after
which the feast commences. The chief issues certain orders for the
conduct of the proceedings, tastes the fruits which are served in the
gourd dish with which he has been presented, and then abdicates all his
functions while the festival lasts.

The cattle from all the neighbouring villages are collected in the
vicinity, and now they are brought together, and the bulls incited to
fight to determine which is to be king among them for the next year. The
young people engage in games and dances, feats) of strength and running.
After these are over the whole community give themselves over to
disorder, debauchery, and riot. In their bull-fights and games 1 they
but did honour to the powers of nature, and now, as they eat and drink,
the same powers are honoured in another form and by other rites. There
is no one in authority to keep order, and every man does what seems good
in his own eyes. Should a man stab his neighbour he escapes all
punishment, and so too with all other crimes against the person,
property, and morality. People are even permitted to abuse the chief to
his face, an offence which at any other time would meet with summary
vengeance and an unceremonious dispatch to join the ancestors. While the
feast continues a deafening noise is kept up by drumming, shouting,
hand-clapping, and every kind of instrument that can be made to emit
sound. Men advance to the chief and explain their origin,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

and also the object they hold sacred, by imitating the sounds and
movements of their most sacred animal. This is the person's totem.
Others imitate, the gurgling made by an enemy when stabbed in the
throat. Those who adopt this latter emblem are known as "children of the
spear."

When the ceremonies, revels, and mummeries are ended, the chief repairs
to his accustomed place, and sitting down there, by that act resumes his
kingly functions. He calls the bravest of his braves before him, who is
immediately clothed and decorated with skins of animals suggestive of
courage and strategy. He performs a dance amid the frenzied shouting of
the multitude, after which the chief declares the 'festival at an end
and harvest commenced. <span id="fr_137"></span>[\*](#fn_137)

The facts deserving of special notice here are the sacrifice, the
fighting of the bulls, and the honour done to the reproductive powers of
nature. These, and the abdication of the chief, would lead to the
inference that the festival is a true survival of what, in earlier times
and under a ruder system, existed when a temporary king was appointed
and killed as a sacrifice, the incarnate god himself being slain that
nature might revive in spring. Whether from such facts men came at last
to infer a resurrection of the body, it is impossible to determine. The
Pondos are not singular in their observance of harvest customs. The Hos
of North-east India have a notion that at this period men and women are
so overcharged with vicious propensities that it is absolutely necessary
to let off steam by allowing

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

for a time full vent to their passions. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[\*](#fn_138) For the time they give themselves up to
feasting, drinking, and debauchery. The men lose all respect for the
women and for themselves, and the women all notions of modesty. Usually
the Hos are a quiet, reserved, and well-behaved moral people, but at the
harvest festival all this is reversed, and their nature seems to undergo
a complete change. The curious thing is, that when all is over they
settle down into their old steady, sober habits as if nothing had
happened.

But what is most peculiar about harvest festivals and feasts of
first-fruits is, their close resemblance to one another among all
peoples the world over, and how near those of civilised man are to the
savage; differing not in kind, but only in the manner of conducting
them; thus showing to us, that they are among the most ancient and
primitive of man's ritual and customs. For example. The Peruvians
believe that all useful plants are animated by a divine being, that is
spirit, who causes their growth. <span id="fr_139"></span>[†](#fn_139)
These divine beings are named after the particular plant, as the Maize
mother, the Rice mother, or the Potato mother. Figures of these mothers
made from the stalks of the respective plants, and dressed in women's
clothes, are worshipped. As the mother, these figures had power of
giving birth to or producing much rice, maize, or potatoes, as the case
might be, <span id="fr_140"></span>[‡](#fn_140) and in this acted
according as they were treated. The Peruvian mother of the Maize was
kept a whole year, and burned at the time of harvest:

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

when a fresh one took her place. During the festival, eating drinking
and general rejoicing goes on. In Ashantee all laws are abrogated for
one day at the Yam festival, and for the time every man does whatever he
pleases. One custom observed is to bring out, to be placed before the
fetish house, the skulls of noted enemies killed in war, and it is said
the skull of an English baronet did duty for many years—in fact, was
still in existence, kept in a brass basin, when the late king's power
was overthrown by the English. The people during the day of liberty give
themselves up to dancing and revelry. Executioners caper about,
ornamented with necklets made from the jaws of victims they slew as
offerings or king's "messengers" to the nether- world, and with girdles
of skulls. Before eating the new yams the king bathes in fetish water as
a ceremonial act; when all is over he resumes his authority as we saw
done by the chief of Pondoland.

These customs, of which examples might be multiplied from every region
of Africa and the heathen world generally, differ in no essential
feature, and are singularly like the survivals we have in Europe. In
Aberdeenshire, Scotland, the last sheaf cut, or "maiden," is carried
home in merry procession by the harvesters. It is then presented to the
mistress of the house, who dresses it up to be preserved till the first
mare foals. The maiden is then taken down and presented to the mare as
its first food. <span id="fr_141"></span>[\*](#fn_141) The neglect of
this would have untoward effects upon the foal, and disastrous
consequences

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

upon farm operations generally for the season. In Caithness the person
who cuts the last sheaf is called "winter," and so remains till next
harvest. The sheaf itself is carefully preserved till it is displaced by
another the following year. The Celts of the west country attached great
importance to cutting the last sheaf. All the harvesters stood round in
a circle while the youngest girl among the reapers cut a few straws left
standing at the corner of the field for that purpose. This sheaf was
ultimately used, as I have been assured by old people, for making Brüd's
bed, which was as follows:—On Candlemas day the mistress and servants of
each family take a sheaf of oats, and dress it up in women's apparel.
They put it in a large basket, and beside it a club of wood. They then
cry three times in chorus, "Brüd is come, Brüd is welcome." This is done
just before they retire to rest, and in the morning they examine the
ashes; expecting to find among them the mark of Brüd's club. If they do,
it is an indication of a prosperous year and good crops; if not, the
opposite. <span id="fr_142"></span>[\*](#fn_142)

In the district of Lochaber, where dancing and merry-making on the last
night of harvest used to be universal, and is still generally observed,
the ceremonies without the "maiden" would be like a wedding without the
bride. The maiden is carried home with tumultuous rejoicing, and after
being suitably decorated is hung up in the barn, where the dancing
usually takes place. After supper, which is served in the barn
ball-room, and before

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

dancing begins, one of the company, generally the oldest man present,
fills himself a glass of whisky, which he drinks, after he has turned
his face to the suspended sheaf and said: "Here's to the maiden." The
company follow his example, each in turn drinking to the "maiden." This
I have seen done more than once. Shall I add that I have myself done it?
Very similar to this is the custom observed in the neighbourhood of
Dantiz, as recorded by Frazer, who follows Mannhardt. He says: "When the
winter corn is cut and mostly bound up in sheaves, the portion which
still remains to be bound is divided amongst the women binders, each of
whom receives a swath of equal length to bind. A crowd of reapers,
children, and idlers gathers round to witness the contest, and at the
word 'Seize the old man,' the women fall to work, all binding their
allotted swaths as hard as they can. The spectators watch them narrowly,
and the woman who cannot keep pace with the rest, and consequently binds
the last sheaf, has to carry the 'old man' (the last sheaf) to the
farm-house and deliver it to the farmer with the words: 'Here I bring
you the old man.' At the supper which follows the 'old man' is placed at
the table and receives an abundant portion of food, which, as he cannot
eat it, falls to the share of the woman who carried him. Afterwards the
'old man' is placed in the yard, and all the people dance round him.
Further, the woman who bound the last sheaf goes herself by the name of
the 'old man' till the next harvest; and is often mocked with the cry,
'Here comes the old man.'"

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

In Bavaria each reaper, as they are about to finish, has a patch to cut.
They reap as fast as they call, and he who has to cut the last few
handfuls "drives out the old man." Near Stettin the woman who binds the
last sheaf has "the old man," and bears the nickname for a year.
Formerly she was herself dressed up in pease-straw and carried home,
when the harvesters danced with her till the straw fell off.

These examples illustrate the contests in reaping and binding, as well
as the subsequent treatment of the sheaf and the person cutting it; and
when it is remembered that the person who is last at reaping represents
the corn spirit, the idea is fully expressed by dressing him in corn
straw. That it is the corn spirit that is represented is clearly seen
from the customs of parts of Germany, where a man and woman, called the
"oats’ wife" and the "oats’ man" dance at the harvest festival, after
which the corn stalks are plucked from their bodies till not a particle
is left. In these cases the idea is that the corn spirit—the "old
man"—the woman, or maiden, is the last sheaf, and that the spirit lives
in the barn during the winter. At sowing time it goes out to the fields
again to resume its functions And, as we saw, in the giving of the
maiden to the first mare that foals, in Aberdeenshire, and as is done in
parts of the West Highlands, where it is distributed among the cows at
Christmas, these functions include reproduction among cattle as well as
growth of corn.

This points to our harvest customs as being a

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

survival from primitive times, and that in one form or another they have
passed down from generation to generation, adapting themselves to all
conditions of life and of faith. They carry us back to the wild revelry
that surrounded the man-god when he gave his people the gifts of
harvest. They still have an echo—faint it may be but real—of the days
when the chief abdicated for a time that he and his people might do
homage to the corn spirit, and to other darker rites when a victim was
slain as the personification of that spirit, to ensure a resurrection in
spring. Even in Christian times, and before our forefathers had freed
themselves from the lingering customs of paganism, they preserved the
maiden as an act of faith and religious duty. What is now a pleasant
ending to the labours of the season was formerly a serious fact, a rite
which, if omitted, might entail the entire subversion of the order of
nature for the season. Formerly the god was present among men, and could
give or withhold blessings, and on that account his rites could not be
neglected with impunity. Man has travelled far in his conceptions of
divinity since then, but the facts of the present connect the life and
knowledge of modern times with a long-forgotten past, which carries us
back to the youth of the world, when man first began to make his way, by
slow and painful steps, to an understanding of the facts of the universe
around him, and the supernatural which he felt must exist somewhere. The
significance of his acts has changed, and the ideas which are associated
with them have no resemblance to what an earlier people

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

conceived, but the acts remain. They are the same substantially the
world over. It is impossible they could have been so universally
borrowed, and the only conclusion is, that they existed from earliest
times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137:\*](ram10.htm#fr_136) J. Sutton, MS.
notes.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138:\*](ram10.htm#fr_137) J. Sutton, MS.
notes.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139:\*](ram10.htm#fr_138) Dalton, "Ethnology
of Bengal," quoted by J. G. Frazer.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[139:†](ram10.htm#fr_139) J. G. Frazer.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[139:‡](ram10.htm#fr_140) Mannhardt.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[140:\*](ram10.htm#fr_141) Miss J. Ligertwood,
MS. notes.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[141:\*](ram10.htm#fr_142) Martin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Prophecy](ram11)
