[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tbr03)  [Next](tbr05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Berakoth*, by , by A. Lukyn Williams, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. ITS RELATION TO THE TEACHING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT

The value of the Mishna then is to be found chiefly in two directions.
It throws light upon the history of Judaism as it is to-day, presenting
a very definite advance upon the religion of the O.*T*.—whether for good
or for evil we need not now discuss—and it also helps us to understand
the environment in which our Lord and His disciples, throughout the
first century, lived and taught. True, it does not supply information
about the whole of that environment. Other influences—very strong and
very different (*e.g.* reactionary Apocalyptic teaching and the pressure
of heathenism)—were also at work. Neither can its information about the
Judaism of the first century be always accepted at its face value. Much
had happened to the Jews between, say, 50 and 200 A.D.

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The city and the
temple, the priests and the Sadducees, had gone, and with them also the
ordinary life of the provincial towns and the villages. It cannot but be
that writings, composed in their present form not earlier than the very
end of the second century, by persons who knew the old times only by
hearsay, contain many details which do not correspond to the facts. In
respect of age therefore it is *primâ facie* probable that when the
Mishna differs from authorities so much earlier, as Josephus and the
N.*T*., these are more accurate than that. Unfortunately however
Josephus was biased by his desire to please his Roman masters, and it is
asserted that the writers of the N.*T*. were biased by their opposition
to Judaism. It is not easy to prove this latter assertion, but it must
not be altogether set aside by genuine lovers of truth. The Christian
student welcomes every inquiry. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

Taking then the Mishna as we find it, and for our immediate purpose we
may add the Tosephta, what light is thrown by this treatise of
*Berakoth* upon the religion of the Jews in the first century, and upon
the meaning of facts or phrases which are to be found in the N.*T*.?

First, the N.*T*. representation in general of the Jewish religion of
the day is abundantly confirmed. It is a legal religion. Every detail of
life, often considered of no importance in these days, has its

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

own regulation which must be observed. *Berakoth* implies this
throughout.

Secondly, the religion underlying *Berakoth* is not merely formal. Both
Mishna and Tosephta insist strongly on the truth that the mind and heart
must be occupied with religion (see below, pp. [14](tbr14.htm#page_14)
*sq*., [35](tbr32.htm#page_35), [37](tbr33.htm#page_37) *sq*.,
[85](tbr60.htm#page_85)). At first sight this would appear to be
contrary to the representation of Judaism in the N.*T*. There is much in
the Gospels against hypocrisy, as though Judaism insisted on action
only, disregarding the inner life. But such is not St. Paul's record of
his own experience, nor what we may gather from the little we know of
Zacharias and Elisabeth, Simeon and Anna, Nicodemus and Joseph of
Arimathæa, or indeed from our information about the antecedent and
character of the Twelve Apostles. There must have been much devout and
pre—existing earnestness to supply the *point d’appui* necessary for the
effect of our Lord's teaching. The Judaism of His time was indeed
imperfect, often very self—satisfied, often very ignorant of the true
meaning of Law and Prophets and Holy Writings, but, taking it as a
whole, it was concerned not with externals only, but also with inner
realities. Hypocrites in the worst sense of the word even the bulk of
the Pharisees were not—superficial and shallow they often were. For
their religion was poor indeed compared with the spiritual wealth which
the Lord Jesus came to impart, and has imparted in Christianity.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

Thirdly, *Berakoth* fully confirms the N.*T*. methods of using the Old
Testament. The logical and contextual meaning of a passage is often of
comparatively little importance. If the phraseology neatly describes a
truth—however far that truth may have been from the mind of the Old
Testament—it may fairly be used to strengthen the argument, and may be
quoted as the utterance, the Divine utterance, of Scripture in favour of
it. Examples may be found on almost every one of the following pages.
See, for example, pp. [13](tbr14.htm#page_13) *sq*.,
[85](tbr60.htm#page_85), [88](tbr63.htm#page_88),
[90](tbr64.htm#page_90).

Fourthly, several terms and phrases in the N.*T*. receive illumination
from *Berakoth*, *e.g.* pp. [45](tbr38.htm#page_45),
[50](tbr40.htm#page_50), [66](tbr47.htm#page_66),
[86](tbr62.htm#page_86).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xii:1](tbr04.htm#fr_0) On the general subject of
the trustworthiness of the links in the traditions see Bacher,
*Tradition u. Tradenten*, 1914.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Relation of the Mishna and the Tosephta](tbr05)
