[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tbr04)  [Next](tbr06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Berakoth*, by , by A. Lukyn Williams, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE RELATION OF THE MISHNA AND THE TOSEPHTA

The relation of the two documents here translated, the *Berakoth* of the
Mishna and the Berakoth of the *Tosephta* (properly *Tosephatha*,
"Additions") is part of the larger and more difficult question, the
relation of the Mishna and the Tosephta in general. It has been the
subject of a good deal of discussion, and requires a much more minute
investigation than the present writer has been able to make, and much
wider knowledge than he possesses, to justify his giving an independent
verdict.

The chief theories (besides the very complicated

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

theory of Lauterbach in the *Jewish Encyclopedia* (*s.v.* Tosephta)
based on the supposition that R. Aqiba made two summaries of the Oral
Law, one ultimately called Mishna, the other Tosephta), are as follows:

i\. The Tosephta is the Mishna expounded in the Palestinian Gemara ("the
Jerusalem Talmud"), our Mishna having arisen later in Babylon. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

ii\. The Tosephta represents for the most part those portions of R.
Meir's "Mishna," which were afterwards cut out, and now preserved with
some alterations and additions. <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2)

iii\. Our Mishna was written essentially as it now is about 200 A.D. by
R. Judah, who made use of previous collections of oral teaching,
especially one formed by R. Meir (*c*. 150 A.D.), on the basis of R.
Aqiba's collection (*c*. 130 A.D.). The Tosephta presupposes our Mishna
and elucidates it, and was written not long after it.

The present writer believes that the last theory holds good for
*Berakoth*. <span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3)

While the Tosephta of this Tract again and again presupposes our present
Mishna, *e.g.* I. 2

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

([p. 4](tbr11.htm#page_4)), I. 5 ([p. 8](tbr13.htm#page_8)), II. 8 ([p.
18](tbr17.htm#page_18) *sq*.), II. 11 ([p. 22](tbr22.htm#page_22)), III.
1 (pp. [28](tbr25.htm#page_28) *sq*.), and continually gives fresh
examples of the application of its principles (occasionally of great
importance, *e.g.* pp. [57](tbr40.htm#page_57) *sqq*., [p.
61](tbr43.htm#page_61)) or fills up some of the discussions, it never
adduces matter contradictory to it, or diverges from its system. Its
arrangement, to be sure, often differs in the order of its details, but
the Tosephta seems to have been much less used than the Mishna, and the.
Mishna may well have undergone some polishing before receiving its
present shape.

It will be seen that in this volume an endeavour has been made so to
arrange the Tosephta that each portion of it shall correspond, as far as
possible, with each Mishna. A. Schwarz in his volume cited above ([p.
xv](#page_xv), note [2](#fn_2)) recognized the importance of this being
attempted if the relation of the two documents was to be thoroughly
understood, and he investigated that relation minutely for the treatises
*Sabbath* and *Erubin*, drawing up tables which showed the resultant
rearrangement of the Tosephta, and printing a new text. Unfortunately he
did not do this for *Berakoth*. The present writer has therefore been
obliged to be content with what he is well aware is only a rough and
very tentative arrangement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xv:1](tbr05.htm#fr_1) Zuckermandel, *e.g.*
*Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Halachakritik*, ii. 48.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xv:2](tbr05.htm#fr_2) "dass die Tosifta in ihrem
weitaus grössten Theile nichts Anderes, als Elemente aus der
Mischnasammlung R. Meir's enthalte" (A Schwarz, *Die Tosifta des Tra
tats Sabbath in ihrem Verhältnisse zur Mischna*, 1879. 541.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xv:3](tbr05.htm#fr_3) Consult Strack, pp. 19,
93, and also his article in the *Theologisches Literaturblatt*, 1912, p.
482.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Authorities for the Text in Each Case](tbr06)
