[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nes03)  [Next](nes05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

# CHAPTER I.

### BIRTH.

<span id="img_oinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![O](img/oinit.jpg) |

N the occasion of a birth there were present a few of the mother's
female friends in the neighbourhood, besides the midwife.

But it was not every woman that was permitted to attend. A woman with
child was not allowed to be in the room; and if two women with child
happened to be living in the same house when the one felt the pains of
labour, they took a straw, or a stalk of grass, or some such thing, and
broke it, each repeating the words, "Ye tak yours, an I tak mine."
Neither could a woman giving suck seat herself on the edge of the bed of
the lying-in woman, from the belief that such an action stopped the flow
of the milk of the lying-in woman. If a woman in this condition did do
so unwittingly, and the milk ceased, the lying-in mother whose milk had
departed had to get secretly the child of her who had been the cause of
the disappearance of the milk, and, with the aid of a friend, to pass it
under and over her apron to bring back her milk.

While the woman was in labour all locks in the house were undone. One
who might enter the house during labour spoke to the woman, and wished
God speed to the birth. If the labour was difficult, the first who
chanced to enter gave her something, as a little water to moisten the
mouth, and there were those whose giving was reputed as of great virtue
in easing and hastening the birth. A doctor was called only in cases of
danger.

When the child was born there was a feast called the *merry meht*, part
of which was the indispensable cheese, or *cryin kebback*. In some
districts a bannock made of oatmeal, milk, and sugar, and baked in a
frying-pan, called the *cryin bannock*, was served up. Each one present
carried off a piece of the cheese to be distributed among friends, and
every one who

came also to see the mother and baby carried away a piece for the same
purpose. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

The belief in fairies was universal, and their power was specially
dreaded in the case of women in childbed and of unbaptised infants.
These beings were believed to have a great liking for human milk, and to
be constantly on the watch for opportunities to gratify their liking,
which could be done only by carrying off unsained or unchurched mothers.
Nor did they show less anxiety to get possession of infants. Every seven
years they had to pay "the teind to hell," and this they endeavoured to
do by a human being rather than by one of themselves.

On the birth of the child, the mother and offspring were *sained*, a
ceremony which was done in the following manner:--A fir-candle was
lighted and carried three times round the bed, if it was in a position
to allow of this being done, and, if this could not be done, it was
whirled three times round their heads; a Bible and bread and cheese, or
a Bible and a biscuit, were placed under the pillow, and the words were
repeated, "May the Almichty debar a’ ill fae this umman, an be aboot ir,
an bliss ir an ir bairn." When the biscuit or the bread and cheese had
served their purpose, they were distributed among the unmarried friends
and acquaintances, to be placed under their pillows to evoke
dreams. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

Among some of the fishing population a fir-candle or a basket containing
bread and cheese was placed on the bed to keep the fairies at a
distance. A pair of trowsers hung at the foot of the bed had the same
effect. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

Strict watch was kept over both mother and child till the mother was
churched and the child was baptised, and in the doing of both all
convenient speed was used. For, besides exposure to the danger of being
carried off by the fairies, the mother was under great restrictions till
churched. She was not allowed to do any kind of work, at least any kind
of work more

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

than the most simple and necessary. Neither was she permitted to enter a
neighbour's house, and, had she attempted to do so, some would have gone
the length of offering a stout resistance, and for the reason that, if
there chanced to be in the house a woman great with child, travail would
prove difficult with her. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

The Kirk of Scotland has no special service for the churching of women,
and churching was simply attending the ordinary service. The mother put
on her very best attire, and contrived if possible, however poor, to
have a piece of new dress; and generally a larger contribution was given
for the poor. On her journey home a neighbour by the wayside took her
in, and set before her both food and drink. If the distance from the
church and the state of the mother's health delayed the churching too
long, she betook herself to the ruins or to the site of some old chapel
that chanced to be near, and on that hallowed ground returned thanks to
God for his goodness. The site of the chapel of St. Bridget, with its
little churchyard and a few nameless stones, near Tomintoul, was the
resort of many a mother; and under the dome of Heaven, with the hills
for temple walls, and the green grass for a carpet, above the long, long
forgotten dead, in a temple not made with hands,

"Kneeling there,  
Down in the dreadful dust that once was man,  
Dust . . . that once was loving hearts,"

did she pour forth her heart for two human lives. Despite of all
superstition, it was a grand sight. Such mothers have made Scotland what
it is.

The first time after childbirth the mother went to fetch water, she did
so, not in a pail, but in her thimble or in a vessel of very small
content, to prevent the child's mouth from continually running saliva.
If possible she ought first to go upstairs rather than downstairs. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:1](nes04.htm#fr_0) Cf. Henderson's *Folk-Lore
of the Northern Counties* (published by the Folk-Lore Society), pp. 11,
12. This book will be referred to hereafter as "Henderson."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:2](nes04.htm#fr_1) *Ibid*. p. 14.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:3](nes04.htm#fr_2) *Ibid*. pp. 14, 15, and
*The Folk-Lore Record*, vol. ii. p. 197.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[6:1](nes04.htm#fr_3) Cf. Henderson, p. 16.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[6:2](nes04.htm#fr_4) Cf. *F. L. Record*, vol. i.
p. 11 (36).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Child](nes05)
