[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spa15)  [Next](spa17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWQM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
](index)*Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans*, by H.G. Raverty,
\[1868\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

### AHMAD SHAH, ABDĀLĪ,

#### SHAH DURR-I-DURRĀN. <span id="fr_339"></span>[\*](#fn_339)

<span class="smallcaps">Aḥmad Shāh</span>, the founder of the Durrānī
monarchy, rose from the mere character of a partisan, to a distinguished
command in the service of the Persian conqueror, Nādir <u>Sh</u>āh. Of
the family of the Saddozīs, and chief of the tribe of Abdālī, the most
illustrious family of the Af<u>gh</u>āns, he was, in his youth,
imprisoned in a fortress, with his elder brother Zū-l-fiḳār <u>Kh</u>ān,
by Husain <u>Kh</u>ān, governor of Kandahār for the Ghalzīs, which
powerful tribe of Af<u>gh</u>āns, after overrunning the whole of Persia,
had, a few years previously, trodden the throne of the Ṣūfis in the
dust, and conquered that mighty empire.

Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh and his brother, whose tribe were at feud with the
Ghalzīs, owed their freedom to Nādir <u>Sh</u>āh, who in the year <span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1736-37, laid siege to Ḳandahār, which he
captured. The brothers, with a powerful body of their clansmen, followed
the fortunes of the conqueror, and greatly distinguished themselves in
the war with the Turks; and were rewarded with the lands now held by the
Durrānī tribe in the vicinity of Ḳandahār.

On the day subsequent to the murder of Nādir <u>Sh</u>āh, (the
particulars of which, as belonging to Persian history, need not be here
detailed, although one among the causes of it has been attributed to his
attachment to the Af<u>gh</u>ān troops in his service) a battle ensued

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

between the Persians on the one side, and the Af<u>gh</u>āns and Uzbaks
on the other; but the event does not appear to have decided any thing.
But after this affair, Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh saw that no time was to be lost
in looking to the safety of himself and clansmen, and he accordingly
fought his way through the greater part of Khurāsān with a small force
of between 2000 and 3000 horsemen, and repaired, by rapid marches, to
Ḳandahār, which had now become the head-quarters of the Abdālī tribe,
and chief city of southwestern Af<u>gh</u>ānistān. Here he intercepted
an immense treasure, which had been sent from India for the use of Nādir
<u>Sh</u>āh, which Aḥmad appropriated, after compelling the Durrānīs,
who had first [seized](errata.htm#6) upon it, to give it up.

In October of the same year, Aḥmad, then but twenty-three years old,
assumed the title of <u>Sh</u>āh or King of Af<u>gh</u>ānistān, and was
crowned at Ḳandahār, with great pomp, the different chiefs of the
various Af<u>gh</u>ān tribes, with but few exceptions, and the
Kazalbā<u>sh</u>es, Balū<u>ch</u>īs, and Hazārahs, assisting; thus
laying the foundation of the Durrānī monarchy. And although the warlike
and independent people, who now became his subjects, had never been
accustomed to a sovereign's yoke, save in being compelled to pay tribute
to a foreign ruler; yet such were his energy and capacity for
government, that he was successful in gaining the affection of his own
tribe; and with the exception of the Ghalzīs, ever a most turbulent and
unruly sept, he succeeded in instilling among the other Af<u>gh</u>ān
tribes a spirit of attachment to their native monarch; and also in
others, not Af<u>gh</u>āns, but dwelling in Af<u>gh</u>ānistān. With the
Balū<u>ch</u> and Hazārah tribes, his neighbours, he formed an offensive
and defensive alliance.

Having first brought the refractory Ghalzīs into subjection, Aḥmad
<u>Sh</u>āh began his conquests; and such was the uninterrupted tide of
his success, that by the summer of 1751 he had conquered the whole of
the countries, extending as far west as Ni<u>sh</u>āpūr in

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Persian Khurāsān.
In 1752 he conquered Kā<u>sh</u>mīr, and obtained from the Mu<u>gh</u>al
Emperor of Hindūstān, a cession of the whole of the tract of country as
far, east as Sirhind, thus laying the foundation of a kingdom, which
soon became formidable to surrounding nations.

Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh had now leisure to turn his attention to internal
affairs, and to the settlement of Af<u>gh</u>ānistān and the
newly-acquired provinces. He thus passed the next four years in
tranquillity, and appears to have had time to devote himself to
literature. He used to hold, at stated periods, what is termed a
Majlis-i-æulamā, or Assembly of the Learned, the early part of which was
generally devoted to divinity and civil law—for Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh
himself was a Molawī <span id="fr_340"></span>[\*](#fn_340)—and
concluded with conversations on science and poetry. He wrote a
Collection of Odes in Pu<u>s’h</u>to, his own native tongue, tinged, as
usual, with the mysticisms of the Ṣūfis, and from that work the
following specimens have been taken. The work is scarce, particularly in
eastern Af<u>gh</u>ānistān. He was also the author of several poems in
the Persian language.

In the year 1756 Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh had again to buckle on the sword, and
advance into the Panjāb, which the Mu<u>gh</u>als about this time
attempted to recover; but he quickly regained all that had been lost;
drove them out of the Panjāb; and advanced straight upon Dilhī, which he
entered after but a faint opposition. His troops having become sickly,
from passing the whole of the hot season in India, warned Aḥmad
<u>Sh</u>āh to return, which he did soon after, having compelled the
Mu<u>gh</u>al Emperor to bestow the Panjāb and Sindh upon his son Tīmūr,
who had already been married to a Mu<u>gh</u>al princess. Aḥmad
<u>Sh</u>āh passed the next winter at Ḳandahār; but was obliged to set
out soon after, for the purpose of quelling disturbances in Persia and
Tūrkistān.

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

During the next year, matters had gone on badly in India; and Prince
Tamar was unable to stem the tide of Mahāraṭa conquest, which had now
rolled upon the Panjāb. The Mahāraṭas had taken Sirhind, and were
advancing from the west, which put Prince Tīmūr under the necessity of
retiring across the Indus with his troops. The Mahāraṭas, being now
unopposed, pushed on as far as the Hydaspes or Jhīlum, and also detached
a force to take possession of Multān.

These events happened in the summer of 1758; and Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh was
preparing to march into India, when he was detained by the rebellion of
the Balū<u>ch</u>īs; and although this matter was subsequently settled
by negotiation, it was not until the winter of 1759 that he could cross
the Indus and advance towards Hindūstān, the Mahāraṭas retreating before
him towards Dilhī, with the intention of covering that city. After
totally defeating them at Budlī, Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh again captured Dilhī.
He afterwards pursued his conquests in the Do-āb; but subsequently
encamped at a place near Anūp-<u>sh</u>ahr, where, being joined by the
Wazīr of Hindūstān, with the few available troops of the Mu<u>gh</u>al
Emperor, he prepared for passing the monsoon, or rainy season, and for
the final struggle with the Mahāraṭas, upon which the fate of India
rested.

The strength of Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh's army consisted of 41,800 horse, his
own subjects, on whom he chiefly relied; 28,000 Rohilahs—Af<u>gh</u>āns,
who were descended from those tribes who had emigrated from
Af<u>gh</u>ānistān at different periods, and settled in India <span
id="fr_341"></span>[\*](#fn_341)—and about 10,000 Hindūstānī troops,
under their own chiefs. He had also 700 *zambūraks*, or camel swivels,
small pieces carrying balls of about a pound weight, and a few pieces of
artillery.

The Mahārata army, under Wiswās Rāo, and <u>Sh</u>edda<u>sh</u>eo Rāo—

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

better known as the Bhow—consisted of about 70,000 horse, 15,000
infantry, trained after the European fashion, and 200 pieces of
artillery, besides numberless *shuturnāls*, or zambūraks.

At length, on the 7th of January 1761, after facing each other for some
months, the Mahāraṭas, who had been blockaded in their own intrenched
camp at Pānīpatt, a few miles from Dilhī, were, from the extremities to
which they were put, for want of food and forage, under the necessity of
attacking the Durrānī army. The details of this great and important
battle need not be enlarged on here: suffice it to say, that Aḥmad
<u>Sh</u>āh was completely successful. The Mahāraṭas were entirely
defeated and put to flight; and Wiwās Rao, the heir-apparent of the
Mahārata empire, and almost the whole of the army, perished in the
flight or pursuit.

The crowning victory at Pānīpatt, which was fatal to the power of the
Mahāraṭas, laid Hindūstān at the feet of Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh; but he,
seeing the difficulty of retaining so remote a dominion, adhered to the
wise plan ha had, from the first, carved out, and contented himself with
that portion of India that had formerly been ceded to him, bestowing the
rest on such native chiefs as had aided him in the struggle.

In the spring of 1761, Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh returned to Kabūl; and from
that period, up to the spring of 1773, was actively employed against
foreign and domestic foes; but at that time his health, which had been
long declining, continued to get worse, and prevented his engaging in
any foreign expeditions. His complaint was a cancer in the face, which
had afflicted him first in 1764, and at last occasioned his death.; He
died at Mur<u>gh</u>ah, in Af<u>gh</u>ānistān, in the beginning of June
1773, in the fiftieth year of his age.

The countries under his dominion extended, at the time of his death,
from the west of <u>Kh</u>urāsān, to Sirhind on the Jumnā, and from the
Oxus to the Indian Ocean, all either secured by treaty, or in actual
possession.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

The character of Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh has been so admirably depicted by
Mountstuart Elphinstone, <span id="fr_342"></span>[\*](#fn_342) that I
shall not hesitate to give it here in full.

"The character of Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh appears to have been admirably
suited to the situation in which he was placed. His enterprise and
decision enabled him to profit by the confusion that followed the death
of Nadir, and the prudence and moderation, which he acquired from his
dealings with his own nation, were no less necessary to govern a warlike
and independent people, than the bold and commanding turn of his own
genius.

"His military courage and activity are spoken of with admiration, both
by his own subjects, and the nations with whom he was engaged, either in
wars or alliances. He seems to have been naturally disposed to mildness
and clemency; and though it is impossible to acquire sovereign power,
and perhaps, in Asia, to maintain it, without crimes; yet the memory of
no Eastern Prince is stained with fewer acts of cruelty and injustice.

"In his personal character he seems to have been cheerful, affable, and
good-natured. He maintained considerable dignity on state occasions, but
at other times his manners were plain and familiar; and with the
Durrānīs he kept up the same equal and popular demeanour which was usual
with their <u>Kh</u>āns or Chiefs before they assumed the title of King.
He treated Moollahs and holy men with great respect, both from policy
and inclination. He was himself a divine and an author, and was always
ambitious of the character of a saint.

"His policy towards the different parts of his dominions was to rely
principally on conciliation with the Af<u>gh</u>āns and Balū<u>ch</u>īs;
with this difference between the nations, that he applied himself to the
whole people in the first case, and only to the chief in the

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

other. His possessions in Tūrkistān he kept under by force; but left the
Tartar chiefs of the country unremoved, and used them with moderation.
The Indian provinces were kept by force alone; and in Khurāsān he
trusted to the attachment of some chiefs, took hostages from others, and
was ready to carry his arms against any who disturbed his plans.

The handsome tomb of Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh stands near the palace at
Ḳandahār. It is held in great estimation by the Durrānīs, and is
respected as a sanctuary, no one venturing to touch one who has taken
refuge there. It is not uncommon for persons of even the highest rank,
to give up the world, and spend their lives at the monarch's tomb; and
certainly, if ever an Asiatic King deserved the gratitude of his
country, it was Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh, the "Pearl of the Durrānīs."

Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh was the grandfather of the unfortunate
<u>Sh</u>āh-<u>Sh</u>ūjaæ-ul-Mulk, whom the British re-seated on the
throne of the Durrānīs in 1839, which affair terminated so unfortunately
for all concerned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_339"></span>[287:\*](spa16.htm#fr_339) Durr-i-Durrān
signifies, "The Pearl of the Durrānīs," a name which the Abdālīs
acquired from wearing pearls in their ears.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[289:\*](spa16.htm#fr_340) A term equivalent to
Doctor of Literature or Divinity.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[290:\*](spa16.htm#fr_341) Also called
Pa<u>tt</u>āns in India; but the name, like that of Rohilah, is
applicable to Af<u>gh</u>āns generally.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[292:\*](spa16.htm#fr_342) "<span
class="smallcaps">Account of the Kingdom of Caubul</span>."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Poems of Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh, Abdālī](spa17)
