[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spa09)  [Next](spa11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWQM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
](index)*Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans*, by H.G. Raverty,
\[1868\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

#### KHU<u>SH</u>ḤĀL KHAN, <u>KH</u>A<u>TT</u>AK.

<span class="smallcaps"><u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl <u>Kh</u>ān</span>, the
renowned chieftain of the powerful Af<u>gh</u>ān tribe of
<u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak—alike a warrior and a poet—was born in the year
1022 of the Hijrah (<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1613).
<u>Sh</u>āh-bāz <u>Kh</u>ān, his father, having received a wound in a
battle with the Yūsufzīs—one of the most numerous and powerful of all
the Af<u>gh</u>ān tribes—from the effects of which he shortly after
died, <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl, who had also been severely wounded in the
head and knee, in the same battle, in the year <span
class="smallcaps">h.</span> 1050 (<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
1640), with the unanimous consent and approbation of his relations and
friends, became chief of his tribe. His father's fief was confirmed to
him by the Mu<u>gh</u>al Emperor, <u>Sh</u>āh Jahān, together with the
charge of protecting the royal road from A<u>tt</u>ak, on the Indus, to
Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar; and other duties were entrusted to him by that
sovereign, in whose estimation <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl stood high. He
accompanied Ṣult̤ān Murād Bak<u>sh</u>, the son of that monarch, on his
expedition to Bada<u>khsh</u>ān in 1645, and was also engaged in other
wars of that period.

On the death of <u>Sh</u>āh Jahān, <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl continued to
serve his son and successor, Aurangzeb, in the same capacity as
formerly; but after some time, through the machinations of his enemies,
among whom was Amīr <u>Kh</u>ān, Ṣūbah-dār, or governor of the province
of Kabūl, he fell under the displeasure, or rather suspicion of the
monarch, and was sent prisoner to the strong hill fortress of Gwalior,
in Upper India, where he remained in captivity about seven years; and
there it was that many of the following poems were written. At length,
at the recommendation of Muḥabbat <u>Kh</u>ān, the second of that name,
Aurangzeb released

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl, and sent him, along with the noble just referred
to—who had been lately appointed Ṣūbah-dār of Kabūl—for the purpose of
settling the affairs of the Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar district, which had fallen
into a very distracted state. But the iron had entered the soul of
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl, and on reaching his native country, he kept as
retired as possible; ceased to hold any intercourse with the governor of
the province, and other subordinate officers; and declined rendering any
assistance to the troops of the Emperor.

<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl's tribe had been long at feud with many of the
other Af<u>gh</u>āns around Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar, amongst whom were the
Yūsufzīs—fighting against whom, as before mentioned, his father lost his
life—and was generally engaged in hostilities with one or other of them;
but with the Afrīdīs, who were also powerful, the <u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>aks
maintained a close alliance. Matters, at length, went so far between the
<u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak chieftain and the Mu<u>gh</u>al authorities, as to
produce an open rupture. <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl now girded his loins
with the sword of courage; and in concert with Ae-mal <u>Kh</u>ān, and
Dar-yā <u>Kh</u>ān, chiefs of the Afrīdīs, carried on, for seven or
eight years, a determined and destructive war with the Mu<u>gh</u>als,
in which the latter were generally defeated.

The whole of the Af<u>gh</u>ān tribes from Banū to Jalālābād, seeing the
success of their countrymen over the hated Mu<u>gh</u>als, had been
drawn, by degrees, into the confederacy, which now aimed at no less than
the total expulsion of the Mu<u>gh</u>als from Af<u>gh</u>ānistān. But
the Yūsufzīs, who could have aided so effectually, held aloof; mid would
render no assistance to their countrymen, through enmity to the
Kha<u>tt</u>aks, notwithstanding that <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl went in
person, even as far as the Suwāt valley, to endeavour to instil into
them some of his own and his confederates’ patriotic spirit, but without
effect—they were deaf to the voice of the charmer. These events he
refers to, in the first of the following poems, written on that
occasion.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

Affairs at Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar had assumed such a serious aspect, that
Aurangzeb considered it necessary to appear in person on the scene; and
for about two years he remained encamped at A<u>tt</u>ak, superintending
the prosecution of the war; and that wily monarch, finding force
unavailable in such a difficult country, began to try the effect of
gold. In this he met with the success he desired; and some of the petty
clans of the confederacy became fascinated with the gold of the
Mu<u>gh</u>als, and submitted to the government; whilst others of
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl's friends began either to desert him, or to give
him cause to doubt their sincerity; and Ae-mal <u>Kh</u>ān and Dar-yā
<u>Kh</u>ān, his most powerful, and most trusty supporters, having
previously been removed, by death, from the scene, such an effect was
produced upon the fine spirit of <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl—as the following
pages testify—that he became disgusted, and sought to find peace in
retirement.

At length, he resigned the chieftainship of the <u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak
tribe, in favour of his eldest son A<u>sh</u>raf, and devoted himself to
books and literature. On A<u>sh</u>raf's becoming chief of the clan,
Bahrām, another son, who appears to have been always regarded with
aversion by his father for his degenerate acts, succeeded in gaining
over a considerable party to his side, and appeared bent upon bringing
misfortune upon his brother. They met in battle several times; and on
one occasion, Bahrām was taken prisoner, but succeeded, by his
artfulness and duplicity, in exciting the pity of his injured brother,
who set him at liberty. <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl, well aware of the
disposition of Bahrām, was highly incensed with A<u>sh</u>raf for
allowing him to escape so easily, and, as it turned out, not without
reason; for no sooner was Bahrām free, than he again commenced his
intrigues against A<u>sh</u>raf; and at length, in the year n. 1093
(<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1681), he succeeded in betraying
him into the hands of the Mu<u>gh</u>als. Aurangzeb sent him prisoner to
the strong fortress of Bejāpūr, in Southern India, where, after
lingering in captivity for about ten years, he died. A further account
of this unfortunate chieftain, will

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

be found prefixed to his poems; for, like other sons of
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl, as well as numbers of his descendants, he was a
poet as well as his father.

Afẓal <u>Kh</u>ān, the young son of A<u>sh</u>raf, now took up arms in
his father's cause, and was installed in the chieftainship by his
grandfather, who was still regarded as their natural and rightful chief,
by the majority of the tribe; but the youth and inexperience of
Afẓal—for he was only seventeen years of age—could not yet cope with the
wily Bahrām, who was also aided and upheld by the Mu<u>gh</u>als.
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl, therefore, taking Afẓal's youth into
consideration, and in order to prevent his clansmen from shedding the
blood of each other, interfered between the contending parties, fearing
that the tribe might hesitate to obey one of such inexperience, and
allowed Bahrām to enjoy the chieftainship, advising Afẓal to bide his
time, and not lengthen his father's captivity by opposition for the
present. Afẓal, therefore, retired with his family into the friendly
country of the Afrīdīs.

Not content with this success in all his schemes, Bahrām would not allow
his aged father to end his days in peace. Several times he made attempts
upon his life. He once despatched his son Mukarram <u>Kh</u>ān, with a
body of troops, to endeavour to secure the old man's person. Mukarram
went, as directed, against his grandfather; but the brave old chieftain,
who had attained his 77th year, having discovered the party from the
place of his retreat, advanced to meet them with his drawn sword in his
hand, at the same time—to quote the words of Afẓal <u>Kh</u>ān, his
grandson, already alluded to, who subsequently wrote a history of these
events—exclaiming, "Whoever are men amongst you, come to the sword, if
you dare; but veneration for the aged chieftain was so predominant in
every one's breast, that no one would make any attempt to lay hands on
him;" and Mukarram, ashamed, returned as he went. Bahrām, his father,
enraged at his son's failure, ordered him to

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

return, with directions to kill <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl with his own
hand, if he should refuse to deliver himself up. On Mukarram's return,
to carry out this inhuman order of a degenerate son, the old chief again
advanced from his place of shelter, and taking his stand upon the crest
of the hill, with his good sword in his hand, again dared them to
approach; and in this manner is said to have remained on the watch for
several days. But no one amongst the party had either the inclination or
the courage to face him, whom they still regarded as their natural
chief.

Bahrām, however, thinking the prey in his toils, had despatched a
message to the Mu<u>gh</u>al governor at Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar, to the effect
that the old lion was at length at bay; and requested him to send a
sufficient escort to take charge of him, and conduct him to
Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar. <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl, however, having been warned,
as soon as night set in, made his escape, after two of Bahrām's party
had lost their lives, and by the next morning succeeded in reaching the
boundary of the Afrīdī tribe—who had always been his friends—a distance
of 90 miles from Ako<u>rr</u>ah, the scene of the occurrences just
related.

<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl took up his residence in the Afrīdī country, and
returned no more to the home of his fathers, which he loved so well. He
died as he had lived, free, among the mountains of his native land, in
the 78th year of his age. Before taking his departure from a world, in
which he had drunk so deeply of the bitter cup of treachery and
unfaithfulness, he particularly charged those few of his children and
friends, who had remained faithful to him through all his trials and
misfortunes, that they should bury him where—to use his own words—"the
dust of the hoofs of the Mu<u>gh</u>al cavalry might not light upon his
grave;" and that "they should carefully conceal his last resting-place,
lest the Mu<u>gh</u>als might seek it out, and insult the ashes of him,
at whose name, whilst in life, they quailed; and by whose sword, and
that of his

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

clansmen, their best troops had been scattered like chaff before the
gale." A third request was, that in case any of his faithful children
should succeed, at any time, in laying hands upon Bahrām the Malignant,
they should, divide his body into two parts, and should burn one half at
the head of his grave, and the other at the foot. He was buried,
accordingly, at a place named I-su<u>rr</u>aey, a small hamlet in the
<u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak mountains, where his tomb may still be seen; and,
according to his dying request, his last resting-place was kept
concealed, till all danger of insult from the Mu<u>gh</u>als had passed
away.

<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl <u>Kh</u>ān was the father of fifty-seven sons,
besides several daughters; but, with the exception of four or five of
the former, they do not appear to have been particularly worthy of their
parent's affection.

<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl, from all accounts, was a voluminous author, and
is said to have composed about three hundred and fifty different works.
This, however, must be greatly exaggerated; nevertheless, he is the
author of numerous works, which I have myself seen, both in Persian, and
in the Pu<u>s’h</u>to, or Af<u>gh</u>ān, consisting of Poetry, Medicine,
Ethics, Religious Jurisprudence, Philosophy, Falconry, etc., together
with an account of the events of his own chequered life. It is greatly
to be regretted, however, that his descendants, after his death, had not
the opportunity to collect all his writings together; and the upshot is,
that many are known only by name. Amongst those which have thus been
lost or dispersed is, I fear, the autobiography I have referred to.

Some of <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl's poetical effusions, written during his
exile in India, and whilst struggling against the power of Aurangzeb,
will, I think, be considered highly of, even in the form of a literal
translation, and in an English dress, as coming from the pen of an
Af<u>gh</u>ān chief, cotemporary with the times of our Charles I.,
evincing, as they do, a spirit of patriotism, and love of hone and

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

country, not usual in the Oriental heart, but such as we might look for
in the Scottish Highlander, or Swiss mountaineer, of bygone days, whom
the hardy Af<u>gh</u>āns strongly resemble. A more extended account of
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl's writings, and those of his descendants, will be
found in the Introductory Chapter to my Af<u>gh</u>ān Grammar, published
last year, together with an account of the Af<u>gh</u>āns and their
literature.

Up to the time of <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl's chieftainship, the bounds of
the <u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak country were not well defined; that is to say,
each family of the tribe had no fixed lands allotted to them.
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl caused a survey to be made of all available land;
fixed the boundaries; entered them in a register; and, according to the
number of each man's family, assigned a corresponding quantity of land
for cultivation. This arrangement is still in force, and hitherto has
not, that I am aware of, been deviated from; and many small towers of
stone, erected to mark the different boundaries, still remain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Poems of <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl <u>Kh</u>ān,
<u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak](spa11)
