[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spa13)  [Next](spa15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWQM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
](index)*Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans*, by H.G. Raverty,
\[1868\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

### ÆABD-UL-ḲĀDIR KHĀN, <u>KH</u>A<u>TT</u>AK.

<span class="smallcaps">Æabd-ul-Ḳādir <u>Kh</u>ān</span>, son of
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl Khān, <u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak, and brother of
A<u>sh</u>raf, the subject of the preceding notice, was born in the year
E. 1063 (<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1652), and is the most
eloquent writer and poet of all <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl's sons, several
of whom were poets of no mean ability. Although his father had little
reason to be very partial towards his sons generally, on account of
their very unnatural conduct, and unfaithfulness towards himself, on too
many occasions; yet, upon the whole, Æabd-ul-Ḳādir appears to have been
a favourite, and to have shared considerably in his father's affection.

Æabd-ul-Ḳādir was as good at the sword as at the pen; and in the battle
with the Mu<u>gh</u>al troops at Ko<u>tt</u>ah, a place in the vicinity
of the Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar district, the victory of the confederate
Af<u>gh</u>āns was chiefly owing to the skill displayed by the poet on
that occasion; and it was he also who led the assault against that
fortress, which, after three hours of severe fighting, he captured. He
afterwards distinguished himself; in like manner, in the war of
Banga<u>s’h</u>, during which operations he was wounded; and the
successes gained in the war were celebrated in his name.

When his father abdicated the chieftainship of the tribe (as related in
the notice of <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl and his writings), and the sons
were each struggling to supplant each other, and grasp the vacant
authority, Æabd-ul-Ḳādir did not hold back. He tried very hard

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

to gain the chieftainship, but fortune was unpropitious; and
A<u>sh</u>raf, who, as the eldest son, had certainly the best right, was
chosen by his father and the tribe to succeed him. When A<u>sh</u>raf
was betrayed into the hands of the Mu<u>gh</u>als, and sent by Aurangzeb
into the Dakhan as state prisoner, "Bahrām the Malignant," the brother,
who had betrayed him, seized the chieftainship; but, subsequently, Afẓal
<u>Kh</u>ān, the son of A<u>sh</u>raf, became chief of the clan.

To pay obedience to this nephew appears to have been extremely difficult
and bitter for Æabd-ul-Ḳādir, who wished to hold the authority himself;
and although the whole of his brothers, then living, sided with him in
his ambitious designs, it was of no avail; for the tribe were unanimous
in favour of A<u>sh</u>raf's son Afẓal, in whom was the hereditary
right, as previously stated. The upshot, however, was, that Afẓal, the
nephew, saw no other practicable solution of the difficulty, according
to the custom of those days, than to get rid of all rivals; and,
accordingly, Æabd-ul-Ḳādir, together with ten of his brothers, and a
number of their sons, were put to death, at the village of Zamān
Ga<u>rr</u>aey, in one day, and buried in one grave; thus escaping the
sorrows and troubles of chieftainship.

The poems of Æabd-ul-Ḳādir, which are deeply imbued with Ṣūfi mysticism,
are thought very highly of by the Af<u>gh</u>āns; and his language is
extremely polished. His chief works, now known, are a Dīwān or
Collection of Odes, from which the following poems are taken; a
translation of Molawī Jāmī's celebrated poem of Yūsuf and
Zulī<u>kh</u>ā, from the Persian, which is rendered by the translator
into the most difficult style of Eastern poetry, and is considered the
most perfect of its kind in the Af<u>gh</u>ān language; the affecting
love tale of Adam and Dur<u>kh</u>āna’ī—which three or four other
authors have written on, both in verse and prose—together with
translations of <u>Sh</u>ai<u>kh</u> Saædī's Gulistān and Bostān, from
the Persian

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He is said, by his
descendants of the present day, to have been the author of about sixty
different works; but with the exception of a small volume on enigmas,
charades, and verses of mysterious meaning, even the names of them are
now unknown.

Specimens of his Odes in the original Pu<u>s’h</u>to, together with a
portion of Yūsuf and Zulī<u>kh</u>ā, and the first part of the Gulistān,
will be found in the "<span
class="smallcaps">Gul<u>sh</u>an-i-Roh</span>," or Selections in the
Af<u>gh</u>ān Language, published by me last year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Poems of Æabd-ul-Ḳādir <u>Kh</u>ān,
<u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak](spa15)
