[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpr07)  [Next](gpr09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Greek Popular Religion*, by Martin P. Nilsson, \[1940\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

### THE HOUSE AND THE FAMILY

A great scholar has graphically described Artemis as the goddess of the
outdoors (Göttin des Draussen). Untamed nature may be lovely and
beneficent, but, on the other hand, it may be terrible and frightful.
The desert wilderness, the rugged mountains, the deep ravines, the
precipitous torrents, and the thick forests inspire awe in man. Among
them he feels himself subject to unknown and dangerous powers. There the
wild beasts which attack him and his herds roam about, and robbers may
lurk in the glens. "It is better at home, for it is dangerous outdoors"
is an old Greek saying, found in Hesiod and in the *Homeric Hymn to
Hermes*. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) Within the walls of his
house, man feels himself secure, protected from dangers which threaten
without. The ancient Greeks would have understood what we mean when we
say, "A man's house is his castle." In the beginning of the work of
Thucydides there is a vivid description of how unsafe life was in early
times because of robbers and pirates.

Descriptions in Homer, supported by archaeological evidence, give us an
idea of the house of the early age in its main lines. It was a great,
square, single-roomed house--a hall with a porch or forehall on one of
its shorter sides and a fixed hearth in its midst. It stood in a
courtyard, surrounded by a wall or fence to protect the inhabitants
against the attacks of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

wild beasts and human foes. This house or hall is generally called a
*megaron*. It is by its nature an isolated building, standing free, not
connected with other houses, and adapted to country life. But already in
prehistoric times there were towns in Greece with complex buildings and
narrow streets, <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75) and in the great
palaces of the Mycenaean age the megaron was introduced into a complex
building plan. We may confidently suppose that the detached house with
its enclosed courtyard survived for a long time in the countryside, but
such mean houses were so lightly built that they have left no traces.
When people settled together in towns or large villages, lack of space
caused a modification of the plan. The houses were built together and
connected, the fence disappeared, and the courtyard was reduced; but the
characteristic form of the great living room, the megaron, remained,
even in the city of Priene, which was built at the time of Alexander the
Great.

The house and its fence protected man against enemies and other dangers,
but it needed divine protection itself. Its protector was Zeus, whom we
here meet in various roles quite different from that of the weather god.
The Greek word for fence is *herkos*, and *herkeios* is an epithet of
Zeus. According to Homer, the altar of Zeus Herkeios generally stood in
the courtyard before the house, where sacrifices and libations were
offered to him. Mythology emphasizes the savagery of Neoptolemus by
making him slay the aged Priamus on the very altar of Zeus Herkeios. An
altar of Zeus Herkeios was to be seen among the ruins of the house of
Oinomaos at Olympia. He is found at Sparta as well as at Athens, where
Aristophanes and Sophocles mention him. In Sophocles his name is used to
designate the whole family. A much more important fact is that at
Athens, when the newly elected archons were examined, they

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

were asked whether they owned an Apollo Patroos and a Zeus Herkeios and
where these sanctuaries were, for this question presupposes that every
citizen had an altar of Zeus Herkeios. The divine protector of the house
was found in every house; but his name proves that originally he was the
protector of the fence which surrounded the house and that he guarded it
against dangers from without.

There is another rather curious instance of the protection which Zeus
afforded to the house. He was the god of lightning, and as such he was
named Kataibates <span id="fr_76"></span>[3](#fn_76) (he who descends),
that is to say the thunderbolt, which was imagined to be a stone or a
stone ax. Stones inscribed with the name of this god have been found.
Now an altar dedicated to Zeus Kataibates stood beside that of Zeus
Herkeios in the ruins of the house of Oinomaos, another was found in a
house on the island of Thera, and at Tarentum there were altars before
the houses on which sacrifices were made to Zeus Kataibates. The altars
were erected and the offerings were made in order to protect the house
from a stroke of lightning. This custom seems to have been fairly
common.

Much more important and interesting is another form of Zeus in which he
appears as a house god, Zeus Ktesios, the most curious of all, because
the sky god appears in the guise of a snake. He is not very often
mentioned, for on the whole the simple house cult belonged to the daily
routine for which literature cared little. But that he was venerated in
all of Greece is proved by the fact that this epithet also appears in
the Doric form *Pasios*. It is exceptional for an epithet thus to appear
in various dialectic forms. Both Ktesios and Pasios signify "the
Acquirer." Sometimes the name is used without the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

addition of Zeus. An altar of Zeus Ktesios is mentioned by Aeschylus, an
altar dedicated to him was found in a house on the island of Thera, and
there are other such altars of a small size with his name. On the island
of Thasos he is called Zeus Patroos Ktesios, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[4](#fn_77) and in its colony Galepsos in Thrace he
appears in company with Zeus Herkeios Patroos. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[5](#fn_78) He was still not forgotten in the Roman
era. Finally, on a relief found at Thespiae his name is inscribed above
a great snake ([Fig. 26](gpr22.htm#img_fig26)). Fortunately, Attic
writers give some information about his cult. Menander says that he was
the protector of the storehouse and that his function was to guard this
against thieves. <span id="fr_79"></span>[6](#fn_79) It is said that his
"image" was erected in the storehouse. Another Attic writer, who treated
of the cults, explains the kind of image these were. He calls them
*semeia* (tokens or symbols). <span id="fr_80"></span>[7](#fn_80) These
were jars or amphorae, the handles of which were deco-rated with woolen
fillets and into which were put fresh water, oil, and fruit of all
kinds. The Greek word for this mixture was panspermia or pankarpia, a
kind of offering which we have become acquainted with in the agrarian
cults. I suppose that this offering was a meal offered to the house god
and that the house god in the shape of a snake came to partake of it.

That this supposition is right is proved by a cult that is familiar
under quite a different aspect, that of the Dioscuri, <span
id="fr_81"></span>[8](#fn_81) the sons of Zeus as their name indicates.
I shall not here go into their generally known appearance and cult, but
shall confine myself to their role in the house cult. The form in which
the Dioscuri appear in mythology and in their cult in later times is
certainly the result of a blending of various elements.}

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They were also
called *Anaktes* (kings), and sometimes they appear as children. Their
cult was especially popular at Sparta, where they were evidently house
gods. A series of reliefs shows their symbols and cult paraphernalia.
Their special symbol was the *dokana*, two upright beams joined by two
transverse beams. This has been interpreted variously and ingeniously
both in ancient and modern times. The simple explanation is that the
dokana represent the wooden frame of a house built of crude bricks. On
certain reliefs from Sparta and from its colony Tarentum, and on Spartan
coins, two amphorae appear as the symbols of the Dioscuri ([Fig.
29](gpr23.htm#img_fig29)). A snake approaches them or is coiling around
them or the beams of the dokana ([Fig. 31](gpr23.htm#img_fig31)). That
the Dioscuri were house gods is proved by their cult. A meal was set out
and a couch prepared for them in the house. This is what Euphorion
did; <span id="fr_82"></span>[9](#fn_82) Phormion was punished because
he would not open the chamber of his house to them. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[10](#fn_83) These meals were called *theoxenia*.
Theron of Agrigentum and Iason of Pherae prepared meals in honor of the
Dioscuri, and Bacchylides in a poem invites them to a meal from which
wine and songs will not be missing. The Athenians spread the table in
the prytaneum for them with a frugal, old-fashioned meal of cheese,
cakes, olives, and leeks. Some vase paintings and reliefs show the
Dioscuri coming to the meal. Here they are riding, in accordance with
the common conception ([Fig. 32](gpr23.htm#img_fig32)). In Sparta they
appear as snakes. The close affinity of Zeus Ktesios and the sons of
Zeus is apparent.

Another Zeus, for whose occurrence in the house cult there is no
evidence, must be mentioned because he is not infrequently represented
as a snake. This is Zeus Meilichios, who was much venerated in Attica
([Fig. 27](gpr22.htm#img_fig27)). He is also represented as seated on a
throne with a cornucopia ([Fig. 28](gpr22.htm#img_fig28)); he is
accordingly

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

akin to Zeus the Acquirer. His name signifies the one who has been
propitiated, he is the propitious one. This is probably the reason why
he became like Zeus the Acquirer. Zeus Soter, the Savior, also seems to
have been connected with Meilichios at Piraeus. I do not speak here of
that Zeus Soter whom the cities celebrated as the savior of their
political freedom, but of the Zeus Soter of the house cult. To him, some
of the altars which were found in the houses of the island of Thera are
dedicated. Aeschylus says that besides the upper and nether gods he is
the third protector of the house. At the symposium the first and third
libations were devoted to him. No representations of him in snake form
are known, however. Finally, we must mention Agathos Daimon, the Good
Daemon, whose name is inscribed on one of the house altars from Thera.
At the end of the daily meal a few drops of unmixed wine were poured out
on the floor as a libation to Agathos Daimon. He too is represented as a
snake.

Why Zeus was the protector of the house is clear if we consider the
epithet "father," which is very often given to him by the Greeks, the
Indians, the Illyrians, <span id="fr_84"></span>[11](#fn_84) and the
Romans, in whose language the epithet coalesced with the noun to form
the name "Jupiter." The occurrence of this epithet among these four
peoples of Indo-European stock proves that it is an ancient heritage
from the time before they had separated. It is generally supposed to
designate Zeus as father of gods and men, but this is clearly erroneous.
It cannot be believed that in those ancient times, before the
Indo-European peoples separated and began their great migrations, there
was a nobility which traced its pedigree back to the gods as Homeric
heroes did. Nor did Zeus create man or the world. He is neither creator
nor father of men in the physical sense. Consequently,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the epithet must designate him as *pater familias*, the head of

the family, which perfectly agrees with the patriarchal social
conditions of the Indo-European peoples. And this is the reason why Zeus
was the obvious protector of the house.

But the astonishing fact is that Zeus appears as a snake. This Zeus was,
of course, called by modern scholars a chthonian deity, because the
snake is always considered to represent the souls of, the dead.
Certainly it does so very often, but we may question whether this is
always the case. It was once supposed that all family and domestic cults
had sprung from the cult of the dead. This doctrine should be reduced to
its proper proportions. It would surely be astonishing if the house cult
had no other roots than the cult of the dead. Among many European
peoples, as well as in other parts of the world, we find the snake as
the guardian of the house. In my own country--Sweden--the house snake
was extremely common, and only a few years ago there died a farmer of
whom I know that he was wont to offer milk to the house snakes. The
house snake is still generally venerated in the Balkan Peninsula and in
modern Greece. When it appears it is greeted with reverent words, such
as "welcome, lady of the house," "your obedient servant," "guardian," or
"guardian spirit of our house." It is related that in ancient Egypt the
houses were full of snakes, which were so tame that they came to partake
of offerings when they were called. The Minoan snake-goddess was a house
goddess. <span id="fr_85"></span>[12](#fn_85) She was a snake-goddess,
not because, as Sir Arthur Evans asserts, she was the lady of the nether
world and of the dead, but because she was a house goddess. The guardian
spirit of the house had been anthropomorphized, and the house snake had
become her attribute. Kipling, in "Letting in the Jungle," says of the
doomed village: "Who could fight against the jungle, when the very
village cobra had left his

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

hole in the platform under the peepul." The holy snake of Athena also
went away when the Athenians evacuated their city at the coming of the
Persians, as Herodotus reports. Athena was the house goddess of the
Mycenaean king. She inherited the snake from the Minoan house goddess.
The great goddess had statues, and the snake could be given to her as
her attribute, but in the common house cult there were no statues or
even statuettes. Hence, it seems that the house god Zeus himself
appeared as a snake. But in reality the association is rather loose and
came about because Zeus was the protector of the house and the snake was
its guardian spirit in bodily form. Many snakes may live in a house, and
therefore people sometimes called them the sons of Zeus, the *Dios
kouroi*. In the cult of the house snake we have come upon another
striking similarity between modern folklore and ancient Greek popular
religion. We see how modern folklore is helpful to a correct
understanding of Greek popular religion. The cult of the house snake
also survives in modern Greece.

In the middle of the great living room of the Greek house, the megaron,
was a fixed hearth. The fire of this hearth warmed the house on cold
days, and over this fire meals were prepared. The fixed hearth was
brought to Greece by the Greeks, for in Minoan houses there were only
portable fire pots of the sort used for preparing meals in Hellenistic
and even in modern times. <span id="fr_86"></span>[13](#fn_86) The
sanctity of the hearth is common to the Greeks and the Romans, and it is
very probable that the Greek name of the goddess of the hearth, Hestia,
and her Roman name, Vesta, are both derived from the same word, although
this has been contested. <span id="fr_87"></span>[14](#fn_87) The
sanctity of the hearth

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

is bound up with the fixed hearth. Consequently, the Greeks are
responsible for it, not the pre-Greek population, who did not have a
fixed hearth. The hearth is the center of the house and the symbol of
the family. When Herodotus counts the number of families in a town he
counts the hearths. <span id="fr_88"></span>[15](#fn_88) The hearth was
sacred. A suppliant took his place on the hearth, as did Odysseus,
Telephus, and Themistocles, because he was protected by its sanctity.
People swore by the hearth. The newborn babe was received into the
family by being carried around the hearth, a ceremony which was called
*amphidromia* and took place on the fifth day after birth.

The hearth was the center of the house cult and of the piety of daily
life. We should remember that while our piety is expressed chiefly in
words, by prayers, the piety of the ancients was expressed chiefly by
acts. In our schools the day begins with a morning prayer, but in the
Greek gymnasia there was a hero shrine at which cult rites were
performed. This fact is particularly evident in daily life. Whereas we
say a prayer before and after the meal, the Greeks before the meal
offered a few bits of food on the hearth and after it poured out a few
drops of unmixed wine on the floor. The libation was said to be made to
Agathos Daimon, the Good Daemon, the guardian of the house, who appears
in snake form. It is not stated to whom the food offering was made, but
if someone is to be mentioned it must be Hestia, the goddess of the
hearth.

Thus, the hearth was sacred, and the daily meal was sacred. The sanctity
of the meal found expression in the rites which accompanied it. It is a
widespread custom to regard the meal as sacred. Among many peoples a
stranger who has been permitted to take part in a meal is thereby
received under the protection of the tribe and becomes inviolable. The
meal unites with sacred bonds all who partake of it. One may recall the
old Russian custom of offering a distinguished visitor bread and

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

salt before the gates of the city. The same feeling was alive in Greece.
"Thou hast forsaken thy great oath, the table, and the salt," the poet
Archilochus says reproachfully to someone; <span
id="fr_89"></span>[16](#fn_89) and the orator Aeschines asked
emphatically of his colleagues by whom he thought he had been deceived:
"Where is the salt? where the table? where the drink-offering?" <span
id="fr_90"></span>[17](#fn_90)

This sanctity of the meal, which knits the partakers together in a
sacred community, will help us to understand the best known and most
prominent of all the rites of Greek religion, animal sacrifice. Its
meaning and origin have been vigorously discussed. A great scholar, W.
Robertson Smith, advanced the hypothesis of a totemistic origin. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[18](#fn_91) The animal sacrificed was the god
himself, Smith thought, and by eating his flesh the worshippers were
united with the god and imbued with his power. This hypothesis has been
somewhat modified by Jane Harrison <span id="fr_92"></span>[19](#fn_92)
and others, but it is untenable. Not the slightest trace of totemism
appears among the Greeks or other Indo-European peoples. The sacredness
of the meal suffices to explain the peculiarities of animal sacrifice.
The sacrifice is a meal common to the god and his worshippers, linking
them together in a close unity. The god is invited by prayer to come to
the meal. He receives his portion, and the men, who are the greater
number, feast on their portions. This is the reason why only a small
portion of the flesh is offered on the altar of the god, a custom which
had already struck Hesiod as so peculiar that he invented a mythical
explanation of it. <span id="fr_93"></span>[20](#fn_93) The sacrifice is
sacred. This is the reason why it is often forbidden to carry parts of
it outside the holy precinct. Even the refuse, the bones,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

and the ashes are sacred and are left in the sanctuary. Such a sacrifice
was performed not only at festivals but occasionally in daily life.
Whenever an animal was slaughtered, it was considered as a sacrifice and
was accompanied by the usual rites. The word *philothytes* (fond of
sacrifices) signifies simply "hospitable."

The sanctity of the hearth was not conferred by any god but was
immanent. Hestia was never wholly anthropomorphized. She was given a
place in mythology, but her statues are artistic inventions, not cult
statues. Nevertheless, her importance was great. A Greek proverb says:
"Begin with Hestia," that is to say, "Begin at the right end." If an
animal was slaughtered and a sacrifice was performed in the house, the
first pieces of the sacrificial meal were offered to her, just as at all
meals a few pieces were laid on the hearth. This is the reason why it
seems to have been customary to offer the first pieces of all
sacrifices, even public ones, to Hestia. The position of Hestia is also
reflected in semiphilosophical speculations, in which it is said that
Hestia is enthroned in the middle of the universe, just as the hearth is
the center of the house.

A few words must be added concerning the role of the hearth in public
cult, for this role is the best argument for the belief that the family
was the model and basis of Greek state organization. Just as each family
had its hearth, so the state had its hearth in the council house, where
the officials and a few especially honored citizens took their daily
meals. When a colony was founded, the emigrants carried fire from this
hearth to kindle the fire on the hearth of the new city.

The cult of the hearth comes down from hoary antiquity, from
Indo-European times. It induces me to add a remark of general bearing in
regard to the difference between our religion and that of the Greeks,
especially their popular religion. This difference is less appreciated
than it ought to be, because

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

our attitude is not the same as that of the Greeks. The sanctity of the
hearth was great, and we rightly speak of a cult of the hearth because
certain sacred acts were performed there. But there were no prayers, no
images, and no gods, for Hestia herself was not a full-fledged
personality but only a pale personification. The cult consisted in acts.
The place was sacred in itself according to the ideas of the ancients.
For us it is not so. Nowadays a place is made sacred by erecting a house
of God on it. Sanctity is conferred upon the building by its
consecration as a church. In antiquity sanctity was inherent in the
place. The place was not made holy by building a house for a god on it,
but a house for a god was built on a certain place because the place was
holy. Finally, although the hearth was sacred, the same hearth was used
for nonreligious purposes--for roasting meat and cooking food, for
boiling water and heating the room. Here we come upon another difference
between ancient and modern religious ideas, which is perhaps greater
than any other. We make a clear distinction between the sacred and the
profane, we object to using holy things for ordinary purposes. Religion
is our Sunday suit. The ancients also made a distinction between the
sacred and the profane. Sacred things could not be treated as profane
things. But the sacred and the profane were intermingled in daily life
in a manner of which there are almost incredible examples. Religion was
much more a part of daily life among the ancients than among us. It
consisted in acts more than in words. Obviously, there was a danger that
these acts might become a mere routine, and in general they probably
did. They were deprived of real religious feeling even more than our
grace is when it is recited by custom and without thinking.

The sanctity of the hearth was so great that everyone who sat on it was
sacred and could not be violated. One would probably say that he was
under the protection of the gods. This

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

was, in fact, considered to be so, but the statement is not quite
correct. The hearth was sacred in itself, and its sacredness was
conferred upon anybody touching it. There was no question of any
personal god as mediator. But, on the other hand, everyone who sought
protection at the hearth was under the protection of the gods and, it
should be added, of a quite special god, Zeus. This takes us back to
early times, in which law and justice and the state were only slightly
developed. Divine protection to foreigners and suppliants was much more
important then than in historical times, when life was regulated by
state institutions and laws and was relatively secure. It should be
added that respect for certain religious rules in regard to foreigners
and suppliants is found among most primitive peoples, and such rules
must have existed in very ancient Indo-European times.

Under primitive conditions a foreigner is excluded from the protection
of law and custom enjoyed by members of the tribe. The word "guest" and
the Latin word *hostis* (foe) are the same word. A suppliant is a man
who by trespassing against law and custom has put himself outside their
protection. Such a man might be purified and pardoned. As for
foreigners, there might be reasons for entering into friendly relations
with them. They might, for example, be merchants, for trade, however
restricted, always existed, even in early times and under the most
primitive conditions. From ancient times there was a god who conferred
his protection upon foreigners and suppliants, namely, Zeus. He, and
almost he alone, has epithets referring to this function (*xenios*,
*hikesios*), and they were very commonly used in the historical age.
Zeus was the protector of suppliants and foreigners because he, being
"the father," the divine *pater familias*, upheld the unwritten laws and
customs on which the power of the head of the family depended. Such laws
and customs were necessary, for otherwise a person who

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

had trespassed would not have been able to make atonement, nor would
commerce or other relations with people outside the tribe have been
possible. So Zeus was the protector of the unwritten laws, of the moral
order, and of customs invested with religious sanctity in primitive
Greek society. But as political life gradually developed and life became
more secure, this function of Zeus receded into the background in actual
practice. Generally speaking, people did not need to turn to Zeus for
protection. Theoretically, Zeus always remained the heavenly ruler and
the protector of justice and morality, but hardly more than
theoretically.

From of old, Zeus had been the protector of the house, the family, and
its rights. But as the power of the state increased and internal peace
was secured, life became safer and consequently the importance of Zeus
in private life diminished. Zeus Ktesios and Zeus Herkeios remained, but
not much was said of them. The old rites were performed in a routine
fashion, more or less without thought. The importance of Zeus and his
cult was noticeably less in the classical age than in Homer. He was
still officially the highest god, the protector of the state and of the
law. But in daily life people cared more for other gods who were nearer
to them.

If in historical times people were relatively safe from the assaults of
enemies and from robbery, they feared dangers of other kinds which
threatened them and their houses. Belief in magic and witchcraft is
primeval and was not lacking even in the classical age. The house also
had to be protected against secret perils from these sources, and for
this purpose people resorted to gods who were able to avert evils of all
kinds. One of these was the great hero Heracles, who had vanquished so
many monsters, ghosts (Antaeus was a ghost), and even Death. Above the
entrance to the house was placed the inscription:

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Here the
gloriously triumphant Heracles dwells; here let no evil enter."

Another great averter of evil was Apollo, the god of sanctity and
purifications. A connection with the cult of stones was peculiar to this
god, and holy stones were common in Greece. Xenophon speaks of certain
men who did not venerate temples or altars and of others who venerated
stones, pieces of wood, and animals. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[21](#fn_94) Theophrastus mentions superstitious
people who poured oil on stones standing at the crossroads, fell on
their knees before them, and greeted them with a kiss of the hand. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[22](#fn_95) The omphalos of Apollo at Delphi is
especially famous. In origin it was neither a tomb nor the center of the
world, but simply one holy stone among many which was made famous by the
fame of the god. Holy stones stood before the doors of houses. Perhaps
they did in prehistoric times also. Square-cut stones have been found
before the gates of the Homeric Troy by Dörpfeld, as well as by recent
American excavators. <span id="fr_96"></span>[23](#fn_96) Since they
could have served no practical purpose, it is supposed that their
purpose was religious. We may perhaps venture to go further. Hrozný has
published the inscriptions of four Hittite altars and read their
pictographs. <span id="fr_97"></span>[24](#fn_97) Among other gods there
is mentioned one whose name is read *Apulunas*. He is a god of the
gates. If this be so, then the oriental origin of Apollo, which has
often been asserted but which has also been vehemently contested, is
proved beyond doubt. This oriental Apollo was the protector of the
gates; so was the Apollo of classical Greece.

Before every Greek house a high conical stone was erected

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> ([Fig.
30](gpr23.htm#img_fig30)). It was called Apollo Agyieus (Apollo of the
street) because it stood in the street before the door of the house. Oil
was poured on it, and it was decorated with fillets. Hence, it was
sometimes called an altar, and sometimes an altar was erected at its
side. We do not know whether the holy stone is older than Apollo
himself. At all events, the stone protected the house against evil, and
in the classical age it was sacred to Apollo, the great averter of evil.

Before the house an image of the triple Hecate was very often erected
([Fig. 33](gpr23.htm#img_fig33)). Aristophanes tells us that when a
woman left her house she made a prayer to Hecate. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[25](#fn_98) We shall have more to say of this goddess
later. The Greeks always regarded her as the special goddess of magic
and witchcraft. A power that can produce ghosts and magical evils can
also avert them, and this is the reason why images of Hecate were set up
at crossroads and before houses.

In this chapter I have dealt with the religion of the house and the
family. I may perhaps pertinently conclude it by a few words about the
social aspect of ancient Greek religion. In contrast to oriental peoples
and to some others, the Greeks had no professional priests and no
temples with their own property and administration. The head of the
family was the priest of his house and the king was the high priest of
the state as long as kingship existed and longer; for when the political
power was taken from the king, he was usually allowed to keep his
religious duties. Even if professionals, such as seers and sacrificial
priests, were called in, they were only advisers. From the beginning,
religion and society, or the state, were not two separate entities among
the Greeks but two closely related aspects of the same entity.

If we consider these facts, an unexpected question emerges. The house
cult was only a small part of Greek religion. Who

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

looked after all the other cults of the gods in the old days? Of course
many of the cults, including some which might have been inherited from
the Mycenaean age, were under the care of the king. Furthermore, we must
not attribute to earlier times great temples and statues like those of
the classical age. The cult places were groves, springs, caves, and the
like, with a simple altar of unworked stones or sods. We hear of this
state of things in Homer, who relates that sacrifices were performed at
a spring beneath a plane tree and that votive gifts were suspended from
the branches of the trees in the grove. If such a cult place became
popular and was visited by many people and if the god received many
gifts, a small building was erected to house him and his paraphernalia.
This is what we mean when we speak of a temple of those times. A
building of this sort might be erected by the people in common. But in
several cases we know that the cult was under the care of a certain
family, which was, of course, the family owning the ground where the
cult place was.

A great many cults were the property of a certain family. We know that
this was true in Attica, <span id="fr_99"></span>[26](#fn_99) about
which our information is much better than about other states of Greece,
and we may suppose that the same was true everywhere. To adduce some
examples, the Eleusinian Mysteries belonged to the Eumolpidae; the
Mysteries at Phlya belonged to the Lycomidae; the priestess of Athena
Polias and the priest of Poseidon in the Erechtheum were taken from the
Eteobutadae, whence it is inferred that this family was the old royal
house of Athens; and the Bouzygae performed the sacred plowing at the
foot of the Acropolis. Herodotus says that he does not know the origin
of Isagoras, the rival of Cleisthenes, but that

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

his family sacrificed to Zeus Karios. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[27](#fn_100) A certain cult was characteristic of a
certain family.

Such a state of things is characteristic of the rule of the nobility, to
whom the political power belonged at the commencement of the archaic
age. The lower classes, the people without ancestors, turned to modest
rural sanctuaries or even to the cults maintained by the nobility, on
whom they were dependent. They apparently formed a kind of cult
association, of which the members were called *orgeones* (worshippers).
In regard to the cult, Solon seems to have put these associations on an
equal footing with the noble families. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[28](#fn_101) The noble families were divided into
phratries, or brotherhoods, whose members were called *phrateres*
(brothers). The political reforms of Solon and Cleisthenes
democratically extended this organization to the people without
ancestors. Every Athenian citizen belonged to a brotherhood. This
political reorganization must have involved a reorganization of the
family cult.

I have already said that the newly elected Athenian archons were asked
if they possessed a Zeus Herkeios, an Apollo Patroos, and family tombs
and where these were situated. Zeus Herkeios was, as we have seen, the
protector of the courtyard. Apollo Patroos was the *agyieus*, the stone
pillar erected before the door of the house. The purpose of these
questions was to ascertain that the man was a citizen. In an age when
written records were unknown, citizenship was proved by the ownership of
a house and ground. Such proof could be given only by men who owned
landed property. But the people without ancestors had no landed
property. The democratic reform did not alter the form of the
examination, but it altered the form of the cult so that it embraced all
the people. The old house gods were taken over by the phratries. The
phratries maintained

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

a cult of the gods of the phratries. These gods were called *patrooi*
(inherited from the ancestors) or *phratrioi* (gods of the brotherhood).
The Athenians venerated Zeus Herkeios, whom others called Patroos or
Phratrios, and Apollo Patroos, who was supposed to be the mythical
ancestor of the Athenian people. To these was added the city goddess
Athena with the epithet of Phratia.

It may perhaps be objected that the matters just mentioned do not belong
to popular religion as we understand it. But in ancient Greece they did,
for the cult of the phratry gods was the cult of all the people, since
it was the cult of the small subdivisions of the Attic state. The origin
of these gods is to be found in the family and house cult. This cult is
little known. In the classical age it consisted mainly of the daily
routine, and its importance vanished when politics and the great cults
became predominant. The aim of this chapter has been to reveal its
fundamental significance for a correct understanding of the religion and
the life of the Greek people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[65:1](gpr08.htm#fr_74) Hesiod, *Opera*, vs.
365, and *Homeric Hymn to Hermes*. vs. 36.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[66:2](gpr08.htm#fr_75) Best known is the town
excavated by M. N. Valmin on Malthi and described in his work, *The
Swedish Messenia Expedition* (Lund, 1938).

<span id="fn_76"></span>[67:3](gpr08.htm#fr_76) See my paper, "Zeus
Kataibates," *Rheinisches Museum*, XLIII (1908), 315 ff. For the various
aspects of Zeus mentioned here see also the great work by A. B. Cook,
*Zeus*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[68:4](gpr08.htm#fr_77) *Revue archèologique*,
IX (1937), 195.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[68:5](gpr08.htm#fr_78) Dittenberger, *Sylloge
inscriptionum Graecarum*, Vol. III, No. 991.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[68:6](gpr08.htm#fr_79) *Pseudo-Herakles*, frag.
519, in T. Kock, *Comicorum Atticorum fragmenta* (Leipzig, 1880-88).

<span id="fn_80"></span>[68:7](gpr08.htm#fr_80) Anticleides, in
Athenaeus, XI, p. 473b.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[68:8](gpr08.htm#fr_81) See my book, *The
Minoan-Mycenaean Religion* and Its Survival in Greek Religion (Lund,
1927), especially pp. 469 ff.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[69:9](gpr08.htm#fr_82) Herodotus, VI, 127.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[69:10](gpr08.htm#fr_83) Pausanias, III, 16, 3.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[70:11](gpr08.htm#fr_84) Hesychius s.v.
Δειπάτυρος· ὁ θεὸς Τυμφαίοις. The Tymphaeans were a tribe in Epirus.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[71:12](gpr08.htm#fr_85) See my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, pp. 279 ff.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[72:13](gpr08.htm#fr_86) In early Minoan times
there seems sometimes to have been a fixed hearth; later only portable
fire pots existed. See P. Demargne, "Culte funéraire et foyer domestique
dans la Crète minoenne," *Bulletin de correspondance hellénique*, LVI
(1932), 60 ff.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[72:14](gpr08.htm#fr_87) By F. Solmsen,
*Untersuchungen zur griechischen Laut- and Verslehre* (Strassburg,
1901), pp. 191, 213.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[73:15](gpr08.htm#fr_88) Herodotus, I, 177.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[74:16](gpr08.htm#fr_89) Frag. 96, in Bergk,
*Poetae lyrici Graeci*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[74:17](gpr08.htm#fr_90) Demosthenes, XIX, 189.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[74:18](gpr08.htm#fr_91) Lectures on the
Religion of the Semites, 3d ed. (London, 1927).

<span id="fn_92"></span>[74:19](gpr08.htm#fr_92) Prolegomena, pp. 84 ff.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[74:20](gpr08.htm#fr_93) *Theogony*, vss. 535
ff. See Ada Thomsen, "Der Trug des Prometheus," *Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft*, XII (1909), 460 ff.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[79:21](gpr08.htm#fr_94) *Memorabilia*, I, 1,
14.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[79:22](gpr08.htm#fr_95) *Characteres*, 16.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[79:23](gpr08.htm#fr_96) W. Dörpfeld, *Troja and
Ilion* (Athens, 1902), p. 134 and Figs. 44, 45; C. W. Blegen in *Amer.
Journ. of Archaeology*, XXXVIII (1934), 241, Fig. 18, and XLI (1937),
593, Fig. 36.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[79:24](gpr08.htm#fr_97) B. Hrozný, "Les Quatre
Autels 'hittites' hiéroglyphiques d’Emri Ghazi et d’Eski Kisla," *Archiv
orientalin*, VIII (1936), 171 ff.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[80:25](gpr08.htm#fr_98) *Lysistrata*, vs. 64.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[81:26](gpr08.htm#fr_99) The examples are
collected by J. Toepffer, *Attische Genealogie* (Berlin, 1889).

<span id="fn_100"></span>[82:27](gpr08.htm#fr_100) Herodotus, V, 66.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[82:28](gpr08.htm#fr_101) See my *Gesch. der
griech. Rel.*, I, 672.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cities; the Panegyreis](gpr09)
