[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks07)  [Next](mks09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### PART FIVE

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part tells how the subconscious processes are continually at work,
and it tells how we may consciously direct this work instead of being
mere passive recipients of its activity. It tells how we may have a
vision of the destination to be reached, the dangers and pitfalls to be
avoided. It tells how "the word has become flesh," how we are constantly
creating and re-creating ourselves. It tells of a mental home which each
of us is building for ourselves, the importance of this home, where the
material is secured, the character of the furnishing, how and why many
of us need a mental housecleaning in case we wish to realize our ideas.
It tells of the conditions by which we may come into an inheritance of
health, harmony and prosperity, and the condition is one which demands
no sacrifice except the loss of our limitations, our servitudes and our
weaknesses, and costs only the labour of harvesting its great resources.

</div>

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART FIVE

After studying this Part carefully, you will see that every conceivable
force or object or fact is the result of mind in action.

Mind in action is thought, and thought is creative. Men are thinking now
as they never thought before. Therefore, this is a creative age, and the
world is awarding its richest prizes to the thinkers.

Matter is powerless, passive, inert. Mind is force, energy power. Mind
shapes and controls matter. Every form which matter takes is but the
expression of some pre-existing thought.

But thought works no magic transformations; it obeys natural laws; it
sets in motion natural forces; it releases natural energies; it
manifests in your conduct and actions, and these in turn react upon your
friends and acquaintances, and eventually upon the whole of your
environment.

You can originate thought, and, since thoughts are creative, you can
create for yourselves the things you desire.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

#### PART FIVE

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:1">V, 1</span></span>1. At least
ninety per cent. of our mental life is subconscious, so that those who
fail to make use of this mental power live within very narrow limits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:2">V, 2</span></span>2. The
subconscious can and will solve any problem for us if we know how to
direct it. The subconscious processes are always at work; the only
question is, are we to be simply passive recipients of this activity, or
are we to consciously direct the work? Shall we have a vision of the
destination to be reached, the dangers to be avoided, or shall we simply
drift?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:3">V, 3</span></span>3. We have
found that mind pervades every part of the physical body and is always
capable of being directed or impressed by authority coming from the
objective or the more dominant portion of the mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:4">V, 4</span></span>4. The mind,
which pervades the body, is largely the result of heredity, which, in
turn, is simply the result of all the environments of all past
generations on the responsive and ever-moving life forces. An
understanding of this fact will enable us to use our authority when we
find some undesirable trait of character manifesting.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:5">V, 5</span></span>5. We can
consciously use all the desirable characteristics with which we have
been provided and we can repress and refuse to allow the undesirable
ones to manifest.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:6">V, 6</span></span>6. Again,
this mind which pervades our physical body is not only the result of
hereditary tendencies, but is the result of home, business and social
environment, where countless thousands of impressions, ideas, prejudices
and similar thoughts have been received. Much of this has been received
from others, the result of opinions, suggestions or statements; much of
it is the result of our own thinking, but nearly all of it has been
accepted with little or no examination or consideration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:7">V, 7</span></span>7. The idea
seemed plausible, the conscious received it, passed it on to the
subconscious, where it was taken up by the Sympathetic System and passed
on to be built into our physical body. "The word has become flesh."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:8">V, 8</span></span>8. This,
then, is the way we are constantly creating and re-creating ourselves;
we are to-day the result of our past thinking, and we shall be what we
are thinking to-day, the Law of Attraction is bringing to us, not the
things we should like, or the things we wish for, or the things some one
else has, but it brings us "our own," the things which we have created
by our thought processes, whether consciously or unconsciously.
Unfortunately, many of us are creating these things unconsciously.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:9">V, 9</span></span>9. If either
of us were building a home for ourselves, how careful we would be in
regard

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

to the plans; how we should study every detail; how we should watch the
material and select only the best of everything; and yet how careless we
are when it comes to building our Mental Home, which is infinitely more
important than any physical home, as everything which can possibly enter
into our lives depends upon the character of the material which enters
into the construction of our Mental Home.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:10">V, 10</span></span>10. What is
the character of this material? We have seen that it is the result of
the impressions which we have accumulated in the past and stored away in
our subconscious Mentality. If these impressions have been of fear, of
worry, of care, of anxiety; if they have been despondent, negative,
doubtful, then the texture of the material which we are weaving to-day
will be of the same negative material. Instead of being of any value, it
will be mildewed and rotten and will bring us only more toil and care
and anxiety. We shall be for ever busy trying to patch it up and make it
appear at least genteel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:11">V, 11</span></span>11. But if
we have stored away nothing but courageous thought, if we have been
optimistic, positive, and have immediately thrown any kind of negative
thought on the scrap heap, have refused to have anything to do with it,
have refused to associate with it or become identified with it in any
way, what then is the result?

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Our mental
material is now of the best kind; we can weave any kind of material we
want; we can use any colour we wish; we know that the texture is firm,
that the material is solid, that it will not fade, and we have no fear,
no anxiety concerning the future; there is nothing to cover, there are
no patches to hide.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:12">V, 12</span></span>12. These
are psychological facts; there is no theory or guess work about these
thinking processes; there is nothing secret about them; in fact, they
are so plain that every one can understand them. The thing to do is to
have a mental house-cleaning, and to have this housecleaning every day,
and keep the house clean. Mental, moral and physical cleanliness are
absolutely indispensable if we are to make progress of any kind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:13">V, 13</span></span>13. When
this mental house-cleaning process has been completed, the material
which is left will be suitable for the making of the kind of ideals or
mental images which we desire to realize.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:14">V, 14</span></span>14. There
is a fine estate awaiting a claimant. Its broad acres, with abundant
crops, running water and fine timber, stretch away as far as the eye can
see. There is a mansion, spacious and cheerful, with rare pictures, a
well-stocked library, rich hangings, and every comfort and luxury. All
the heir has to do is to assert his heirship, take possession, and use
the property. He must use it; he must not let it decay;

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

for use is the condition on which he holds it. To neglect it is to lose
possession.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:15">V, 15</span></span>15. In the
domain of mind and spirit, in the domain of practical power, such an
estate is yours. You are the heir! You can assert your heirship, and
possess, and use this rich inheritance. Power over circumstances is one
of its fruits, health, harmony and prosperity are assets upon its
balance sheet. It offers you poise and peace. It costs you only the
labour of studying and harvesting its great resources. It demands no
sacrifice, except the loss of your limitations, your servitudes, your
weakness. It clothes you with self-honour, and puts a sceptre in your
hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:16">V, 16</span></span>16. To gain
this estate, three processes are necessary: You must earnestly desire
it. You must assert your claim. You must take possession.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:17">V, 17</span></span>17. You
admit that those are not burdensome conditions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:18">V, 18</span></span>18. You are
familiar with the subject of heredity. Darwin, Huxley, Haeckel, and
other physical scientists have piled evidence mountain high that
heredity is a law attending progressive creation. It is progressive
heredity which gives man his erect attitude, his power of motion, the
organs of digestion, blood circulation, nerve force, muscular force,
bone structure and a host of other faculties on the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

physical side. There are even more impressive facts concerning heredity
of mind force. All these constitute what may be called your human
heredity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:19">V, 19</span></span>19. But
there is a heredity which the physical scientists have not compassed. It
lies beneath and antecedent to all their researches. At a point where
they throw up their hands in despair, saying they cannot account for
what they see, this divine heredity is found in full sway.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:20">V, 20</span></span>20. It is
the benignant force which decrees primal creation. It thrills down from
the Divine, direct into every created being. It originates life, which
the physical scientist has not done, nor ever can do. It stands out
among all forces supreme, unapproachable. No human heredity measures up
to it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:21">V, 21</span></span>21. This
Infinite Life flows through you; is you. Its doorways are but the
faculties which comprise your consciousness. To keep open these doors is
the Secret of Power. Is it not worth while to make the effort?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:22">V, 22</span></span>22. The
great fact is, that the source of all life and all power is from within.
Persons, circumstances and events may suggest need and opportunities,
but the insight, strength and power to answer these needs will be found
within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:23">V, 23</span></span>23. Avoid
counterfeits. Build firm foundations

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

for your consciousness upon forces which flow direct from the Infinite
source, the Universal Mind of which you are the image and likeness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:24">V, 24</span></span>24. Those
who have come into possession of this inheritance are never quite the
same again. They have come into possession of a sense of power hitherto
undreamed of. They can never again be timid, weak, vacillating, or
fearful. They are indissolubly connected with Omnipotence. Something in
them has been aroused; they have suddenly discovered that they possess a
tremendous latent ability of which they were heretofore entirely
unconscious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:25">V, 25</span></span>25. This
power is from within, but we cannot receive it unless we give it. Use is
the condition upon which we hold this inheritance. We are each of us but
the channel through which the Omnipotent power is being differentiated
into form; unless we give out the channel is obstructed and we can
receive no more. This is true on every plane of existence and in every
field of endeavour and all walks of life. The more we give, the more we
get. The athlete who wishes to get strong must make use of the strength
he has, and the more he gives the more he will get. The financier who
wishes to make money must make use of the money he has, for only by
using it can he get more.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:26">V, 26</span></span>26. The
merchant who does not keep his goods going out will soon have none
coming in; the business which fails to give efficient service will soon
lack customers; the barrister who fails to get results will soon lack
clients, and so it goes everywhere; power is contingent upon a proper
use of the power already in our possession; what is true in every field
of endeavour, every experience in life, is true of the power from which
every other power known among men is begotten—spiritual power. Take away
the spirit and what is left? Nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:27">V, 27</span></span>27. If then
the spirit is all there is, upon the recognition of this fact must
depend the ability to demonstrate all power, whether physical, mental or
spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:28">V, 28</span></span>28. All
possession is the result of the accumulative attitude of mind, or the
money consciousness; this is the magic wand which will enable you to
receive the idea, and it will formulate plans for you to execute, and
you will find as much pleasure in the execution as in the satisfaction
of attainment and achievement.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_V:29">V, 29</span></span>29. Now, go
to your room, take the same seat, the same position as heretofore, and
mentally select a place which has pleasant associations. Make a complete
mental picture of it, see the buildings, the grounds, the trees,
friends, associations, everything complete. At

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

first you will find yourself thinking of every thing under the sun,
except the ideal upon which you desire to concentrate. But do no let
that discourage you. Persistence will win, but persistence requires that
you practise these exercises every day without fail.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Relation and connection are not somewhere and some time, but everywhere
and always.—Emerson.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

#### PART FIVE

41\. *What proportion of our mental life is subconscious?*

At least ninety per cent.

42\. *Is this vast mental storehouse generally utilized?*

No.

43\. *Why not?*

Few understand or appreciate the fact that it is an activity which they
may consciously direct.

44\. *Where has the conscious mind received its governing tendencies?*

From heredity which means that it is the result of all the environments
of all past generations.

45\. *What is the law of attraction bringing to us?*

Our "Own."

46\. *What is our "Own"?*

What we inherently are, and is the result of our past thinking, both
conscious and subconscious.

47\. *Of what is the material with which we construct our mental home
composed?*

The thoughts which we entertain.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

48\. *What is the Secret of Power?*

A recognition of the omnipresence of omnipotence.

49\. *Where does it originate?*

All life and all power is from within.

50\. *Upon what is the possession of power contingent?*

Upon a proper use of the power already in our possession.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

The key to every man is his thought. Sturdy and defying though he look,
he has a helm which he obeys, which is the idea after which all his
facts are classified. He can only be reformed by showing him a new idea
which commands his own.—Emerson.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Six](mks09.md)
