[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks08)  [Next](mks10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### PART SIX

<div style="font-size: 90%">

TELLS of the unlimited possibilities of the Universal Mind, which is the
life principle of every atom in existence, and explains how this mind is
differentiated in form. It tells of the most marvellous piece of
mechanism which has ever been constructed, and tells how the effect
which will be produced depends entirely upon the "mechanism to which it
is attached." It tells why we should all become familiar with the
mechanism so as to secure the effects which we desire. The power to
which it can be attached is unlimited, and we can accordingly secure any
effect we desire when we become familiar with the mechanism, and
understand how to make the proper connections. An understanding of this
part will enable you to plan courageously and execute fearlessly,
because you will have come into a knowledge of the source of all power
and this will determine your course in life, bringing you into contact
with all that is strongest and best and most desirable.

</div>

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART SIX

This Part will give you an excellent understanding of the most wonderful
piece of mechanism which has ever been created. A mechanism whereby you
may create for yourself Health, Strength, Success, Prosperity or any
other condition which you desire. Necessities are demands, and demands
create action, and actions bring about results. The process of evolution
is constantly building our tomorrows out of our to-days. Individual
development, like Universal development, must be gradual with an
ever-increasing capacity and volume.

The knowledge that if we infringe upon the rights of others we become
moral thorns and find ourselves entangled at every turn of the road,
should be an indication that success is contingent upon the highest
moral ideal, which is "The greatest good to the greatest number."

Aspiration, desire and harmonious relations constantly and persistently
maintained will accomplish results. The greatest hindrance is erroneous
and fixed ideas.

To be in tune with eternal truth we must possess poise and harmony
within. In order to receive intelligence the receiver must be in tune
with the transmitter.

Thought is a product of Mind, and Mind is creative, but this does not
mean that the Universal will change its modus operandi to suit us or our
ideas, but it does mean that we can come into harmonious relationship
with the Universal, and when we have accomplished this we may ask
anything to which we are entitled, and the way will be made plain.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

#### PART SIX

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:1">VI, 1</span></span>1. The
Universal Mind is so wonderful that it is difficult to understand its
utilitarian powers and possibilities and its unlimited creative effects.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:2">VI, 2</span></span>2. We have
found that this Mind is not only all intelligence but all substance.
How, then, is it to be differentiated in form? How are we to secure the
effect which we desire?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:3">VI, 3</span></span>3. Ask any
electrician what the effect of electricity will be and he will reply
that "Electricity is a form of motion and its effect will depend upon
the mechanism to which it is attached." Upon this mechanism will depend
whether we shall have heat, light, power, music or any of the other
marvellous demonstrations of power to which this vital energy has been
harnessed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:4">VI, 4</span></span>4. What
effect can be produced by thought? The reply is that thought is mind in
motion (just as wind is air in motion), and its effect will depend
entirely on the "mechanism to which it is attached."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:5">VI, 5</span></span>5. Here,
then, is the secret of all mental power; it depends entirely on the
mechanism which we attach.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:6">VI, 6</span></span>6. What is
this mechanism? You know something of the mechanism which has been
invented by Edison, Bell, Marconi and other electrical wizards, by which
place and space and time have become only figures of speech, but did you
ever stop to think that the mechanism

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

which has been given you for transforming the Universal, Omnipresent
Potential Power was invented by a greater inventor than Edison?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:7">VI, 7</span></span>7. We are
accustomed to examining the mechanism of the implements which we use for
tilling the soil, and we try to get an understanding of the mechanism of
the motor-car which we drive, but most of us are content to remain in
absolute ignorance of the greatest piece of mechanism which has ever
come into existence, the brain of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:8">VI, 8</span></span>8. Let us
examine the wonders of this mechanism; perhaps we shall thereby get a
better understanding of the various effects of which it is the cause.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:9">VI, 9</span></span>9. In the
first place, there is the great mental world in which we live and move
and have our being; this world is omnipotent, omniscient and
omnipresent; it will respond to our desire in direct ratio to our
purpose and faith; the purpose must be in accordance with the law of our
being, that is, it must be creative or constructive; our faith must be
strong enough to generate a current of sufficient strength to bring our
purpose into manifestation. "As thy faith is, so be it unto thee," bears
the stamp of scientific test.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:10">VI, 10</span></span>10. The
effects which are produced in the world without are the result of the
action and reaction of the individual upon the universal; that is the
process which we call thinking; the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

brain is the organ through which this process is accomplished. Think of
the wonder of it all! Do you love music, flowers, literature, art, or
are you inspired by the thought of ancient or modern genius? Remember,
every beauty to which you respond must have its corresponding outline in
your brain before you can appreciate it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:11">VI, 11</span></span>11. There
is not a single virtue or principle in the storehouse of nature which
the brain cannot express. The brain is an embryonic world, ready to
develop at any time as necessity may arise. If you can comprehend that
this is a scientific truth and one of the wonderful laws of nature, it
will be easier for you to get an understanding of the mechanism by which
these extraordinary results are being accomplished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:12">VI, 12</span></span>12. The
nervous system has been compared to an electric circuit with its battery
of cells in which force is originated, and its white matter to insulated
wires by which the current is conveyed; it is through these channels
that every impulse or desire is carried through the mechanism.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:13">VI, 13</span></span>13. The
spinal cord is the great motor and sensory pathway by which messages are
conveyed to and from the brain; then, there is the blood supply plunging
through the veins and arteries, renewing our energy and strength, the
perfectly arranged structure upon which

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the entire physical body rests, and, finally, the delicate and beautiful
skin, clothing the entire mechanism in a mantle of beauty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:14">VI, 14</span></span>14. This
then is the "Temple of the living God" and the individual "I" is given
control, and upon his understanding of the mechanism which is within his
control will the result depend.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:15">VI, 15</span></span>15. Every
thought sets the brain cells in action; at first the substance upon
which the thought is directed fails to respond, but if the thought is
sufficiently refined and concentrated, the substance finally yields and
expresses perfectly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:16">VI, 16</span></span>16. This
influence of the mind can be exerted upon any part of the body, causing
the elimination of any undesirable effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:17">VI, 17</span></span>17. A
perfect conception and understanding of the laws governing in the mental
world cannot fail to be of inestimable value in the transaction of
business, as it develops the power of discernment and gives a clearer
understanding and appreciation of facts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:18">VI, 18</span></span>18. The
man who looks within instead of without cannot fail to make use of the
mighty forces which will eventually determine his course in life and so
bring him into vibration with all that is best, strongest and most
desirable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:19">VI, 19</span></span>19.
Attention or concentration is probably the most important essential in
the development of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

mind culture. The possibilities of attention when properly directed are
so startling that they would hardly appear credible to the uninitiated.
The cultivation of attention is the distinguishing characteristic of
every successful man or woman, and is the very highest personal
accomplishment which can be acquired.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:20">VI, 20</span></span>20. The
power of attention can be more readily understood by comparing it with a
sun glass in which the rays of sunlight are focussed; they possess no
particular strength as long as the glass is moved about and the rays
directed from one place to another; but let the glass be held perfectly
still and let the rays be focussed on one spot for any length of time,
the effect will become immediately apparent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:21">VI, 21</span></span>21. So
with the power of thought; let power be dissipated by scattering the
thought from one object to another, and no result is apparent but focus
this power through attention or concentration on any single purpose for
any length of time and nothing becomes impossible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:22">VI, 22</span></span>22. A
very simple remedy for a very complex situation, some will say. All
right, try it, you who have had no experience in concentrating the
thought on a definite purpose or object. Choose any single object and
concentrate your attention on it for a definite purpose for even ten
minutes; you cannot do it; the mind will wander a dozen times and it
will be necessary to bring it back to the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

original purpose, and each time the effect will have been lost and at
the end of the ten minutes nothing will have been gained, because you
have not been able to hold your thought steadily to the purpose.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:23">VI, 23</span></span>23. It
is, however, through attention that you will finally be able to overcome
obstacles of any kind that appear in your path onward and upward, and
the only way to acquire this wonderful power is by practice—practice
makes perfect, in this as in anything else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:24">VI, 24</span></span>24. In
order to cultivate the power of attention, bring a photograph with you
to the same seat in the same room in the same position as heretofore.
Examine it closely at least ten minutes, note the expression of the
eyes, the form of the features, the clothing, the way the hair is
arranged; in fact, note every detail shown on the photograph carefully.
Now cover it and close your eyes and try to see it mentally; if you can
see every detail perfectly and can form a good mental image of the
photograph, you are to be congratulated; if not, repeat the process
until you can.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:25">VI, 25</span></span>25. This
step is simply for the purpose of preparing the soil; in Part Seven we
shall be ready to sow the seed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:26">VI, 26</span></span>26. It is
by such exercises as these that you will finally be able to control your
mental moods, your attitude, your consciousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:27">VI, 27</span></span>27. Great
organizers are learning to withdraw

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

from the multitude more and more, that they may have more time for
planning, thinking and generating the right mental moods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:28">VI, 28</span></span>28.
Successful business men are constantly demonstrating the fact that it
pays to keep in touch with the thought of other successful business men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:29">VI, 29</span></span>29. A
single idea may be worth thousands of dollars, and these ideas can only
come to those who are receptive, who are prepared to receive them, who
are in a successful frame of mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:30">VI, 30</span></span>30. Men
are learning to place themselves in harmony with the Universal Mind;
they are learning the unity of all things; they are learning the basic
methods and principles of thinking, and this is changing conditions and
multiplying results.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:31">VI, 31</span></span>31. They
are finding that circumstances and environment follow the trend of
mental and spiritual progress; they find that growth follows knowledge;
action follows inspiration; opportunity follows perception; always the
spiritual first, then the transformation into the infinite and
illimitable possibilities of achievement.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:32">VI, 32</span></span>32. As
the individual is but the channel for the differentiation of the
Universal, these possibilities are necessarily inexhaustible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:33">VI, 33</span></span>33.
Thought is the process by which we

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

may absorb the Spirit of Power, and hold the result in our inner
consciousness until it becomes a part of our ordinary consciousness. The
method of accomplishing this result by the persistent practice of a few
fundamental principles, as explained in this Book, is the Master-Key
which unlocks the storehouse of Universal Truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_VI:34">VI, 34</span></span>34. The
two great sources of human suffering at present are bodily disease and
mental anxiety. These may be readily traced to the infringement of some
Natural Law. This is, no doubt, owing to the fact that so far knowledge
has largely remained partial, but the clouds of darkness which have
accumulated through long ages are beginning to roll away and with them
many of the miseries that attend imperfect information.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

<span id="an_VI:35"></span>That a man can change himself, improve
himself, re-create himself, control his environment, and master his own
destiny is the conclusion of every mind that is wide awake to the power
of right thought in constructive action.—Larsen.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

#### PART SIX

51\. *What are some of the effects which can be produced by
electricity?*

Heat, light, power, music.

52\. *Upon what do these various effects depend?*

Upon the mechanism to which the electricity is attached.

53\. *What is the result of the action and interaction of the individual
mind upon the Universal?*

The conditions and experiences with which we meet.

54\. *How may these conditions be changed?*

By changing the mechanism by which the Universal is differentiated in
form.

55\. *What is this mechanism?*

The brain.

56\. *How may it be changed?*

By the process we call thinking. Thoughts produce brain cells, and these
cells respond to the corresponding thought in the Universal.

57\. *Of what value is the power of concentration?*

It is the very highest personal accomplishment which can be acquired,
and the distinguishing characteristic of every successful man or woman.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

58\. *How may it be acquired?*

By faithfully practising the exercises outlined in this System.

59\. Why is this so important?

Because it will enable us to control our thoughts, and since thoughts
are causes conditions must be effects; if we can control the cause we
can also control the effect.

60\. What is changing conditions and multiplying results in the
objective world?

Men are learning the basic methods of constructive thinking.

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

"This above all: To thine own self be true,  
And it must follow, as the night the day,  
Thou canst not then be false to any man."

</div>

</div>

<span id="page__000"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1" width="50%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="462"><p>ADVICE</p>
<p><em>Remember</em>—<br />
<em>Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much time as to conceive it</em>. JOUBERT</p>
<p>If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master Key"—go slowly.</p>
<p>Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for twenty-four weeks.</p>
<p>Realize the meaning of every phrase.</p>
<p>Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and stimulus.</p>
<p>Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the eternal cosmic principles.</p>
<p>Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.</p>
<p><em>The Publishers</em></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Seven](mks10.md)
