[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks03)  [Next](mks05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### PART ONE

<div style="font-size: 90%">

TELLS upon what possession is based, explains the cause of all gain,
explains the cause of loss as well as all other experiences in life. It
explains how power is secured. It tells of a world within and how this
world is governed. It explains how the solution for every problem in
life may be found. It tells how practical men and women find the
courage, power, hope, enthusiasm and confidence by which they are given
the intelligence and wisdom to make their dreams come true. It tells how
more efficiency is obtained and retained, and how our future may be
placed under our own control instead of being at the mercy of any
capricious or uncertain external power. It explains the cause of every
condition, the reason for every experience, the origin of all power, and
why all power is absolutely under our own control.

</div>

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART ONE

Would you bring into your life more power? Get the power consciousness.
More health? Get the health consciousness. More happiness? Get the
happiness consciousness. Live the spirit of these things until they
become yours by right. It will then become impossible to keep them from
you. The things of the world are fluid to a power within man by which he
rules them.

You need not acquire this power. You already have it. But you want to
understand it; you want to use it; you want to control it; you want to
impregnate yourself with it, so that you can go forward and carry the
world before you.

Day by day, as you go on and on, as you gain momentum, as your
inspiration deepens, as your plans crystallize, as you gain
understanding, you will come to realize that this world is no dead pile
of stones and timber, but that it is a living thing! It is made up of
the beating hearts of humanity. It is a thing of life and beauty.

It is evident that it requires understanding to work with material of
this description, but those who come into this understanding are
inspired by a new light, a new force, they gain confidence and greater
power each day, they realize their hopes and their dreams come true,
life has a deeper, fuller, clearer meaning than before.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

#### PART ONE

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:1">I, 1</span></span>1. That much
gathers more is true on every plane of existence, and that loss leads to
greater loss is equally true.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:2">I, 2</span></span>2. Mind is
creative, and conditions, environment and all experiences in life are
the result of our habitual or predominant mental attitude.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:3">I, 3</span></span>3. The
attitude of mind necessarily depends upon what we think. Therefore, the
secret of all power, all achievement and all possession depends upon our
method of thinking.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:4">I, 4</span></span>4. This is
true because we must "be" before we can "do" and we can "do" only to the
extent that we "are," and what we "are" depends upon what we "think."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:5">I, 5</span></span>5. We cannot
express powers that we do not possess. The only way by which we may
secure possession of power is to become conscious of power, and we can
never become conscious of power until we learn that all power is from
within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:6">I, 6</span></span>6. There is a
world within—a world of thought and feeling and power; of light and life
and beauty and, although invisible, its forces are mighty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:7">I, 7</span></span>7. The world
within is governed by mind. When we discover this world we shall find
the solution for every problem, the cause for every effect; and since
the world within is subject to our control, all laws, of power and
possession are also within our control.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:8">I, 8</span></span>8. The world
without is a reflection of the world within. What appears without is
what has been found within. In the world within may be found infinite
Wisdom, infinite Power, infinite Supply of all that is necessary,
waiting for unfoldment, development and expression. If we recognize
these potentialities in the world within they will take form within the
world without.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:9">I, 9</span></span>9. Harmony in
the world within will be reflected in the world without by harmonious
conditions, agreeable surroundings, the best of everything. It is the
foundation of health, and a necessary essential to all greatness, all
power, all attainment, all achievement and all success.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:10">I, 10</span></span>10. Harmony
in the world within means the ability to control our thoughts, and to
determine for ourselves how any experience is to affect us.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:11">I, 11</span></span>11. Harmony
in the world within results in optimism and affluence; affluence within
results in affluence without.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:12">I, 12</span></span>12. The
world without reflects the circumstances and the conditions of the
consciousness within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:13">I, 13</span></span>13. If we
find wisdom in the world within, we shall have the understanding to
discern the marvellous possibilities that are latent in this world
within, and we shall be given the power to make these possibilities
manifest in the world without.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:14">I, 14</span></span>14. As we
become conscious of the wisdom in the world within we mentally take
possession of this wisdom, and by taking mental possession we come into
actual possession of the power and wisdom necessary to bring into
manifestation the essentials necessary for our most complete and
harmonious development.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:15">I, 15</span></span>15. The
world within is the practical world in which the men and women of power
generate courage, hope, enthusiasm, confidence, trust and faith, by
which they are given the fine intelligence to see the vision and the
practical skill to make the vision real.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:16">I, 16</span></span>16. Life is
an enfoldment, not accretion. What comes to us in the world without is
what we already possess in the world within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:17">I, 17</span></span>17. All
possession is based on consciousness. All gain is the result of an
accumulative consciousness. All loss is the result of a scattering
consciousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:18">I, 18</span></span>18. Mental
efficiency is contingent upon harmony; discord means confusion;
therefore, he who would acquire power must be in harmony with Natural
Law.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:19">I, 19</span></span>19. We are
related to the world without by the objective mind. The brain is the
organ of this mind, and the cerebro-spinal system of nerves puts us in
conscious communication with every part of the body. This system of
nerves

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

responds to every sensation of light, heat, odour, sound and taste.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:20">I, 20</span></span>20. When
this mind thinks correctly, when it understands the truth, when the
thoughts sent through the cerebro-spinal nervous system to the body are
constructive, these sensations are pleasant, harmonious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:21">I, 21</span></span>21. The
result is that we build strength, vitality and all constructive forces
into our body, but it is through this same objective mind that all
distress, sickness, lack, limitation and every form of discord and
inharmony is admitted to our lives. It is therefore through the
objective mind, by wrong thinking, that we are related to all.
destructive forces.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:22">I, 22</span></span>22. We are
related to the world within by the subconscious mind. The solar plexus
is the organ of this mind; the sympathetic system of nerves presides
over all subjective sensations, such as joy, fear, love, emotion,
respiration, imagination and all other subconscious phenomena. It is
through the subconscious that we are connected with the Universal Mind
and brought into relation with the Infinite constructive forces of the
Universe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:23">I, 23</span></span>23. It is
the co-ordination of these two centres of our being, and the
understanding of their functions, which is the great secret of life.
With this knowledge we can bring the objective and subjective minds into
conscious co-operation

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

and thus co-ordinate the finite and the infinite. Our future is entirely
within our own control. It is not at the mercy of any capricious or
uncertain external power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:24">I, 24</span></span>24. All
agree that there is but one Principle or Consciousness pervading the
entire Universe, occupying all space, and being essentially the same in
kind at every point of its presence. It is all powerful, all wisdom and
always present. All thoughts and things are within Itself. It is all in
all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:25">I, 25</span></span>25. There
is but one consciousness in the universe able to think, and when it
thinks its thoughts become objective things to it. As this Consciousness
is omnipresent it must be present within every individual; each
individual must be a manifestation of that Omnipotent, Omniscient and
Omnipresent Consciousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:26">I, 26</span></span>26. As
there is only one Consciousness in the Universe that is able to think it
necessarily follows that your consciousness is identical with the
Universal Consciousness, or, in other words, all mind is one mind. There
is no dodging this conclusion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:27">I, 27</span></span>27. The
consciousness that focuses in your brain cells is the same consciousness
which focuses in the brain cells of every other individual. Each
individual is but the individualization of the Universal, the Cosmic
Mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:28">I, 28</span></span>28. The
Universal Mind is static or potential

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

energy; it simply is; it can manifest only through the individual, and
the individual can manifest only through the Universal. They are one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:29">I, 29</span></span>29. The
ability of the individual to think is his ability to act on the
Universal and bring it into manifestation. Human consciousness consists
only in the ability of man to think. Walker says, "Mind in itself is
believed to be a subtle form of static energy, from which arises the
activities called 'thought,' which is the dynamic phase of mind. Mind is
static energy, thought is dynamic energy—the two phases of the same
thing." Thought is therefore the vibratory force formed by converting
static mind into dynamic mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:30">I, 30</span></span>30. As the
sum of all attributes is contained in the Universal Mind, which is
Omnipotent, Omniscient and Omnipresent, these attributes must be present
at all times in their potential form in every individual. Therefore,
when the individual thinks, the thought is compelled by its nature to
embody itself in an objectivity or condition which will correspond with
its origin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:31">I, 31</span></span>31. Every
thought is therefore a cause, and every condition an effect; for this
reason it is absolutely essential that you control your thoughts so as
to bring forth only desirable conditions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:32">I, 32</span></span>32. All
power is from within, and is absolutely

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

under your control; it comes through exact knowledge and by the
voluntary exercises of exact principles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:33">I, 33</span></span>33. It
should be plain that when you acquire a thorough understanding of this
law, and are able to control your thought processes, you can apply it to
any condition; in other words, you will have come into conscious
co-operation with Omnipotent law, which is the fundamental basis of all
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:34">I, 34</span></span>34. The
Universal Mind is the life principle of every atom which is in
existence; every atom is continually striving to manifest more life; all
are intelligent, and all are seeking to carry out the purpose for which
they were created.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:35">I, 35</span></span>35. A
majority of mankind lives in the world without; few have found the world
within, and yet it is the world within that makes the world without; it
is therefore creative and everything which you find in your world
without has been created by you in the world within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:36">I, 36</span></span>36. The
Master Key will bring you into a realization of power which will be
yours when you understand this relation between the world without and
the world within. The world within is the cause, the world without the
effect; to change the effect you must change the cause.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:37">I, 37</span></span>37. You
will at once see that this is a radically new and different idea; most
men try to change effects by working with effects.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They fail to see
that this is simply changing one form of distress for another. To remove
discord, we must remove the cause, and this cause can be found only in
the world within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:38">I, 38</span></span>38. All
growth is from within. This is evident in all nature. Every plant, every
animal, every human being is a living testimony to this great law, and
the error of the ages is in looking for strength or power from without.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:39">I, 39</span></span>39. The
world within is the Universal fountain of supply, and the world without
is the outlet to the stream. Our ability to receive depends upon our
recognition of this Universal Fountain, this Infinite Energy of which
each individual is an outlet, and so is one with every other individual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:40">I, 40</span></span>40.
Recognition is a mental process, mental action is therefore the
interaction of the individual upon the Universal Mind, and as the
Universal Mind is the intelligence which pervades all space and animates
all living things, this mental action and reaction is the law of
causation, but the principle of causation does not obtain in the
individual but in the Universal Mind. It is not an objective faculty but
a subjective process, and the results are seen in an infinite variety of
conditions and experiences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:41">I, 41</span></span>41. In
order to express life there must be mind; nothing can exist without
mind. Everything which exists is some manifestation of this

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

one basic substance from which and by which all things have been created
and are continually being re-created.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:42">I, 42</span></span>42. We live
in a fathomless sea of plastic mind substance. This substance is ever
alive and active. It is sensitive to the highest degree. It takes form
according to the mental demand. Thought forms the mould or matrix from
which the substance expresses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:43">I, 43</span></span>43.
Remember that it is in the application alone that the value consists,
and that a practical understanding of this law will substitute abundance
for poverty, wisdom for ignorance, harmony for discord and freedom for
tyranny, and certainly there can be no greater blessing than these from
a material and social standpoint.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:44">I, 44</span></span>44. Now
make the application; Select a room where you can be alone and
undisturbed; sit erect, comfortably, but do not lounge; let your
thoughts roam where they will but be perfectly still for from fifteen
minutes to half an hour; continue this for three or four days or for a
week until you secure full control of your physical being.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_I:45">I, 45</span></span>45. Many
will find this extremely difficult; others will conquer with ease, but
it is absolutely essential to secure complete control of the body before
you are ready to progress. In Part Two you will receive instructions for
the next step; in the meantime you must have mastered this one.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

#### PART ONE

1\. *What is the world without in its relation to the world within?*

The world without is a reflection of the world within.

2\. *Upon what does all possession depend?*

All possession is based on consciousness.

3\. *How is the individual related to the objective world?*

The individual is related to the objective world by the objective mind;
the brain is the organ of this mind.

4\. *How is he related to the Universal Mind?*

He is related to the Universal Mind by the subconscious mind; the Solar
Plexus is the organ of this mind.

5\. *What is the Universal Mind?*

The Universal Mind is the life principle of every atom which is in
existence.

6\. *How can the Individual act on the Universal?*

The ability of the individual to think is his ability to act upon the
Universal and bring it into manifestation.

7\. *What is the result of this action and interaction?*

The result of this action and inter-action is cause and effect; every
thought is a cause, and every condition an effect.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

8\. *How are harmonious and desirable conditions secured?*

Harmonious and desirable conditions are obtained by right thinking.

9\. *What is the cause of all discord, inharmony, lack and limitation?*

Discord, inharmony, lack and limitation are the result of wrong
thinking.

10\. *What is the source of all power?*

The source of all power is the world within, the Universal Fountain of
Supply, the Infinite Energy of which each individual is an outlet.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Those who have finished by making all others think with them have
usually been those who began by daring to think for themselves.—Colton.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Two](mks05.md)
