[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks14)  [Next](mks16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### PART TWELVE

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part tells of numerous counterfeits and perversions by which many
are led to think that something can be had for nothing. There is no
royal road to success, we must give before we can get; if we cannot give
money, we must give service, we must give time and thought, the Law of
Compensation demands an eye for an eye. It tells how we may create the
implements by which we may put into operation the laws by which we can
gain access to the unlimited resources of Nature.

</div>

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART TWELVE

In the fourth paragraph you will find the following statement: "You must
first have the knowledge of your power; second, the courage to dare;
third, the faith to do."

If you concentrate upon the thoughts given; if you give them your entire
attention, you will find a world of meaning in each sentence, and will
attract to yourself other thoughts in harmony with them, and you will
soon grasp the full significance of the vital knowledge upon which you
are concentrating.

Knowledge does not apply itself; we as individuals must make the
application, and the application consists in fertilizing the thought
with a living purpose.

The time and thought which most persons waste in aimless effort would
accomplish wonders if properly directed with some special object in
view. In order to do this, it is necessary to centre your mental force
upon a specific thought and hold it there, to the exclusion of all other
thoughts. If you have ever looked through the focussing screen of a
camera, you found that when the object was not in focus, the impression
was indistinct and possibly blurred, but when the proper focus was
obtained the picture was clear and distinct. This illustrates the power
of concentration. Unless you can concentrate upon the object which you
have in view, you will have but a hazy, indifferent, vague, indistinct
and blurred outline of your ideal and the results will be in accordance
with your mental picture.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

#### PART TWELVE

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:1">XII, 1</span></span>1. There
is no purpose in life that cannot be best accomplished through a
scientific understanding of the creative power of thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:2">XII, 2</span></span>2. The
power to think is common to all. Man is, because he thinks. Man's power
to think is infinite, consequently his creative power is unlimited.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:3">XII, 3</span></span>3. We
know that thought is building for us the thing we think of and actually
bringing it nearer, yet we find it difficult to banish fear, anxiety or
discouragement, all of which are powerful thought forces, and which
continually send the things we desire further away, so that it is often
one step forward and two steps backward.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:4">XII, 4</span></span>4. The
only way to keep from going backward is to keep going forward. Eternal
vigilance is the price of success. There are three steps, and each one
is absolutely essential. You must first have the knowledge of your
power; second, the courage to dare; third, the faith to do.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:5">XII, 5</span></span>5. With
this as a basis you can construct an ideal business, an ideal home,
ideal friends, ideal environment. You are not restricted as to material
or cost. Thought is omnipotent and has the power to draw on the Infinite
bank of primary substance for all that it requires. Infinite resources
are therefore at your command.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:6">XII, 6</span></span>6. But
your ideal must be sharp, clear-cut,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

definite; to have one ideal to-day, another to-morrow, and a third next
week, means to scatter your forces and accomplish nothing; your result
will be a meaningless and chaotic combination of wasted material.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:7">XII, 7</span></span>7.
Unfortunately this is the result which many are securing, and the cause
is self evident. If a sculptor started out with a piece of marble and a
chisel and changed his ideal every fifteen minutes, what result could he
expect? And why should you expect any different result in moulding the
greatest and most plastic of all substances, the only real substance?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:8">XII, 8</span></span>8. The
result of this indecision and negative thought is often found in the
loss of material wealth. Supposed independence which required many years
of toil and effort suddenly disappears. It is often found then that
money and property are not independence at all. On the contrary, the
only independence is found to be a practical working knowledge of the
creative power o f thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:9">XII, 9</span></span>9. This
practical working method cannot come to you, until you learn that the
only real power which you can have, is the power to adjust yourself to
Divine and unchangeable principles. You cannot change the Infinite, but
you can come into an understanding of Natural laws. The reward of this
understanding is a conscious realization of your ability to adjust your
thought faculties to the Universal

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thought which is
Omnipresent. Your ability to co-operate with this Omnipotence will
indicate the degree of success with which you meet.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:10">XII, 10</span></span>10. The
power of thought has many counterfeits which are more or less
fascinating, but the results are harmful instead of helpful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:11">XII, 11</span></span>11. Of
course, worry, fear and all negative thoughts produce a crop after their
kind; those who harbour thoughts of this kind must inevitably reap
exactly what they have sown.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:12">XII, 12</span></span>12.
Again. there are the Phenomena seekers who gormandize on the so-called
proofs and demonstrations obtained at materializing seances. They throw
open their mental doors and soak themselves in the most poisonous
currents which can be found in the psychic world. They do not seem to
understand that it is the ability to become negative, receptive and
passive, and thus drain themselves of all their vital force, which
enables them to bring about these vibratory thought forms.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:13">XII, 13</span></span>13.
There are also the Hindu worshippers, who see in the materializing
phenomena which are performed by the so-called adepts, a source of
power, forgetting, or never seeming to realize that as soon as the will
is withdrawn the forms wither, and the vibratory forces of which they
are composed vanish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:14">XII, 14</span></span>14.
Telepathy, or thought transference, has received considerable attention,
but as it requires

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

a negative mental state on the part of the receiver, the practice is
harmful. A thought may be sent with the intention of hearing or seeing,
but it will bring the penalty attached to the inversion of the principle
involved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:15">XII, 15</span></span>15.
Hypnotism is positively dangerous to the subject as well as the
operator. No one familiar with the laws governing in the mental world
would think of attempting to dominate the will of another, for by so
doing he will gradually but surely divest himself of his own power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:16">XII, 16</span></span>16. All
of these perversions have their temporary satisfaction and for some a
keen fascination, but there is an infinitely greater fascination in a
true understanding of the world of power within, a power which increases
with use; is permanent instead of fleeting; which not only is potent as
a remedial agency to bring about the remedy for past error or results of
wrong thinking, but is a prophylactic agency protecting us from all
manner and form of danger, and finally is an actual creative force with
which we can build new conditions and new environment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:17">XII, 17</span></span>17. The
law is, that thought will correlate with its object and bring forth in
the material world the correspondence of the thing thought or produced
in the mental world. We then discern the absolute necessity of seeing
that every thought has the inherent germ of truth

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

in order that the law of growth will bring into manifestation good, for
good alone can confer any permanent power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:18">XII, 18</span></span>18. The
principle which gives the thought the dynamic power to correlate with
its object, and therefore to master every adverse human experience, is
the law of attraction, which is another name for love. This is an
eternal and fundamental principle, inherent in all things, in every
system of Philosophy, in every Religion and in every Science. There is
no getting away from the law of love. It is feeling that imparts
vitality to thought. Feeling is desire, and desire is love. Thought
impregnated with love becomes invincible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:19">XII, 19</span></span>19. We
find this truth emphasized wherever the power of thought is understood.
The Universal Mind is not only Intelligence, but it is substance, and
this substance is the attractive force which brings electrons together
by the law of attraction so that they form atoms; the atoms in turn are
brought together by the same law and form molecules; molecules take
objective forms; and so we find that the law of love is the creative
force behind every manifestation, not only of atoms, but of worlds, of
the Universe, of everything of which the imagination can form any
conception.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:20">XII, 20</span></span>20. It
is the operation of this marvellous law of attraction which has caused
men in all ages and all times to believe that there must be

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

some personal being who responded to their petitions and desires, and
manipulated events in order to comply with their requirements.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:21">XII, 21</span></span>21. It
is the combination of Thought and Love which forms the irresistible
force, called the law of attraction. All natural laws are irresistible,
the law of Gravitation, or Electricity, or any other law operates with
mathematical exactitude. There is no variation, it is only the channel
of distribution which may be imperfect. If a bridge falls, we do not
attribute the collapse to any variation of the law of gravitation. If a
light fails us, we do not conclude that the laws governing electricity
cannot be depended upon, and if the law of attraction seems to be
imperfectly demonstrated by an inexperienced or uninformed person, we
are not to conclude that the greatest and most infallible law upon which
the entire system of creation depends has been suspended. We should
rather conclude that a little more understanding of the law is required,
for the same reason that a correct solution of a difficult problem in
Mathematics is not always readily and easily obtained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:22">XII, 22</span></span>22.
Things are created in the mental or spiritual world before they appear
in the outward act or event. By the simple process of governing our
thought forces to-day, we help create the events which will come into
our lives in the future, perhaps even to-morrow. Educated

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

desire is the most potent means of bringing into action the law of
attraction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:23">XII, 23</span></span>23. Man
is so constituted that he must first create the tools, or implements by
which he gains the power to think. The mind cannot comprehend an
entirely new idea until a corresponding vibratory brain cell has been
prepared to receive it. This explains why it is so difficult for us to
receive or appreciate an entirely new idea; we have no brain cell
capable of receiving it; we are therefore incredulous; we do not believe
it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:24">XII, 24</span></span>24. If,
therefore, you have not been familiar with the Omnipotence of the law of
attraction, and the scientific method by which it can be put into
operation, or if you have not been familiar with the unlimited
possibilities which it opens to those who are enabled to take advantage
of the resources it offers, begin now and create the necessary brain
cells which will enable you to comprehend the unlimited powers which may
be yours by co-operating with Natural Law. This is done by concentration
or attention.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:25">XII, 25</span></span>25. The
intention governs the attention. Power comes through repose. It is by
concentration that deep thoughts, wise speech and all forces of high
potentiality are accomplished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:26">XII, 26</span></span>26. It
is in the Silence that you get into touch with the Omnipotent power of
the subconscious mind from which all power is evolved.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:27">XII, 27</span></span>27. He
who desires wisdom, power or permanent success of any kind will find it
only within; it is an unfoldment. The unthinking may conclude that the
silence is very simple and easily attained, but it should be remembered
that only in absolute silence may one come into contact with Divinity
itself; may learn of the unchangeable law and open for himself the
channels by which persistent practice and concentration lead to
perfection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XII:28">XII, 28</span></span>28. Now
go to the same room, take the same chair, the same position as
heretofore; be sure to relax, let go, both mentally and physically;
always do this; never try to do any mental work under pressure; see that
there are no tense muscles or nerves, that you are entirely comfortable.
Now realize your unity with omnipotence; get into touch with this power,
come into a deep and vital understanding, appreciation and realization
of the fact that your ability to think is your ability to act upon the
Universal Mind, and bring it into manifestation, realize that it will
meet any and every requirement; that you have exactly the same potential
ability which any individual ever did have or ever will have, because
each is but an expression or manifestation of the One, all are parts of
the whole, there is no difference in kind or quality, the only
difference being one of degree.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

#### PART TWELVE

111\. *How may any purpose in life be best accomplished?*

Through a scientific understanding of the spiritual nature of thought.

112\. *What three steps are absolutely essential?*

The knowledge of our power, the courage to dare, the faith to do.

113\. *How is the practical working knowledge secured?*

By an understanding of Natural laws.

114\. *What is the reward of an understanding of these laws?*

A conscious realization of our ability to adjust ourselves to Divine and
unchanging principle.

115\. *What will indicate the degree of success with which we meet?*

The degree in which we realize that we cannot change the Infinite but
must co-operate with it.

116\. *What is the principle which gives thought its dynamic power?*

The Law of Attraction which rests on vibration, which in turn rests upon
the law of love. Thought impregnated with love becomes invincible.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

117\. *Why is this law irresistible?*

Because it is a Natural law. All. Natural laws are irresistible and
unchangeable and act with mathematical exactitude. There is no deviation
or variation.

118\. *Why then does it sometimes seem to be difficult to find the
solution to our problems in life?*

For the same reason that it is sometimes difficult to find the correct
solution to a difficult mathematical problem. The operator is uninformed
or inexperienced.

119\. *Why is it impossible for the mind to grasp an entirely new idea?*

We have no corresponding vibratory brain cell capable of receiving the
idea.

120\. *How is wisdom secured?*

By concentration; it is unfoldment; it comes from within.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

—Thought cannot conceive of anything that may not be brought to
expression. He who first uttered it may be only the suggester, but the
doer will appear.—Wilson.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page__001"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1" width="50%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>ADVICE</p>
<p><em>Remember—<br />
Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much time as to conceive it</em>. JOUBERT</p>
<p>If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master Key"—go slowly.</p>
<p>Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for twenty-four weeks.</p>
<p>Realize the meaning of every phrase.</p>
<p>Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and stimulus.</p>
<p>Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the eternal cosmic principles.</p>
<p>Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.</p>
<p>The Publishers</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Thirteen](mks16)
