[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks11)  [Next](mks13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

### PART NINE

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part tells of the fundamental principle, the imperative condition,
the immutable law underlying every successful business relation or
social condition. It tells of the law by which you may make yourself
irresistible, by which you may sweep away every form of discord,
inharmony and doubt. It tells the secret of the solution to every
problem. It explains that there are only three things which all mankind
requires for complete happiness and development. It tells what they are
and how they may be had.

</div>

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART NINE

In this Part you may learn to fashion the tools by which you may build
for yourself any condition you desire.

If you wish to change conditions, you must change yourself. Your whims,
your wishes, your fancies, your ambitions may be thwarted at every step,
but your inmost thoughts will find expression just as certainly as the
plant springs from the seed.

Suppose, then, we desire to change conditions, how are we to bring this
about? The reply is simple: By the law of growth. Cause and effect are
as absolute and undeviating in the hidden realm of thought as in the
world of material things.

Hold in mind the condition desired; affirm it as an already existing
fact. This indicates the value of a powerful affirmation. By constant
repetition it becomes a part of ourselves. We are actually changing
ourselves; we are making ourselves what we want to be.

Character is not a thing of chance, but it is the result of continued
effort. If you are timid, vacillating, self-conscious, or if you are
over-anxious or harrassed by thoughts of fear or impending danger,
remember that it is axiomatic that "two things cannot exist in the same
place at the same time." Exactly the same thing is true in the mental
and spiritual world; so that your remedy is plainly to substitute
thoughts of courage, power, self-reliance and confidence, for those of
fear, lack and limitation.

The easiest and most natural way to do this is to select an affirmation
which seems to fit your particular case. The positive thought will
destroy the negative as certainly as light destroys darkness, and the
results will be just as effectual.

Act is the blossom of thought, and conditions are the result of action,
so that you constantly have in your possession the tools by which you
will certainly and inevitably make or unmake yourself, and joy or
suffering will be the reward.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

#### PART NINE

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:1">IX, 1</span></span>1. There
are only three things which can possibly be desired in the "world
without" and each of them can be found in the "world within." The secret
of finding them is simply to apply the proper "mechanism of attachment
to the omnipotent power to which each individual has access.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:2">IX, 2</span></span>2. The
three things which all mankind desires and which are necessary for his
highest expression and complete development are Health, Wealth and Love.
All will admit that Health is absolutely essential; no one can be happy
if the physical body is in pain. All will not so readily admit that
Wealth is necessary, but all must admit that a sufficient supply at
least is necessary, and what would be considered sufficient for one,
would be considered absolute and painful lack for another; and as Nature
provides not only enough but abundantly, wastefully, lavishly, we
realize that any lack or limitation is only the limitation which has
been made by an artificial method of distribution.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:3">IX, 3</span></span>3. All will
probably admit that Love is the third, or some will say the first,
essential necessary to the happiness of mankind; at any rate, those who
possess all three, Health, Wealth and Love, find nothing else which can
be added to their cup of happiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:4">IX, 4</span></span>4. We have
found that the Universal substance is "All Health," "All Substance" and

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "All Love" and
that the mechanism of attachment whereby we can consciously connect with
this Infinite supply is in our method of thinking. To think correctly is
therefore to enter into the "Secret Place of the Most High."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:5">IX, 5</span></span>5. What
shall we think? If we know this we shall have found the proper mechanism
of attachment which will relate us to "Whatsoever things we desire."
This mechanism may seem very simple when I give it to you, but read on;
you will find that it is in reality the "Master-Key," the "Aladdin's
lamp," if you please; you will find that it is the foundation, the
imperative condition, the absolute law of well-doing, which means,
well-being.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:6">IX, 6</span></span>6. To think
correctly, accurately, we must know the "Truth." The truth then is the
underlying principle in every business or social relation. It is a
condition precedent to every right action. To know the truth, to be
sure, to be confident, affords a satisfaction beside which no other is
at all comparable; it is the only solid ground in a world of doubt,
conflict and danger.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:7">IX, 7</span></span>7. To know
the Truth is to be in harmony with the Infinite and Omnipotent power. To
know the truth is, therefore, to connect yourself with a power which is
irresistible and which will sweep away every kind of discord, inharmony,
doubt or error, because the "Truth is mighty and will prevail."

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:8">IX, 8</span></span>8. The
humblest intellect can readily foretell the result of any action when he
knows that it is based on truth, but the mightiest intellect, the most
profound and penetrating mind loses its way hopelessly and can form no
conception of the results which may ensue when his hopes are based on a
premise which he knows to be false.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:9">IX, 9</span></span>9. Every
action which is not in harmony with Truth, whether through ignorance or
design, will result in discord, and eventual loss in proportion to its
extent and character.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:10">IX, 10</span></span>10. How
then are we to know the truth in order to attach this mechanism which
will relate us to the Infinite?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:11">IX, 11</span></span>11. We
can make no mistake about this if we realize that Truth is the vital
principle of the Universal Mind and is Omnipresent. For instance, if you
require health, a realization of the fact that the "I" in you is
spiritual and that all spirit is one; that wherever a part is the whole
must be, will bring about a condition of health, because every cell in
the body must manifest the truth as you see it. If you see sickness they
will manifest sickness; if you see perfection they must manifest
perfection. The affirmation, "I am whole, perfect, strong, powerful,
loving, harmonious and happy," will bring about harmonious conditions.
The reason for this is because the affirmation is in strict accordance
with the Truth, and when truth

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

appears every form of error or discord must necessarily disappear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:12">IX, 12</span></span>12. You
have found that the "I" is spiritual, it must necessarily then always be
no less than perfect. The affirmation. "I am whole, perfect, strong,
powerful, loving, harmonious and happy" is therefore an exact scientific
statement.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:13">IX, 13</span></span>13.
Thought is a spiritual activity and spirit is creative, therefore the
result of holding this thought in mind, must necessarily bring about
conditions in harmony with the thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:14">IX, 14</span></span>14. If
you require Wealth a realization of the fact that the "I" in you is one
with the Universal mind which is all substance, and is Omnipotent, will
assist you in bringing into operation the law of attraction which will
bring you into vibration with those forces which make for success and
bring about conditions of power and affluence in direct proportion with
the character and purpose of your affirmation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:15">IX, 15</span></span>15.
Visualization is the mechanism of the attachment which you require.
Visualization is a very different process from seeing; seeing is
physical, and is therefore related to the objective world, the "world
without," but Visualization is a product of the imagination, and is
therefore a product of the subjective mind, the "world within." It
therefore possesses vitality; it will grow. The thing visualized will
manifest itself in form. The mechanism

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

is perfect; it was created by the Master Architect who "doeth all things
well," but unfortunately sometimes the operator is inexperienced or
inefficient, but practice and determination will overcome this defect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:16">IX, 16</span></span>16. If
you require Love try to realize that the only way to get love is by
giving it, that the more you give the more you will get, and the only
way in which you can give it, is to fill yourself with it, until you
become a magnet. The method was explained in another Part.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:17">IX, 17</span></span>17. He
who has learned to bring the greatest spiritual truths into touch with
the so-called lesser things of life has discovered the secret of the
solution of his problem. One is always quickened, made more thoughtful,
by his nearness of approach to great ideas, great events, great natural
objects, and great men. Lincoln is said to have begotten in all who came
near him the feeling awakened when one approaches a mountain, and this
sense asserts itself most keenly when one comes to realize that he
understands the things that are eternal, including the power of Truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:18">IX, 18</span></span>18. It is
sometimes an inspiration to hear from some one who has actually put
these principles to the test, some one who has demonstrated them in his
own life. I am to-day in receipt of a letter from a Mr. Andrews; he
says:

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

"Dear Friend:

You will find my experience published in the March issue of 'Nautilus,'
and you are at liberty to make any extracts from or reference to it that
may suit your purpose.

Sincerely yours,          
Frederick Andrews,        
Oddfellows Building,      
Indianapolis, Ind."  

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:19">IX, 19</span></span>19. "I
was about thirteen years old when Dr. T. W. Marsee, since passed over,
said to my mother: 'There is no possible chance, Mrs. Andrews. I lost my
little boy the same way, after doing everything for him that it was
possible to do. I have made a special study of these cases, and I know
there is no possible chance for him to get well.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:20">IX, 20</span></span>20. "She
turned to him and said: 'Doctor, what would you do if he were your boy?'
and he answered, 'I would fight, fight, as long as there is a breath of
life to fight for.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:21">IX, 21</span></span>21. "That
was the beginning of a long drawn-out battle, with many ups and downs,
the doctors all agreeing that there was no chance for a cure, though
they encouraged and cheered us the best they could.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:22">IX, 22</span></span>22. "But
at last the victory came, and I have grown from a little, crooked,
twisted cripple, going about on my hands and knees, to a strong,
straight, well formed man.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:23">IX, 23</span></span>23. "Now,
I know you want the formula, and I will give it to you as briefly and
quickly as I can.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:24">IX, 24</span></span>24. "I
built up an affirmation for myself, taking the qualities I most needed,
and affirming for myself over and over again, 'I am whole, perfect,
strong, powerful, loving, harmonious and happy.' I kept up this
affirmation, always the same, never varying, till I could wake up in the
night and find myself repeating, 'I am whole, perfect, strong, powerful,
loving, harmonious and happy.' It was the last thing on my lips at night
and the first thing in the morning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:25">IX, 25</span></span>25. "Not
only did I affirm it for myself, but for others that I knew needed it. I
want to emphasize this point. Whatever you desire for yourself, affirm
it for others, and it will help you both. We reap what we sow. If we
send out thoughts of love and health, they return to us like bread cast
upon the waters; but if we send out thoughts of fear, worry, jealousy,
anger, hate, etc., we will reap the results in our own lives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:26">IX, 26</span></span>26. "It
used to be said that man is built completely anew every seven years, but
some scientists now declare that we build ourselves entirely over again
every eleven months so we are really only eleven months old. if we build
the defects back into our bodies year after year, we have no one to
blame but ourselves.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:27">IX, 27</span></span>27. "Man
is the sum total of his own thoughts; so the question is, how are we
going to entertain only the good thoughts and reject the evil ones? At
first we can't keep the evil thoughts from coming, but we can keep from
entertaining them. The only way to do this is to forget them which
means, get something for them. This is where the ready-made affirmation
comes in.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:28">IX, 28</span></span>28. "When
a thought of anger, jealousy, fear or worry creeps in, just start your
affirmation going. The way to fight darkness is with light—the only way
to fight cold is with heat—the way to overcome evil is with good. For
myself, I never could find any help in denials. Affirm the good, and the
bad will vanish.

Frederick Andrews."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:29">IX, 29</span></span>29. If
there is anything you require, it will be well for you to make use of
this affirmation; it cannot be improved upon. Use it just as it is; take
it into the silence with you, until it sinks into your
sub-consciousness, so that you can use it anywhere, in your car, on the
tram, in the office, at home; this is the advantage of spiritual
methods; they are always available. Spirit is omnipresent, ever ready;
all that is required is a proper recognition of its omnipotence, and a
willingness or desire to become the recipient of its beneficent effects.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:30">IX, 30</span></span>30. If
our predominant mental attitude is one of power, courage, kindliness and
sympathy, we

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

shall find that our environment will reflect conditions in
correspondence with these thoughts; if it is weak, critical, envious and
destructive, we shall find our environment reflecting conditions
corresponding to these thoughts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:31">IX, 31</span></span>31.
Thoughts are causes and conditions are effects. Herein is the
explanation of the origin of both good and evil. Thought is creative and
will automatically correlate with its object. This is a Cosmological
law, the law of Attraction, the law of Cause and Effect; the recognition
and application of this law will determine both beginning and end; it is
the law by which in all ages and in all times the people were led to
believe in the power of prayer. "As thy faith is, so be it unto thee,"
is simply another, a shorter and a better way of stating it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:32">IX, 32</span></span>32. Your
next exercise is to visualize a plant; take a flower, the one you most
admire, bring it from the unseen into the seen, plant the tiny seed,
water it, care for it, place it where it will get the direct rays of the
morning sun, see the seed burst; it is now a living thing, something
which is alive and beginning to search for the means of subsistence. See
the roots penetrating the earth, watch them shoot out in all directions
and remember that they are living cells dividing and subdividing, and
that they will soon number millions, that each cell is intelligent, that
it knows what it wants and knows how to get it. See the stem shoot
forward and upward, watch it burst through the surface of the earth, see
it

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

divide and form branches, see how perfect and symmetrical each branch is
formed, see the leaves begin to form, and then the tiny stems, each one
holding aloft a bud, and as you watch you see the bud begin to unfold
and your favourite flower comes to view; and now if you will concentrate
intently you will become conscious of a fragrance; it is the fragrance
of the flower as the breeze gently sways the beautiful creation which
you have visualized.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:33">IX, 33</span></span>33. When
you are enabled to make your vision clear and complete you will be
enabled to enter into the spirit of a thing; it will become very real to
you; you will be learning to concentrate and the process is the same,
whether you are concentrating on health, a favourite flower, an ideal, a
complicated business proposition or any other problem of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_IX:34">IX, 34</span></span>34. Every
success has been accomplished by persistent concentration upon the
object in view.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

In the end, thought rules the world. There are times when impulses and
passions are more powerful, but they soon expend themselves; while mind,
acting constantly, is ever ready to drive them back and work when their
energy is exhausted.—J. McCosh.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

#### PART NINE

81\. *What is the imperative condition of all well-being?*

Well doing.

82\. *What is the condition precedent to every right action?*

Right thinking.

83\. *What is the underlying condition necessary in every business
transaction or social relation?*

To know the Truth

84\. *What is the result of a knowledge of the Truth?*

We can readily foretell the result of any action that is based upon a
true premise.

85\. *What is the result of any action based upon a false premise?*

We can form no conception of the results which may ensue.

86\. *How may we know the Truth?*

By a realization of the fact that Truth is the vital principle of the
Universe and is therefore omnipresent.

87\. *What is the nature of Truth?*

It is spiritual.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

88\. *What is the secret of the solution to every problem?*

To apply spiritual Truth.

89\. *What is the advantage of spiritual methods?*

They are always available,

90\. *What are the necessary requirements?*

A recognition of the omnipotence of spiritual power and a desire to
become the recipient of its beneficent effects.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Thought means life, since those who do not think do not live in any high
or real sense. Thinking makes the man.—A. B. Alcott.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Ten](mks13.md)
