[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks19)  [Next](mks21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

### PART SEVENTEEN

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part tells of the Law of Vibration and why the highest principle
necessarily determines the circumstances, aspects and relations of
everything with which it comes in contact. It tells why and how a
knowledge of these higher forces makes all physical force sink into
insignificance. It explains the nature of concentration; it tells
something of the practice of concentration, tells something of the
results of concentration. It tells how the mind may become a magnet, how
it may irresistibly attract the conditions which it desires; it tells
why it is necessary "to be" in order "to have." It tells how to unfasten
the prison bars of weakness, impotence and self-belittlement and realize
the joy of overcoming obstacles. It tells how the intuitive power is set
in operation and how this inevitably leads to success. It tells of the
difference between real power and the symbols of power, and why the
symbols turn to ashes just as we overtake them.

</div>

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART SEVENTEEN

The kind of Deity which a man, consciously or unconsciously, worships,
indicates the intellectual status of the worshipper.

Ask the Indian of God, and he will describe to you a powerful chieftain
of a glorious tribe. Ask the Pagan of God, and he will tell you of a God
of fire, a God of water, a God of this, that and the other.

Ask the Israelite of God, and he will tell you of the God of Moses, who
conceived it expedient to rule by coercive measures; hence, the Ten
Commandments. Or he will tell you of Joshua, who led the Israelites into
battle, confiscated property, murdered the prisoners and laid cities
waste.

The so-called heathen made "graven images" of their Gods, whom they were
accustomed to worship, but among the most intelligent, at least, these
images were but the visible emblems which they used to facilitate mental
concentration on the qualities which they desired to externalize in
their lives.

We of the twentieth century worship a God of Love in theory, but in
practice we make for ourselves "graven images" of "Wealth," "Power,"
"Fashion," "Custom and "Conventionality." We "fall down" before them and
worship them. We concentrate on them and they are thereby externalized
in our lives.

The reader who masters the contents of Part Seventeen will not mistake
symbols for reality; he will be interested in causes, rather than
effects. He will concentrate on the realities of life, and will then not
be disappointed in the results.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

#### PART SEVENTEEN

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:1">XVII, 1</span></span>1. We
are told that Man has "dominion over all things"; this dominion is
established through Mind. Thought is the activity which controls every
principle beneath it. The highest principle by reason of its superior
essence and qualities necessarily determines the circumstances, aspects
and relation of everything with which it comes into contact.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:2">XVII, 2</span></span>2. The
vibrations of Mental forces are the finest and consequently the most
powerful in existence. To those who perceive the nature and
transcendency of mental force, all physical power sinks into
insignificance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:3">XVII, 3</span></span>3. We
are accustomed to look upon the Universe with a lens of five senses, and
from these experiences our anthropomorphic conceptions originate, but
true conceptions are only secured by spiritual insight. This insight
requires a quickening of the vibrations of the Mind, and is only secured
when, the mind is continuously concentrated in a given direction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:4">XVII, 4</span></span>4.
Continuous concentration means an even, unbroken flow of thought and is
the result of patient, persistent, persevering and well-regulated
system.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:5">XVII, 5</span></span>5.
Great discoveries are the result of long-continued investigation. The
science of mathematics requires years of concentrated effort to master
it, and the greatest science—that of

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the Mind—is revealed only through concentrated effort.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:6">XVII, 6</span></span>6.
Concentration is much misunderstood; there seems to be an idea of effort
or activity associated with it, when just the contrary is necessary. The
greatness of an actor lies in the fact that he forgets himself in the
portrayal of his character, becoming so identified with it that the
audience is swayed by the realism of the performance. This will give you
a good idea of true concentration; you should be so interested in your
thought, so engrossed in your subject, as to be conscious of nothing
else. Such concentration leads to intuitive perception and immediate
insight into the nature of the object concentrated upon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:7">XVII, 7</span></span>7. All
knowledge is the result of concentration of this kind; it is thus that
the secrets have been wrested from Heaven and Earth; it is thus that the
mind becomes a magnet and the desire to know draws the knowledge,
irresistibly attracts it, makes it your own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:8">XVII, 8</span></span>8.
Desire is largely sub-conscious; conscious desire rarely realizes its
object when the latter is out of immediate reach. Sub-conscious desire
arouses the latent faculties of the mind, and difficult problems seem to
solve themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:9">XVII, 9</span></span>9. The
sub-conscious mind may be aroused and brought into action in any
direction and made to serve us for any purpose, by concentration.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The practice of
concentration requires the control of the physical, mental and psychical
being; all modes of consciousness, whether physical, mental or
psychical, must be under control.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:10">XVII, 10</span></span>10.
Spiritual Truth is therefore the controlling factor; it is this which
will enable you to grow out of limited attainment and reach a point
where you will be able to translate modes of thought into character and
consciousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:11">XVII, 11</span></span>11.
Concentration does not mean mere thinking of thoughts, but the
transmutation of these thoughts into practical values; the average
person has no conception of the meaning of concentration. There is
always the cry "to have" but never the cry "to be"; people fail to
understand that they cannot have one without the other, that they must
first find the "kingdom" before they can have the "things added."
Momentary enthusiasm is of no value; it is only by unbounded
self-confidence that the goal is reached.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:12">XVII, 12</span></span>12.
The mind may place the ideal a little too high and fall short of the
mark; it may attempt to soar on untrained wings and, instead of flying,
fall to earth; but that is no reason for not making another attempt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:13">XVII, 13</span></span>13.
Weakness is the only barrier to mental attainment; attribute your
weakness to physical limitations or mental uncertainties and try

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

again; ease and perfection are gained by repetition.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:14">XVII, 14</span></span>14.
The astronomer centres his mind on the stars and they give forth their
secrets; the geologist centres his mind on the construction of the earth
and we have geology; so with all things. Men centre their minds on the
problems of life, and the result is apparent in the vast and complex
social order of the day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:15">XVII, 15</span></span>15.
All mental discovery and attainment are the result of desire plus
concentration; desire is the strongest motive to action; the more
persistent the desire, the more authoritative the revelation. Desire
added to concentration will wrench any secret from nature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:16">XVII, 16</span></span>16.
In realizing great thoughts, in experiencing great emotions that
correspond with great thoughts, the mind is in a state where it
appreciates the value of higher things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:17">XVII, 17</span></span>17.
The intensity of one moment's earnest concentration and the intense
longing to become and to attain may take you further than years of slow
normal and forced effort; it will unfasten the prison bars of unbelief,
weakness, impotence and self-belittlement, and you will corne into a
realization of the joy of overcoming.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:18">XVII, 18</span></span>18.
The spirit of initiative and originality is developed through
persistence and continuity of mental effort. Business teaches the value
of concentration and encourages decision of character; it develops
practical insight and

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

quickness of conclusion. The mental element in every commercial pursuit
is dominant as the controlling factor, and desire is the predominating
force; all commercial relations are the externalization of desire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:19">XVII, 19</span></span>19.
Many of the sturdy and substantial virtues are developed in commercial
employment; the mind is steadied and directed; it becomes efficient. The
principal necessity is the strengthening of the mind so that it rises
superior to the distractions and wayward impulses of instinctive life
and thus successfully prevails in the conflict between the higher and
lower self.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:20">XVII, 20</span></span>20.
All of us are dynamos, but the dynamo of itself is nothing; the mind
must work the dynamo; then it is useful and its energy can be definitely
concentrated. The mind is an engine whose power is undreamed; thought is
an omni-working power. It is the ruler and creator of all form and all
events occurring in form. Physical energy is nothing in comparison with
the omnipotence of thought, because thought enables man to harness all
other natural power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:21">XVII, 21</span></span>21.
Vibration is the action of thought; it is vibration which reaches out
and attracts the material necessary to construct and build. There is
nothing mysterious concerning the power of thought; concentration simply
implies that consciousness can be focalized to the point

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

where it becomes identified with the object of its attention. As food
absorbed is the essence of the body, so the mind absorbs the object of
its attention, gives it life and being.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:22">XVII, 22</span></span>22.
If you concentrate on some matter of importance, the intuitive power
will be set in operation, and help will come in the nature of
information which will lead to success.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:23">XVII, 23</span></span>23.
Intuition arrives at conclusions without the aid of experience or
memory. Intuition often solves problems that are beyond the grasp of the
reasoning power. Intuition often comes with a suddenness that is
startling; it reveals the truth for which we are searching, so directly
that it seems to come from a higher power. Intuition can be cultivated
and developed. In order to do this it must be recognized and
appreciated; if the intuitive visitor is given a royal welcome when he
comes, he will come again; the more cordial the welcome the more
frequent his visits will become, but if he is ignored or neglected he
will make his visits few and far apart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:24">XVII, 24</span></span>24.
Intuition usually comes in the Silence; great minds seek solitude
frequently; it is here that all the larger problems of life are worked
out. For this reason every business man who can afford it has a private
office, where he will not be disturbed; if you cannot afford a private
office you can at least find somewhere where you can be alone a few
minutes each day, to

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

train the thought along lines which will enable you to develop that
invincible power which is necessary to achieve.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:25">XVII, 25</span></span>25.
Remember that fundamentally the subconscious is omnipotent; there is no
limit to the things that can be done when it is given the power to act.
Your degree of success is determined by the nature of your desire. If
the nature of your desire is in harmony with Natural Law or the
Universal Mind, it will gradually emancipate the mind and give you
invincible courage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:26">XVII, 26</span></span>26.
Every obstacle conquered, every victory gained, will give you more faith
in your power, and you will have greater ability to win. Your strength
is determined by your mental attitude; if this attitude is one of
success, and is permanently held with an unswerving purpose, you will
attract to yourself from the invisible domain the things you silently
demand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:27">XVII, 27</span></span>27.
By keeping the thought in mind, it will gradually take tangible form. A
definite purpose sets causes in motion which go out in the invisible
world and find the material necessary to serve your purpose.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:28">XVII, 28</span></span>28.
You may be pursuing the symbols of power, instead of power itself. You
may be pursuing fame instead of honour, riches instead of wealth,
position instead of service; in either

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

event you will find that they turn to ashes just as you overtake them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:29">XVII, 29</span></span>29.
Premature wealth or position cannot be retained because it has not been
earned; we get only what we give, and those who try to get without
giving always find that the law of compensation is relentlessly bringing
about an exact equilibrium.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:30">XVII, 30</span></span>30.
The race has hitherto been for money and other mere symbols of power,
but with an understanding of the true source of power we can afford to
ignore the symbols. The man with a large bank account finds it
unnecessary to load his pockets down with gold; so with the man who has
found the true source of power; he is no longer interested in its shams
or pretentions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:31">XVII, 31</span></span>31.
Thought ordinarily leads outwardly in evolutionary directions, but it
can be turned within where it will take hold of the basic principles of
things, the heart of things, the spirit of things. When you get to the
heart of things it is comparatively easy to understand and command them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:32">XVII, 32</span></span>32.
This is because the Spirit of a thing is the thing itself, the vital
part of it, the real substance. The form is simply the outward
manifestation of the spiritual activity within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:33">XVII, 33</span></span>33.
For your next exercise concentrate as nearly as possible in accordance
with the

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

method outlined in this Part; let there be no conscious effort or
activity associated with your purpose. Relax completely, avoid any
thought of anxiety as to results. Remember that power comes through
repose. Let the thought dwell upon your object until it is completely
identified with it, until you are conscious of nothing else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:34">XVII, 34</span></span>34.
If you wish to eliminate fear concentrate on courage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:35">XVII, 35</span></span>35.
If you wish to eliminate lack concentrate on abundance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:36">XVII, 36</span></span>36.
If you wish to eliminate disease concentrate on health.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVII:37">XVII, 37</span></span>37.
Always concentrate on the ideal as an already existing fact; this is the
Elohim, the germ cell, the life principle which goes forth, and enters
in, and becomes, sets in motion those causes which guide, direct and
bring about the necessary relation, which eventually manifests in form.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Thought is the property of those only who can entertain it.—Emerson.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

#### PART SEVENTEEN

161\. *What is the true method of concentration?*

To become so identified with the object of your thought that you are
conscious of nothing else.

162\. *What is the result of this method of concentration?*

Invisible forces are set in motion which irresistibly bring about
conditions in correspondence with your thought.

163\. *What is the controlling factor in this method of thought?*

Spiritual Truth.

164\. *Why is this so?*

Because the nature of our desire must be in harmony with Natural Law.

167\. *What is the practical value of this method of concentration?*

Thought is transmuted into character, and character is the magnet which
creates the environment of the individual.

166\. *What is the controlling factor in every commercial pursuit?*

The mental element.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

167\. *Why is this so?*

Because Mind is the ruler and creator of all form and all events
occurring in form.

168\. *How does concentration operate?*

By the development of the powers of perception, wisdom, intuition, and
sagacity.

169\. *Why is intuition superior to reason?*

Because it does not depend upon experience or memory and frequently
brings about the solution of our problem by methods concerning which we
are in entire ignorance.

170\. *What is the result of pursuing the symbol of the reality?*

Symbols frequently turn to ashes just as we overtake them, because the
symbol is only the outward form of the spiritual activity within;
therefore, unless we can possess the spiritual reality the form
disappears.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

The greatest events of an age are its best thoughts. It is the nature of
thought to find its way into action.—Bovee.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Eighteen](mks21)
