[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks21)  [Next](mks23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

#### PART NINETEEN

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part tells of the search for truth, which is another name for
ultimate cause. If we can find the truth we shall have found the cause
for every effect, and having found the cause we shall be in a position
to control the effect. It explains that all things are finally
resolvable into one thing, and that as they are thus translatable they
must ever be in relation and can never be in opposition to one another.
It explains that a knowledge of this primary substance is power; it
explains that a knowledge of cause and effect is power, that wealth is
the offspring of power, that events and conditions are significant only
as they effect power, and finally that all things represent certain
forms and decrees of power. It tells of a certain form of power which
can control every other power, why it is superior and how we may make
use of this superior power.

</div>

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART NINETEEN

Fear is a powerful form of thought. It paralyses the nerve centres, thus
affecting the circulation of the blood. This, in turn, paralyses the
muscular system, so that fear affects the entire being, body, brain and
nerve, physical, mental and muscular.

Of course the way to overcome fear is to become conscious of power. What
is this mysterious vital force which we call power? We do not know;
neither do we know what electricity is. But we do know that by
conforming to the requirements of the law by which electricity is
governed, it will be our obedient servant; that it will light our homes,
our cities, run our machinery and serve us in many useful capacities.

And so it is with vital force. Although we do not know what it is, and
possibly may never know, we do know that it is a primary force which
manifests through living bodies, and that by complying with the laws and
principles by which it is governed, we can open ourselves to a more
abundant inflow of this vital energy, and thus express the highest
possible degree of mental, moral and spiritual efficiency.

Part Nineteen, which follows, tells of a very simple way of developing
this vital force. If you put into practice the information outlined in
this Part you will soon develop the sense of power which has ever been
the distinguishing mark of genius.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

#### PART NINETEEN.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:1">XIX, 1</span></span>1. The
search for truth is no longer a haphazard adventure, but it is a
systematic process, and is logical in its operation. Every kind of
experience is given a voice in shaping its decision.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:2">XIX, 2</span></span>2. In
seeking the truth we are seeking ultimate cause; we know that every
human experience is an effect; then if we may ascertain the cause, and
if we shall find that this cause is one which we can consciously
control, the effect or the experience will be within our control also.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:3">XIX, 3</span></span>3. Human
experience will then no longer be the football of fate; a man will not
be the child of fortune, but destiny, fate and fortune will be
controlled as readily as a captain controls his vessel, or an engineer
his train.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:4">XIX, 4</span></span>4. All
things are finally resolvable into the same element and as they are thus
translatable, one into the other, they must ever be in relation and may
never be in opposition to one another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:5">XIX, 5</span></span>5. In the
physical world there are innumerable contrasts, and these may for
convenience sake be designated by distinctive names. There are sizes,
colours, shades or ends to all things. There is a North Pole, and a
South Pole, an inside and an outside, a seen and an unseen, but these
expressions merely serve to place extremes in contrast.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:6">XIX, 6</span></span>6. They
are names given to two different parts of one quantity. The two extremes
are

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

relative; they are not separate entities, but are two parts or aspects
of the whole.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:7">XIX, 7</span></span>7. In the
mental world we find the same law; we speak of knowledge and ignorance,
but ignorance is only a lack of knowledge and is therefore found to be
simply a word to express the absence of knowledge; it has no principle
in itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:8">XIX, 8</span></span>8. In the
Moral World we again find the same law; we speak of good and evil, but
Good is a reality, something tangible, while Evil is found to be simply
a negative condition, the absence of Good. Evil is sometimes thought to
be a very real condition, but it has no principle, no vitality, no life;
we know this because it can always be destroyed by Good; just as Truth
destroys Error and light destroys darkness, so Evil vanishes when Good
appears; there is therefore but one principle in the Moral World.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:9">XIX, 9</span></span>9. We
find exactly the same law obtaining in the Spiritual world; we speak of
Mind and Matter as two separate entities, but clearer insight makes it
evident that there is but one operative principle, and that is Mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:10">XIX, 10</span></span>10.
Mind is the real and the eternal. Matter is for ever changing; we know
that in the æons of time a hundred years is but as a day. If we stand in
any large city and let the eye rest on the innumerable large and
magnificent buildings,

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

the railways, the electric trams, the telephones, the electric lights
and all the other conveniences of modern civilization, we may remember
that not one of them was there 100 years ago, excepting perhaps several
of the buildings; and if we could stand on the same spot in a hundred
years from now, in all probability we should find that but few of them
remained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:11">XIX, 11</span></span>11. In
the animal kingdom we find the same law of change. The millions and
millions of animals come and go, a few years constituting their span of
life. In the plant world the change is still more rapid. Many plants and
nearly all grasses come and go in a single year. When we pass to the
inorganic, we expect to find something more substantial, but as we gaze
on the apparently solid continent, we are told that it arose from the
ocean; we see the giant mountain and are told that the place where it
now stands was once a lake; and as we stand in awe before the great
cliffs in the Yosemite Valley we can easily trace the path of the
glaciers which carried all before them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:12">XIX, 12</span></span>12. We
are in the presence of continual change, and we know that this change is
but the evolution of the Universal Mind, the grand process whereby all
things are continually being created anew, and we come to know that
matter is but a form which Mind takes and is therefore simply a
condition. Matter has no principle; Mind is the only principle.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:13">XIX, 13</span></span>13. We
have then come to know that Mind is the only principle which is
operative in the physical, mental, moral and spiritual world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:14">XIX, 14</span></span>14. We
also know that this mind is static, or mind at rest; and we know that
the ability of the individual to think is his ability to act upon the
Universal Mind and convert it into dynamic mind, or mind in motion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:15">XIX, 15</span></span>15. In
order to do this fuel must be applied in the form of food, for man
cannot think without eating, and so we find that even a spiritual
activity such as thinking cannot be converted into sources of pleasure
and profit except by making use of material means.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:16">XIX, 16</span></span>16. It
requires energy of some kind to collect electricity and convert it into
a dynamic power; it requires the rays of the sun to give the necessary
energy to sustain plant life; so it also requires energy in the form of
food to enable the individual to think and thereby act upon the
Universal Mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:17">XIX, 17</span></span>17. You
may know that thought constantly, eternally, is taking form, is for ever
seeking expression, or you may not, but the fact remains that if your
thought is powerful, constructive, and positive, this will be plainly
evident in the state of your health, your business and your environment.
If your thought is weak, critical, destructive and negative generally,
it will manifest in your body as fear, worry and nervousness,

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

in your finance as lack and limitation, and in discordant conditions in
your environment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:18">XIX, 18</span></span>18. All
wealth is the offspring of power; possessions are of value only as they
confer power. Events are significant only as they affect power; all
things represent certain forms and degrees of power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:19">XIX, 19</span></span>19. A
knowledge of cause and effect as shown by the laws governing steam,
electricity, chemical affinity and gravitation enables men to plan
courageously and to execute fearlessly. These laws are called Natural
Laws, because they govern the physical world, but all power is not
physical power; there is also mental power, and there is moral and
spiritual power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:20">XIX, 20</span></span>20.
What are our schools, our universities, but mental power-houses, places
where mental power is being developed?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:21">XIX, 21</span></span>21. As
there are many mighty power-houses for the application of power to
ponderous machinery, whereby raw material is collected and converted
into the necessities and comforts of life, so the mental power-houses
collect the raw material and cultivate and develop it into a power which
is infinitely superior to all the forces of Nature, marvellous though
these may be.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:22">XIX, 22</span></span>22.
What is this raw material which is being collected in these thousands of
mental powerhouses all over the world and developed into a

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

power which is evidently controlling every other power? In its static
form it is Mind, in its dynamic form it is Thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:23">XIX, 23</span></span>23.
This power is superior because it exists on a higher plane, because it
has enabled man to discover the law by which these wonderful forces of
Nature could be harnessed and made to do the work of hundreds and
thousands of men. It has enabled man to discover laws whereby time and
space have been annihilated, and now apparently the law of gravitation
is to be overcome.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:24">XIX, 24</span></span>24.
Thought is the vital force or energy which is being developed and which
has produced such startling results in the last half century as to bring
about a world which would be absolutely inconceivable to a man existing
only fifty or even twenty-five years ago. If such results have been
secured by organizing these mental power-houses in fifty years, what may
not be expected in another fifty years?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:25">XIX, 25</span></span>25. The
substance from which all things are created is infinite in quantity; we
know that light travels at the rate of 186,000 miles per second, and we
know that there are stars so remote that it takes light 2,000 years to
reach us, and we know that such stars exist in all parts of the heaven;
we know, too, that this light comes in waves, so that if the ether on
which these waves travel was not continuous the light

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

would fail to reach us; we can then only come to the conclusion that
this substance, or ether, or raw material, is universally present.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:26">XIX, 26</span></span>26.
How, then does it manifest in form? In electrical science a battery is
formed by connecting the opposite poles of zinc and copper, which causes
a current to flow from one to the other and so provides energy. This
same process is repeated in respect to every polarity, and as all form
simply depends upon the rate of vibration and consequent relations of
atoms to each other if we wish to change the form of manifestation we
must change the polarity. This is the principle of causation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:27">XIX, 27</span></span>27. For
your next exercise, concentrate, and when I use the word concentrate, I
mean all that the word implies; become so absorbed in the object of your
thought that you are conscious of nothing else, and do this a few
minutes every day. You take the necessary time to eat in order that the
body may be nourished, why not take the time to assimilate your mental
food?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:28">XIX, 28</span></span>28. Let
the thought rest on the fact that appearances are deceptive. The earth
is not flat, neither is it stationary; the sky is not a dome, the sun
does not move, the stars are not small specks of light, and matter which
was once supposed to be fixed has been found to be in a state of
perpetual flux.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIX:29">XIX, 29</span></span>29. Try
to realize that the day is fast approaching—its dawn is now at hand—when
modes of thought and action must be adjusted to rapidly increasing
knowledge of the operation of eternal principles.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Nothing is comparable to the pleasure of an active and prevailing
thought; a thought prevailing over the difficulty and obscurity of the
object, and refreshing the soul with new discoveries and images of
things; andthereby extending the bounds of apprehension, and as it were
enlarging the territory of reason.—South.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

#### PART NINETEEN

181\. *How are extremes placed in contrast?*

They are designated by distinctive names, such as inside and outside,
top and bottom, light and dark, good and bad.

182\. *Are these separate entities?*

No, they are parts or aspects of one Whole.

183\. *What is the one creative Principle in the physical, mental and
spiritual world?*

The Universal Mind, or the Eternal Energy from which all things proceed.

184\. *How are we related to this creative Principle?*

By our ability to think.

185\. *How does this creative Principle become operative?*

Thought is the seed which results in action, and action results in form.

186\. *Upon what does form depend?*

Upon the rate of vibration.

18y. *How may the rate of vibration be changed?*

By mental action.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

188\. *Upon what does mental action depend?*

Upon polarity, action and reaction, between the individual and the
Universal.

189\. *Does the creative energy originate in the individual or the
Universal?*

In the Universal, but the Universal can manifest only through the
individual.

190\. *Why is the individual necessary?*

Because the Universal is static, and requires energy to start it in
motion. This is furnished by food which is converted into energy, which
in turn enables the individual to think. When the individual stops
eating he stops thinking; then he no longer acts upon the Universal;
there is consequently no longer any action or reaction; the Universal is
then only pure mind in static form mind at rest.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

There is no thought in my mind but it quickly tends to convert itself
into a power and organizes a huge instrumentality of means.—Emerson.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Twenty](mks23.md)
