[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](egl12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428056998/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*English Gipsies and Their Language*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1874\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FOOTNOTES

<span id="xref_0a">0a</span> The reason why Gipsy words have been kept
unchanged was fully illustrated one day in a Gipsy camp in my hearing,
when one man declaring of a certain word that it was only *kennick* or
slang, and not “Rommanis,” added, “It can’t be Rommanis, because
everybody knows it. When a word gets to be known to everybody, it’s no
longer Rommanis.”

<span id="xref_1">1</span> Lavengro and the Rommany Rye: London, John
Murray.

<span id="xref_5">5</span> To these I would add “Zelda’s Fortune,” now
publishing in the *Cornhill Magazine*.

<span id="xref_21">21</span> Educated Chinese often exercise themselves
in what they call “handsome talkee,” or “talkee leeson” (i.e., reason),
by sitting down and uttering, by way of assertion and rejoinder, all the
learned and wise sentences which they can recall. In their conversation
and on their crockery, before every house and behind every counter, the
elegant formula makes its appearance, teaching people not merely *how*
to think, but what should be thought, and when.

<span id="xref_24">24</span> Probably from the modern Greek πατουνα, the
sole of the foot, *i.e*., a track. Panth, a road, Hindustani.

<span id="xref_26">26</span> Pott: “Die Zigeuner in Europa and Asien,”
vol. ii, p. 293.

<span id="xref_30">30</span> Two hundred (shel) years growing, two
hundred years losing his coat, two hundred years before he dies, and
then he loses all his blood and is no longer good.

<span id="xref_32">32</span> The words of the Gipsy, as I took them down
from his own lips, were as follows:—

“Bawris are kushto habben. You can latcher adusta ’pré the bors. When
they’re pirraben pauli the puvius, or tale the koshters, they’re kek
kushti habben. The kushtiest are sovven sār the wen. Lel’em and tove ’em
and chiv ’em adrée the kávi, with panny an’ a bitti lun. The simmun’s
kushto for the yellow jaundice.”

I would remind the reader that in *every instance* where the original
Gipsy language is given, it was written down or *noted* during
conversation, and subsequently written out and read to a Gipsy, by whom
it was corrected. And I again beg the reader to remember, that every
Rommany phrase is followed by a translation into English.

<span id="xref_33">33</span> Dr Pott intimates that *scharos*, a globe,
may be identical with *sherro*, a head. When we find, however, that in
German Rommany *tscharo* means goblet, pitcher, vessel, and in fact cup,
it seems as if the Gipsy had hit upon the correct derivation.

<span id="xref_34">34</span> “Dovós yect o’ the covvos that saw foki
jins. When you lel a wart ’pré tutés wasters you jāl ’pré the drum or
’drée the puvius till you latcher a kaulo bawris—yeck o’ the boro kind
with kek ker apré him, an’ del it apré the cāro of a kaulo kosh in the
bor, and ear the bawris mullers, yeck divvus pāuli the wāver for shtār
or pange divvuses the wart’ll kinner away-us. ’Dusta chairusses I’ve
pukkered dovo to Gorgios, an’ Gorgios have kaired it, an’ the warts have
yuzhered avree their wasters.”

<span id="xref_35">35</span> Among certain tribes in North America,
tobacco is both burned before and smoked “unto” the Great Spirit.

<span id="xref_38">38</span> This word palindrome, though Greek, is
intelligible to every Gipsy. In both languages it means “back on the
road.”

<span id="xref_53">53</span> The Krallis’s Gav, King’s Village, a term
also applied to Windsor.

<span id="xref_65">65</span> Pronounced cúv-vas, like *covers* without
the *r*.

<span id="xref_70">70</span> The Lord’s Prayer in pure English Gipsy:—

“Moro Dad, savo djives oteh drey o charos, te caumen Gorgio ta Rommanny
chal tiro nav, te awel tiro tem, te kairen tiro lav aukko prey puv, sar
kairdios oteh drey o charos. Dey men todivvus more divvuskoe moro, ta
for dey men pazorrhus tukey sar men for-denna len pazhorrus amande; ma
muck te petrenna drey caik temptaciones; ley men abri sor doschder. Tiro
se o tem, mi-duvel, tiro o zoozlu vast, tiro sor koskopen drey sor
cheros. Avali. Tachipen.”

Specimens of old English Gipsy, preserving grammatical forms, may be
found in Bright’s Hungary (Appendix). London, 1818. I call attention to
the fact that all the specimens of the language which I give in this
book simply represent *the modern and greatly corrupted* Rommany of the
roads, which has, however, assumed a peculiar form of its own.

<span id="xref_75">75</span> In gipsy *chores* would mean swindles. In
America it is applied to small jobs.

<span id="xref_81">81</span> Vide chapter x.

<span id="xref_83">83</span> This should be *Bengo-tem* or devil land,
but the Gipsy who gave me the word declared it was *bongo*.

<span id="xref_110">110</span> In English: “Water is the Great God, and
it is Bishnoo or Vishnoo because it falls from God. *Vishnu is then the
Great God*?” “Yes; there can be no forced meaning there, can there, sir?
Duvel (God) is Duvel all the world over; but correctly speaking, Vishnu
is God’s blood—I have heard that many times. And the snow is feathers
that fall from the angels’ wings. And what I said, that Bishnoo is God’s
Blood is old Gipsy, and known by all our people.”

<span id="xref_112">112</span> “Simurgh—a fabulous bird, *a
griffin*.”—*Brice’s Hindustani Dictionary*.

<span id="xref_124">124</span> Romi in Coptic signifies *a man*.

<span id="xref_127">127</span> Since writing the above I have been told
that among many Hindus “(good) evening” is the common greeting at any
time of the day. And more recently still, meeting a gentleman who during
twelve years in India had paid especial attention to all the dialects, I
greeted him, as an experiment, with “Sarisham!” He replied, ‘Why, that’s
more elegant than common Hindu—it’s Persian!” “Sarisham” is, in fact,
still in use in India, as among the Gipsies. And as the latter often
corrupt it into *sha’shān*, so the vulgar Hindus call it “shān!”
Sarishan means in Gipsy, “How are you?” but its affinity with *sarisham*
is evident.

<span id="xref_133">133</span> Miklosich (“Uber die Mundarten de der
Zigeuner,” Wien, 1872) gives, it is true, 647 Rommany words of Slavonic
origin, but many of these are also Hindustani. Moreover, Dr Miklosich
treats as Gipsy words numbers of Slavonian words which Gipsies in
Slavonian lands have Rommanised, but which are not generally Gipsy.

<span id="xref_171">171</span> Fortune-telling.

<span id="xref_189">189</span> In Egypt, as in Syria, every child is
more or less marked by tattooing. Infants of the first families, even
among Christians, are thus stamped.

<span id="xref_206">206</span> The Royston rook or crow has a
greyish-white back, but is with this exception entirely black.

<span id="xref_209">209</span> The peacock and turkey are called
lady-birds in Rommany, because, as a Gipsy told me, “they spread out
their clothes, and hold up their heads and look fine, and walk proud,
like great ladies.” I have heard a swan called a pauno rāni chillico—a
white lady-bird.

<span id="xref_210">210</span> To make skewers is a common employment
among the poorer English Gipsies.

<span id="xref_213">213</span> This rhyme and metre (such as they are)
were purely accidental with my narrator; but as they occurred *verb. et
lit*., I set them down.

<span id="xref_218">218</span> This story is well known to most
“travellers.” It is also true, the “hero” being a *pash-and-pash*, or
half-blood Rommany chal, whose name was told to me.

<span id="xref_219">219</span> The reader will find in Lord Lytton’s
“Harold” mention of an Anglo-Saxon superstition very similar to that
embodied in the story of the Seven Whistlers. This story is, however,
entirely Gipsy.

<span id="xref_221a">221a</span> This, which is a common story among the
English Gipsies, and told exactly in the words here given, is implicitly
believed in by them. Unfortunately, the terrible legends, but too well
authenticated, of the persecutions to which their ancestors were
subjected, render it very probable that it may have occurred as
narrated. When Gipsies were hung and transported merely for *being*
Gipsies, it is not unlikely that a persecution to death may have
originated in even such a trifle as the alleged theft of a dish-clout.

<span id="xref_221b">221b</span> Although they bear it with remarkable
*apparent* indifference, Gipsies are in reality extremely susceptible to
being looked at or laughed at.

<span id="xref_235">235</span> This story was told me in a Gipsy tent
near Brighton, and afterwards repeated by one of the auditors while I
transcribed it.
