[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](egl11)  [Next](egl13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428056998/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*English Gipsies and Their Language*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1874\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ROMMANI GUDLI; OR, GIPSY STORIES AND FABLES.

The Gipsy to whom I was chiefly indebted for the material of this book
frequently narrated to me the *Gudli* or small stories current among his
people, and being a man of active, though child-like imagination, often
invented others of a similar character. Sometimes an incident or saying
would suggest to me the outline of a narrative, upon which he would
eagerly take it up, and readily complete the tale. But if I helped him
sometimes to evolve from a hint, a phrase, or a fact, something like a
picture, it was always the Gipsy who gave it Rommany characteristics and
conferred colour. It was often very difficult for him to distinctly
recall an old story or clearly develop anything of the kind, whether it
involved an effort of memory or of the imagination, and here he required
aid. I have never in my life met with any man whose mind combined so
much simplicity, cunning, and grotesque fancy, with such an entire
incapacity to appreciate either humour or “poetry” as expressed in the
ordinary language of culture. The metre and rhyme of the simplest ballad
made it unintelligible to him, and I was obliged to repeat such poetry
several times before he could comprehend it. Yet he would, while I was
otherwise occupied than with him, address to his favourite wooden image
of a little bear on the chimneypiece, grotesque soliloquies which would
have delighted a Hoffman, or conduct with it dialogues which often
startled me. With more education, he would have become a Rommany
Bid-pai; and since India is the fatherland of the fable, he may have
derived his peculiar faculty for turning morals and adorning tales
legitimately from that source.

I may state that those stories, which were made entirely; as a few were;
or in part, by my assistant and myself, were afterwards received with
approbation by ordinary Gipsies as being thoroughly Rommany. As to the
*language* of the stories, it is all literally and faithfully that of a
Gipsy, word by word, written down as he uttered it, when, after we had
got a *gudlo* into shape, he told it finally over, which he invariably
did with great eagerness, ending with an improvised moral.

### GUDLO I. HOW A GIPSY SAVED A CHILD’S LIFE BY BREAKING A WINDOW.

‘Pré yeck dívvus (or yéckorus) a Rommany chal was kairin’ pýass with the
koshters, an’ he wussered a kosh ’pré the hev of a boro ker an’ poggered
it. Welled the prastramengro and penned, “Tu must póoker (or péssur) for
the glass.” But when they jawed adrée the ker, they lastered the kosh
had mullered a divio júckal that was jawán’ to dant the chavo. So the
rāni del the Rommany chal a sónnakai óra an’ a fíno gry.

But yeck koshter that poggers a hev doesn’t muller a juckal.

#### TRANSLATION.

On a day (or once) a Gipsy was playing at cockshy, and he threw a stick
through the window of a great house and broke the glass. Came the
policeman and said, “You must answer (or pay) for the glass.” But when
they went into the house, they found the stick had killed a mad dog that
was going to bite the child (boy). So the lady gave the Gipsy a gold
watch and a good horse.

But every stick that breaks a window does not kill a dog.

### GUDLO II. THE GIPSY STORY OF THE BIRD AND THE HEDGEHOG.

’Pré yeck divvus a hótchewítchi dicked a chillico adrée the puv, and the
chillico pūkkered lesco, “Mor jāl paūli by the kúshto wástus, or the
hunters’ graias will chiv tute adrée the chick, mullo; an’ if you jāl
the waver rikk by the bongo wast, dovo’s a Rommany tan adoi, and the
Rommany chals will haw tute.” Penned the hótchewítchi, “I’d rather jāl
with the Rommany chals, an’ be hawed by foki that kaum mandy, than be
pirraben apré by chals that dick kaulo apré mandy.”

It’s kushtier for a tácho Rom to be mullered by a Rommany pal than to be
náshered by the Gorgios.

#### TRANSLATION.

On a day a hedgehog met a bird in the field, and the bird told him, “Do
not go around by the right hand, or the hunters’ horses will trample you
dead in the dirt; and if you go around by the left hand, there’s a Gipsy
tent, and the Gipsies will eat you.” Said the hedgehog, “I’d rather go
with the Gipsies, and be eaten by folk that like me, than be trampled on
by people that despise (literally, look black upon) me.”

It is better for a real Gipsy to be killed by a Gipsy brother than to be
hung by Gorgios.

### GUDLO III. A STORY OF A FORTUNE-TELLER.

Yeckorus a tāno Gorgio chivved apré a shubo an’ jālled to a puri Rommany
dye to get dúkkered. And she póokered lester, “Tute’ll rummorben a Fair
Man with kauli yākkas.” Then the raklo delled lāki yeck shukkori an’
penned, “If this shukkori was as boro as the hockaben tute pukkered
mandy, tute might porder sār the bongo tem with rupp.” But, hatch a
wongish!—maybe in a dívvus, maybe in a cúrricus, maybe a dood, maybe a
besh, maybe wāver dívvus, he rúmmorbend a rākli by the nav of Fair Man,
and her yākkas were as kaulo as miri júva’s.

There’s always dui rikk to a dúkkerben.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a little Gorgio put on a woman’s gown and went to an old Gipsy
mother to have his fortune told. And she told him, “You’ll marry a Fair
Man with black eyes.” Then the young man gave her a sixpence and said,
“If this sixpence were as big as the lie you told me, you could fill all
hell with silver.” But, stop a bit! after a while—maybe in a week, maybe
a month, maybe in a year, maybe the other day—he married a girl by the
name of Fair Man, and her eyes were as black as my sweetheart’s.

There are always two sides to a prediction.

### GUDLO IV. HOW THE ROYSTON ROOK DECEIVED THE ROOKS AND PIGEONS.

’Pré yeck dívvus a Royston rookus jālled mongin the kaulo chiriclos, an’
they putched (pootschered) him, “Where did tute chore tiro pauno
chúkko?” And yuv pookered, “Mandy chored it from a bikshérro of a
pigeon.” Then he jālled a-men the pigeons an’ penned, “Sárishan, pals?”
And they pūtched lesti, “Where did tute lel akovo kauli rokámyas te
byáscros?” And yuv penned, “Mandy chored ’em from those wafri múshis the
rookuses.”

Pāsh-rātis pen their kókeros for Gorgios mongin Gorgios, and for Rommany
mongin Rommany chals.

#### TRANSLATION.

On a day a Royston rook  [206](egl13.htm#xref_206.md) went among the crows
(black birds), and they asked him, “Where did you steal your white
coat?” And he told (them), “I stole it from a fool of a pigeon.” Then he
went among the pigeons and said, “How are you, brothers?” And they asked
him, “Where did you get those black trousers and sleeves?” And he said,
“I stole ’em from those wretches the rooks.”

Half-breeds call themselves Gorgio among Gorgios, and Gipsy among
Gipsies.

### GUDLO V. THE GIPSY’S STORY OF THE GORGIO AND THE ROMMANY CHAL.

Once ’pré a chairus (or chýrus) a Gorgio penned to a Rommany chal, “Why
does tute always jāl about the tem ajaw? There’s no kushtoben in what
don’t hatch acäi.” Penned the Rommany chal, “Sikker mandy tute’s
wóngur!” And yuv sikkered him a cutter (cotter?), a bar, a pāsh-bar, a
pāsh-cutter, a pange-cullo (caulor?) bittus, a pāsh-krooner (koraúna), a
dui-cullos bittus, a trin-mushi, a shuckóri, a stor’óras, a trin’óras, a
dui’óras, a haura, a poshéro, a lúlli, a pāsh-lúlli. Penned the Rommany
chal, “Acovo’s sār wáfri wóngur.” “Kek,” penned the Gorgio; “se sār
kushto an’ kirus. Chiv it adrée tute’s wast and shoon it ringus.” “Āvo,”
penned the Rommany chal. “Tute pookered mandy that only wáfri covvas
keep jāllin’, te ’covo wóngur has jālled sar ’pré the ‘tem adusta timei
(or timey).”

Sār mushis aren’t all sim ta rúkers (rúkkers.) Some must pírraben, and
can’t besh’t a lay.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once upon a time a Gorgio said to a Gipsy, “Why do you always go about
the country so? There is ‘no good’ in what does not rest (literally,
stop here).” Said the Gipsy, “Show me your money!” And he showed him a
guinea, a sovereign, a half-sovereign, a half-guinea, a five-shilling
piece, a half-crown, a two-shilling piece, a shilling, a sixpence, a
fourpenny piece, a threepence, a twopence, a penny, a halfpenny, a
farthing, a half-farthing. Said the Gipsy, “This is all bad money.”
“No,” said the other man; “it is all good and sound. Toss it in your
hand and hear it ring!” “Yes,” replied the Gipsy. “You told me that only
bad things *keep going*, and this money has gone all over the country
many a time.”

All men are not like trees. Some must travel, and cannot keep still.

### GUDLO VI. HOW THE GIPSY BRIBED THE POLICEMAN.

Once apré a chairus a Rommany chal chored a rāni chillico (or chiriclo),
and then jālled atút a prastraméngro ’pré the drum. “Where did tute
chore adovo rāni?” putchered the prastramengro. “It’s kek rāni; it’s a
pauno rāni that I kinned ’drée the gav to del tute.” “Tácho,” penned the
prastraméngro, “it’s the kushtiest pauno rāni mandy ever dickdus. Ki did
tute kin it?”

Āvali, many’s the chairus mandy’s tippered a trinmushi to a
prastraméngro ta mukk mandy hatch my tan with the chávvis.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once on a time a Gipsy stole a turkey, and then met a policeman on the
road. “Where did you steal that turkey?” asked the policeman. “It’s no
turkey; it’s a goose that I bought in the town to give you.” “Fact,”
said the policeman, “it *is* the finest goose I ever saw. Where *did*
you buy it?”

Yes, many’s the time I have given a shilling (three fourpence) to a
policeman to let me pitch my tent with the children.
 [209](egl13.htm#xref_209.md)

### GUDLO VII. HOW A GIPSY LOST THREEPENCE.

Yeckorus a choro mush besht a lay ta kair trin horras-worth o’ peggi for
a māséngro. There jessed alang’s a rye, who penned, “Tool my gry, an’
I’ll del tute a shukóri.” While he tooled the gry a rāni pookered him,
“Rikker this trúshni to my ker, an’ I’ll del tute a trin grushi.” So he
lelled a chavo to tool the gry, and pookered lester, “Tute shall get
pāsh the wongur.” Well, as yuv was rikkinin’ the trúshnee an’ siggerin
burry ora bender the drum, he dicked a rye, who penned, “If tute’ll jaw
to the ker and hatch minni’s júckal ta mandy, mi’ll del tute a
pash-koraúna.” So he got a waver chávo to rikker the trúshnee for pāsh
the wongur, whilst he jālled for the júckal. Wellin’ alángus, he dicked
a bárvelo givéscro, who penned, “‘Avacai an’ hūsker mandy to lel my
gurúvni (*grūvni*) avree the ditch, and I’ll del you pange cullos”
(caulos). So he lelled it. But at the kūnsus of the divvus, sā yuv sus
kennin apré sustis wóngurs, he penned, “How wafro it is mandy nashered
the trinóras I might have lelled for the māss-kóshters!”

A mush must always pet the giv in the puv before he can chin the
harvest.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a poor man sat down to make threepence-worth of skewers
 [210](egl13.htm#xref_210.md) for a butcher. There came along a gentleman,
who said, “Hold my horse, and I’ll give you a sixpence.” While he held
the horse a lady said to him, “Carry this basket to my house, and I’ll
give you a shilling.” So he got a boy to hold the horse, and said to
him, “You shall have half the money.” Well, as he was carrying the
basket and hurrying along fast across the road he saw a gentleman, who
said, “If you’ll go to the house and bring my dog to me, I will give you
half-a-crown.” So he got another boy to carry the basket for half the
money, while he went for the dog. Going along, he saw a rich farmer, who
said, “Come and help me here to get my cow out of the ditch, and I’ll
give you five shillings.” So he got it. But at the end of the day, when
he was counting his money, he said, “What a pity it is I lost the
threepence I might have got for the skewers!” (literally, meat-woods.)

A man must always put the grain in the ground before he can cut the
harvest.

### GUDLO VIII. THE STORY OF THE GIPSY’S DOG.

’Pré yeck divvus a choro mush had a júckal that used to chore covvas and
hākker them to the kér for his mush—mass, wóngur, hóras, and rooys. A
rye kinned the júckal, an’ kaired boot dusta wóngur by sikkerin’ the
júckal at wellgóoras.

Where bárvelo mushis can kair wóngur tácho, chori mushis have to loure.

#### TRANSLATION.

On a day a poor man had a dog that used to steal things and carry them
home for his master—meat, money, watches, and spoons. A gentleman bought
the dog, and made a great deal of money by showing him at fairs.

Where rich men can make money honestly, poor men have to steal.

### GUDLO IX. A STORY OF THE PRIZE-FIGHTER AND THE GENTLEMAN.

’Pré yeck chairus a cooroméngro was to coor, and a rye rākkered him,
“Will tute mukk your kókero be koored for twenty bar?” Penned the
cooroméngro, “Will tute mukk mandy pogger your hérry for a hundred bar?”
“Kek,” penned the rye; “for if I did, mandy’d never pirro kushto ajaw.”
“And if I nashered a kóoraben,” penned the éngro, “mandy’d never praster
kekóomi.”

Kāmmoben is kushtier than wóngur.

#### TRANSLATION.

On a time a prize-fighter was to fight, and a gentleman asked him, “Will
you sell the fight” (*i.e*., let yourself be beaten) “for twenty
pounds?” Said the prize-fighter, “Will you let me break your leg for a
hundred pounds?” “No,” said the gentleman; “for if I did, I should never
walk well again.” “And if I lost a fight,” said the prize-fighter
(literally, master, doer), “I could never ‘run’ again.”

Credit is better than money.

### GUDLO X. OF THE GENTLEMAN AND THE OLD GIPSY WOMAN.

Pré yeck chairus a Rommany dye adrée the wellgooro rākkered a rye to del
lāker trin mushi for kushto bāk. An’ he del it, an’ putchered láki, “If
I bitcher my wóngur a-múkkerin’ ’pré the graias, ki’ll manni’s bāk be?”
“My fino rye,” she penned, “the bāk’ll be a collos-worth with mandy and
my chávvis.”

Bāk that’s pessured for is saw (sār) adöi.

#### TRANSLATION.

On a time a Gipsy mother at the fair asked a gentleman to give her a
shilling for luck. And he gave it, and asked her, “If I lose my money
a-betting on the horses, where will my luck be?” “My fine gentleman,”
she said, “the luck will be a shilling’s worth with me and my children.”

Luck that is paid for is always somewhere (literally, there).

### GUDLO XI. THE GIPSY TELLS OF THE CAT AND THE HARE.

Yeckorus the matchka jālled to dick her kako’s chávo the kanéngro. An’
there welled a huntingmush, an’ the matchka taddied up the choomber, pré
durer, pré a rukk, an’ odöi she lastered a chillico’s nest. But the
kanéngro prastered alay the choomber, longodurus adrée the tem.

> Wafri bāk kairs  
>   A choro mush ta jāl alay,  
> But it mukks a boro mush  
>   To chiv his kokero apré.  [213](egl13.htm#xref_213.md)

#### TRANSLATION.

Once the cat went to see her cousin the hare. And there came a hunter,
and the cat scrambled up the hill, further up, up a tree, and there she
found a bird’s nest. But the hare ran down the hill, far down into the
country.

Bad luck sends a poor man further down, but it causes a great man to
rise still more.

### GUDLO XII. OF THE GIPSY WOMAN AND THE CHILD.

Pre yeck cháirus a chi jālled adrée a waver tem, an’ she rikkered a
gunno pré lāki dumo with a baulo adrée. A rakli who was ladge of her
tikno chored the baulo avree the gunno and chivved the chavi adrée.
Pasch a waver hora the chi shooned the tikno rov (ruvving), and dicked
adrée the gunno in boro toob, and penned, “If the baulos in akovo tem
púraben into chávos, sā do the chávos púraben adrée?”

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a woman went into a strange land, and she carried a bag on her back
with a pig in it. A girl who was ashamed of her child stole the pig from
the bag and put the baby in (its place). After an hour the woman heard
the child cry, and looked into the bag with great amazement, and said,
“If the pigs in this country change into children, into what do the
children change?”

### GUDLO XIII. OF THE GIRL THAT WAS TO MARRY THE DEVIL.

’Pré yeck divvus a Rommany dye dūkkered a rakli, and pookered lāki that
a kaulo rye kaumed her. But when the chi putchered her wóngur, the rakli
penned, “Puri dye, I haven’t got a poshéro to del túté. But pen mandy
the nav of the kaulo rye.” Then the dye shelled avree, very húnnalo,
“Beng is the nav of tute’s pírryno, and yuv se kaulo adusta.”

If you chore puri juvas tute’ll lel the beng.

#### TRANSLATION.

On a day a Gipsy mother told a girl’s fortune, and said to her that a
dark (black) gentleman loved her. But when the woman demanded her money,
the girl said, “Old mother, I haven’t got a halfpenny to give you. But
tell me the name of the dark gentleman.” Then the mother roared out,
very angry, “Devil is the name of your sweetheart, and he is black
enough.”

If you cheat old women you will catch the devil.

### GUDLO XIV. OF THE GIPSY WHO STOLE THE HORSE.

Yeckorus a mush chored a gry and jālled him avree adrée a waver tem, and
the gry and the mush jālled kushti bāk kéttenus. Penned the gry to his
mush, “I kaums your covvas to wearus kushtier than mandy’s, for there’s
kek chúcknee or méllicus (pusimígree) adrée them.” “Kek,” penned the
mush pauli; “the trash I lel when mandy jins of the prastramengro an’
the bitcherin’ mush (krallis mush) is wafrier than any chucknee or
būsaha, an’ they’d kair mandy to praster my míramon (miraben) avree any
divvus.”

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a man stole a horse and ran him away into another country, and the
horse and the man became very intimate. Said the horse to the man, “I
like your things to wear better than I do mine, for there’s no whip or
spur among them.” “No,” replied the man; “the fear I have when I think
of the policeman and of the judge (sending or “transporting” man, or
king’s man) is worse than any whip or spur, and they would make me run
my life away any day.”

### GUDLO XV. THE HALF-BLOOD GIPSY, HIS WIFE, AND THE PIG.

’Pré yeck divvus there was a mush a-piin’ mā his Rommany chals adrée a
kitchema, an’ pauli a chairus he got pash mātto. An’ he penned about
mullo baulors, that *he* never hawed kek. Kennā-sig his juvo welled
adrée an’ putched him to jāl kerri, but yuv pookered her, “Kek—I won’t
jāl kenna.” Then she penned, “Well alang, the chavvis got kek hābben.”
So she putchered him ajaw an’ ajaw, an’ he always rākkered her pauli
“Kek.” So she lelled a mullo baulor ap her dumo and wussered it ’pré the
haumescro pré saw the foki, an’ penned, “Lel the mullo baulor an’ rummer
it, an’ mandy’ll dick pauli the chavos.”

#### TRANSLATION.

Once there was a man drinking with his Gipsy fellows in an alehouse, and
after a while he got half drunk. And he said of pigs that had died a
natural death, *he* never ate any. By-and-by his wife came in and asked
him to go home, but he told her, “No—I won’t go now.” Then she said,
“Come along, the children have no food.” So she entreated him again and
again, and he always answered “No.” So she took a pig that had died a
natural death, from her back and threw it on the table before all the
people, and said, “Take the dead pig for a wife, and I will look after
the children.”  [218](egl13.htm#xref_218.md)

### GUDLO XVI. THE GIPSY TELLS THE STORY OF THE SEVEN WHISTLERS.

My raia, the gudlo of the Seven Whistlers, you jin, is adrée the
Scriptures—so they pookered mandy.

An’ the Seven Whistlers (*Efta Shellengeri*) is seven spirits of rānis
that jāl by the ratti, ’pré the bávol, parl the heb, like chíllicos. An’
it pookers ’drée the Bible that the Seven Whistlers shell wherever they
praster atút the bávol. But adúro timeus yeck jālled avree an’ got
nashered, and kennā there’s only shove; but they pens ’em the Seven
Whistlers. An’ that sims the story tute pookered mandy of the Seven
Stars.

#### TRANSLATION.

Sir, the story of the Seven Whistlers, you know, is in the Scriptures—so
they told me.

An’ the Seven Whistlers are seven spirits of ladies that go by the
night, through the air, over the heaven, like birds. And it tells (us)
in the Bible that the Seven Whistlers whistle wherever they fly across
the air. But a long time ago one went away and got lost, and now there
are only six; but they call them the Seven Whistlers. And that is like
the story you told me of the Seven Stars.  [219](egl13.htm#xref_219.md)

### GUDLO XVII. AN OLD STORY WELL KNOWN TO ALL GIPSIES.

A Rommany rákli yeckorus jālled to a ker a-dukkerin’. A’ter she jālled
avree, the rákli of the ker missered a plāchta, and pookered the rye
that the Rommany chi had chored it. So the rye jālled aduro pauli the
tem, and latched the Rommany chals, and bitchered them to stáruben. Now
this was adrée the púro chairus when they used to nasher mushis for any
bitti cóvvo. And some of the Rommany chals were nashered, an’ some
pannied. An’ sār the gunnos, an’ kávis, and cóvvas of the Rommanis were
chivved and pordered kéttenus ’pré the bor adrée the cángry-pūv, an’ kek
mush tooled ’em. An’ trin dood (or munti) pauli, the rákli was kairin’
the baulors’ habben at the kókero ker, when she latched the plāchta they
nashered trin dood adóvo divvus. So the rákli jālled with the plachta ta
lāki rye, and penned, “Dick what I kaired on those chúvvenny, chori
Rommany chals that were náshered and pannied for adóvo bitti cóvvo
adöi!”

And when they jālled to dick at the Rommanis’ cóvvas pauli the bor adrée
the cángry-pūv, the gunnos were pordo and chivved adrée, chingered saw
to cut-engroes, and they latched ’em full o’ ruppeny covvos—rooys an’
churls of sonnakai, an’ oras, curros an’ piimangris, that had longed o’
the Rommany chals that were nashered an’ bitschered pādel.

#### TRANSLATION.

A Gipsy girl once went to a house to tell fortunes. After she went away,
the girl of the house missed a pudding-bag (literally, *linen cloth*),
and told the master the Gipsy girl had stolen it. So the master went far
about the country, and found the Gipsies, and sent them to prison. Now
this was in the old time when they used to hang people for any little
thing. And some of the Gipsies were hung, and some transported
(literally, *watered*). And all the bags, and kettles, and things of the
Gipsies were thrown and piled together behind the hedge in the
churchyard, and no man touched them. And three months after, the maid
was preparing the pigs’ food at the same house, when she found the linen
cloth they lost three months (before) that day. So the girl went with
the cloth to her master, and said, “See what I did to those poor, poor
Gipsies that were hung and transported for that trifle (there)!”

And when they went to look at the Gipsies’ things behind the hedge in
the churchyard, the bags were full and burst, torn all to rags, and they
found them full of silver things—spoons and knives of gold, and watches,
cups and teapots, that had belonged to the Gipsies that were hung and
transported.  [221a](egl13.htm#xref_221a.md)

### GUDLO XVIII. HOW THE GIPSY WENT TO CHURCH.

Did mandy ever jāl to kangry? Āvali, dui koppas, and beshed a lay odöi.
I was adrée the tāle tem o’ sār, an’ a rye putched mandy to well to
kangry, an’ I welled. And sār the ryas an’ ranis dicked at mandy as I
jālled adrée.  [221b](egl13.htm#xref_221b.md) So I beshed pukkenus mongin
some geeros and dicked upar again the chumure praller my sherro, and
there was a deer and a kanengro odöi chinned in the bar, an’ kaired
kushto. I shooned the rashai a-rākkerin’; and when the shunaben was
kérro, I welled avree and jālled alay the drum to the kitchema.

I latchered the raias mush adrée the kitchema; so we got mātto odöi, an’
were jallin’ kerri alay the drum when we dicked the raias wardo
a-wellin’. So we jālled sig ’dusta parl the bor, an’ gavered our kokeros
odöi adrée the pūv till the rye had jessed avree.

I dicked adovo rye drée the sala, and he putched mandy what I’d kaired
the cauliko, pāsh kangry. I pookered him I’d pii’d dui or trin curros
levinor and was pāsh mātto. An’ he penned mandy, “My mush was mātto sār
tute, and I nashered him.” I pookered him ajaw, “I hope not, rya, for
such a bitti covvo as dovo; an’ he aint cāmmoben to piin’ levinor, he’s
only used to pabengro, that don’t kair him mātto.” But kek, the choro
mush had to jāl avree. An’ that’s sār I can rakker tute about my jāllin’
to kangry.

#### TRANSLATION.

Did I ever go to church? Yes, twice, and sat down there. I was in the
lower land of all (Cornwall), and a gentleman asked me to go to church,
and I went. And all the ladies and gentlemen looked at me as I went in.
So I sat quietly among some men and looked up on the wall above my head,
and there were a deer and a rabbit cut in the stone, beautifully done. I
heard the clergyman speaking; and when the sermon was ended (literally,
made), I came out and went down the road to the alehouse.

I found the gentleman’s servant in the alehouse; so we got drunk there,
and were going home down the road when we saw the gentleman’s carriage
coming. So we went quickly enough over the hedge, and hid ourselves
there in the field until the gentleman was gone.

I saw the gentleman in the morning, and he asked me what I had done the
day before, after church. I told him I’d drunk two or three cups of ale
and was half tipsy. And he said, “My man was drunk as you, and I sent
him off.” I told him then, “I hope not, sir, for such a little thing as
that; and he is not used to drink ale, he’s only accustomed to cider,
that don’t intoxicate him.” But no, the poor man had to go away. *And
that’s all I can tell you about my going to church*.

### GUDLO XIX. WHAT THE LITTLE GIPSY GIRL TOLD HER BROTHER.

Penned the tikni Rommani chavi lāki pal, “More mor the pishom, ’cause
she’s a Rommani, and kairs her jivaben jāllin’ parl the tem dukkerin’
the ruzhas and lellin’ the gudlo avree ’em, sār moro dye dukkers the
rānis. An’ mā wusser bars at the rookas, ’cause they’re kaulos, an’
kaulo rātt is Rommany rātt. An’ maun pogger the bawris, for yuv rikkers
his tan pré the dumo, sār moro puro dádas, an’ so yuv’s Rommany.”

#### TRANSLATION.

Said the little Gipsy girl to her brother, “Don’t kill the bee, because
she is a Gipsy, and makes her living going about the country telling
fortunes to the flowers and taking honey out of them, as our mother
tells fortunes to the ladies. And don’t throw stones at the rooks,
because they are dark, and dark blood is Gipsy blood. And don’t crush
the snail, for he carries his tent on his back, like our old father”
(*i.e*., carries his home about, and so he too is Rommany).

### GUDLO XX. HOW CHARLEY LEE PLAYED AT PITCH-AND-TOSS.

I jinned a tāno mush yeckorus that nashered sār his wongur ’drée the
toss-ring. Then he jālled kerri to his dádas’ kanyas and lelled pange
bar avree. Paul’ a bitti chairus he dicked his dádas an’ pookered lester
he’d lelled pange bar avree his gunnas. But yuv’s dádas penned, “Jāl an,
kair it ajaw and win some wongur againus!” So he jālled apopli to the
toss-ring an’ lelled sār his wongur pauli, an’ pange bar ferridearer. So
he jālled ajaw kerri to the tan, an’ dicked his dádas beshtin’ alay by
the rikk o’ the tan, and his dádas penned, “Sā did you keravit, my
chavo?” “Kushto, dádas. I lelled sār my wongur pauli; and here’s tute’s
wongur acäi, an’ a bar for tute an’ shtār bar for mi-kokero.”

An’ that’s tācho as ever you tool that pen in tute’s waster—an’ dovo
mush was poor Charley Lee, that’s mullo kennā.

#### TRANSLATION.

I knew a little fellow once that lost all his money in the toss-ring
(*i.e*., at pitch-and-toss). Then he went home to his father’s sacks and
took five pounds out. After a little while he saw his father and told
him he’d taken five pounds from his bags. But his father said, “Go on,
spend it and win some more money!” So he went again to the toss-ring and
got all his money back, and five pounds more. And going home, he saw his
father sitting by the side of the tent, and his father said, “How did
you succeed (*i.e*., *do it*), my son?” “Very well, father. I got all
*my* money back; and here’s *your* money now, and a pound for you and
four pounds for myself.”

And that’s true as ever you hold that pen in your hand—and that man was
poor Charley Lee, that’s dead now.

### GUDLO XXI. OF THE TINKER AND THE KETTLE.

A petulamengro hatched yeck divvus at a givéscro kér, where the rāni del
him māss an’ tood. While he was hawin’ he dicked a kekávi sār chicklo
an’ bongo, pāshall a boro hev adrée, an’ he putchered, “Del it a mandy
an’ I’ll lel it avree for chichi, ’cause you’ve been so kushto an’
kāmmoben to mandy.” So she del it a lester, an’ he jālled avree for trin
cooricus, an’ he keravit apré, an’ kaired it pauno sār rupp. Adovo he
welled akovo drum pauli, an’ jessed to the same kér, an’ penned, “Dick
acai at covi kushti kekávi! I del shove trin mushis for it, an’ tu shall
lel it for the same wongur, ’cause you’ve been so kushto a mandy.”

Dovo mush was like boot ’dusta mushis—wery cāmmoben to his kokero.

#### TRANSLATION.

A tinker stopped one day at a farmer’s house, where the lady gave him
meat and milk. While he was eating he saw a kettle all rusty and bent,
with a great hole in it, and he asked, “Give it to me and I will take it
away for nothing, because you have been so kind and obliging to me.” So
she gave it to him, and he went away for three weeks, and he repaired it
(the kettle), and made it as bright (white) as silver. Then he went that
road again, to the same house, and said, “Look here at this fine kettle!
I gave six shillings for it, and you shall have it for the same money,
because you have been so good to me.”

That man was like a great many men—very benevolent to himself.

### GUDLO XXII. THE STORY OF “ROMMANY JŌTER.”

If a Rommany chal gets nashered an’ can’t latch his drum i’ the rātti,
he shells avree, “*Hup*, *hup*—*Rom-ma-ny*, *Rom-ma-ny jō-ter*!” When
the chavvis can’t latch the tan, it’s the same gudlo, “*Rom-ma-ny
jō-ter*!” Jōter pens kett’nus.

And yeck rātti my dádas, sixty besh kennā, was pirryin’ par the weshes
to tan, an’ he shooned a bitti gúdlo like bitti rānis a rākkerin’ puro
tácho Rommanis, and so he jālled from yeck boro rukk to the waver, and
paul’ a cheirus he dicked a tāni rāni, and she was shellin’ avree for
her miraben, “*Rom-ma-ny*, *Rom-ma-ny jō-ter*!” So my dáda shokkered
ajaw, “*Rom-ma-ny chal*, *ak-ái*!” But as he shelled there welled a boro
bavol, and the bitti rānis an’ sār prastered avree i’ the heb like
chillicos adrée a starmus, and all he shunned was a savvaben and
“Rom-ma-ny jō-ter!” shukàridir an’ shukàridir, pash sar was kerro.

An’ you can dick by dovo that the kukalos, an’ fairies, an’ mullos, and
chovihans all rākker pūro tàcho Rommanis, ’cause that’s the old ’Gyptian
jib that was penned adrée the Scripture tem.

#### TRANSLATION.

If a Gipsy is lost and cannot find his way in the night, he cries out,
“Hup, hup—Rom-ma-ny, Rom-ma-ny jō-ter!” When the children cannot find
the tent, it is the same cry, “*Rom-ma-ny jō-ter*!” Joter means
together.

And one night my father, sixty years ago (literally, *now*), was walking
through the woods to his tent, and he heard a little cry like little
ladies talking real old Gipsy, and so he went from one great tree to the
other (*i.e*., concealing himself), and after a while he saw a little
lady, and she was crying out as if for her life, “*Rom-ma-ny*,
*Rom-ma-ny jō-ter*!” So my father cried again, “*Gipsy*, *here*!” But as
he hallooed there came a great blast of wind, and the little ladies and
all flew away in the sky like birds in a storm, and all he heard was a
laughing and “*Rom-ma-ny jō-ter*!” softer and softer, till all was done.

And you can see by that that the goblins (dwarfs, mannikins), and
fairies, and ghosts, and witches, and all talk real old Gipsy, because
that is the old Egyptian language that was talked in the Scripture land.

### GUDLO XXIII. OF THE RICH GIPSY AND THE PHEASANT.

Yeckorus a Rommany chal kaired adusta wongur, and was boot barvelo an’ a
boro rye. His chuckko was kāshno, an’ the crafnies ’pré lester chuckko
were o’ sonnakai, and his graias solivaris an’ guiders were sār ruppeny.
Yeck divvus this here Rommany rye was hawin’ habben anerjāl the
krallis’s chavo, an’ they hatched adrée a weshni kānni that was kannelo,
but saw the mushis penned it was kūshtidearer. “Bless mi-Duvel!”
rākkered the Rommany rye shukár to his juvo, “tu and mandy have hawed
mullo mass boot ’dusta cheiruses, mi-deari, but never soomed kek so
wafro as dovo. It kauns worse than a mullo grai!”

Boro mushis an’ bitti mushis sometimes kaum covvas that waver mushis
don’t jin.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a Gipsy made much money, and was very rich and a great gentleman.
His coat was silk, and the buttons on his coat were of gold, and his
horse’s bridle and reins were all silver. One day this Gipsy gentleman
was eating (at table) opposite to the king’s son, and they brought in a
pheasant that smelt badly, but all the people said it was excellent.
“Bless me, God!” said the Gipsy gentleman softly (whispering) to his
wife, “you and I have eaten dead meat (meat that died a natural death)
many a time, my dear, but never smelt anything so bad as that. It stinks
worse than a dead horse!”

Great men and small men sometimes like (agree in liking things) that
which other people do not understand.

### GUDLO XXIV. THE GIPSY AND THE “VISITING-CARDS.”

Yeckorus a choro Rommany chal dicked a rāni hatch taller the wuder of a
boro ker an’ mukked adovo a bitti lil. Then he putched the rakli, when
the rāni jessed avree, what the lil kaired. Adoi the rakli pukkered
lesco it was for her rāni ta jin kun’d welled a dick her. “Āvali!”
penned the Rommany chal; “*that’s* the way the Gorgios mukks their
patteran! *We* mukks char apré the drum.”

The grai mukks his pirro apré the drum, an’ the sap kairs his trail
adrée the pūv.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a poor Gipsy saw a lady stop before the door of a great house and
left there a card (little letter). Then he asked the girl, when the lady
went away, what the card meant (literally, *did*). Then (there) the girl
told him it was for her lady to know who had come to see her. “Yes!”
said the Gipsy; “so that is the way the Gorgios leave their sign! *We*
leave grass on the road.”

The horse leaves his track on the road, and the snake makes his trail in
the dust.

### GUDLO XXV. THE GIPSY IN THE FOREST.

When I was beshin’ alay adrée the wesh tāle the bori rukkas, mandy
putched a tikno chillico to latch mandy a bitti moro, but it jālled
avree an’ I never dicked it kekoomi. Adöi I putched a boro chillico to
latch mandy a curro o’ tatti panni, but it jālled avree paul’ the waver.
Mandy never putchered the rukk parl my sherro for kek, but when the
bàvol welled it wussered a lay to mandy a hundred ripe kóri.

#### TRANSLATION.

When I was sitting down in the forest under the great trees, I asked a
little bird to bring (find) me a little bread, but it went away and I
never saw it again. Then I asked a great bird to bring me a cup of
brandy, but it flew away after the other. I never asked the tree over my
head for anything, but when the wind came it threw down to me a hundred
ripe nuts.

### GUDLO XXVI. THE GIPSY FIDDLER AND THE YOUNG LADY.

Yeckorus a tāno mush was kellin’ kushto pré the boshomengro, an’ a
kushti dickin rāni pookered him, “Tute’s killaben is as sāno as
best-tood.” And he rākkered ajaw, “Tute’s mui’s gudlo sār pishom, an’
I’d cāmmoben to puraben mi tood for tute’s pishom.”

Kushto pāsh kushto kairs ferridearer.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a young man was playing well upon the violin, and a beautiful lady
told him, “Your playing is as soft as cream.” And he answered, “Your
mouth (*i.e*., lips or words) is sweet as honey, and I would like to
exchange my cream for your honey.”

Good with good makes better.

### GUDLO XXVII. HOW THE GIPSY DANCED A HOLE THROUGH A STONE.

Yeckorus some plochto Rommany chals an’ juvas were kellin’ the
pāsh-divvus by dood tall’ a boro kér, and yeck penned the waver, “I’d be
cāmmoben if dovo kér was mandy’s.” And the rye o’ the kér, kún sus
dickin’ the kellaben, rākkered, “When tute kells a hev muscro the bar
you’re hatchin’ apré, mandy’ll del tute the ker.” Adöi the Rom tarried
the bar apré, an’ dicked it was hollow tāle, and sār a curro ’pré the
waver rikk. So he lelled dui sastern chokkas and kelled sār the rātti
’pré the bar, kairin’ such a gúdlo you could shoon him a mee avree; an’
adrée the sala he had kaired a hev adrée the bar as boro as lesters
sherro. So the barvelo rye del him the fino ker, and sār the mushis got
mātto, hallauter kettenus.

Many a cheirus I’ve shooned my puri dye pen that a bar with a hev adrée
it kairs kāmmoben.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once some jolly Gipsy men and girls were dancing in the evening by
moonlight before a great house, and one said to the other, “I’d be glad
if that house was mine.” And the gentleman of the house, who was looking
at the dancing, said, “When you dance a hole through (in the centre of)
the stone you are standing on, I’ll give you the house.” Then the Gipsy
pulled the stone up, and saw it was hollow underneath, and like a cup on
the other side. So he took two iron shoes and danced all night on the
stone, making such a noise you could hear him a mile off; and in the
morning he had made a hole in the stone as large as his head. So the
rich gentleman gave him the fine house, and all the people got drunk,
all together.

Many a time I’ve heard my old mother say that a stone with a hole in it
brings luck.

### GUDLO XXVIII. STORY OF THE GENTLEMAN AND THE GIPSY.

Yeckorus a boro rye wouldn’t mukk a choro, pauvero, chovveny Rommany
chal hatch odöi ’pré his farm. So the Rommany chal jālled on a puv apré
the waver rikk o’ the drum, anerjal the ryas beshaben. And dovo rātti
the ryas ker pelled alay; kek kāsh of it hatched apré, only the foki
that loddered adöi hullered their kokeros avree mā their miraben. And
the ryas tikno chavo would a-mullered if a Rommany juva had not lelled
it avree their pauveri bitti tan.

An’ dovo’s sār *tacho like my dad*, an’ to the divvus kennā they pens
that pūv the Rommany Pūv.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a great gentleman would not let a poor, poor, poor Gipsy stay on
his farm. So the Gipsy went to a field on the other side of the way,
opposite the gentleman’s residence. And that night the gentleman’s house
fell down; not a stick of it remained standing, only the people who
lodged there carried themselves out (*i.e*., escaped) with their lives.
And the gentleman’s little babe would have died if a Gipsy woman had not
taken it into their poor little tent.

And that’s all *true as my father*, and to this day they call that field
the Gipsy Field.

### GUDLO XXIX. HOW THE GIPSY WENT INTO THE WATER.

Yeck divvus a prastramengro prastered pauli a Rommany chal, an’ the chal
jālled adrée the panni, that was pordo o’ boro bittis o’ floatin’ shill,
and there he hatched pāll his men with only his sherro avree. “Hav
avree,” shelled a rye that was wafro in his see for the pooro mush, “an’
we’ll mukk you jāl!” “Kek,” penned the Rom; “I shan’t jāl.” “Well
avree,” penned the rye ajaw, “an’ I’ll del tute pange bar!” “*Kek*,”
rakkered the Rom. “Jāl avree,” shokkered the rye, “an’ I’ll del tute
pange bar an’ a nevvi chukko!” “Will you del mandy a walin o’ tatto
panni too?” putched the Rommany chal. “Āvail, ávail,” penned the rye;
“but for Duveleste hav’ avree the panni!” “Kushto,” penned the Rommany
chal, “for cāmmoben to tute, rya, I’ll jāl avree!”
 [235](egl13.htm#xref_235.md)

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a policeman chased a Gipsy, and the Gipsy ran into the river, that
was full of great pieces of floating ice, and there he stood up to his
neck with only his head out. “Come out,” cried a gentleman that pitied
the poor man, “and we’ll let you go!” “No,” said the Gipsy; “I won’t
move.” “Come out,” said the gentleman again, “and I’ll give you five
pounds!” “No,” said the Gipsy. “Come out,” cried the gentleman, “and
I’ll give you five pounds and a new coat!” “Will you give me a glass of
brandy too?” asked the Gipsy. “Yes, yes,” said the gentleman; “but for
God’s sake come out of the water!” “Well,” exclaimed the Gipsy, “to
oblige you, sir, I’ll come out!”

### GUDLO XXX. THE GIPSY AND HIS TWO MASTERS.

“Savo’s tute’s rye?” putched a ryas mush of a Rommany chal. “I’ve dui
ryas,” pooked the Rommany chal: “Duvel’s the yeck an’ beng’s the waver.
Mandy kairs booti for the beng till I’ve lelled my yeckora habben, an’
pallers mi Duvel pauli ajaw.”

#### TRANSLATION.

“Who is your master?” asked a gentleman’s servant of a Gipsy. “I’ve two
masters,” said the Gipsy: “God is the one, and the devil is the other. I
work for the devil till I have got my dinner (one-o’clock food), and
after that follow the Lord.”

### GUDLO XXXI. THE LITTLE GIPSY BOY AT THE SILVERSMITH’S.

A bitti chavo jalled adrée the boro gav pāsh his dàdas, an’ they hatched
taller the hev of a ruppenomengro’s buddika sār pordo o’ kushti-dickin
covvas. “O dàdas,” shelled the tikno chavo, “what a boro choroméngro
dovo mush must be to a’ lelled so boot adusta rooys an’ horas!”

A tácho cóvva often dicks sār a hokkeny (huckeny) cóvva; an dovo’s sim
of a tácho mush, but a juva often dicks tácho when she isn’t.

#### TRANSLATION.

A little boy went to the great village (*i.e*., London) with his father,
and they stopped before the window of a silversmith’s shop all full of
pretty things. “O father,” cried the small boy, “what a great thief that
man must be to have got so many spoons and watches!”

A true thing often looks like a false one; and the same is true (and
that’s *same*) of a true man, but a girl often looks right when she is
not.

### GUDLO XXXII. THE GIPSY’S DREAM.

Mandy sūtto’d I was pirraben lang o’ tute, an’ I dicked mandy’s pen odöi
’pré the choomber. Then I was pirryin’ ajaw parl the puvius, an’ I
welled to the panni paul’ the Beng’s Choomber, an’ adöi I dicked some
rānis, saw nāngo barrin’ a pauno plāchta ’pré lengis sherros, adree the
panni pāsh their bukkos. An’ I pookered lengis, “Mi-rānis, I putch
tute’s cāmmoben; I didn’t jin tute sus acai.” But yeck pré the wavers
penned mandy boot kushti cāmmoben, “Chichi, mor dukker your-kokero; we
just welled alay acai from the kér to lel a bitti bath.” An’ she savvy’d
sā kushto, but they all jalled avree glan mandy sār the bavol, an’ tute
was hatchin’ pāsh a maudy sār the cheirus.

So it pens, “when you dick rānis sār dovo, you’ll muller kushto.” Well,
if it’s to be akovo, I kaum it’ll be a booti cheirus a-wellin.’ Tácho!

#### TRANSLATION.

I dreamed I was walking with you, and I saw my sister (a fortune-teller)
there upon the hill. Then I (found myself) walking again over the field,
and I came to the water near the Devil’s Dyke, and there I saw some
ladies, quite naked excepting a white cloth on their heads, in the water
to the waists. And I said to them, “Ladies, I beg your pardon; I did not
know you were here.” But one among the rest said to me very kindly, “No
matter, don’t trouble yourself; we just came down here from the house to
take a little bath.” And she smiled sweetly, but they all vanished
before me like the cloud (wind), and you were standing by me all the
time.

So it means, “*when you see ladies like that, you will die happily*.”
Well, if it’s to be that, I hope it will be a long time coming. Yes,
indeed.

### GUDLO XXXIII. OF THE GIRL AND HER LOVER.

Yeckorus, boot hundred beshes the divvus acai, a juva was wellin’ to
chore a yora. “Mukk mandy hatch,” penned the yora, “an’ I’ll sikker tute
ki tute can lel a tikno pappni.” So the juva lelled the tikno pappni,
and it pookered lāki, “Mukk mandy jāl an’ I’ll sikker tute ki tute can
chore a bori kāni.” Then she chored the bori kāni, an’ it shelled avree,
“Mukk mandy jāl an’ I’ll sikker tute ki you can loure a rāni-chillico.”
And when she lelled the rāni-chillico, it penned, “Mukk mandy jāl an’
I’ll sikker tute odöi ki tute can lel a guruvni’s tikno.” So she lelled
the guruvni’s tikno, an’ it shokkered and ruvved, an’ rākkered, “Mukk
mandy jāl an’ I’ll sikker tute where to lel a fino grai.” An’ when she
loured the grai, it penned lāki, “Mukk mandy jāl an’ I’ll rikker tute to
a kushto-dick barvelo rye who kaums a pirreny.” So she lelled the kushto
tauno rye, an’ she jivved with lester kushto yeck cooricus; but pāsh
dovo he pookered her to jāl avree, he didn’t kaum her kekoomi. “Sā a
wafro mush is tute,” ruvved the rakli, “to bitcher mandy avree! For
tute’s cāmmoben I delled avree a yora, a tikno pappni, a boro kāni, a
rāni-chillico, a guruvni’s tikno, an’ a fino grai.” “Is dovo tácho?”
putched the raklo. “’Pré my mullo dàdas!” sovahalled the rākli,” I del
’em sār apré for tute, yeck paul the waver, an’ kennā tu bitchers mandy
avree!” “So ’p mi-Duvel!” penned the rye, “if tute nashered sār booti
covvas for mandy, I’ll rummer tute.” So they were rummobend.

Āvali, there’s huckeny (hokkeny) tàchobens and tacho hùckabens. You can
sovahall pré the lil adovo.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once, many hundred years ago (to-day now), a girl was going to steal an
egg. “Let me be,” said the egg, “and I will show you where you can get a
duck.” So the girl got the duck, and it said (told) to her, “Let me go
and I will show you where you can get a goose” (large hen). Then she
stole the goose, and it cried out, “Let me go and I’ll show you where
you can steal a turkey” (lady-bird). And when she took the turkey, it
said, “Let me go and I’ll show you where you can get a calf.” So she got
the calf, and it bawled and wept, and cried, “Let me go and I’ll show
you where to get a fine horse.” And when she stole the horse, it said to
her, “Let me go and I’ll carry you to a handsome, rich gentleman who
wants a sweetheart.” So she got the nice young gentleman, and lived with
him pleasantly one week; but then he told her to go away, he did not
want her any more. “What a bad man you are,” wept the girl, “to send me
away! For your sake I gave away an egg, a duck, a goose, a turkey, a
calf, and a fine horse.” “Is that true?” asked the youth. “By my dead
father!” swore the girl, “I gave them all up for you, one after the
other, and now you send me away!” “So help me God!” said the gentleman,
“if you lost so many things for me, I’ll marry you.” So they were
married.

Yes, there are false truths and true lies. You may kiss the book on
*that*.

### GUDLO XXXIV. THE GIPSY TELLS OF WILL-O’-THE-WISP.

Does mandy jin the lav adrée Rommanis for a Jack-o’-lantern—the dood
that prasters, and hatches, an’ kells o’ the rātti, parl the panni,
adrée the puvs? *Avali*; some pens ’em the Momeli Mullos, and some the
Bitti Mullos. They’re bitti geeros who rikker tute adrée the gógemars,
an’ sikker tute a dood till you’re all jālled apré a wafro drum an
nashered, an’ odöi they chiv their kokeros pāuli an’ savs at tute.
Mandy’s dicked their doods ádusta cheiruses, an’ kekoomi; but my pal
dicked längis muis pāsh mungwe yeck rātti. He was jāllin’ langus an’
dicked their doods, and jinned it was the yāg of lesters tan. So he
pallered ’em, an’ they tàdered him dúkker the drum, parl the bors,
weshes, puvius, gogemars, till they lelled him adrée the panni, an then
savvy’d avree. And odöi he dicked lender pré the waver rikk, mā lesters
kokerus yākkis, an’ they were bitti mushis, bitti chovihānis, about dui
peeras boro. An’ my pal was bengis hunnalo, an’ sovahalled pal’ lengis,
“If I lelled you acai, you ratfolly juckos! if I nashered you, I’d chin
tutes curros!” An’ he jālled to tan ajaw an’ pookered mandy saw dovo
’pré dovo rat. “Kún sus adovo?” Āvali, rya; dovo was pāsh Kaulo
Panni—near Blackwater.

#### TRANSLATION.

Do I know the word in Rommanis for a Jack-o’-lantern—the light that
runs, and stops, and dances by night, over the water, in the fields?
Yes; some call them the Light Ghosts, and some the Little Ghosts.
They’re little men who lead you into the waste and swampy places, and
show you a light until you have gone astray and are lost, and then they
turn themselves around and laugh at you. I have seen their lights many a
time, and nothing more; but my brother saw their faces close and
opposite to him (directly *vis-à-vis*) one night. He was going along and
saw their lights, and thought it was the fire of his tent. So he
followed them, and they drew him from the road over hedges, woods,
fields, and lonely marshes till they got him in the water, and then
laughed out loud. And there he saw them with his own eyes, on the
opposite side, and they were little fellows, little goblins, about two
feet high. And my brother was devilish angry, and swore at them! “If I
had you here, you wretched dogs! if I caught you, I’d cut your throats!”
And he went home and told me all that that night. “*Where was it*?” Yes,
sir; that was near Blackwater.

### GUDLO XXXV. THE GIPSY EXPLAINS WHY THE FLOUNDER HAS HIS MOUTH ON ONE SIDE.

Yeckorus sār the matchis jālled an’ suvved kettenescrus ’drée the panni.
And yeck penned as yuv was a boro mush, an’ the waver rakkered ajaw sā
yuv was a borodiro mush, and sār pookered sigán ket’nus how lengis were
borodirer mushis. Adöi the flounder shelled avree for his meriben
“Mandy’s the krallis of you sār!” an’ he shelled so surrelo he kaired
his mui bongo, all o’ yeck rikkorus. So to akovo divvus acäi he’s penned
the Krallis o’ the Matchis, and rikkers his mui bongo sār o’ yeck sidus.

Mushis shouldn’t shell too shunaben apré lengis kokeros.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once all the fish came and swam together in the water. And one said that
he was a great person, and the other declared that he was a greater
person, and (at last) all cried out at once what great characters (men)
they all were. Then the flounder shouted for his life, “I’m the king of
you all!” and he roared so violently he twisted his mouth all to one
side. So to this day he is called the King of the Fishes, and bears his
face crooked all on one side.

Men should not boast too loudly of themselves.

### GUDLO XXXVI. A GIPSY ACCOUNT OF THE TRUE ORIGIN OF THE FISH CALLED OLD MAIDS OR YOUNG MAIDS.

Yeckorus kushti-dickin raklos were suvvin’ ’drée the lun panni, and
there welled odoi some plochti rāklis an’ juvas who pooked the tāno ryas
to hav’ avree an’ choomer ’em. But the rāklos wouldn’t well avree, so
the rānis rikkered their rivabens avree an’ pirried adrée the panni
paul’ lendy. An’ the ryas who were kandered alay, suvved andurer ’drée
the panni, an’ the rānis pallered ’em far avree till they were saw
latchered, rāklos and rāklis. So the tauno ryas were purabened into
Barini Mushi Matchis because they were too ladge (latcho) of the rānis
that kaumed ’em, and the rānis were kaired adrée Puri Rāni Matchis and
Tāni Rāni Matchis because they were too tatti an’ ruzli.

Rāklos shouldn’t be too ladge, nor rāklis be too boro of their kokeros.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once some handsome youths were swimming in the sea, and there came some
wanton women and girls who told the young men to come out and kiss them.
But the youths would not come out, so the ladies stripped themselves and
ran into the water after them. And the gentles who were driven away swam
further into the water, and the ladies followed them far away till all
were lost, boys and girls. So the young men were changed into Codfish
because they were too shy of the girls that loved them, and the ladies
were turned into Old Maids and Young Maids because they were too wanton
and bold.

Men should not be too modest, nor girls too forward.

### GUDLO XXXVII. HOW LORD COVENTRY LEAPED THE GIPSY TENT. A TRUE STORY.

I dicked Lord Coventry at the Worcester races. He kistured lester noko
grai adrée the steeple-chase for the ruppeny—kek,—a sonnakai tank I
think it was,—but he nashered. It was dovo tāno rye that yeck divvus in
his noko park dicked a Rommany chal’s tan pāsh the rikk of a bor; and at
yeck leap he kistered apré the bor, and jālled right atut an’ parl the
Rommany chal’s tan. “Ha, kún’s acai?” he shelled, as he dicked the tikno
kaulos; “a Rommany chal’s tan!” And from dovo divvus he mukked akovo Rom
hatch his cāmmoben ’pré his puv. Tácho.

Ruzlo mushis has boro sees.

#### TRANSLATION.

I saw Lord Coventry at the Worcester races. He rode his own horse in the
steeple-chase for the silver—no, it was a gold tankard, I think, but he
lost.

It was that young gentleman who one day in his own park saw a Gipsy tent
by the side of a hedge, and took a flying leap over tent, hedge, and
all. “Ha, what’s here?” he cried, as he saw the little brown children;
“a Gipsy’s tent!” And from that day he let that Gipsy stay as much as he
pleased on his land.

Bold men have generous hearts.

### GUDLO XXXVIII. OF MR BARTLETT’S LEAP.

Dovo’s sim to what they pens of Mr Bartlett in Glo’stershire, who had a
fino tem pāsh Glo’ster an’ Bristol, where he jivved adrée a boro ker.
Kek mush never dicked so booti weshni juckalos or weshni kannis as yuv
rikkered odöi. They prastered atūt saw the drumyas sim as kanyas. Yeck
divvus he was kisterin’ on a kushto grai, an’ he dicked a Rommany chal
rikkerin’ a truss of gib-pūss ’pré lester dūmo prāl a bitti drum, an’
kistered ’pré the pooro mush, pūss an’ sār. I jins that puro mush better
’n I jins tute, for I was a’ter yeck o’ his raklis yeckorus; he had
kushti-dick raklis, an’ he was old Knight Locke. “Puro,” pens the rye,
“did I kair you trash?” “I māng tūte’s shunaben, rya,” pens Locke pauli;
“I didn’t jin tute sus wellin’!” So puro Locke hatched odöi ’pré dovo
tem sār his miraben, an’ that was a kushti covva for the puro Locke.

#### TRANSLATION.

That is like what is told of Mr Bartlett in Gloucestershire, who had a
fine place near Gloucester and Bristol, where he lived in a great house.
No man ever saw so many foxes or pheasants as he kept there. They ran
across all the paths like hens. One day he was riding on a fine horse,
when he saw a Gipsy carrying a truss of wheat-straw on his back up a
little path, and leaped over the poor man, straw and all. I knew that
old man better than I know you, for I was after one of his daughters
then; he had beautiful girls, and he was old Knight Locke. “Old fellow,”
said the gentleman, “did I frighten you?” “I beg your pardon, sir,” said
Locke after him; “I didn’t know you were coming!” So old Locke stayed on
that land all his life, and that was a good thing for old Locke.

### GUDLO XXXIX. THE GIPSY, THE PIG, AND THE MUSTARD.

Yeckorus a Rommany chal jālled to a boro givescroker sā’s the rye sus
hawin’. And sikk’s the Rom wan’t a-dickin’, the rye all-sido pordered a
kell-mallico pāsh kris, an’ del it to the Rommany chal. An’ sā’s the
kris dantered adrée his gullo, he was pāsh tassered, an’ the panni
welled in his yākkas. Putched the rye, “Kún’s tute ruvvin’ ajaw for?”
An’ he rākkered pauli, “The kris lelled mandys bávol ajaw.” Penned the
rye, “I kaum the kris’ll del tute kushti bāk.” “Parraco, rya,” penned
the Rom pauli; “I’ll kommer it kairs dovo.” Sikk’s the rye bitchered his
sherro, the Rommany chal loured the krissko-curro mā the ruppeny rooy,
an’ kek dicked it. The waver divvus anpauli, dovo Rom jālled to the ryas
baulo-tan, an’ dicked odöi a boro rikkeno baulo, an’ gillied, “I’ll dick
acai if I can kair tute ruv a bitti.”

Now, rya, you must jin if you del a baulor kris adrée a pābo, he can’t
shell avree or kair a gudlo for his miraben, an’ you can rikker him
bissin’, or chiv him apré a wardo, an’ jāl andūrer an’ kek jin it. An’
dovo’s what the Rommany chal kaired to the baulor, pāsh the sim kris;
an’ as he bissered it avree an’ pakkered it adrée a gunno, he penned
shukkár adrée the baulor’s kan, “Cālico tute’s rye hatched my bavol, an’
the divvus I’ve hatched tute’s; an’ yeckorus your rye kaumed the kris
would del mandy kushti bāk, and kennā it *has* del mengy kushtier bāk
than ever he jinned.

Ryes must be sig not to kair pyass an’ trickis atop o’ choro mushis.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a Gipsy went to a great farmhouse as the gentleman sat at table
eating. And so soon as the Gipsy looked away, the gentleman very quietly
filled a cheese-cake with mustard and gave it to the Gipsy. When the
mustard bit in his throat, he was half choked, and the tears came into
his eyes. The gentleman asked him, “What are you weeping for now?” And
he replied, “The mustard took my breath away.” The gentleman said, “I
hope the mustard will give you good luck!” “Thank you, sir,” answered
the Gipsy; “I’ll take care it does” (that). As soon as the gentleman
turned his head, the Gipsy stole the mustard-pot with the silver spoon,
and no one saw it. The next day after, that Gipsy went to the
gentleman’s pig-pen, and saw there a great fine-looking pig, and sang,
“I’ll see now if I can make *you* weep a bit.”

Now, sir, you must know that if you give a pig mustard in an apple, he
can’t cry out or squeal for his life, and you can carry him away, or
throw him on a waggon, and get away, and nobody will know it. And that
is what the Gipsy did to the pig, with the same mustard; and as he ran
it away and put it in a bag, he whispered softly into the pig’s ear,
“Yesterday your master stopped my breath, and to-day I’ve stopped yours;
and once your master hoped the mustard would give me good luck, and now
it *has* given me better luck than he ever imagined.”

Gentlemen must be careful not to make sport of and play tricks on poor
men.

### GUDLO XL. EXPLAINING THE ORIGIN OF A CURRENT GIPSY PROVERB OR SAYING.

Trin or shtor beshes pauli kennā yeck o’ the Petulengros dicked a boro
mullo baulor adrée a bitti drum. An’ sig as he latched it, some Rommany
chals welled alay an’ dicked this here Rommany chal. So Petulengro he
shelled avree, “A fino baulor! saw tulloben! jāl an the sala an’ you
shall have pāsh.” And they welled apopli adrée the sāla and lelled pāsh
sār tacho. And ever sense dovo divvus it’s a rākkerben o’ the Rommany
chals, “Sār tulloben; jāl an the sāla an’ tute shall lel your pash.”

#### TRANSLATION.

Three or four years ago one of the Smiths found a great dead pig in a
lane. And just as he found it, some Gipsies came by and saw this
Rommany. So Smith bawled out to them, “A fine pig! all fat! come in the
morning and you shall have half.” And they returned in the morning and
got half, all right. And ever since it has been a saying with the
Gipsies, “It’s *all fat*; come in the morning and get your half.”

### GUDLO XLI. THE GIPSY’S FISH-HOOK.

Yeckorus a rye pookered a Rommany chal he might jāl matchyin’ ’drée his
panni, and he’d del lester the cāmmoben for trin mushi, if he’d only
matchy with a bongo sivv an’ a púnsy-ran. So the Rom jālled with
India-drab kaired apré moro, an’ he drabbered saw the matchas adrée the
panni, and rikkered avree his wardo sār pordo. A boro cheirus pauli
dovo, the rye dicked the Rommany chal, an’ penned, “You choramengro, did
tute lel the matchas avree my panni with a hook?” “Āyali, rya, with a
hook,” penned the Rom pāle, werry sido. “And what kind of a hook?”
“Rya,” rākkered the Rom, “it was yeck o’ the longi kind, what we pens in
amandis jib a hookaben” (*i.e*., huckaben or hoc’aben).

When you del a mush cāmmoben to lel matchyas avree tute’s panni, you’d
better hatch adoi an’ dick how he kairs it.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a gentleman told a Gipsy he might fish in his pond, and he would
give him permission to do so for a shilling, but that he must only fish
with a hook and a fishing-pole (literally, crooked needle). So the Gipsy
went with India-drab (juice of the berries of *Indicus cocculus*) made
up with bread, and poisoned all the fish in the pond, and carried away
his waggonful. A long time after, the gentleman met the Gipsy, and said,
“You thief, did you catch the fish in my pond with a hook?” “Yes, sir,
with a hook,” replied the Gipsy very quietly. “And what kind of a hook?”
“Sir,” said the Gipsy, “it was one of the long kind, what we call in our
language a hookaben” (*i.e*., *a lie or trick*).

When you give a man leave to fish in your pond, you had better be
present and see how he does it.

### GUDLO XLII. THE GIPSY AND THE SNAKE.

If you more the first sappa you dicks, tute’ll more the first enemy
you’ve got. That’s what ’em pens, but I don’t jin if it’s tácho or
nettus. And yeckorus there was a werry wafro mush that was allers
a-kairin’ wafri covvabens. An’ yeck divvus he dicked a sap in the wesh,
an’ he prastered paller it with a bori churi adrée lester waster and
chinned her sherro apré. An’ then he rākkered to his kokerus, “Now that
I’ve mored the sap, I’ll lel the jivaben of my wenomest enemy.” And just
as he penned dovo lav he delled his pirro atut the danyas of a rukk, an’
pet alay and chivved the churi adrée his bukko. An’ as he was beshin’
alay a-mullerin’ ’drée the weshes, he penned to his kokerus, “Āvali, I
dicks kennā that dovo’s tacho what they pookers about morin’ a sappa;
for I never had kek worser ennemis than I’ve been to mandy’s selfus, and
what wells of morin’ innocen hanimals is kek kushtoben.”

#### TRANSLATION.

If you kill the first snake you see, you’ll kill the first (principal)
enemy you have. That is what they say, but I don’t know whether it is
true or not. And once there was a very bad man who was always doing bad
deeds. And one day he saw a snake in the forest, and ran after it with a
great knife in his hand and cut her head off. And then he said to
himself, “Now that I’ve killed the snake, I’ll take the life of my most
vindictive (literally, most venomous) enemy.” And just as he spoke that
word he struck his foot against the roots of a tree, and fell down and
drove the knife into his own body (liver or heart). And as he lay dying
in the forests, he said to himself, “Yes, I see now that it is true what
they told me as to killing a snake; for I never had any worse enemy than
I have been to myself, and what comes of killing innocent animals is
naught good.”

### GUDLO XLIII. THE STORY OF THE GIPSY AND THE BULL.

Yeckorus there was a Rommany chal who was a boro koorin’ mush, a surrelo
mush, a boro-wasteni mush, werry toonery an’ hunnalo. An’ he penned
adusta cheiruses that kek geero an’ kek covva ’pré the drumyas couldn’t
trasher him. But yeck divvus, as yuv was jāllin’ langs the drum with a
wáver pal, chūnderin’ an’ hookerin’ an’ lunterin’, an’ shorin’ his
kokero how he could koor the puro bengis’ selfus, they shooned a gūro
a-goorin’ an’ googerin’, an’ the first covva they jinned he prastered
like divius at ’em, an’ these here geeros prastered apré ye rukk, an’
the boro koorin’ mush that was so flick o’ his wasters chury’d first o’
saw (sār), an’ hatched duri-dirus from the puv pré the limmers. An’ he
beshed adoi an’ dicked ye bullus wusserin’ an’ chongerin’ his trushnees
sār aboutus, an’ kellin’ pré lesters covvas, an’ poggerin’ to cutengroes
saw he lelled for lesters miraben. An’ whenever the bavol pudered he was
atrash he’d pelt-a-lay ’pré the shinger-ballos of the gooro (gūro). An’
so they beshed adoi till the sig of the sala, when the mush who dicked
a’ter the gruvnis welled a-pirryin’ by an’ dicked these here chals
beshin’ like chillicos pré the rukk, an’ patched lengis what they were
kairin’ dovo for. So they pookered him about the bullus, an’ he hānkered
it avree; an’ they welled alay an’ jālled andūrer to the kitchema, for
there never was dui mushis in ’covo tem that kaumed a droppi levinor
koomi than lender. But pāle dovo divvus that trusheni mush never
sookered he couldn’t be a trashni mush no moreus. Tácho.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once there was a Gipsy who was a great fighting man, a strong man, a
great boxer, very bold and fierce. And he said many a time that no man
and no thing on the roads could frighten him. But one day, as he was
going along the road with another man (his friend), exaggerating and
bragging and boasting, and praising himself that he could beat the old
devil himself, they heard a bull bellowing and growling, and the first
thing they knew he ran like mad at them; and these men hurried up a
tree, and the great fighting man that was so handy with his fists
climbed first of all, and got (placed) himself furtherest from the
ground on the limbs. And he sat there and saw the bull tossing and
throwing his baskets all about, and dancing on his things, and breaking
to pieces all he had for his living. And whenever the wind blew he was
afraid he would fall on the horns of the bull. And so they sat there
till daybreak, when the man who looked after the cows came walking by
and saw these fellows sitting like birds on the tree, and asked them
what they were doing that for. So they told him about the bull, and he
drove it away; and they came down and went on to the alehouse, for there
never were two men in this country that wanted a drop of beer more than
they. But after that day that thirsty man never boasted he could not be
a frightened man. True.

### GUDLO XLIV. THE GIPSY AND HIS THREE SWEETHEARTS.

Yeckorus a tāno mush kaired his cāmmoben ta trin juvas kett’nus an’ kek
o’ the trin jinned yuv sus a pirryin’ ye waver dui. An ’covo ráklo
jivved adrée a bitti tan pāsh the rikkorus side o’ the boro lun panni,
an’ yeck rātti sār the chais welled shikri kett’nus a lester, an’ kek o’
the geeris jinned the wavers san lullerin adoi. So they jālled sār-sigán
kett’nus, an’ rākkered, “Sarshan!” ta yeck chairus. An’ dovo ráklo
didn’t jin what jūva kaumed lester ferridīrus, or kun yuv kaumed ye
ferridīrus, so sār the shtor besht-a-lay sum, at the habbenescro, and
yuv del len habben an’ levinor. Yeck hawed booti, but ye waver dui
wouldn’t haw kek, yeck pii’d, but ye wāver dui wouldn’t pi chommany,
’cause they were sār hunnali, and sookeri an’ kūried. So the ráklo
penned lengis, yuv sos atrash if yuv lelled a jūva ’at couldn’t haw, she
wouldn’t jiv, so he rummored the rákli that hawed her hābben.

All’ers haw sār the hābben foki banders apré a tute, an’ tute’ll jāl
sikker men dūsh an’ tukli.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once a young man courted three girls together, and none of the three
knew he was courting the two others. And that youth lived in a little
place near the side of the great salt water, and one night all the girls
came at once together to him, and none of the girls knew the others were
coming there. So they went all quick together, and said “Good evening,”
(sarishan means really “How are you?”) at the same time. And that youth
did not know which girl liked him best, or whom he loved best; so all
the four sat down together at the table, and he gave them food and beer.
One ate plenty, but the other two would eat nothing; one drank, but the
other two would not drink something, because they were all angry, and
grieved, and worried. So the youth told them he was afraid if he took a
wife that could not eat, she would not live, so he married the girl that
ate her food.

Always eat all the food that people give you (literally share out to
you), and you will go readily (securely) through sorrow and trouble.

### GUDLO XLV. THE GIPSIES AND THE SMUGGLERS. A TRUE STORY.

Yeckorus, most a hundred besh kennā, when mi dádas sus a chávo, yeck
rātti a booti Rommany chals san millerin kettenescrus pāsh the boro
panni, kún sar-sig the graias ankaired a-wickerin an’ lúdderin an’
núckerin’ an kairin a boro gúdli, an’ the Rommanis shūned a shellin, an’
dicked mūshis prasterin and lullyin for lenders miraben, sā’s seer-dush,
avree a boro hev. An’ when len sān sār jālled lúg, the Rommany chāls
welled adoi an’ latched adusta bitti barrels o’ tatto-pánni, an’ fino
covvas, for dovo mushis were ’mugglers, and the Roms lelled sar they
mukked pāli. An’ dovo sus a boro covva for the Rommany chāls, an’ they
pii’d sār graias, an’ the raklis an’ juvas jālled in kúshni heezis for
booti divvuses. An’ dovo sus kerro pāsh Bo-Peep—a boro pūvius adrée bori
chumures, pāsh Hastings in Sussex.

When ’mugglers násher an’ Rommany chāls latch, there’s kek worser
cāmmoben for it.

#### TRANSLATION.

Once almost a hundred years now, when my father was a boy, one night
many Gipsies were going together near the sea, when all at once the
horses began whinnying and kicking and neighing, and making a great
noise, and the Gipsies heard a crying out, and saw men running and
rushing as if in alarm, from a great cave. And when they were all gone
away together, the Gipsies went there and found many little barrels of
brandy, and valuables, for those men were smugglers, and the Gipsies
took all they left behind. And that was a great thing for the Gipsies,
and they drank like horses, and the girls and women went in silk clothes
for many days. And that was done near Bo-Peep, a great field in the
hills, by Hastings in Sussex.

When smugglers lose and Gipsies find, nobody is the worse for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Footnotes](egl13.md)
