[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](egl09)  [Next](egl11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428056998/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*English Gipsies and Their Language*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1874\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IX. MISCELLANEA.

Gipsies and Cats.—“Christians.”—Christians not “Hanimals.”—Green, Red,
and Yellow.—The Evil Eye.—Models and Morals.—Punji and
Sponge-cake.—Troubles with a Gipsy Teacher.—Pilferin’ and
Bilberin’.—Khapana and Hopper.—Hoppera-glasses.—The little wooden
Bear.—Huckeny Ponkee, Hanky Panky, Hocus-pocus, and Hokkeny
Bāro.—Burning a Gipsy Witch alive in America.—Daniel in the Lions’
Den.—Gipsy Life in Summer.—The Gavengroes.—The Gipsy’s Story of
Pitch-and-Toss.—“You didn’t fight your Stockings off?”—The guileless and
venerable Gipsy.—The Gipsy Professor of Rommany and the Police.—His
Delicacy of Feeling.—The old Gipsy and the beautiful Italian Models.—The
Admired of the Police.—Honesty strangely illustrated.—Gipsies willing or
unwilling to communicate Rommany.—Romance and Eccentricity of Gipsy Life
and Manners.—The Gipsy Grandmother and her Family.—A fine Frolic
interrupted.—The Gipsy Gentleman from America.—No such Language as
Rommany.—Hedgehogs.—The Witch Element in Gipsy Life.—Jackdaws and
Dogs.—Their Uses.—Lurchers and Poachers.—A Gipsy Camp.—The Ancient
Henry.—I am mistaken for a Magistrate or Policeman.—Gipsies of Three
Grades.—The Slangs.—Jim and the Twigs.—Beer rained from
Heaven.—Fortune-telling.—A golden Opportunity to live at my
Ease.—Petulamengro.—I hear of a New York Friend.—The Professor’s Legend
of the Olive-leaf and the Dove, “A wery tidy little Story.”—The Story of
Samson as given by a Gipsy.—The great Prize-fighter who was hocussed by
a Fancy Girl.—The Judgment Day.—Passing away in Sleep or Dream to God.—A
Gipsy on Ghosts.—Dogs which can kill Ghosts.—Twisted-legged
Stealing.—How to keep Dogs away from a Place.—Gipsies avoid Unions.—A
Gipsy Advertisement in the “Times.”—A Gipsy Poetess and a Rommany Song.

It would be a difficult matter to decide whether the superstitions and
odd fancies entertained by the Gipsies in England are derived from the
English peasantry, were brought from India, or picked up on the way.
This must be left for ethnologists more industrious and better informed
than myself to decide. In any case, the possible common Aryan source
will tend to obscure the truth, just as it often does the derivation of
Rommany words. But nothing can detract from the inexpressibly quaint
spirit of Gipsy originality in which these odd *credos* are expressed,
or surpass the strangeness of the reasons given for them. If the spirit
of the goblin and elfin lingers anywhere on earth, it is among the
Rommany.

One day I questioned a Gipsy as to cats, and what his opinion was of
black ones, correctly surmising that he would have some peculiar ideas
on the subject, and he replied—

“Rommanys never lel kaulo matchers adrée the ker, ’cause they’re mullos,
and beng is covvas; and the puro beng, you jin, is kaulo, an’ has shtor
herros an’ dui mushis—an’ a sherro. But pauno matchers san kushto, for
they’re sim to pauno ghosts of rānis.”

Which means in English, “Gipsies never have black cats in the house,
because they are unearthly creatures, and things of the devil; and the
old devil, you know, is black, and has four legs and two arms—and a
head. But white cats are good, for they are like the white ghosts of
ladies.”

It is in the extraordinary reason given for liking white cats that the
subtle Gipsyism of this cat-commentary consists. Most people would
consider a resemblance to a white ghost rather repulsive. But the Gipsy
lives by night a strange life, and the reader who peruses carefully the
stories which are given in this volume, will perceive in them a
familiarity with goblin-land and its denizens which has become rare
among “Christians.”

But it may be that I do this droll old Gipsy great wrong in thus
apparently classing him with the heathen, since he one day manifested
clearly enough that he considered he had a right to be regarded as a
true believer—the only drawback being this, that he was apparently under
the conviction that all human beings were “Christians.” And the way in
which he declared it was as follows: I had given him the Hindustani word
*janwur*, and asked him if he knew such a term, and he answered—

“Do I jin sitch a lav (know such a word) as *janwur* for a hanimal? Āvo
(yes); it’s *jomper*—it’s a toadus” (toad).

“But do you jin the lav (know the word) for an *animal*?”

“Didn’t I just pooker tute (tell you) it was a jomper? for if a toad’s a
hanimal, *jomper* must be the lav for hanimal.”

“But don’t you jin kek lav (know a word) for sar the covvas that have
jivaben (all living things)—for jompers, and bitti matchers (mice), and
gryas (horses)? You and I are animals.”

“Kek, rya, kek (no, sir, no), we aren’t hanimals. *Hanimals* is critters
that have something queer about ’em, such as the lions an’ helephants at
the well-gooroos (fairs), or cows with five legs, or won’ful piebald
grais—*them’s* hanimals. But Christins aint hanimals. Them’s *mushis*”
(men).

To return to cats: it is remarkable that the colour which makes a cat
desirable should render a bowl or cup objectionable to a true Gipsy, as
I have elsewhere observed in commenting on the fact that no
old-fashioned Rommany will drink, if possible, from white crockery. But
they have peculiar fancies as to other colours. Till within a few years
in Great Britain, as at the present day in Germany, their fondness for
green coats amounted to a passion. In Germany a Gipsy who loses caste
for any offence is forbidden for a certain time to wear green, so that
*ver non semper viret* may be truly applied to those among them who
bloom too rankly.

The great love for red and yellow among the Gipsies was long ago pointed
out by a German writer as a proof of Indian origin, but the truth is, I
believe, that all dark people instinctively choose these hues as
agreeing with their complexion. A brunette is fond of amber, as a blonde
is of light blue; and all true *kaulo* or dark Rommany *chāls* delight
in a bright yellow *pongdishler*, or neckerchief, and a red waistcoat.
The long red cloak of the old Gipsy fortune-teller is, however, truly
dear to her heart; she feels as if there were luck in it—that *bāk*
which is ever on Gipsy lips; for to the wanderers, whose home is the
roads, and whose living is precarious, Luck becomes a real deity. I have
known two old fortune-telling sisters to expend on new red cloaks a sum
which seemed to a lady friend very considerable.

I have spoken in another chapter of the deeply-seated faith of the
English Gipsies in the evil eye. Subsequent inquiry has convinced me
that they believe it to be peculiar to themselves. One said in my
presence, “There was a kauli juva that dicked the evil yack ad mandy the
sala—my chavo’s missis—an’ a’ter dovo I shooned that my chavo was naflo.
A bongo-yācki mush kairs wafro-luckus. *Avali*, the Gorgios don’t jin
it—it’s saw Rommany.”

*I.e*., “There was a dark woman that looked the evil eye at me this
morning—my son’s wife—and after that I heard that my son was ill. A
squint-eyed man makes bad-luck. Yes, the Gorgios don’t know it—it’s all
Rommany.”

The Gipsy is of an eminently social turn, always ready when occasion
occurs to take part in every conversation, and advance his views. One
day my old Rom hearing an artist speak of having rejected some
uncalled-for advice relative to the employment of a certain model, burst
out in a tone of hearty approbation with—

“That’s what *I* say. Every man his own juva (every man his own girl),
an’ every painter his own *morals*.”

If it was difficult in the beginning for me to accustom the Gipsy mind
to reply clearly and consistently to questions as to his language, the
trouble was tenfold increased when he began to see his way, as he
thought, to my object, and to take a real interest in aiding me. For
instance, I once asked—

“Puro! do you know such a word as *punji*? It’s the Hindu for capital.”

(Calmly.)  “Yes, rya; that’s a wery good word for capital.”

“But is it Rommany?”

(Decidedly.)  “It’ll go first-rateus into Rommany.”

“But can you make it out? Prove it!”

(Fiercely.)  “Of course I can make it out. *Kushto*. Suppose a man sells
’punge-cake, would’nt that be his capital? *Punje* must be capital.”

But this was nothing to what I endured after a vague fancy of the
meaning of seeking a derivation of words had dimly dawned on his mind,
and he vigorously attempted to aid me. Possessed with the crude idea
that it was a success whenever two words could be forced into a
resemblance of any kind, he constantly endeavoured to Anglicise Gipsy
words—often, alas! an only too easy process, and could never understand
why it was I then rejected them. By the former method I ran the risk of
obtaining false Hindustani Gipsy words, though I very much doubt whether
I was ever caught by it in a single instance; so strict were the tests
which I adopted, the commonest being that of submitting the words to
other Gipsies, or questioning him on them some days afterwards. By the
latter “aid” I risked the loss of Rommany words altogether, and
undoubtedly did lose a great many. Thus with the word *bilber* (to
entice or allure), he would say, in illustration, that the girls
*bilbered* the gentleman into the house to rob him, and then cast me
into doubt by suggesting that the word must be all right, “’cause it
looked all the same as *pilferin*’.”

One day I asked him if the Hindustani word khapana (pronounced almost
hopana) (to make away with) sounded naturally to his ears.

“Yes, rya; that must be *happer*, *habber*, or *huvver*. To hopper
covvas away from the tan (*i.e*., to *hopper* things from the place), is
when you rikker ’em awayus (carry them away, steal them), and gaverit
(hide *it*) tally your chuckko (under your coat). An’ I can pen you a
waver covva (I can tell you another thing) that’s *hopper*—them’s the
glasses that you look through—*hoppera*-glasses.”

And here in bounding triumph he gave the little wooden bear a drink of
ale, as if it had uttered this chunk of solid wisdom, and then treated
himself to a good long pull. But the glance of triumph which shot from
his black-basilisk eyes, and the joyous smile which followed these feats
of philology, were absolutely irresistible. All that remained for me to
do was to yield in silence.

One day we spoke of *huckeny pokee*, or *huckeny ponkee*, as it is
sometimes called. It means in Rommany “sleight of hand,” and also the
adroit substitution of a bundle of lead or stones for another containing
money or valuables, as practised by Gipsy women. The Gipsy woman goes to
a house, and after telling the simple-minded and credulous housewife
that there is a treasure buried in the cellar, persuades her that as
“silver draws silver,” she must deposit all her money or jewels in a bag
near the place where the treasure lies. This is done, and the Rommany
*dye* adroitly making up a parcel resembling the one laid down, steals
the latter, leaving the former.

Mr Barrow calls this *hokkeny bāro*, the great swindle. I may remark, by
the way, that among jugglers and “show-people” sleight of hand is called
*hanky panky*. “Hocus-pocus” is attributed by several writers to the
Gipsies, a derivation which gains much force from the fact, which I have
never before seen pointed out, that *hoggu bazee*, which sounds very
much like it, means in Hindustani legerdemain. English Gipsies have an
extraordinary fancy for adding the termination *us* in a most irregular
manner to words both Rommany and English. Thus *kéttene* (together) is
often changed to *kettenus*, and *side* to *sidus*. In like manner,
*hoggu* (*hocku* or *honku*) *bazee* could not fail to become *hocus
bozus*, and the next change, for the sake of rhyme, would be to
hocus-po-cus.

I told my ancient rambler of an extraordinary case of “huckeny pokee”
which had recently occurred in the United States, somewhere in the west,
the details of which had been narrated to me by a lady who lived at the
time in the place where the event occurred.

“A Gipsy woman,” I said, “came to a farmhouse and played huckeny pokee
on a farmer’s wife, and got away all the poor woman’s money.”

“Did she indeed, rya?” replied my good old friend, with a smile of joy
flashing from his eyes, the unearthly Rommany light just glinting from
their gloom.

“Yes,” I said impressively, as a mother might tell an affecting story to
a child. “All the money that that poor woman had, that wicked Gipsy
woman took away, and utterly ruined her.”

This was the culminating point; he burst into an irrepressible laugh; he
couldn’t help it—the thing had been done too well.

“But you haven’t heard all yet,” I added. “There’s more covvas to well.”

“Oh, I suppose the Rummany chi prastered avree (ran away), and got off
with the swag?”

“No, she didn’t.”

“Then they caught her, and sent her to starabun” (prison).

“No,” I replied.

“And what did they do?”

“THEY BURNT HER ALIVE!”

His jaw fell; a glossy film came over his panther-eyes. For a long time
he had spoken to me, had this good and virtuous man, of going to
America. Suddenly he broke out with this vehement answer—

“I won’t go to that country—*s’up mi duvel*! I’ll never go to America.”

It is told of a certain mother, that on showing her darling boy a
picture in the Bible representing Daniel in the lions’ den, she said,
“And there is good Daniel, and there are those naughty lions, who are
going to eat him all up.” Whereupon the dear boy cried out, “O mother,
look at that poor little lion in the corner—he won’t get any.”

It is from this point of view that such affairs are naturally regarded
by the Rommany.

There is a strange goblinesque charm in Gipsydom—something of nature,
and green leaves, and silent nights—but it is ever strangely commingled
with the forbidden; and as among the Greeks of old with Mercury amid the
singing of leafy brooks, there is a tinkling of, at least, petty
larceny. Witness the following, which came forth one day from a Gipsy,
in my presence, as an entirely voluntary utterance. He meant it for
something like poetry—it certainly was suggested by nothing, and as fast
as he spoke I wrote it down:—

“It’s kushto in tattoben for the Rommany chals. Then they can jāl langs
the drum, and hatch their tan acai and odoi pré the tem. We’ll lel moro
habben acai, and jāl andūrer by-an’-byus, an’ then jāl by rātti, so’s
the Gorgios won’t dick us. I jins a kūshti puv for the graias; we’ll
hatch ’pré in the sala, before they latcher we’ve been odoi, an’ jāl an
the drum an’ lel moro habben.”

“It is pleasant for the Gipsies in the summer-time. Then they can go
along the road, and pitch their tent here and there in the land. We’ll
take our food here, and go further on by-and-by, and then go by night,
so that the Gorgios won’t see us. I know a fine field for the horses;
we’ll stop there in the morning, before they find we have been there,
and go on the road and eat our food.”

“I suppose that you often have had trouble with the *gavengroes*
(police) when you wished to pitch your tent?”

Now it was characteristic of this Gipsy, as of many others, that when
interested by a remark or a question, he would reply by bursting into
some picture of travel, drawn from memory. So he answered by saying—

“They hunnelo’d the choro puro mush by pennin’ him he mustn’t hatch
odoi. ‘What’s tute?’ he pens to the prastramengro; ‘I’ll del you thrin
bar to lel your chuckko offus an’ koor mandy. You’re a ratfully jucko
an’ a huckaben.’”

*English*—They angered the poor old man by telling him he must not stop
there. “What are you?” he said to the policeman, “I’ll give you three
pounds to take your coat off and fight me. You’re a bloody dog and a
lie” (liar).

“I suppose you have often taken your coat off?”

“Once I lelled it avree an’ never chivved it apré ajaw.”

(*I.e*., “Once I took it off and never put it on again.”)

“How was that?”

“Yeckorus when I was a tāno mush, thirty besh kennā—rummed about pange
besh, but with kek chavis—I jālled to the prasters of the graias at
Brighton. There was the paiass of wussin’ the pāsheros apré for wongur,
an’ I got to the pyass, an’ first cheirus I lelled a boro bittus—twelve
or thirteen bar. Then I nashered my wongur, an’ penned I wouldn’t pyass
koomi, an’ I’d latch what I had in my poachy. Adoi I jālled from the
gudli ’dree the toss-ring for a pāshora, when I dicked a waver mush, an’
he putched mandy, ‘What bāk?’ and I penned pauli, ‘Kek bāk; but I’ve got
a bittus left.’ So I wussered with lester an’ nashered saw my covvas—my
chukko, my gad, an’ saw, barrin’ my rokamyas. Then I jālled kerri with
kek but my rokamyas an—I borried a chukko off my pen’s chavo.

“And when my juva dickt’omandy pash-nāngo, she pens, ‘Dovo’s tute’s
heesis?’ an’ I pookered her I’d been a-koorin’. But she penned, ‘Why,
you haven’t got your hovalos an; you didn’t koor tute’s hovalos avree?’
‘No,’ I rakkered; ‘I taddered em offus. (The mush played me with a
dui-sherro poshéro.)

“But drée the sala, when the mush welled to lel avree the jucko (for I’d
nashered dovo ajaw), I felt wafrodearer than when I’d nashered saw the
waver covvas. An’ my poor juvā ruvved ajaw, for she had no chāvo. I had
in those divvuses as kushti coppas an’ heesus as any young Gipsy in
Anglatérra—good chukkos, an’ gads, an’ pongdishlers.

“An’ that mush kurried many a geero a’ter mandy, but he never lelled no
bāk. He’d chore from his own dadas; but he mullered wafro adrée East
Kent.”

“Once when I was a young man, thirty years ago (now)—married about five
years, but with no children—I went to the races at Brighton. There was
tossing halfpence for money, and I took part in the game, and at first
(first time) I took a good bit—twelve or thirteen pounds. Then I lost my
money, and said I would play no more, and would keep what I had in my
pocket. Then I went from the noise in the toss-ring for half an hour,
when I saw another man, and he asked me, ‘What luck?’ and I replied, ‘No
luck; but I’ve a little left yet.’ So I tossed with him and lost all my
things—my coat, my shirt, and all, except my breeches. Then I went home
with nothing but my breeches on—I borrowed a coat of my sister’s boy.

“And when my wife saw me half-naked, she *says*, ‘Where are your
clothes?’ and I told her I had been fighting. But she said, ‘Why, you
have not your stockings on; you didn’t fight your stockings off!’ ‘No,’
I said; ‘I drew them off.’ (The man played me with a two-headed
halfpenny.)

“But in the morning when the man came to take away the dog (for I had
lost that too), I felt worse than when I lost all the other things. And
my poor wife cried again, for she had no child. I had in those days as
fine clothes as any young Gipsy in England—good coats, and shirts, and
handkerchiefs.

“And that man hurt many a man after me, but he never had any luck. He’d
steal from his own father; but he died miserably in East Kent.”

It was characteristic of the venerable wanderer who had installed
himself as my permanent professor of Rommany, that although almost every
phrase which he employed to illustrate words expressed some act at
variance with law or the rights of property, he was never weary of
descanting on the spotlessness, beauty, and integrity of his own life
and character. These little essays on his moral perfection were
expressed with a touching artlessness and child-like simplicity which
would carry conviction to any one whose heart had not been utterly
hardened, or whose eye-teeth had not been remarkably well cut, by
contact with the world. In his delightful *naïveté* and simple
earnestness, in his ready confidence in strangers and freedom from all
suspicion—in fact, in his whole deportment, this Rommany elder reminded
me continually of one—and of one man only—whom I had known of old in
America. Need I say that I refer to the excellent --- ---?

It happened for many days that the professor, being a man of early
habits, arrived at our rendezvous an hour in advance of the time
appointed. As he resolutely resisted all invitation to occupy the room
alone until my arrival, declaring that he had never been guilty of such
a breach of etiquette, and as he was, moreover, according to his word,
the most courteous man of the world in it, and I did not wish to
“contrary” him, he was obliged to pass the time in the street, which he
did by planting himself on the front steps or expanding himself on the
railings of an elderly and lonely dame, who could not endure that even a
mechanic should linger at her door, and was in agony until the milkman
and baker had removed their feet from her steps. Now, the appearance of
the professor (who always affected the old Gipsy style), in striped
corduroy coat, leather breeches and gaiters, red waistcoat, yellow
neck-handkerchief, and a frightfully-dilapidated old white hat, was not,
it must be admitted, entirely adapted to the exterior of a highly
respectable mansion. “And he had such a vile way of looking, as if he
were a-waitin’ for some friend to come out o’ the ’ouse.” It is almost
needless to say that this apparition attracted the police from afar off
and all about, or that they gathered around him like buzzards near a
departed lamb. I was told by a highly intelligent gentleman who
witnessed the interviews, that the professor’s kindly reception of these
public characters—the infantile smile with which he courted their
acquaintance, and the good old grandfatherly air with which he listened
to their little tales—was indescribably delightful. “In a quarter of an
hour any one of them would have lent him a shilling;” and it was soon
apparent that the entire force found a charm in his society. The lone
lady herself made a sortie against him once; but one glance at the
amiable smile, “which was child-like and bland,” disarmed her, and it
was reported that she subsequently sent him out half-a-pint of beer.

It is needless to point out to the reader accustomed to good society
that the professor’s declining to sit in a room where valuable and small
objects abounded, in the absence of the owner, was dictated by the most
delicate feeling. Not less remarkable than his strict politeness was the
mysterious charm which this antique nomad unquestionably exercised on
the entire female sex. Ladies of the highest respectability and culture,
old or young, who had once seen him, invariably referred to him as “that
charming old Gipsy.”

Nor was his sorcery less potent on those of low degree. Never shall I
forget one morning when the two prettiest young Italian model-girls in
all London were poséeing to an artist friend while the professor sat and
imparted to me the lore of the Rommany. The girls behaved like moral
statues till he appeared, and like quicksilver imps and devilettes for
the rest of the sitting. Something of the wild and weird in the mountain
Italian life of these ex-contadine seemed to wake like unholy fire, and
answer sympathetically to the Gipsy wizard-spell. Over mountain and sea,
and through dark forests with legends of *streghe* and Zingari, these
semi-outlaws of society, the Neapolitan and Rommany, recognised each
other intuitively. The handsomest young gentleman in England could not
have interested these handsome young sinners as the dark-brown,
grey-haired old vagabond did. Their eyes stole to him. Heaven knows what
they talked, for the girls knew no English, but they whispered; they
could not write little notes, so they kept passing different objects, to
which Gipsy and Italian promptly attached a meaning. Scolding them
helped not. It was “a pensive sight.”

To impress me with a due sense of his honesty and high character, the
professor informed me one day that he was personally acquainted, as he
verily believed, with every policeman in England. “You see, rya,” he
remarked, “any man as is so well known couldn’t never do nothing wrong
now,—could he?”

Innocent, unconscious, guileless air—and smile! I shall never see its
equal. I replied—

“Yes; I think I can see you, Puro, walking down between two lines of
hundreds of policemen—every one pointing after you and saying, ‘There
goes that good honest --- the honestest man in England!’”

“Āvo, rya,” he cried, eagerly turning to me, as if delighted and
astonished that I had found out the truth. “That’s just what they all
pens of me, an’ just what I seen ’em a-doin’ every time.”

“You know all the police,” I remarked. “Do you know any turnkeys?”

He reflected an instant, and then replied, artlessly—

“I don’t jin many o’ them. But I can jist tell you a story. Once at
Wimbledown, when the *kooroo-mengroes* were *odoi* (when the troopers
were there), I used to get a pound a week carryin’ things. One day, when
I had well on to two stun on my *dumo* (back), the chief of police sees
me an’ says, ‘There’s that old scoundrel again! that villain gives the
police more trouble than any other man in the country!’ ‘Thank you,
sir,’ says I, wery respectable to him. ‘I’m glad to see you’re earnin’ a
’onest livin’ for once,’ says he. ‘How much do you get for carryin’ that
there bundle?’ ‘A sixpence, rya!’ says I. ‘It’s twice as much as you
ought to have,’ says he; ‘an’ I’d be glad to carry it myself for the
money.’ ‘All right, sir,’ says I, touchin’ my hat and goin’ off, for he
was a wery nice gentleman. Rya,” he exclaimed, with an air of placid
triumph, “do you think the head-police his selfus would a spoke in them
wery words to me if he hadn’t a thought I was a good man?”

“Well, let’s get to work, old Honesty. What is the Rommanis for to
hide?”

“To *gaverit* is to hide anything, rya. *Gaverit*.” And to illustrate
its application he continued—

“They penned mandy to gaver the gry, but I nashered to keravit, an’ the
mush who lelled the gry welled alangus an’ dicked it.”

(“They told me to hide the horse, but I forgot to do it, and the man who
*owned* the horse came by and saw it.”)

It is only a few hours since I heard of a gentleman who took incredible
pains to induce the Gipsies to teach him their language, but never
succeeded. I must confess that I do not understand this. When I have met
strange Gipsies, it has often greatly grieved me to find that they spoke
their ancient tongue very imperfectly, and were ignorant of certain
Rommany words which I myself, albeit a stranger, knew very well, and
would fain teach them. But instead of accepting my instructions in a
docile spirit of ignorant humility, I have invariably found that they
were eagerly anxious to prove that they were not so ignorant as I
assumed, and in vindication of their intelligence proceeded to pour
forth dozens of words, of which I must admit many were really new to me,
and which I did not fail to remember.

The scouting, slippery night-life of the Gipsy; his familiarity with
deep ravine and lonely wood-path, moonlight and field-lairs; his use of
a secret language, and his constant habit of concealing everything from
everybody; his private superstitions, and his inordinate love of
humbugging and selling friend and foe, tend to produce in him that
goblin, elfin, boyish-mischievous, out-of-the-age state of mind which is
utterly indescribable to a prosaic modern-souled man, but which is
delightfully piquant to others. Many a time among Gipsies I have felt, I
confess with pleasure, all the subtlest spirit of fun combined with
picture-memories of Hayraddin Maugrabin—witch-legends and the
“Egyptians;” for in their ignorance they are still an unconscious race,
and do not know what the world writes about them. They are not
attractive from the outside to those who have no love for quaint
scholarship, odd humours, and rare fancies. A lady who had been in a
camp had nothing to say of them to me save that they were “dirty—dirty,
and begged.” But I ever think, when I see them, of Tieck’s Elves, and of
the Strange Valley, which was so grim and repulsive from without, but
which, once entered, was the gay forecourt of goblin-land.

The very fact that they hide as much as they can of their Gipsy life and
nature from the Gorgios would of itself indicate the depths of
singularity concealed beneath their apparent life—and this reminds me of
incidents in a Sunday which I once passed beneath a Gipsy roof. I was,
*en voyage*, at a little cathedral town, when learning that some Gipsies
lived in a village eight miles distant, I hired a carriage and rode over
to see them. I found my way to a neat cottage, and on entering it
discovered that I was truly enough among the Rommany. By the fire sat a
well-dressed young man; near him was a handsome, very dark young woman,
and there presently entered a very old woman,—all gifted with the
unmistakable and peculiar expression of real Gipsies.

The old woman overwhelmed me with compliments and greetings. She is a
local celebrity, and is constantly visited by the most respectable
ladies and gentlemen. This much I had learned from my coachman. But I
kept a steady silence, and sat as serious as Odin when he visited the
Vala, until the address ceased. Then I said in Rommany—

“Mother, you don’t know me. I did not come here to listen to
fortune-telling.”

To which came the prompt reply, “I don’t know what the gentleman is
saying.” I answered always in Rommany.

“You know well enough what I am saying. You needn’t be afraid of me—I’m
the nicest gentleman you ever saw in all your life, and I can talk
Rommany as fast as ever you ran away from a policeman.”

“What language is the gentleman talking?” cried the old dame, but
laughing heartily as she spoke.

> “Oh dye—miri dye,  
> Don’t tute jin a Rommany rye?  
> Can’t tu rakker Rommany jib,  
> Tachipen and kek fib?”

“Āvo, my rye; I can understand you well enough, but I never saw a Gipsy
gentleman before.”

\[Since I wrote that last line I went out for a walk, and on the other
side of Walton Bridge, which legend says marks the spot where Julius
Cæsar crossed, I saw a tent and a waggon by the hedge, and knew by the
curling blue smoke that a Gipsy was near. So I went over the bridge, and
sure enough there on the ground lay a full-grown Petulamengro, while his
brown *juva* tended the pot. And when I spoke to her in Rommany she
could only burst out into amazed laughter as each new sentence struck
her ear, and exclaim, “Well! well! that ever I should live to hear this!
Why, the gentleman talks just like one of *us*! ‘*Bien apropos*,’ sayde
ye ladye.”\]

“Dye,” quoth I to the old Gipsy dame, “don’t be afraid. I’m *tácho*. And
shut that door if there are any Gorgios about, for I don’t want them to
hear our *rakkerben*. Let us take a drop of brandy—life is short, and
here’s my bottle. I’m not English—I’m a *waver temmeny mush* (a
foreigner). But I’m all right, and you can leave your spoons out.
Tácho.”

>    “The boshno an’ kāni  
>   The rye an’ the rāni;  
> Welled acai ’pré the boro lun pani.  
>   Rinkeni juva hav acai!  
>   Del a choomer to the rye!”

“*Duveleste*!” said the old fortune-teller, “that ever I should live to
see a rye like you! A boro rye rakkerin’ Rommanis! But you must have
some tea now, my son—good tea.”

“I don’t pi muttermengri dye (‘drink tea,’ but an equivoque). It’s
muttermengri with you and with us of the German jib.”

“Ha! ha! but you must have food. You won’t go away like a Gorgio without
tasting anything?”

“I’ll eat bread with you, but tea I haven’t tasted this five-and-twenty
years.”

“Bread you shall have, rya.” And saying this, the daughter spread out a
clean white napkin, and placed on it excellent bread and butter, with
plate and knife. I never tasted better, even in Philadelphia. Everything
in the cottage was scrupulously neat—there was even an approach to
style. The furniture and ornaments were superior to those found in
common peasant houses. There was a large and beautifully-bound
photograph album. I found that the family could read and write—the
daughter received and read a note, and one of the sons knew who and what
Mr Robert Browning was.

But behind it all, when the inner life came out, was the wild Rommany
and the witch-*aura*—the fierce spirit of social exile from the world in
which they lived (the true secret of all the witch-life of old), and the
joyous consciousness of a secret tongue and hidden ways. To those who
walk in the darkness of the dream, let them go as deep and as windingly
as they will, and into the grimmest gloom of goblin-land, there will
never be wanting flashes of light, though they be gleams diavoline,
corpse-candlelights, elfin sparkles, and the unearthly blue lume of the
eyes of silent night-hags wandering slow. In the forgotten grave of the
sorcerer burns steadily through long centuries the Rosicrucian lamp, and
even to him whose eyes are closed, sparkle, on pressure, phosphorescent
rings. So there was Gipsy laughter; and the ancient *wicca* and Vala
flashed out into that sky-rocketty joyousness and Catherine-wheel
gaiety, which at eighty or ninety, in a woman, vividly reminds one of
the Sabbat on the Brocken, of the ointment, and all things terrible and
unearthly and forbidden.

I do not suppose that there are many people who can feel or understand
that among the fearfully dirty dwellers in tents and caravans,
cock-shysters and dealers in dogs of doubtful character, there can be
anything strange, and quaint, and deeply tinged with the spirit of which
I have spoken. As well might one attempt to persuade the twenty-stone
half-illiterate and wholly old-fashioned rural magistrate of the last
century that the poor devil of a hen-stealing Gipsy dragged before him
knew that which would send thrills of joy through the most learned
philologist in Europe, and cause the great band of scholars to sing for
joy. Life, to most of us, is nothing without its humour; and to me a
whilome German student illustrating his military marauding by phrases
from Fichte, or my friend Pauno the Rommany urging me with words to be
found in the Mahabahrata and Hāfiz to buy a terrier, is a charming
experience.

I believe that my imagination has neither been led nor driven, when it
has so invariably, in my conversing with Gipsy women, recalled Faust,
and all I have ever read in Wierus, Bodinus, Bekker, Mather, or Glanvil,
of the sorceress and *sortilega*. And certainly on this earth I never
met with such a perfect *replica* of Old Mother Baubo, the mother of all
the witches, as I once encountered at a certain race. Swarthy,
black-eyed, stout, half-centuried, fiercely cunning, and immoderately
sensual, her first salutation was expressed in a phrase such as a
Corinthian soul might be greeted with on entering that portion of the
after-world devoted to the fastest of the fair. With her came a tall,
lithe, younger sorceress; and verily the giant fat sow for her majesty,
and the broom for the attendant, were all that was wanting.

To return to the cottage. Our mirth and fun grew fast and furious; the
family were delighted with my anecdotes of the Rommany in other
lands—German, Bohemian, and Spanish,—not to mention the *gili*. And we
were just in the gayest centre of it all, “whin,—och, what a pity!—this
fine tay-party was suddenly broken up,” as Patrick O’Flanegan remarked
when he was dancing with the chairs to the devil’s fiddling, and his
wife entered. For in rushed a Gipsy boy announcing that Gorgios (or, as
I may say, “wite trash”) were near at hand, and evidently bent on
entering. That this irruption of the enemy gave a taci-turn to our
riotry and revelling will be believed. I tossed the brandy in the cup
into the fire; it flashed up, and with it a quick memory of the spilt
and blazing witch-brew in “Faust.” I put the tourist-flask in my pocket,
and in a trice had changed my seat and assumed the air of a chance
intruder. In they came, two ladies—one decidedly pretty—and three
gentlemen, all of the higher class, as they indicated by their manner
and language. They were almost immediately followed by a Gipsy, the son
of my hostess, who had sent for him that he might see me.

He was a man of thirty, firmly set, and had a stern hard countenance, in
which shone two glittering black eyes, which were serpent-like even
among the Rommany. Nor have I ever seen among his people a face so
expressive of self-control allied to wary suspicion. He was neatly
dressed, but in a subdued Gipsy style, the principal indication being
that of a pair of “cords,” which, however, any gentleman might have
worn—in the field. His English was excellent—in fact, that of an
educated man; his sum total that of a very decided “character,” and one
who, if you wronged him, might be a dangerous one.

We entered into conversation, and the Rommany rollicking seemed all at
once a vapoury thing of the dim past; it was the scene in a witch-revel
suddenly shifted to a drawing-room in May Fair. We were all, and all at
once, so polite and gentle, and so readily acquainted and
cosmo-polite—quite beyond the average English standard; and not the
least charming part of the whole performance was the skill with which
the minor parts were filled up by the Gipsies, who with exquisite tact
followed our lead, seeming to be at once hosts and guests. I have been
at many a play, but never saw anything better acted.

But under it all burnt a lurid though hidden flame; and there was a
delightful *diablerie* of concealment kept up among the Rommany, which
was the more exquisite because I shared in it. Reader, do you remember
the scene in George Borrow’s “Gipsies in Spain,” in which the woman
blesses the child in Spanish, and mutters curses on it meanwhile in
Zincali? So it was that my dear old hostess blessed the sweet young
lady, and “prodigalled” compliments on her; but there was one instant
when her eye met mine, and a soft, quick-whispered, wicked Rommany
phrase, unheard by the ladies, came to my ear, and in the glance and
word there was a concentrated anathema.

The stern-eyed Gipsy conversed well, entertaining his guests with ease.
After he had spoken of the excellent behaviour and morals of his
tribe—and I believe that they have a very high character in these
respects—I put him a question.

“Can you tell me if there is really such a thing as a Gipsy language?
one hears such differing accounts, you know.”

With the amiable smile of one who pitied my credulity, but who was
himself superior to all petty deception or vulgar mystery, he replied—

“That is another of the absurd tales which people have invented about
Gipsies. As if we could have kept such a thing a secret!”

“It does, indeed, seem to me,” I replied, “that if you *had*, some
people who were not Gipsies *must* have learned it.”

“Of course,” resumed the Gipsy, philosophically, “all people who keep
together get to using a few peculiar terms. Tailors and shoemakers have
their own words. And there are common vagabonds who go up and down
talking thieves’ slang, and imposing it on people for Gipsy. But as for
any Gipsy tongue, I ought to know it” (“So I should think,” I mentally
ejaculated, as I contemplated his brazen calmness); “and I don’t know
three words of it.”

And we, the Gorgios, all smiled approval. At least that humbug was
settled; and the Rommany tongue was done for—dead and buried—if, indeed,
it ever existed. Indeed, as I looked in the Gipsy’s face, I began to
realise that a man might be talked out of a belief in his own name, and
felt a rudimentary sensation to the effect that the language of the
Black Wanderers was all a dream, and Pott’s Zigeuner the mere tinkling
of a pot of brass, Paspati a jingling Turkish symbol, and all Rommany a
*præterea nihil* without the *vox*. To dissipate the delusion, I
inquired of the Gipsy—

“You have been in America. Did you ever hunt game in the west?”

“Yes; many a time. On the plains.”

“Of course—buffalo—antelope—jack rabbits. And once” (I said this as if
forgetfully)—“I once ate a hedgehog—no, I don’t mean a hedgehog, but a
porcupine.”

A meaning glance shot from the Gipsy’s eye. I uttered a first-class
password, and if he had any doubt before as to who the Rommany rye might
be, there was none now. But with a courteous smile he replied—

“It’s quite the same, sir—porcupine or hedgehog. I know perfectly well
what you mean.”

“Porcupines,” I resumed, “are very common in America. The Chippeways
call them *hotchewitchi*.”

This Rommany word was a plumper for the Gipsy, and the twinkle of his
eye—the smallest star of mirth in the darkest night of gravity I ever
beheld in my life—was lovely. I had trumped his card at any rate with as
solemn gravity as his own; and the Gorgios thought our reminiscences of
America were very entertaining.

> “He had more tow upon his distaffé  
> Than Gervais wot of.”

But there was one in the party—and I think only one—who had her own
private share in the play. That one was the pretty young lady. Through
all the conversation, I observed from time to time her eyes fixed on my
face, as if surmising some unaccountable mystery. I understood it at
once. The bread and butter on the table, partly eaten, and the
snow-white napkin indicated to a feminine eye that some one not of the
household had been entertained, and that I was the guest. Perhaps she
had seen the old woman’s quick glance at me, but it was evident that she
felt a secret. What she divined I do not know. Should this work ever
fall into her hands, she will learn it all, and with it the fact that
Gipsies can talk double about as well as any human beings on the face of
the earth, and enjoy fun with as grave a face as any Ojib’wa of them
all.

The habits of the Gipsy are pleasantly illustrated by the fact that the
collection of “animated books,” which no Rommany gentleman’s library
should be without, generally includes a jackdaw. When the foot of the
Gorgio is heard near the tent, a loud “*wā-āwk*” from the wary bird
(sounding very much like an alarm) at once proclaims the fact; and on
approaching, the stranger finds the entire party in all probability
asleep. Sometimes a dog acts as sentinel, but it comes to the same
thing. It is said you cannot catch a weasel asleep: I am tempted to add
that you can never find a Gipsy awake—but it means precisely the same
thing.

Gipsies are very much attached to their dogs, and in return the dogs are
very much attached to their masters—so much so that there are numerous
instances, perfectly authenticated, of the faithful animals having been
in the habit of ranging the country alone, at great distances from the
tent, and obtaining hares, rabbits, or other game, which they carefully
and secretly brought by night to their owners as a slight testimonial of
their regard and gratitude. As the dogs have no moral appreciation of
the Game Laws, save as manifested in gamekeepers, no one can blame them.
Gipsies almost invariably prefer, as canine manifesters of devotion,
lurchers, a kind of dog which of all others can be most easily taught to
steal. It is not long since a friend of mine, early one morning between
dark and dawn, saw a lurcher crossing the Thames with a rabbit in his
mouth. Landing very quietly, the dog went to a Gipsy *tan*, deposited
his burden, and at once returned over the river.

Dogs once trained to such secret hunting become passionately fond of it,
and pursue it unweariedly with incredible secrecy and sagacity. Even
cats learn it, and I have heard of one which is “good for three rabbits
a week.” Dogs, however, bring everything home, while puss feeds herself
luxuriously before thinking of her owner. But whether dog or cat, cock
or jackdaw, all animals bred among Gipsies do unquestionably become
themselves Rommanised, and grow sharp, and shrewd, and mysterious. A
writer in the *Daily News* of October 19, 1872, speaks of having seen
parrots which spoke Rommany among the Gipsies of Epping Forest. A Gipsy
dog is, if we study him, a true character. Approach a camp: a black
hound, with sleepy eyes, lies by a tent; he does not bark at you or act
uncivilly, for that forms no part of his master’s life or plans, but
wherever you go those eyes are fixed on you. By-and-by he disappears—he
is sure to do so if there are no people about the *tan*—and then
reappears with some dark descendant of the Dom and Domni. I have always
been under the impression that these dogs step out and mutter a few
words in Rommany—their deportment is, at any rate, Rommanesque to the
highest degree, indicating a transition from the barbarous silence of
doghood to Christianly intelligence. You may persuade yourself that the
Gipsies do not mind your presence, but rest assured that though he may
lie on his side with his back turned, the cunning *jucko* is carefully
noting all you do. The abject and humble behaviour of a poor negro’s dog
in America was once proverbial: the quaint shrewdness, the droll
roguery, the demure devilry of a real Gipsy dog are beyond all praise.

The most valuable dogs to the Gipsies are by no means remarkable for
size or beauty, or any of the properties which strike the eye; on the
contrary, an ugly, shirking, humble-looking,
two-and-sixpenny-countenanced cur, if he have but intellect, is much
more their *affaire*. Yesterday morning, while sitting among the tents
of “ye Egypcians,” I overheard a knot of men discussing the merits of a
degraded-looking doglet, who seemed as if he must have committed
suicide, were he only gifted with sense enough to know how idiotic he
looked. “Would you take seven pounds for him?” asked one. “Āvo, I would
take seven bar; but I wouldn’t take six, nor six an’ a half neither.”

The stranger who casts an inquisitive eye, though from afar off, into a
Gipsy camp, is at once noted; and if he can do this before the wolf—I
mean the Rom—sees him, he must possess the gift of fern-seed and walk
invisible, as was illustrated by the above-mentioned yesterday visit.
Passing over the bridge, I paused to admire the scene. It was a fresh
sunny morning in October, the autumnal tints were beautiful in golden
brown or oak red, while here and there the horse-chestnuts spread their
saffron robes, waving in the embraces of the breeze like hetairæ of the
forest. Below me ran the silver Thames, and above a few silver
clouds—the belles of the air—were following its course, as if to watch
themselves in the watery winding mirror. And near the reedy island, at
the shadowy point always haunted by three swans, whom I suspect of
having been there ever since the days of Odin-faith, was the usual punt,
with its elderly gentlemanly gudgeon-fishers. But far below me, along
the dark line of the hedge, was a sight which completed the English
character of the scene—a real Gipsy camp. Caravans, tents, waggons,
asses, smouldering fires; while among them the small forms of dark
children could be seen frolicking about. One Gipsy youth was fishing in
the stream from the bank, and beyond him a knot of busy basketmakers
were visible.

I turned the bridge, adown the bank, and found myself near two young men
mending chairs. They greeted me civilly; and when I spoke Rommany, they
answered me in the same language; but they did not speak it well, nor
did they, indeed, claim to be “Gipsies” at all, though their complexions
had the peculiar hue which indicates some other than Saxon admixture of
blood. Half Rommany in their knowledge, and yet not regarded as such,
these “travellers” represented a very large class in England, which is
as yet but little understood by our writers, whether of fact or fiction.
They laughed while telling me anecdotes of gentlemen who had mistaken
them for real Rommany chals, and finally referred me to “Old Henry,”
further down, who “could talk with me.” This ancient I found a hundred
yards beyond, basketing in the sun at the door of his tent. He greeted
me civilly enough, but worked away with his osiers most industriously,
while his comrades, less busy, employed themselves vigorously in looking
virtuous. One nursed his infant with tender embraces, another began to
examine green sticks with a view to converting them into clothes-pegs—in
fact I was in a model community of wandering Shakers.

I regret to say that the instant I uttered a Rommany word, and was
recognised, this discipline of decorum was immediately relaxed. It was
not complimentary to my moral character, but it at least showed
confidence. The Ancient Henry, who bore, as I found, in several respects
a strong likeness to the Old Harry, had heard of me, and after a short
conversation confided the little fact, that from the moment in which I
had been seen watching them, they were sure I was a *gav-mush*, or
police or village authority, come to spy into their ways, and to at
least order them to move on. But when they found that I was not as one
having authority, but, on the contrary, came talking Rommany with the
firm intention of imparting to them three pots of beer just at the
thirstiest hour of a warm day, a great change came over their faces. A
chair was brought to me from a caravan at some distance, and I was told
the latest news of the road.

“Matty’s got his slangs,” observed Henry, as he inserted a *ranya* or
osier-withy into his basket, and deftly twined it like a serpent to
right and left, and almost as rapidly. Now a *slang* means, among divers
things, a hawker’s licence.

“I’m glad to hear it,” I remarked. There was deep sincerity in this
reply, as I had more than once contributed to the fees for the aforesaid
*slangs*, which somehow or other were invariably refused to the
applicant. At last, however, the slangs came; and his two boys, provided
with them (at ten shillings per head), were now, in their sphere of
life, in the position of young men who had received an education or been
amply established in business, and were gifted with all that could be
expected from a doting father. In its way this bit of intelligence meant
as much to the basketmaker as, “Have you heard that young Fitz-Grubber
has just got the double-first at Oxford?” or, “Do you know that old
Cheshire has managed that appointment in India for his boy?—splendid
independence, isn’t it?” And I was shrewdly suspected by my audience, as
the question implied, that I had had a hand in expanding this
magnificent opening for the two fortunate young men.

“*Dick adoi*!” cried one, pointing up the river. “Look there at Jim!”

I looked and saw a young man far off, shirking along the path by the
river, close to the hedge.

“He thinks you’re a *gav-mush*,” observed Henry; “and he’s got some
sticks, an’ is tryin’ to hide them ’cause he daren’t throw ’em away. Oh,
aint he scared?”

It was a pleasing spectacle to see the demi-Gipsy coming in with his
poor little green sticks, worth perhaps a halfpenny, and such as no
living farmer in all North America would have grudged a cartload of to
anybody. Droll as it really seemed, the sight touched me while I
laughed. Oh, if charity covereth a multitude of sins, what should not
poverty do? I care not through which door it comes—nay, be it by the
very portal of Vice herself—when sad and shivering poverty stands before
me in humble form, I can only forgive and forget. And this child-theft
was to obtain the means of work after all. And if you ask me why I did
not at once proceed to the next magistrate and denounce the criminal, I
can only throw myself for excuse on the illustrious example of George
the Fourth, head of Church and State, who once in society saw a
pickpocket remove from a gentleman’s fob his gold watch, winking at the
king as he did so. “Of course I couldn’t say anything,” remarked the
good-natured monarch, “for the rascal took me into his confidence.”

Jim walked into camp amid mild chaff, to be greeted in Rommany by the
suspected policeman, and to accept a glass of the ale, which had rained
as it were from heaven into this happy family. These basketmakers were
not real Gipsies, but *churdi* or half-bloods, though they spoke with
scorn of the two chair-menders, who, working by themselves at the
extremity of the tented town (and excluded from a share in the beer),
seemed to be a sort of pariahs unto these higher casters.

I should mention, *en passant*, that when the beer-bearer of the camp
was sent for the three pots, he was told to “go over to Bill and borrow
his two-gallon jug—and be very careful not to let him find out what it
was for.” I must confess that I thought this was deeply unjust to the
imposed-upon and beerless William; but it was another case of
confidence, and he who sits among Gipsies by hedgerows green must not be
over-particular. *Il faut heurler avec les loups*. “Ain’t it wrong to
steal dese here chickens?” asked a negro who was seized with scruples
while helping to rob a hen-roost. “Dat, Cuff, am a great moral question,
an’ we haint got time to discuss it—so jist hand down anoder pullet.”

I found that Henry had much curious knowledge as to old Rommany ways,
though he spoke with little respect of the Gipsy of the olden time, who,
as he declared, thought all he needed in life was to get a row of silver
buttons on his coat, a pair of high boots on his feet, and
therewith—*basta*! He had evidently met at one time with Mr George
Borrow, as appeared by his accurate description of that gentleman’s
appearance, though he did not know his name. “Ah! he could talk the jib
first-rateus,” remarked my informant; “and he says to me, ‘Bless you!
you’ve all of you forgotten the real Gipsy language, and don’t know
anything about it at all.’ Do you know Old Frank?” he suddenly inquired.

“Āvo,” I replied. “He’s the man who has been twice in America.”

“But d’ye know how rich he is? He’s got money in bank. And when a man
gets money in bank, *I* say there is somethin’ in it. An’ how do you
suppose he made that money?” he inquired, with the air of one who is
about to “come down with a stunner.” “He did it *a-dukkerin*’.”
 [171](egl13.htm#xref_171.md) But he pronounced the word *durkerin*’; and
I, detecting at once, as I thought, an affinity with the German
“turkewava,” paused and stared, lost in thought. My pause was set down
to amazement, and the Ancient Henry repeated—

“Fact. By *durkerin*’. I don’t wonder you’re astonished. Tellin’
fortunes just like a woman. It isn’t every man who could do that. But I
suppose you could,” he continued, looking at me admiringly. “You know
all the ways of the Gorgios, an’ could talk to ladies, an’ are up to
high life; ah, you could make no end of money. Why don’t you do it?”

Innocent Gipsy! was this thy idea of qualification for a seer and a
reader of dark lore? What wouldst thou say could I pour into thy brain
the contents of the scores of works on “occult nonsense,” from Agrippa
to Zadkiel, devoured with keen hunger in the days of my youth? Yes, in
solemn sadness, out of the whole I have brought no powers of divination;
and in it all found nothing so strange as the wondrous tongue in which
we spoke. In this mystery called Life many ways have been proposed to me
of alleviating its expenses; as, for instance, when the old professor
earnestly commended that we two should obtain (I trust honestly) a
donkey and a *rinkni juva*, who by telling fortunes should entirely
contribute to our maintenance, and so wander cost-free, and *kost-frei*
over merrie England. But I threw away the golden opportunity—ruthlessly
rejected it—thereby incurring the scorn of all scientific philologists
(none of whom, I trow, would have lost such a chance). It was for doing
the same thing that Matthew Arnold immortalised a clerke of Oxenforde:
though it may be that “since Elizabeth” such exploits have lost their
prestige, as I knew of two students at the same university who a few
years ago went off on a six weeks’ lark with two Gipsy girls; but who,
far from desiring to have the fact chronicled in immortal rhyme, were
even much afraid lest it should get into the county newspaper!

Leaving the basketmakers (among whom I subsequently found a
grand-daughter of the celebrated Gipsy Queen, Charlotte Stanley), I went
up the river, and there, above the bridge, found, as if withdrawn in
pride, two other tents, by one of which stood a very pretty little girl
of seven or eight years with a younger brother. While talking to the
children, their father approached leading a horse. I had never seen him
before, but he welcomed me politely in Rommany, saying that I had been
pointed out to him as the Rommany rye, and that his mother, who was
proficient in their language, was very desirous of meeting me. He was
one of the smiths—a Petulengro or Petulamengro, or master of the
horse-shoe, a name familiar to all readers of Lavengro.

This man was a full Gipsy, but he spoke better English, as well as
better Rommany, than his neighbours, and had far more refinement of
manner. And singularly enough, he appeared to be simpler hearted and
more unaffected, with less Gipsy trickery, and more of a disposition for
honest labour. His brother and uncle were, indeed, hard at work among
the masons in a new building not far off, though they lived like true
Gipsies in a tent. Petulamengro, as the name is commonly given at the
present day, was evidently very proud of his Rommany, and talked little
else: but he could not speak it nearly so well nor so fluently as his
mother, who was of “the old sort,” and who was, I believe, sincerely
delighted that her skill was appreciated by me. All Gipsies are quite
aware that their language is very old and curious, but they very seldom
meet with Gorgios who are familiar with the fact, and manifest an
interest in it.

While engaged in conversation with this family, Petulamengro asked me if
I had ever met in America with Mr ---, adding, “He is a brother-in-law
of mine.”

I confess that I was startled, for I had known the gentleman in question
very well for many years. He is a man of considerable fortune, and
nothing in his appearance indicates in the slightest degree any affinity
with the Rommany. He is not the only real or partial Gipsy whom I know
among the wealthy and highly cultivated, and it is with pleasure I
declare that I have found them all eminently kind-hearted and
hospitable.

It may be worth while to state, in this connection, that Gipsy blood
intermingled with Anglo-Saxon when educated, generally results in
intellectual and physical vigour. The English Gipsy has greatly changed
from the Hindoo in becoming courageous, in fact, his pugnacity and pluck
are too frequently carried to a fault.

My morning’s call had brought me into contact with the three types of
the Gipsy of the roads. Of the half-breeds, and especially of those who
have only a very slight trace of the dark blood or *kālo ratt*, there
are in Great Britain many thousands. Of the true stock there are now
only a few hundreds. But all are “Rommany,” and all have among
themselves an “understanding” which separates them from the “Gorgios.”

It is difficult to define what this understanding is—suffice it to say,
that it keeps them all in many respects “peculiar,” and gives them a
feeling of free-masonry, and of guarding a social secret, long after
they leave the roads and become highly reputable members of society. But
they have a secret, and no one can know them who has not penetrated it.

\* \* \* \* \*

One day I mentioned to my old Rommany, what Mr Borrow has said, that no
English Gipsy knows the word for a leaf, or *patrin*. He admitted that
it was true; but after considering the subject deeply, and dividing the
deliberations between his pipe and a little wooden bear on the table—his
regular oracle and friend—he suddenly burst forth in the following
beautiful illustration of philology by theology:—

“Rya, I pens you the purodirus lav for a leaf—an’ that’s a *holluf*.
(Don’t you jin that the holluf was the firstus leaf? so holluf must be
the Rommany lav, sense Rommanis is the purodirest jib o’ saw.) For when
the first mush was kaired an’ created in the tem adrée—and that was the
boro Duvel himself, I expect—an’ annered the tem apré, he was in the
bero, an’ didn’t jin if there was any puvius about, so he bitchered the
chillico avree. An’ the chillico was a dove, ’cause dove-us is like
Duvel, an’ pāsh o’ the Duvel an’ Duvel’s chillico. So the dove mukkered
avree an’ jalled round the tem till he latchered the puvius; for when he
dickered a tan an’ lelled a holluf-leaf, he jinned there was a tem, an’
hatched the holluf apopli to his Duvel. An’ when yuv’s Duvel jinned
there was a tem, he kaired bitti tiknos an’ foki for the tem—an’ I don’t
jin no more of it. Kekoomi. An’ that is a wery tidy little story of the
leaf, and it sikkers that the holluf was the first leaf. Tācho.”

“Sir, I will tell you the oldest word for a leaf—and that is an olive.
(Don’t you know that the olive was the first leaf? so olive must be the
Rommany word, since Rommanis is the oldest language of all.) For when
the first man was made and created in the world—and that was the great
God himself, I expect—and brought the land out, he was in the ship, and
didn’t know if there was any earth about him, so he sent the bird out.
And the bird was a dove, because *dove* is like *Duvel* (God), and half
God and God’s bird. So the dove flew away and went around the world till
he found the earth; for when he saw a place and took an olive-leaf, he
knew there was a country (land), and took the olive-leaf back to his
Lord. And when his Lord knew there was land, he made little children and
people for it—and I don’t know anything more about it. And that is a
very tidy little story of the leaf, and it shows that the olive was the
first leaf.”

Being gratified at my noting down this original narrative from his own
lips, my excellent old friend informed me, with cheerfulness not
unmingled with the dignified pride characteristic of erudition, and of
the possession of deep and darksome lore, that he also knew the story of
Samson. And thus spake he:—

“Samson was a boro mush, wery hunnalo an’ tatto at koorin’, so that he
nashered saw the mushis avree, an’ they were atrash o’ lester. He was so
surrelo that yeckorus when he poggered avree a ker, an’ it had a boro
sasterni wuder, he just pet it apré his dumo, an’ hookered it avree, an’
jalled kerri an’ bikin’d it.

“Yeck divvus he lelled some weshni juckals, an’ pandered yāgni-trushnees
to their poris and mukked ’em jāl. And they nashered avree like puro
bengis, sig in the sala, when sār the mushis were sūtto, ’ūnsa parl the
giv puvius, and hotchered sār the giv.

“Then the krallis bitchered his mushis to lel Samson, but he koshered
’em, an’ pāsh mored the tāt of ’em; they couldn’t kurry him, and he
sillered ’em to praster for their miraben. An’ ’cause they couldn’t
serber him a koorin’, they kaired it sidd pré the chingerben drum. Now
Samson was a seehiatty mush, wery cāmmoben to the juvas, so they got a
wery rinkeni chi to kutter an’ kuzzer him. So yuv welled a lāki to a
worretty tan, an’ she hocussed him with drab till yuv was pilfry o’
sutto, an his sherro hungered hooper side a lācker; an’ when yuv was
selvered, the mushis welled and chinned his ballos apré an’ chivved him
adrée the sturaben.

“An’ yeck divvus the foki hitchered him avree the sturaben to kair pyass
for ’em. And as they were gillerin’ and huljerin’ him, Samson chivved
his wasters kettenus the boro chongurs of the sturaben, and bongered his
kokerus adrée, an sār the ker pet a lay with a boro gudli, an’ sār the
pooro mushis were mullered an’ the ker poggered to bitti cutters.”

“Samson was a great man, very fierce and expert at fighting, so that he
drove all men away, and they were afraid of him. He was so strong that
once when he broke into a house, and it had a great iron door, he just
put it on his back, and carried it away and went home and sold it.

“One day he caught some foxes, and tied firebrands to their tails and
let them go. And they ran away like old devils, early in the morning,
when all the people were asleep, across the field, and burned all the
wheat.

“Then the king sent his men to take Samson, but he hurt them, and half
killed the whole of them; they could not injure him, and he compelled
them to run for life. And because they could not capture him by
fighting, they did it otherwise by an opposite way. Now Samson was a man
full of life, very fond of the girls, so they got a very pretty woman to
cajole and coax him. And he went with her to a lonely house, and she
‘hocussed’ him with poison till he was heavy with sleep, and his head
drooped by her side; and when he was poisoned, the people came and cut
his hair off and threw him into prison.

“And one day the people dragged him out of prison to make sport for
them. And as they were making fun of him and teasing him, Samson threw
his hands around the great pillars of the prison, and bowed himself in,
and all the house fell down with a great noise, and all the poor men
were killed and the house broken to small pieces.

“And so he died.”

“Do you know what the judgment day is, Puro?”

“Āvo, rya. The judgment day is when you *soves alay* (go in sleep, or
dream away) to the boro Duvel.”

I reflected long on this reply of the untutored Rommany. I had often
thought that the deepest and most beautiful phrase in all Tennyson’s
poems was that in which the impassioned lover promised his mistress to
love her after death, ever on “into the dream beyond.” And here I had
the same thought as beautifully expressed by an old Gipsy, who, he
declared, for two months hadn’t seen three nights when he wasn’t as
drunk as four fiddlers. And the same might have been said of Carolan,
the Irish bard, who lived in poetry and died in whisky.

The soul sleeping or dreaming away to God suggested an inquiry into the
Gipsy idea of the nature of spirits.

“You believe in *mullos* (ghosts), Puro. Can everybody see them, I
wonder?”

“Āvo, rya, āvo. Every mush can dick mullos if it’s their cāmmoben to be
dickdus. But ’dusta critters can dick mullos whether the mullos kaum it
or kek. There’s grais an’ mylas can dick mullos by the rātti; an’
yeckorus I had a grai that was trasher ’drée a tem langs the rikkorus of
a drum, pāsh a boro park where a mush had been mullered. He prastered a
mee pauli, but pāsh a cheirus he welled apopli to the wardos. A chinned
jucko or a wixen can hunt mullos. Āvali, they chase sperits just the sim
as anything ’drée the world—dan’r ’em, koor ’em, chinger ’em—’cause the
dogs can’t be dukkered by mullos.”

In English: “Yes, sir, yes. Every man can see ghosts if it is their will
to be seen. But many creatures can see ghosts whether the ghosts wish it
or not. There are horses and asses (which) can see ghosts by the night;
and once I had a horse that was frightened in a place by the side of a
road, near a great park where a man had been murdered. He ran a mile
behind, but after a while came back to the waggons. A cut (castrated)
dog or a vixen can hunt ghosts. Yes, they chase spirits just the same as
anything in the world—bite ’em, fight ’em, tear ’em—because dogs cannot
be hurt by ghosts.”

“Dogs,” I replied, “sometimes hunt men as well as ghosts.”

“Āvo; but men can fool the juckals avree, and men too, and mullos
can’t.”

“How do they kair it?”

“If a choramengro kaums to chore a covva when the snow is apré the
puvius, he jāls yeck piro, pālewavescro. If you chiv tutes pīros
pal-o-the-waver—your kusto pīro kaired bongo, jallin’ with it a
rikkorus, an’ the waver pīro straightus—your patteran’ll dick as if a
bongo-herroed mush had been apré the puvius. (I jinned a mush yeckorus
that had a dui chokkas kaired with the dui tāchabens kaired bongo, to
jāl a-chorin’ with.) But if you’re pallered by juckals, and pet lully
dantymengro adrée the chokkas, it’ll dukker the sunaben of the juckos.

“An’ if you chiv lully dantymengro where juckos kair panny, a’ter they
soom it they won’t jāl adoi chichi no moreus, an’ won’t mutter in dovo
tan, and you can keep it cleanus.”

That is, “If a thief wants to steal a thing when the snow is on the
ground, he goes with one foot behind the other. If you put your feet one
behind the other—your right foot twisted, going with it to one side, and
the other foot straight—your trail will look as if a crooked-legged man
had been on the ground. (I knew a man once that had a pair of shoes made
with the two heels reversed, to go a-thieving with.) But if you are
followed by dogs, and put red pepper in your shoes, it will spoil the
scent of the dogs.

“And if you throw red pepper where dogs make water, they will not go
there any more after they smell it, and you can keep it clean.”

“Well,” I replied, “I see that a great many things can be learned from
the Gipsies. Tell me, now, when you wanted a night’s lodging did you
ever go to a union?”

“Kek, rya; the tramps that jāl langs the drum an’ māng at the unions are
kek Rommany chals. The Rommany never kair dovo—they’d sooner besh in the
bāvol puv firstus. We’d putch the farming rye for mukkaben to hatch the
rātti adrée the granja,but we’d sooner suv under the bor in the bishnoo
than jāl adrée the chuvveny-ker. The Rommany chals aint sim to tramps,
for they’ve got a different drum into ’em.”

In English: “No, sir; the tramps that go along the road and beg at the
unions are not Gipsies. The Rommany never do that—they’d sooner stay in
the open field (literally, air-field). We would ask the farmer for leave
to stop the night in the barn, but we’d sooner sleep under the hedge in
the rain than go in the poorhouse. Gipsies are not like tramps, for they
have a different *way*.”

The reader who will reflect on the extreme misery and suffering incident
upon sleeping in the open air, or in a very scanty tent, during the
winter in England, and in cold rains, will appreciate the amount of
manly pride necessary to sustain the Gipsies in thus avoiding the union.
That the wandering Rommany can live at all is indeed wonderful, since
not only are all other human beings less exposed to suffering than many
of them, but even foxes and rabbits are better protected in their holes
from storms and frost. The Indians of North America have, without
exception, better tents; in fact, one of the last Gipsy *tans* which I
visited was merely a bit of ragged canvas, so small that it could only
cover the upper portion of the bodies of the man and his wife who slept
in it. Where and how they packed their two children I cannot understand.

The impunity with which any fact might be published in English Rommany,
with the certainty that hardly a soul in England not of the blood could
understand it, is curiously illustrated by an incident which came within
my knowledge. The reader is probably aware that there appear
occasionally in the “Agony” column of the *Times* (or in that devoted to
“personal” advertisements) certain sentences apparently written in some
very strange foreign tongue, but which the better informed are aware are
made by transposing letters according to the rules of cryptography or
secret writing. Now it is estimated that there are in Great Britain at
least one thousand lovers of occult lore and quaint curiosa, decipherers
of rebuses and adorers of anagrams, who, when one of these delightful
puzzles appears in the *Times*, set themselves down and know no rest
until it is unpuzzled and made clear, being stimulated in the pursuit by
the delightful consciousness that they are exploring the path of
somebody’s secret, which somebody would be very sorry to have made
known.

Such an advertisement appeared one day, and a friend of mine, who had a
genius for that sort of thing, sat himself down early one Saturday
morning to decipher it.

First of all he ascertained which letter occurred most frequently in the
advertisement, for this must be the letter *e* according to rules made
and provided by the great Edgar A. Poe, the American poet-cryptographer.
But to reveal the secret in full, I may as well say, dear reader, that
you must take printers’ type in their cases, *and follow the proportions
according to the size of the boxes*. By doing this you cannot fail to
unrip the seam of any of these transmutations.

But, alas! this cock would not fight—it was a dead bird in the pit. My
friend at once apprehended that he had to deal with an old hand—one of
those aggravating fellows who are up to cryp—a man who can write a
sentence, and be capable of leaving the letter *e* entirely out. For
there *are* people who will do this.

So he went to work afresh upon now hypotheses, and pleasantly the hours
fled by. Quires of paper were exhausted; he worked all day and all the
evening with no result. That it was not in a foreign language my friend
was well assured.

> “For well hee knows the Latine and the Dutche;  
> Of Fraunce and Toscanie he hath a touche.”

Russian is familiar to him, and Arabic would not have been an unknown
quantity. So he began again with the next day, and had been breaking the
Sabbath until four o’clock in the afternoon, when I entered, and the
mystic advertisement was submitted to me. I glanced at it, and at once
read it into English, though as I read the smile at my friend’s lost
labour vanished in a sense of sympathy for what the writer must have
suffered. It was as follows, omitting names:—

> “MANDY jins of --- ---. Patsa mandy, te bitcha lav ki tu shan. Opray
> minno lav, mandy’l kek pukka til tute muks a mandi. Tute’s di’s see se
> welni poggado. Shom atrash tuti dad’l jal divio. Yov’l fordel sor. For
> miduvel’s kom, muk lesti shoon choomani.”

In English: “I know of ---. Trust me, and send word where you are. On my
word, I will not tell till you give me leave. Your mother’s heart is
wellnigh broken. I am afraid your father will go mad. He will forgive
all. For God’s sake, let him know something.”

This was sad enough, and the language in which it was written is good
English Rommany. I would only state in addition, that I found that in
the very house in which I was living, and at the same time, a lady had
spent three days in vainly endeavouring to ascertain the meaning of
these sentences.

It is possible that many Gipsies, be they of high or low degree, in
society or out of it, may not be pleased at my publishing a book of
their language, and revealing so much of what they fondly cherish as a
secret. They need be under no apprehension, since I doubt very much
whether, even with its aid, a dozen persons living will seriously
undertake to study it—and of this dozen there is not one who will not be
a philologist; and such students are generally aware that there are
copious vocabularies of all the other Gipsy dialects of Europe easy to
obtain from any bookseller. Had my friend used the works of Pott or
Paspati, Ascoli or Grellman, he would have found it an easy thing to
translate this advertisement. The truth simply is, that for *scholars*
there is not a single secret or hidden word in English Gipsy or in any
other Rommany dialect, and none except scholars will take pains to
acquire it. Any man who wished to learn sufficient Gipsy to maintain a
conversation, and thereby learn all the language, could easily have done
so half a century ago from the vocabularies published by Bright and
other writers. A secret which has been for fifty years published in very
practical detail in fifty books, is indeed a *secrét de Ponchinelle*.

I have been asked scores of times, “Have the Gipsies an alphabet of
their own? have they grammars of their language, dictionaries, or
books?” Of course my answer was in the negative. I have heard of
vocabularies in use among crypto-Rommanies, or those who having risen
from the roads live a secret life, so to speak, but I have never seen
one. But they have songs; and one day I was told that in my
neighbourhood there lived a young Gipsy woman who was a poetess and made
Rommany ballads. “She can’t write,” said my informant; “but her
husband’s a *Gorgio*, and he can. If you want them, I’ll get you some.”
The offer was of course accepted, and the Gipsy dame, flattered by the
request, sent me the following. The lyric is without rhyme, but, as
sung, not without rhythm.

### “GILLI OF A RUMMANY JUVA.

> “Die at the gargers (Gorgios),  
> The gargers round mandy!  
> Trying to lel my meripon,  
> My meripon (meripen) away.
>
> I will care (kair) up to my chungs (chongs),  
> Up to my chungs in Rat,  
> All for my happy Racler (raklo).
>
> My mush is lelled to sturribon (staripen),  
> To sturribon, to sturribon;  
> Mymush is lelled to sturribon,  
> To the Tan where mandy gins (jins).”

### TRANSLATION.

“Look at the Gorgios, the Gorgios around me! trying to take my life
away.

“I will wade up to my knees in blood, all for my happy boy.

“My husband is taken to prison, to prison, to prison; my husband is
taken to prison, to the place of which I know.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Gipsies In Egypt](egl11.md)
