[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omy05)  [Next](omy07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766144569/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWO8Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Oriental Mysticism*, by E.H. Palmer, \[1867\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

#### OF LAW, DOCTRINE AND TRUTH.

THE Law is the word of the Prophet, the Doctrine <span
class="margnote">Definition of Law, Doctrine and Truth.</span> is the
example of the Prophet, and the Truth is the vision of the Prophet. This
follows from the Hadís <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md), "My words are
Law, my example is Doctrine, my state is Truth." The Traveller must
first learn the theory of the Law, and act up to the practice of the
Doctrine, by which means the Truth will become manifest in him. Those
who possess all these three things are the Perfect, and these are the
leaders of the people; but those who are deficient in all are lower than
the brutes; these are the wretches

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

referred to in the Corán: "Verily we have created for Hell many of
mankind and of the genii; hearts have they and understand not, eyes have
they and see not, ears have they and hear not; they are like unto the
beasts of the field, nay more perverse, for they are the negligent."
(Cor. cap. 7, v. 178.) From this we learn that each is bound to fulfil
his duty in his allotted sphere.

<span class="margnote">Of the superficial and the real.</span>The
superficial has no credit without the real. Mankind in reality is man;
the animal kingdom in reality is animal. By reality is meant the
possession and employment of the qualities naturally appertaining to the
order to which the individual belongs. Thus the wise man knows all, sees
all, and works with all; for otherwise the business of the world would
not go on. Teachers also work in their way for the same reason. But
Rulers work not, or otherwise the harmony of the world would be
disturbed.

<span class="margnote">The object of Law, Doctrine and Truth.</span>The
final object of Law, Doctrine and Truth is that mankind should speak
aright, act aright, and think aright, or, in other words, become wise
and good. The object is threefold: first, that man may not become like
the brute he should receive the command and prohibition of Scripture,
and obey the same. This he must confirm in his heart and confess with
his tongue. Secondly, that he may be adorned with grace and piety he
should associate with the wise, and strive earnestly to know and
understand the unity of God. Thirdly, that he may become accomplished he
should, after the knowledge of God, learn the nature and properties of
material objects.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When thus
accomplished the Traveller may be considered as adorned with Law,
Doctrine and Truth.

But all the foregoing theory is useless without <span
class="margnote">Marks and Practice of the followers of Doctrine.</span>
practice; the Traveller cannot arrive at the goal unless he combines
theory with practice, superficiality with reality; for the Corán says,
"and righteous actions shall raise him." (Cor. cap. 35, v. 11.) Now the
actions constituting this practice are ten in number. 1. Search after
God, which is the object of all striving and conflict. 2. Search after
Wisdom, the guide without whom it is impossible to find the road. 3.
Inclination towards the wise; that is, the Traveller should frequent the
society of the wise and sit as a disciple at their feet. This
inclination is the strong steed that bears him on his way. 4. Obedience.
The Traveller should in everything be obedient and submissive to the
wise, both in reference to the affairs of this world and the next. 5.
Renunciation. He must renounce trifling, and at the bidding of the elder
even give up all that he has to his care, forsaking his most favourite
pursuits, unless they meet with the approbation of his superior. 6.
Piety. He must be pious and continent, in word and deed and mode of
life, complying with the dictates of the Law and the Scriptures. 7.
Submission. The serenity of the Traveller's path is the result of
submission to the Law. 8. Reticence. To speak little. 9. Vigilance. To
sleep little. 10. Temperance. To eat little. These are the marks which
determine the practice of the followers of the Doctrine, ten fierce
dragons in the Traveller's path to keep him from

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

swerving in the direction of sin. If he assiduously follow them under
the direction of the wise he ultimately reaches his Goal, and the Truth
is made manifest in him; but if he be deficient in one only he can never
arrive at his destination.

<span class="margnote">Marks and Practice of the followers of
Truth.</span>There are also ten marks which determine the practice of
the followers of Truth. 1. That the Traveller should know God first, and
subsequently the nature and properties of material objects. 2. That he
should be at peace with all the world, and refrain from all
contradiction and opposition. According to the mother from whom he is
born into the community each receives a different patronymic; thus one
is called a Hanefite, one a Shafíite <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md),
one a Pagan, one a Jew, and another a Mussulmán; but the true
philosopher recognises in each a weak and helpless being like himself,
he sees in each a fellow-searcher after God. 3. Charity towards all.
Charity is that course of action and teaching which benefits our fellows
both temporally and spiritually. Now real charity consists in the
employment of counsel and discipline. Teachers should employ counsel
that men may be improved; rulers should employ discipline for the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

regulation and well-being of society. 4. Humility; this consists in
paying due respect to others. 5. Submission and resignation. 6. Trust in
God, patience, endurance and perseverance. 7. Freedom from avarice; for
avarice is the mother of vice. 8. Contentment. 9. Inoffensiveness. 10.
Conviction; for the Truth brings conviction with it.

Such are the marks, and such is the practice of the followers of Truth;
and until the Traveller shall have thoroughly penetrated the inmost
depths of wisdom, and shall have completed the journey to and in God,
these marks and qualities will not be made manifest in him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:1](omy06.htm#fr_3.md) The sayings of Mohammed are
so called.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[10:1](omy06.htm#fr_4.md) The Hanefites are the
followers of Abú Hanífa, one of the principal authorities for the
traditional law. His doctrines are esteemed chiefly among the Turks.

The Shafíites are those who follow the tenets taught by Abú Abdallah
Mohammed ben Idrís, al Sháfi’í, who was descended from the family of
Mohammed. Salah-uddin (Saladin) founded a college for the exclusive
propagation of his doctrines at Cairo. A beautiful mosque to his memory
also exists at Herát, in Khorassan. Both sects are considered perfectly
orthodox by the Mussulmáns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Concerning the Perfect Man, and the Perfectly Free
Man](omy07.md)
