[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omy07)  [Next](omy09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766144569/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWO8Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Oriental Mysticism*, by E.H. Palmer, \[1867\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

#### CONCERNING FELLOWSHIP AND RENUNCIATION.

<span class="margnote">Fellowship"</span>FELLOWSHIP has many qualities
and effects both of good and evil. The fellowship of the wise is the
only thing that can conduct the Traveller safely to the Goal; therefore
all the submission, earnestness and discipline that have been hitherto
inculcated are merely in order to render him worthy of such

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

fellowship. Provided he have the capacity, a single day, nay, a single
hour, in the society of the wise, tends more to his improvement than
years of self-discipline without it. "Verily one day with thy Lord is
better than a thousand years." (Cor. cap. 22, v. 46.)

It is however possible to frequent the society of the wise without
receiving any benefit therefrom, but this must proceed either from want
of capacity or want of will. In order then to avoid such a result, the
Sufis have laid down the following rules for the conduct of the disciple
when in the presence of his teachers.

 

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Hear, attend, but speak little. <span class="margnote">Rules to be
observed in intercourse with Elders.</span>

Never answer a question not addressed to you; but if asked, answer
promptly and concisely, never feeling ashamed to say, "I know not."

Do not dispute for disputation's sake.

Never boast before your elders.

Never seek the highest place, nor even accept it if it be offered to
you.

Do not be over-ceremonious, for this will compel your elders to act in
the same manner towards you, and give them needless annoyance.

Observe in all cases the etiquette appropriate to the time, place and
persons present.

In indifferent matters, that is, matters involving no breach of duty by
their omission or commission, conform to the practice and wishes of
those with whom you are associating.

</div>

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Do not make a practice of anything which is not either a duty or
calculated to increase the comfort of your associates; otherwise it will
become an idol to you; and it is incumbent on every one to break his
idols and renounce his habits.

</div>

<span class="margnote">Renunciation.</span>This leads us to the subject
of Renunciation, which is of two kinds, external and internal. The
former is the renunciation of worldly wealth; the latter, the
renunciation of worldly desires. Everything that hinders or veils the
Traveller's path must be renounced, whether it relate to this world or
the next. Wealth and dignity are great hindrances; but too much praying
and fasting are often hindrances too. The one is a shroud of darkness,
the other a veil of light. The Traveller must renounce idolatry, if he
desire to reach the Goal, and everything that bars his progress is an
idol. All men have some idol, which they worship; with one it is wealth
and dignity, with another overmuch prayer and fasting. If a man sit
always upon his prayer-carpet his prayer-carpet becomes his idol. And so
on with a great number of instances.

<span class="margnote">What ought and ought not to be renounced.</span>
Renunciation must not be performed without the advice and permission of
an elder. It should be the renunciation of trifles, not of necessaries,
such as food, clothing and dwelling place which are indispensable to
man; for without them he would be obliged to rely on the aid of others,
and this would beget avarice, which is "the mother of vice." The
renunciation of necessaries produces as corrupting

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

an influence upon the mind as the possession of too much wealth. The
greatest of blessings is to have a sufficiency, but to over-step this
limit is to gain nought but additional trouble.

Renunciation is the practice of those who know <span
class="margnote">Renunciation how recognized.</span> God, and the
characteristic mark of the wise. Every individual fancies that he alone
possesses this knowledge, but knowledge is an attribute of the mind, and
there is no approach from unaided sense to the attributes of the mind,
by which we can discover who is, or who is not, possessed of this
knowledge. Qualities however are the sources of action; therefore a
man's practice is an infallible indication of the qualities he
possesses; if, for instance, a man asserts that he is a baker, a
carpenter, or a blacksmith, we can judge at once if he possesses skill
in these crafts by the perfection of his handiwork. In a word, theory is
internal, and practice external, the presence of the practice,
therefore, is a proof that the theory too is there.

Renunciation is necessary to the real confession <span
class="margnote">Application of this test.</span> of faith; for the
formula "There is no God but God," involves two things, negation and
proof. Negation is the renunciation of other Gods, and proof is the
knowledge of God. Wealth and dignity have led many from the right path,
they are the gods the people worship; if then you see that one has
renounced these, you may be sure that he has expelled the love of this
world from his heart, and completed the negation; and whosoever has
attained to the knowledge of God has completed the proofs.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

This is really confessing that "there is no God but God;" and he who has
not attained to the knowledge of God, has never really repeated the
confession of faith. Early prejudices are a great stumblingblock to many
people; for the first principles of Monotheism are contained in the
words of the Hadís: "Every one is born with a disposition \[for the true
faith\], but his parents make him a Jew, a Christian, or a Magian." The
Unitarians also say, that the real confession of faith consists in
negation and proof; but they explain negation by renunciation of self,
and proof by acknowledgement of God.

<span class="margnote">Conclusion.</span>Thus, according to the Sufis,
confession of faith, prayer and fasting contain two distinct features,
namely, form and truth; the former being entirely inefficacious without
the latter. Renunciation and the knowledge of God are like a tree; the
knowledge of God is the root, renunciation the branches, and all good
principles and qualities are the fruit.-To sum up, the lesson to be
learnt is that in repeating the formula the Traveller must acknowledge
in his heart that God only always was, God only always will be. This
world and the next, nay, the very existence of the Traveller, may
vanish, but God alone remains. This is the true confession of faith; and
although the Traveller before was blind, the moment he is assured of
this his eyes are opened, and he seeth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Concerning Attraction and Devotion](omy09)
