[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omy21)  [Next](omy23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766144569/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWO8Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Oriental Mysticism*, by E.H. Palmer, \[1867\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

#### CONCLUSION.

<span class="margnote">Summary.</span>THE words quoted in the first
chapter, "I am a hidden treasure, and I would fain be known," form the
basis of the whole system of Sufiistic speculation. Considering the
entire universe merely as a manifestation of God, produced by the agency
of intelligence directly proceeding from Him, they rightly surmise that
this intelligence is the only means by which He can be known.

Now man being with them the most perfect entity in the universe, is
clearly the instrument by which the object of its creation is to be
accomplished; but this object is that God should be known, and He can
only be known through intelligence; therefore the attainment of this
intelligence is the final aim of man.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

But as man sprung from the Intelligence which <span
class="margnote">Development of the system.</span> originated the
Universe, and should, as has been just stated, tend to the same, the
Sufis proceed to consider his existence as a circle meeting in the
Intelligence which reveals the Godhead. This circle they divide into two
arcs, the former called Descent (*nuzúl*), includes every stage, from
the first scintillation from the original intelligence to the full
development of man's reasoning powers; the latter arc, called Ascent
(*’urúj*), includes every stage, from his first use of reason for its
true purpose to his final reabsorption into the Divine intelligence.
This is what is meant when they speak of the Origin and Return of Man.

The Ascent, or upward progress, naturally presents<span
class="margnote">Idea of the "Journey."</span> itself to the Sufiistic
mind in the form of a  journey, and the doctrines which profess to
describe it are accordingly called the road (*taríkat*).

When a man possessing the necessary requirements <span
class="margnote">The *Tálib*, or Neophyte.</span> of fully developed
reasoning powers turns to them for a resolution of his doubts and
uncertainties concerning the real nature of the Godhead, he is called a
*Tálib*, or Searcher after God.

If he manifest a further inclination to prosecute <span
class="margnote">The *Muríd* or Disciple.</span> his inquiry according
to their system, he is called a *Muríd*, or One who inclines.

Placing himself then under the spiritual instruction <span
class="margnote">The *Sálik*, or Traveller.</span> of some eminent
leader of the sect, he is fairly started upon his journey, and becomes a
*Sálik* or Traveller, whose whole business in after-life is *sulúk*,
devotion, (or, as the word signifies, the prosecution

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

of his journey,) to the end that he may ultimately arrive at the
knowledge of God.

<span class="margnote">1st stage, Worship.</span>Here he is exhorted to
serve God as the first step towards a knowledge of Him; this is the
first stage of his journey, and is called *’Abúdiyat*, Service or
Worship.

<span class="margnote">2nd stage, Love.</span>When in answer to his
prayers the Divine influence or Attraction has developed his inclination
into love of God, he is said to have reached the stage called *’Ishk*,
Love.

<span class="margnote">3rd stage, Seclusion.</span>This Divine Love
expelling all worldly desires from his heart, leads him to the next
stage, called *Zuhd*, or Seclusion,

<span class="margnote">4th stage, Knowledge.</span>Occupying himself
henceforward with contemplations and the investigations of those
metaphysical theories concerning the nature, attributes, and works of
God, which have been described in the Second Part of this treatise, he
reaches his next stage, which is that of *Ma’rifat*, Knowledge.

<span class="margnote">5th stage, Ecstasy.</span>Now this assiduous
contemplation of startling metaphysical theories is exceedingly
attractive to an Oriental mind, and not unfrequently produces a state of
mental excitement akin to the phenomena observed during the recent
religious revivals. Such ecstatic state is considered a sure
prognostication of direct illumination of the heart by God, and
constitutes the next stage, *Wejd* or *Hál*, Ecstasy.

<span class="margnote">6th stage, Truth.</span>During this stage he is
supposed to receive a revelation of the true nature of the Godhead, and
to have reached the stage called *Hakíkat*, or The Truth.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

He is then said to proceed to the stage of *Jam’* <span
class="margnote">7th stage, Union.</span> or *Wasl*, direct Union with
God.

Further than this he cannot go, but pursues his<span
class="margnote">Last stage Extinction.</span> habit of self-denial and
contemplation until his death, which is, however, merely looked upon as
a total reabsorption into the Deity, forming the consummation of his
Journey, the last stage designated *Faná*, Extinction.

That stage in which he is said to have attained <span
class="margnote">The Interpretation of Mystical Poems.</span> to the
Love of God is the point of view from which the Sufiistic poets love to
discuss the doctrines of their sect; with them man is the Lover, God the
Beloved One, and the journey above described is referred to
allegorically as the distance which separates the lover from the object
of his affection. The glossary which I have appended to this work will
enable the student of Háfiz and other Sufiistic writers to interpret for
himself the Mystical Poems of the East.

 

Thus far have we followed the Traveller upon his trackless path through
every mystery, human and divine. But one thing now remains; if we, like
him, aspire to reach the goal we must cast away the pride of intellect
and boasted knowledge, and kneeling before the throne of God in humble
thankfulness for the light He hath already vouchsafed, ask Him for
guidance and protection who alone is "the light and life of men."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](omy23.md)
