[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mmi02)  [Next](mmi04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRD VERSION OF THE STORY OF CUY-A-HO-MARR.

(A fragment, interesting for comparison.)

One of the story-tellers of the Campo-Manzanita region was an old man
who had grown a little childish, and was so afraid of the strange white
woman, and so reluctant to tell the stories of the past, that he made
his escape across the Mexican border. His nephew, my interpreter, José
Santo Lopez, commonly called Sant, remembers a part of the long
Cuy-a-ho-marr story which the old man used to relate to him twenty-five
years ago when he was a little boy.

The account of the gambling game is the same as that given above, except
that Sant remembers to explain that the people who gambled and were so
eager to eat their enemies were coyotes, that is to say, they were at
that time those among the First People who afterwards became
coyotes. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

Sant gives the following account of the conclusion of the game: When the
game was over, and the uncle had won all the possessions

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

of the other side, the little boy told his uncle to make the people
carry all those things home for him.

The little boy had a small bag or wallet such as children have. They had
won lots of corn, and he asked them to fill his bag so that he could
parch and eat the corn. There was a great big granary basket there, and
out of this they began to fill his little bag. They put the corn in the
bag, and more and more and more; but it was never filled, and the big
basket was quite emptied, so they had to give it up.

The visit to the Fire and Winds is briefly given; and the dramatic
climax is nearly the same.

The Light Wind came and blew on the water in the ollas so that it would
not boil.

Then the Strong, Wind brought the dust. Every one ran into the house or
took shelter in the brush, thinking that it was a sandstorm. The Wind
broke the ollas, smashed them, and rolled them into the fire. Then Fire
came burning the brush, burning everything it touched. Great balls of it
fell here and there and everywhere and burned everything up.

Fire had told the little boy to make himself ice and go down into the
ground with his mother. He must save her, and all the rest of his
enemies should be burned up. But the boy got a great big hard basket and
put his mother's sister under it, and stood on top of it watching the
people burn. They screamed, burning. He saw his mother burn, but said
nothing.

After Fire had gone, he got off the basket and lifted it up. "My
nephew," said his aunt, "you ought not to have burned your mother and
have saved me."

"Never mind that. That is your good luck."

While the Fire was burning, Coyote ran and jumped into the water to save
himself, so that he was not burned up, but his skin was scorched; and
that is the reason it looks brown and scorched to this day.

When the little boy pulled his uncle's body out of the ground they cried
and talked together.

His uncle said, "You ought not to have done this, as you will make great
deal of trouble, sorrow, and sickness in the world unless you are very
careful, when you put me back, not to let a breath of wind arise from
the place where I am buried."

The little boy tried to do as he directed. Very carefully he put the
earth in place over him, and pressed it down with his heel; but in spite
of all his trouble, a breath of air puffed up from the grave; and this
is the cause of all the sickness in the world.

Then he came to his father's grave and did the same thing, and

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

sat there crying. "You can't do anything," said his father. "All my
bones are scattered. But you will cause sickness and trouble in the
world by taking me out of my grave."

Then the little boy went back to his old grandmother, his father's
mother, and she went into the ground while he went up in the sky. In
whatever direction he goes in the sky (the path of a meteoric fireball)
there his grandmother is in the ground in the mountain over which he
passes. He makes a noise like thunder which is heard when he passes
overhead as a big bluish ball of fire. Sant saw one once when he was a
boy. The Indians fear him greatly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[162:1](mmi03.htm#fr_3) I use the term First
People as a convenient generality borrowed from Curtin, though I have
not heard the Diegueños or Luiseños use this term exactly as he does.
Their creation myths are more consistent than those which Curtin
relates, as their First Cause created the Earth and Sky, the former
bringing forth the First People as her children. The change into animals
came in a different way, occurring at the time when the death of Ouiot
brought death to all upon earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Comment By Sant Upon The Cuy-a-ho-marr Story](mmi04)
