[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mmi08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

# Mythology of the Mission Indians

### Luiseño Creation Myth

#### JAFL Vol. XVII, No. 66, pp. 185-8. \[1904\]

THE following creation myth is that of the San Luiseños, and was
translated from the Spanish as related by an old man of La Jolla Indian
reservation by Mary C. B. Watkins.

In the beginning Tú-co-mish (night) and Ta-nó-wish (earth) sat
crouching, brooding, silent. Then Tú-co-mish said, "I am older than
you." Ta-nó-wish said, "No, I am stronger than you." So they disputed.
Then Tú-co-mish caused Ta-nó-wish to go to sleep. When she woke she knew
that something had happened, and that she was to be the Mother. She
said, "What have you done?" "Nothing. You have slept." "No," she said.
"I told you that I am stronger (morally) than you."

Soon within her grew all things and she sat erect and round. Wy-ót was
her first born, the father (in a care-taking sense) of all things. The
grasses, trees, birds, all things were born of Ta-nó-wish.

Then Evil, Tó-wish, wished to be born. He tried to escape by the ears,
eyes, and nose, but at last passed from the mouth with a t-s-i-z
(hissing noise). He is nothing but spirit. He has no form whatsoever.

Tá-quish is a ball of light, and is a witch. He was the third son.

The frog was beautifully made, white and red, with great eyes. Wy-ót
said, "Oh, my daughter, you are so beautiful." But her lower limbs were
thin and ugly. When she saw men walk she was jealous, and hated Wy-ót,
cursing him with terrible words.

Then Wy-ót said, "In ten months I shall die. When the great star rises
and the grass is high, I shall go." (Here the narrator named all the
large stars, counting ten months in that way.) Wy-ót said to his people,
"You have never killed anything; now you may kill the deer. Make an awl,
gather shoots of bushes and grasses and make a basket to contain my
ashes." Then he taught them how to make baskets, redas, ollas, and all
their arts. He died in the spring (May).

They burned his body, but his spirit became the moon. His ashes were
placed in a long basket, and for this reason they pass the basket in
front of the chief dancer and mourn. They sing "Wy-ót, Wy-ót," nine
times, then "Ne-yónga (My head) Ne-cháya, tomáve."

The (lances were to please the moon and prevent his waning.

Another old man of the San Luiseños gave his version of the story in a
different way.

THE DEATH OF WY-ÓT.

Wy-ót went every day to a clear, cold spring, so large (spreading

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

his arms). The frog saw him day after day and hated him more, though
Wy-ót always saluted him kindly. One day the frog, Wa-há-wut, said, "I
will spit in the water and curse him because he made my legs so
miserably." So he spit three times in the water. Then Wy-ót became sick,
and in ten months, counted by the rising of the brightest stars, he
died. He gave them wise laws and taught them all their arts. Before his
death he said, "From my ashes shall spring the most precious gift to all
my children."

Then the oak-tree grew from his ashes. Very fast it grew, very lovely,
with acorns hanging like apples so thick and fine. All the birds and
animals and men watched it day and night that not a seed should be lost.

Then after a while the acorns were ripe. The men said to the crow,

Go to the large star (possibly Vega) and find Wy-ót."

The crow flew high and higher, but returned. The eagle was sent, but
without result. All the birds were sent. No one could find Wy-ót.

Then the hummingbird went like the arrow from the strong man's bow.
After days of waiting he returned with this message from Wy-ót: "Eat of
the seeds of my tree, all birds and animals. Men must make flour out of
them, and make little cakes." So all men were glad and made the fiesta
of the bellota (acorn, still used by the Mission Indians for food).

 

This myth of the San Luiseños is doubly important at present when, for
the first time since pioneer days, attention is directed to the
folk-lore of the Mission Indians.

In the first place it corrects an error in my translation of the
mythology of the Diegueños, as published in the journal of American
Folk-Lore.

In old Cinon Duro's version of the myth there was a confusion in his
account of the frog's action as producing the death of the hero-god
(Tu-chai-pai). By a mistake in pronouns it was made to appear that the
frog by poisoning the water brought about his own death as well as that
of Tu-chai-pai. The sentence on page 183 of the journal of American
Folk-Lore, vol. xiv. No. liv. should read as corrected, "By that time
the frog had planned a wrong deed; he meant to exude poison into the
water that Tu-chai-pai might swallow it and die."

In the second place, and especially, this San Luiseño version of the
myth is valuable as proving its primitive character, and its freedom
from what might be imagined to be traces of Christian influence in the
account of the death of a hero-god. Father Boscana, an early Franciscan
missionary, with a breadth of mind unfortunately

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

lacking in most of his co-workers, transcribed and recorded as of
interest and value the primitive myths current among the Indians when he
first went among them.

"Father Geronimo Boscana," says Bancroft, "gives us the following
relation of the faith and worship of the Agagchemem nations in the
valley and neighborhood of San Capistrano. We give first the version
held by the highlanders of the interior country three or four leagues
inland from San Juan Capistrano."

And it is this version which is still preserved in the Diegueño and San
Luiseño myths which I have given, as told by Indians dwelling in the
highlands within twelve miles of each other, and almost in a direct line
back sixty miles or so from San Juan Capistrano on the coast.

As Boscana's story is important in itself and for comparison, I quote
part of it herewith. It is interesting to note its similarity even as to
the name of the hero-god, with the San Luiseño story.

"Before the material world at all existed there lived two beings,
brother and sister, of a nature that cannot be explained, the brother
living above and his name signifying the heavens, and the sister living
below and her name signifying Earth. From the union of these two there
sprang a numerous offspring. Earth and sand were the first-fruits of
this marriage; then were born rocks and stones; then trees both great
and small; then grass and herbs; then animals; lastly was born a great
personage called Ouiot, who was a great captain.

"By some unknown mother many children of a medicine race were born to
this Ouiot. All these things happened in the north, but as the people
multiplied they moved toward the south, the earth growing larger also,
and extending itself in the same direction.

"In process of time, Ouiot growing old, his children plotted to kill
him, alleging that the infirmities of age made him unfit to govern them
or attend to their welfare. So they put a strong poison in his drink,
and when he drank of it a sore sickness came upon him. He rose up and
left his home in the mountains and went down to what is now the
seashore, though at that time there was no sea there. His mother, whose
name is Earth, mixed him an antidote in a large shell and set it out in
the sun to brew; but the fragrance of it attracted the Coyote, who came
and overset the shell.

"So Ouiot sickened to death, and though he told his children that he
would shortly return and be with them again, he has never been seen
since. All the people made a great pile of wood and burned his body
there, and just as the ceremony began, the Coyote leaped upon the body
saying that he would burn with it; but he only tore a piece of flesh
from the stomach and escaped. After that the title of

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

the Coyote was changed from Eyacque which means Sub-Captain, to Eno,
that is to say, Thief and Cannibal."

From the time of Father Boscana to the present day, the mythology of the
Indians of the interior of southern California has remained overlooked
and unrecorded; and the fact that there still exist fragments of
primitive myths of so superior a character should lead the exertions of
scientists in this direction, since all that is of value in this sort is
hanging on a thread as precarious as a spider's web, and will perish in
less than ten years, with the passing of the centenarians who still
cherish as sacred the heritage of myths and legends from the past.

Constance Goddard Du Bois.

WATERBURY, CONN.
