                           ENOCHIAN TEMPLES:

                    A RITUAL FOR THE CONSECRATION 

                                OF THE 

                      TEMPLE OF THE FIRE TABLET.

                           BY BENJAMIN ROWE

                 Copyright 1988, 1992 by Benjamin Rowe




Introduction

This ritual consecration is to be used with an astral Temple built
according to the plan described in the chapbook Enochian Temples and
the supplemental paper titled The Lower Temple. Readers unfamiliar
with the Temple system and its symbolism should obtain and study those
documents before making use of the ritual presented here.

This current ritual is divided into five parts, the first including a
general invocation of the aspect of God ruling the Enochian system, a
general invocation of the element of Fire, and an invocation and
consecration of those parts of the Temple derived from the Great Cross
of the Fire Tablet. This is followed by four sections for consecration
of the parts of the Temple built from the Lesser Angles. Once the
Temple has been built and fully charged, each section can be used
independently for invocation of the forces it refers to. Further
details will be mentioned in the "Symbols and Visualizations" section.

In any ritual of this length, ninety percent of its effectiveness is
in the preparation beforehand. At the least, the magician should be
thoroughly familiar with the design of the Temple, and able to main-
tain an unwavering image of it in his astral vision throughout the
work. The power of the work will increase greatly if the magician
takes the time to memorize the Keys and the other words, gestures, and
visualizations and rehearses them several times before using the
ritual with full invocatory intent. One can not expect the Enochian
entities to appreciate a poorly-rehearsed ritual; no more than actors
can expect an audience to appreciate a play if they must continually
stop to look up their lines.

Since the work makes use of the powerful Enochian names, it is to be
expected that some response may be produced even during rehearsals.
These effects should be neither rejected nor encouraged, but simply
disregarded until the practice session is concluded. 


                    The Words And Gestures

0. The place of the working is astral. The area should be seen as a
flat, empty plain, on which are inscribed four tangent circles,
representing the four elements in the quarters, with a fifth circle in
the middle intersecting the centers of all the others. From a height,
these five circles can be seen to be within the central circle of a
huge Enochian sigil of Fire, enscribed on the plain in the appropriate
colors. The sky is vermilion, the plain itself of a deeper red with
flashing streaks of orange-red and gold. 


The Consecration of the Hall of the Gods.

1. Banish using the pentagram and hexagram rituals, or the Greater
Ritual of the Pentagram alone.

2. Take the cup of purifying water, and sprinkle it to the four
quarters, beginning with the south, saying, "From the waters of Nuit
did all things arise. In the waters of Nuit do all things live and
have their being. To the waters of Nuit shall all things return." The
magician shall lastly sprinkle himself with the waters.

3. Take the flame of consecrating fire, and cast it towards the four
quarters, saying, "The fires of Had did stir the waters, raising all
things to appearance. The fires of Had move all things in their
courses. In the fires of Had is the universe destroyed." Lastly the
magician shall gesture towards himself with the flame. 

4. Move to the center of the circle of working, and face the south,
saying, "As Heru-Ra-Ha do I stand in the midst of their union."

5. Face the east, and perform the exordium:

"O, Most Just God, who has made the tablets to appear for the eyes of
men! Blessed be ye in the eyes of those greater creators who see us
both together. Ye who have taken the world, and divided it into its
several parts, and given each a name and number. Blessed be ye in the
eyes of all creators!

"Your art surpasses the stars in beauty, and fills my heart with
comfort and gladness. The light of your creation blinds me, yet
withall do my eyes see a beauty greater yet beyond your forms and
structures. 

"Give to all of your light, Iad Balt. Give to all of your light, so
that men may walk with their brothers the gods. 

"Come ye, o creator-god, bless this one who in his own creations is
your Will incarnate. Be unto me as the light in the soul. Be unto me
as the comfort of earth. Be unto me as the gods of livingness and
breath within me.
"Come ye, come ye, come ye, o creator-god, and bless and aid this man
who is your disciple in the arts!"

6. Vibrate the first Enochian Key, invoking the God-name BITOM from
the Tablet of Union.

7. Perform a preliminary invocation of the element Fire. The G.D.
"Opening of the Temple in the Grade of 4=7" keeps the appropriate
mood:

Sign of Thoum-aesh-neith.

Knock 333-1-333.

Say: "Let us adore the Lord and King of Fire!"

"IHVH TzBAOTh! Blessed by thou! The Leader of Armies is Thy Name!"

Invoking pentagram of Spirit.

"AHIH, AGLA, BITOM!"

Invoking pentagram of Fire.

"ALHIM, IHVH TzBAOTh!"

Sign of Leo with the Fire wand.

"In the name of MIKAL, archangel of Fire, Spirits of Fire, adore your
creator!"

Sign of the equal-armed cross.

"In the Names and the Letters of the Great Southern Quadrangle,
Spirits of Fire, adore your creator!"

Raise the censer.

"In the Three Secret Names of God, OIP TEAA PDOCE, Spirits of Fire,
adore your creator!"

Lower and raise the censer.

"In the Name of EDLPRNAA, Great King of the South, Spirits of Fire,
adore your creator!"

"In the Name of IHVH TzBAOTh, I declare that the Spirits of Fire have
been duly invoked!"

Knock 333-1-333.

8. Follow the "Opening of the Temple" with the Greater Ritual of the
Pentagram for the element of Fire. At the end of the ritual, continue
by saying:

"From the light have I called you down into darkness, o you Gods of
Flame. Let that greater Light come with you, and bless this Temple of
Fire that I build here. By the sacred Name BITOM do I call the Spirit
of Fire to come in attendance on the consecration of this Temple."

9. Vibrate the sixth Enochian Key. 

10. Move to the South side of the circle, and stand in the Sign of the
Enterer.

"OIP TEAA PDOCE, banner on the heights of the Temple! Sphere of Nuit
mirrored in the element of Fire! In whom the Archer, the Lion, and the
Ram keep their triune truce! Let the light flow in from above, and let
it illuminate the King's abode in all its brilliance and flashing
glory!"

Perform the sign of Harpocrates.

11. Move to the north of the circle, and stand facing south. Draw the
hexagram of Sol at the center of the circle.

"EDLPRNAA, thou mighty King of the Tablet of Fire! Show before men
that shower of brilliance, that leaping changeful light that is yours!
At the peak of the temple do thou stand, lighting the Temple both
within and without! Thou art a Burning Sun to the wicked, and a Flame
of Hope to the Righteous. Come thou, EDLPRNAA, burn in the heart of
the temple as the soul burns in the heart of man."

12. "Seniors of Fire, I invoke you! You, who are the cross become the
star become the wheel! You, who are the comfort of man and the direc-
tors of Fire within man's realm! You, who support the roof of the
Temple, and sit upon your seats within the upper hall, changing the
heat of the sun into the Waters of Life for man to drink! Your waters
hide the core of the Temple, yet they reveal its truths in their
flowing, rippling passage."

"Hear me, and come unto this temple in your power, you Seniors of
Fire! Be as a sweet wine for the mouths of the priests and worship-
ers!"

Go to the north-northwest edge of the circle, and draw the hexagram of
Jupiter before invoking ADOEOET. Move from there clockwise around the
circle in 60-degree intervals, and draw the appropriate hexagram for
each Senior as "he" or "she" is invoked.

"Hear me, ADOEOET, Fire of Jove, Lesser King who binds all together!

"Hear me, ALNDVOD, coolly flaming mother, brilliance of night!
"Hear me, AAPDOCE, priestess burning with the Fires of Love!

"Hear me, ARINNAP, you who strain at your limits!

"Hear me, ANODOIN, gay, flashing, childlike in your quickness!

"Hear me, AAETPIO, consummate warrior, Spear of the Gods!

"Come all ye, and visit this Temple! Make for it a sturdy roof, and
dwell therein as the Waters of the Gods, Life extended and given
Form."

13. Move to the center of the circle. 

"The Hall of the Gods within the Temple of Fire has been duly con-
secrated, and the Lives of the Gods dwell therein. Let them ever give
to the man in the lower Temple that Light which is theirs, that he
might come to know himself as one of them."


The Consecration of the Fiery Lesser Angle

14. The magician should stand in the center of the Temple, and should
expand his astral body to the extent that his top-of-the-head chakra
is contiguous with the sphere of the Three Names, and his spinal
column with the beam emanating downwards from the sphere. Face the
southeast.

15. Vibrate the Sixth Enochian Key again.

16. "Let there be light, o you Flames of Glory that shine in the
Lesser Angle of Fire!

"Purified, rarified, doubling upon yourselves in your movement, you
flash about the Temple in a moment.

"The Life of Sol is your source!

"The Life of Man is your guide!

"Flashing, flaming, bursting the bonds of matter!

"None can say whence you go, if they know your power!

"None can know your power if they know whence you go!

"Beginning of all, and end of all!

"Mediators of all action!"

17. "By the powers of RZIONR, minister of the greater gods, do I call
you forth! 
"By the powers of NRZFM, minister of those lesser gods that are the
souls of men, do I bind you to my purpose!

"Come forth, you powers of Fire, from the heart of Fire, and fill this
Temple with light!"

18. "Terrible is the Guardian of the Fiery Lesser Angle, a pillar of
flame to strike fear into the hearts of the unknowing, and to call
them to Judgement! Yet to the knowing is he a pillar of righteousness,
his feet upon the Earth, and his head supporting the heavens within
the Angle. 

"I call him by his four names!

"ZIZA!
"IZAZ!
"ZAZI!
"AZIZ!

"Come forth, o Kerub of Fire of Fire, in your might, and support and
guard this Temple of Fire!"

"Yet this pillar of terrible force is leavened by the spirit, and made
also to be a teacher of men, awakening them from the dream of matter
to knowledge of their souls. Hear the names of your spirit, o Kerub,
and cloak yourself in the light of the gods!

"BZIZA!
"BIZAZ!
"BZAZI!
"BAZIZ!

19. "Grails of living light are the angels of the Fiery Lesser Angle,
vessels of purity uncovered before the eyes of men, that they might be
drawn to the glory of God. Many are they who have drunk unknowing of
these vessels, seeking only power over matter or their fellow men. Yet
having partaken of these vessels are they tied to God, will they or
not. And all their actions after come to naught, save only those that
bring them closer to the hidden heart of the Temple.

"Come, o Vessels of God, and take your place within the Angle of Fire
as I call upon your names:

"You who are ADRE openly, and ADIRE in the secret heart of God, enter
this Temple and stand with your brothers."

"You who are SISP openly, and SIOSP in the secret heart of God, enter
this Temple and stand with your brothers."

"You who are PALI openly, and PANLI in the secret heart of God, enter
this Temple and stand with your brothers."

"You who are ACAR openly, and ACRAR in the secret heart of God, enter
this Temple and stand with your brothers."

20. "By the power of the God Most High, by his three names OIP TEAA
PDOCE, I declare that the Lesser Angle of Fire has been established in
the Temple of Fire."

The Consecration of the Watery Lesser Angle

21. Follow point 14, except face northeast.

22. Vibrate the Seventeenth Enochian Key.

23. "Let creation flow forth, o you Flames that spill about the Lesser
Angle of Water!

"Action sustained, force squared and extended!

"Waves upon the face of the void!

"Fire reflected upon itself to become concentrated force!

"Essence of connection and relationship!"

24. "By the powers of VADALI, minister of the greater gods, do I call
you forth! 

"By the powers of OBAVA, minister of the lesser gods that are the
souls of men, I bind you to my purpose!

"Come forth, you powers of Water within the heart of Fire, and fill
this Temple with light!"

25. "Terrible is the Guardian of the Watery Lesser Angle, a pillar of
flame to strike fear into the hearts of the unknowing, and to call
them to Judgement! Yet to the knowing is he a pillar of righteousness,
his feet upon the Earth, and his head supporting the heavens within
the Angle. 

"I call him by his four names!

"ANAA!
"NAAA!
"AAAN!
"AANA!

"Come forth, o Kerub of Water of Fire, in your might, and support and
guard this Temple of Fire!"

"Yet this pillar of terrible force is leavened by the spirit, and made
also to be a teacher of men, awakening them from the dream of matter
to knowledge of their souls. Hear the names of your spirit, o Kerub,
and cloak yourself in the light of the gods!

"BANAA!
"BNAAA!
"BAAAN!
"BAANA!

26. "Grails of saving blood are the angels of the Watery Lesser Angle,
vessels of purity uncovered before the eyes of men, that they might be
drawn to the glory of God. Many are they who have drunk unknowing of
these vessels, seeking only power over matter or their fellow men. Yet
having partaken of these vessels are they tied to God, will they or
not. And all their actions after come to naught, save only those that
bring them closer to the hidden heart of the Temple.

"Come, o Vessels of God, and take your place within the Angle of Fire
as I call upon your names:

"You who are GMNM openly, and GMDNM in the secret heart of God, enter
this Temple and stand with your brothers."

"You who are ECOP openly, and ECAOP in the secret heart of God, enter
this Temple and stand with your brothers."

"You who are AMOX openly, and AMLOX in the secret heart of God, enter
this Temple and stand with your brothers."

"You who are BRAP openly, and BRIAP in the secret heart of God, enter
this Temple and stand with your brothers."

27. "By the power of the God Most High, by his three names OIP TEAA
PDOCE, I declare that the Lesser Angle of Water has been established
in the Temple of Fire."


Consecration of the Lesser Angle of Air

28. Follow point 14, except face northwest.

29. Vibrate the Sixteenth Enochian Key.

30. "Let the Fires take form, o you Flames that leap and turn in the
Lesser Angle of Air!

"You whose god is a sword of conquest, whose house is a place of
justice in action!

"Who know the parts of the world, cleaving them in twain, and causing
them to cleave to each other.

"Swift messengers, linking Will with Thought, and Thought with Ac-
tion!"

31. Invoke the God-names of the Lesser Angle as in points 17 and 24,
but using the names NOALMR and OLOAG.

32. Invoke the Kerubic Angel(s) as in point 18, but replacing the
first set of names with DOPA, OPAD, PADO, ADOP. Replace the second set
of names with BDOPA, BOPAD, BPADO, BADOP.

33. Invoke the servient angels as in point 19, substituting "Grails of
liberating Will" at the beginning of the section, and replacing each
pair of names with these:

OPMNOPAMN
APSTAPLST
SCIOSCMIO
VASGVARSG

34. Repeat all of point 20, changing the name of the Lesser Angle.


Consecration of the Lesser Angle of Earth

35. Follow point 14, except face southwest.

36. Vibrate the Eighteenth Enochian Key.

37. "Let the Fire become manifest, o you Flames that glow in the
Lesser Angle of Earth!

"You whose god is unmeasurable joy brought into matter!

"Who are a window into the heavens, a gate of return for those who
have traveled the outward path!

"Fire rising from the center of the world, a comforting heat to
maintain the life upon her!"

38. Invoke the God-names of the Lesser Angle as in point 17, but using
the names VOLXDO and SIODA.

39. Invoke the Kerubic Angel(s) as in point 18, replacing the first
set of names with PSAC, SACP, ACPS, CPSA. Replace the second set of
names with BPSAC, BSACP, BACPS, BCPSA.

40. Invoke the servient angels as in point 19, substituting "Grails of
God's fulfillment" at the beginning of the section, and replacing each
pair of names with these:

DATTDALTT
DIOMDIXOM
OOPZOODPZ
RGANRGOAN

41. Repeat point 20, changing the name of the Lesser Angle.


The Visualizations and Symbols

The four circles should be placed to follow the placement of the
elements in the Great Tablet that combines the four elemental tablets.
That is, fire = southeast, earth = southwest, air = northwest, water =
northeast. The fifth central circle is spirit. The actual circle of
working encompasses all these and is tangent to the four outer cir-
cles. The interior area of the circle of working is colored red, in
contrast to the bright green of the immediate exterior, which is the
color of the central circle of the large Fire Sigil. 

An idea of the appropriate colors for the land and sky can be achieved
by study of the photographs sent back from Mars by the NASA space
probe.

The Temple is composed of all the elements, though in the present case
the forces of the element of Fire are dominant. So the material out of
which it is made, represented by the ground on which it is built, must
contain all the elements. The five circles affirm that this is the
case. The red color of the circle of working shows that the magician
is here concerned with the element and sub-elements of Fire.


The Consecration of the Hall of the Gods.

The magician may find that he lacks the time to perform a consecration
of all four Lesser Angles of the Temple in a single ceremony. The
Lesser Angles may be consecrated in separate rituals, but if this is
done, this present section of the ritual should be performed in each
of those rituals. This section can also be used as a stand-alone
ritual for the invocation of the forces of the macrocosm within the
element of Fire.

The course of this ritual is hierarchical, going from the extremely
general to the extremely specific. The magician is attempting to bring
the force of the whole universe into the building of the Temple. 

In the preliminary purification and blessing of the area of work, the
magician seeks to unite himself with the two extremes of being, Nuit
and Hadit. He affirms their pervasive presence, both internal and
external, in his gestures of Water and Fire. 

In point 2, Nuit is visualized as Infinite Space, the Ain Soph, filled
with potential energy ready to be directed by the Will. The darkness
of space is not because of its emptiness, but because its energy is at
a rate of vibration beyond the visible range. It surrounds the area of
working in all directions.

Nuit is also that which the phenomenologists have framed in the word
"horizon". No matter how far we can see, there is always something
beyond the range of our vision. No matter how well we know an object,
it is still capable of giving us an infinite number of new sense
impressions. No matter how much we experience, there is always more to
experience. No matter how much we know, there is always more to be
known. No matter how big we are, we are always within a space that is
larger than ourselves. Nuit is that infinity of possibilities out of
which comes the events that we actually experience. 

The potential energy of Nuit is stirred into activity by the action of
Hadit. Being a dimensionless point, he is without observable charac-
teristics and thus is an expression of the AIN, nothing. He is "not
extended", or "not, extended". 

Yet at the same time, he says "I am the flame that burns in every
heart of man, and in the core of every star. I am Life, and the giver
of Life, yet therefore is knowledge of me the knowledge of death." And
he continues in the next verse of Liber AL: "I am the Magician and the
Exorcist. I am the axle of the wheel and the cube in the circle. 'Come
unto me' is a foolish word: for it is I that go."

While nothing in himself, it is his existence that stirs all things
into activity, and determines the types of activity expressed by any
given thing or person. It is his withdrawal that causes existence to
cease; not only on the human level of existence, the mesocosm, but in
the microcosm of sub-atomic phenomena and the macrocosm of stellar
phenomena as well. 

No matter how far into ourselves we explore, we can never discover
Hadit as something which can be observed. This is because it is him in
us that is doing the exploring. That which sees can never see itself,
but only its own outward projection. He remains as unknown as that
which lies beyond the horizon of Nuit. Yet the latter can eventually
be known, by expanding the radius of the horizon, while that which
sees remains a perpetual mystery.

During the initial consecration with fire, Hadit should be seen as a
dimensionless point residing within the heart, but projecting fiery
force outwards in all directions. The magician should feel his aura to
be filled to near-bursting with a golden-white light. Ideally, he
should become unconscious of the physical body for a while, aware only
of the spherical body of light. The 2nd formula of Clavis Rei Primae
of the Aurum Solis cult can be used to charge the aura with force at
this point in the ceremony.

Next, the force accumulated in the aura should be seen exploding
outwards into the universe in all directions, while at the same time a
spherical wave of more water-like energies should be seen coming
inwards to the magician from infinity. The two wavefronts crash
together in the middle distance, and their merger fills the universe
with nova-bright flashing sparks of every imaginable color, each
giving off a feeling of ecstatic triumph. Thus the Ain Soph Aur, the
limitless light, which is Heru-Ra-Ha, is formed from the union of the
two infinities, and the perceptible universe is created. The magician
then draws in this light and forms it into the god-form of Heru-Ra-Ha
around himself, positioning himself in the figure's heart. The god
should be a gigantic figure, large enough to use planets and stars for
stepping stones. As the magician speaks the words of point 4, he
projects his consciousness into the god-form.

Between the infinities of Nuit and Hadit is an infinite cosmos, filled
with creative beings. Man is the type of creative being closest to the
microcosmic end of the scale. Going on in the macrocosmic direction we
discover an unending multitude of other beings, whose spheres of
creative action become more and more inclusive as we proceed. Here we
invoke that creator who perfected the aspect of existence embodied in
the Enochian system of magick. And we call upon that yet higher being
who is God to this creator to bless him for his works.

The nature of his creation is then described, and praised for its
beauty and perfection, while recognizing that there are other aspects
of existence beyond those embodied in his creation. In an infinite
universe, it is impossible to describe all aspects of existence within
any particular system.

The magician then asserts that men are also creative gods, within
their own spheres of activity. He calls upon the God of the Tablets to
lend his force to the task of raising men to their rightful place in
the hierarchy of creators.

Finally the magician asserts his own power as a creator, whose work is
united with that of the God of the Tablets. He asks that god to bless
his work in each of the five elemental modes.

The language of this section was provided to the author by some of the
non-incarnate mages associated with the Enochian system, and reflects
their own view of existence. It is intended as a general exordium to
be performed before working with any of the Tablets, not just with the
Tablet of Fire. 

Having identified himself with the God of the Tablets, the magician
now speaks as that god in reciting the First Key of the Enochian
rituals, calling Spirit of Fire to fill the place of working and
maintain the balance of the elements during the rest of the ritual. A
white light tinged with orange-scarlet should be seen filling the
circle at the end of the invocation.

Having set the stage, we now narrow our focus to include only the
element of Fire. The use of the G.D. invocation in this point is a
matter of convenience. The invocation is relatively short, and its
language is consistent in style with the rest of the ceremony. The
magician should feel free to substitute other language as genius
dictates.

With this point, the preliminaries are over, and we begin the con-
struction of the Temple. The magician should be familiar with the form
and symbolism of the Temple, and able to maintain a visualization of
it without effort. The structure of the Temple should be maintained in
the astral vision throughout the rest of the ceremony. At first, it
should appear just as a skeleton of itself. As each force of the
Tablet is invoked, the corresponding part of the Temple should begin
to glow with the appropriate color. The Temple should be large enough
so that each pillar is positioned at the center of one of the outer
four circles in the area of working. When the magician recites the
sentence beginning "From the light...", the fire of the sky above the
area of working should be visualized descending to the plain, leaving
behind a starry night sky. 

The Three Names of God and the Elemental King reflect Nuit and Hadit
on a slightly smaller scale. The Names of God are connected with the
signs of the Zodiac, which are the manifestation of Nuit in time and
space. In this particular case, OIP = Sagittarius, TEAA = Leo, and
PDOCE = Aries. The symbolic figures of the signs should be seen
against the backdrop of the stars, at the points of an equilateral
triangle around the work area. The magician should attempt to get a
sense of vast distances between himself and these figures, so vast
that the width of the Solar system is pinhead-sized by comparison. 

As the sign of Harpocrates is performed, beams of light spear inward
from these figures to strike the sphere of three rings at the peak of
the Temple. Each ring should glow in the color of its corresponding
sign, and there should be a sense of the forces spinning around the
circumference of each ring. The rings kindle into flame, and the light
of that flame flows outward again to the stars, and inward, filling
the sphere with energy under great pressure.

The Elemental King is Hadit reflected in Sol. In his higher aspect, as
the initiating Life of the Solar system, the "central spiritual sun",
he is a point of intensely concentrated energy at the center of the
Sphere of the Three Names. As the first three sentences of the para-
graph are spoken, the energy within the sphere all collapses into the
center, where it kindles a flaming point that immediately becomes
self-sustaining, drawing further energy out of itself rather than from
the continuing infall from the signs.

As the last two sentences are spoken, a spear of intensely radiating
light bursts downward into the Temple to its floor, illuminating the
entire area of work. 

Where the King is Atziluthic, and therefore of a fiery nature, the
Seniors are Briatic, and therefore Watery. As the planets, astrologi-
cally, embody aspects of the Sun's force, so the Seniors embody
aspects of the King's power, and each relates to a particular planet. 
"The cross become the star become the wheel" refers to the tranforma-
tion of the four-armed Central Cross of the two-dimensional Tablet
into the six-spoked star of the three-dimensional Temple, and thence
into the circular curtain around the Temple.

A telesmatic image for each of the Seniors should be devised under the
guidance of magician's own genius, and visualized as each Senior is
invoked. He should then see a flow of force from that image into the
Senior's arm of the Temple roof. After all the Seniors have been
invoked, a flow of vermillion liquid fire should be visualized flowing
outward between the arms of the roof and falling in a circular curtain
around the temple. The circle described by this curtain is identical
with the central circle of the area of work. 

The completion of this section of the consecration is confirmed with
an appropriate speech.


The Consecration of the Lesser Angle of Fire

In dealing with the lesser angles, the magician acts as the represen-
tative or minister of the higher powers embodied in the Great Central
Cross of the Tablet. He shows his position by identifying his body
with the visible symbols of these powers in the Temple.

The lesser angle of Fire represents the Element in its purest, most
refined state. In the Enochian system, the element of Fire is "the
secret life of all things". Thus it takes on some characteristics that
are normally ascribed to Spirit. In the physical world, Fire is
energy, and the purest form of energy is the photon, the only particle
in which the quality of mass is completely absent. This section of the
ritual is a celebration of Fire of Fire in terms of life and light. 

The first sentence recalls the biblical "Iehi Aur" or "Fiat Lux", the
first action of God in creating the world. It also reminds us that in
the creation-mythos fostered by modern physics, nothing except photons
existed in the first few moments after the Big Bang. "Flames of Glory"
echoes the Enochian word "Ialprg", which is also translated as "God-
flame". Thus Fire of Fire is identified with the energy of the Creator
in three different myth systems.

The second sentence celebrates some of the characteristics of the
lesser angle. "Purified" because there is no intermixture of other
elements in this angle. "Rarified" because Fire is the subtlest of the
elements. "Doubling upon yourselves" because both the primary and
secondary attributes of the angle are Fiery. "Movement" is a primary
quality of Fire. 

The third sentence reminds us that Sol is either directly or indirect-
ly the source of all life and energy within the ecologic economy of
the planet Earth. The only exception to this, the radioactive ele-
ments, are still the products of other stellar beings.

The Life or Soul of man is the guide of light in several ways. Spirit-
ually, because Man is the mesocosm, the mediator between spirit and
matter, and thus directs the action of spiritual light in relation to
the lower kingdoms of nature. Physically, because Man is the only
embodied creature who is capable of willfully directing the use of
energy.

The final five sentences celebrate the characteristics of physical
light in the quantum-mechanical view of the universe. "Bursting the
bonds..." reflects the fact that photons are the means by which one
physical element changes into another. The next two sentences recall
the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. 

"Beginning of all..." reminds us that photons were the first particles
to appear in the Big Bang mythos, and will be the only particles
remaining in the Big Crunch with which the physicists claim the
universe will end.

Photons are mediators of action because all use of physical force is
actually a transference of photons from the actor to the thing acted
upon.

The energies of the lesser angle are called forth by the power of the
god-names of six and five letters. The combination of these two names
in the sephirotic cross of the angle represents the power of Tiphereth
with respect to the lesser angle.

When the magician is identified with the column of fire in the center
of the Temple, the six Seniors radiate outwards at the level of the
throat chakra, and the four sephirotic crosses surround him at the
level of the heart chakra. As the god-names of the angle are vibrated,
the cross should be visualized in its horizontal position over the
lesser angle, and the summoned energies should project out from the
magician's heart to strike the Kether square of the cross and fill the
whole cross with force.

A telesmatic image for the Kerubic angel should be devised that is
appropriate to the magician's accustomed symbol-system. The angel's
image should be seen standing within the pillar. As the names of the
Kerub are invoked, there should be a sense that the pillar is being
filled with a force that is unconquerable, a fierce strength which no
power on earth or in heaven can move from its appointed place and
duties. 

As the Archangelic names (those beginning with the letter "B" are
invoked, this fierceness is softened, mitigated by a sun-like radi-
ance, and a nimbus of etherial light begins to glow around the pillar.

The "servient" angels of the tablets are a trap for the unwary, a trap
that can not be avoided if they are used at all. Their powers are
oriented towards the Earth, towards manifest events, a promise of
power displayed for those who seek power. Their surface appearance is
"elemental" in the medieval use of that term -- natural powers having
no connection to the spirit, no soul. But those powers are only the
bait on the hook, encouraging the unaware person to bite so that he
may be drawn up into the hands of the fishermen.

Each servient angel has a secret nature, represented by the fifth
letter added in the second forms of their names. This secret nature is
the power of the macrocosm, represented in the Lesser Angle by the
god-name of six letters, from which the additional letters come. This
power operates constantly in the microcosm, even when it is unper-
ceived. But by invoking the servient angels for mundane or non-spirit-
ual uses, the magician opens a channel by which the macrocosmic forces
can work on him in concentration rather than being hidden behind the
elemental surface appearance of existence. The action of these forces
twists the events of life in such a way that the person inevitably
becomes committed to the path of initiation. Efforts in other direc-
tions become subject to inexplicable failures, interventions of
"chance" events that frustrate the person's intentions, leaving only
one path of successful action open.

Those who are making the effort to build a Temple from one of the
Tablets are most likely already committed to the Great Work, and so
will not notice any particular effects of this trap in their lives.

The consecration of the Lesser Angle ends with a re-invocation of the
highest forces of the Tablet, generating a return current for the flow
of force into the Lesser Angle.


Consecration of the other Lesser Angles

The rituals for the remaining Lesser Angles are for the most part the
same as the Fiery Lesser Angle. Only the Key used, and the introduc-
tory recitation of the powers of the angle changes significantly. The
invocations of the God-names of six and five letters, the Kerubic
Angels, and the Servient Angels contain only minor changes in words
specific to each angle. 


Watery Lesser Angle

The first "Heh" of IHVH is associated both with Water and with the
Briatic or Creative world, so the commemoration of the powers of the
Lesser Angle begins "Let creation flow forth...".

In our metaphor relating elemental fire to physical energy, this
lesser angle represents the wave aspects of light. The quanta of the
Fiery Lesser Angle were essentially one-dimensional, as close to a
geometric point as exists in nature. In contrast, the wave aspect of
light only appears when light is considered within a framework of
several dimensions. The purest conception of the wave aspect needs
only two dimensions for description. But as photons move through space
they generate a rotating magnetic field around themselves, which forms
a spiral in three dimensions.

The description of the angle's energies as "force squared and ex-
tended" reflects this in a transformation to two dimensions through
the process of squaring, then into three dimensions by movement at
some angle to the plane. The fourth dimension of time is present in
the phrase "Action sustained", which also commemorates the function of
Water as a receiver and preserver of the fiery impulse.

The line "Waves upon the face of the void", states the result of the
processes of the previous line. It also reflects a conception common
to both physics and some metaphysical systems, in which existence is
considered as vibratory movement taking place on or in a substratum
whose qualities are unknowable, and therefore "void".

"Fire reflected upon itself...." refers to another quality of water,
reflection or reversal. "...concentrated force" refers to the seven-
teenth Key, in which the god of the Lesser Angle is named "Vonpovnph"
a contraction of "Vonpho-vonph" meaning "Wrath in wrath", its form and
meaning suggesting concentration of force.

Energy exchange is the means by which different objects in a system
interact and affect one another. The "connectedness" or degree of
relationship between such objects can to a certain extent be defined
by the amount and types of energy that move between them. Hence the
final line in this section.


Airy Lesser Angle

Air is Vav of IHVH, and the Yetziratic or Formative world. But "forma-
tive" might be better translated as "formulative". Air is Mind,
Intelligence, and (on a lower level) Intellect, the quality in man and
god that separates undifferentiated sense-impressions into perception
of objects and actions, and further separates from these perceptions
the abstract formulas "governing" the perceived events. Thus the call
of the Lesser Angle gives the spirits of the angle the power to "know
and separate all creatures".

Conversely, Mind translates Will, through formulae, into a multitude
of potential actions by which Will can accomplish its goals. In either
case, the idea of separation is paramount, hence the attribution of
the Knife as the magickal weapon of Air.

The first line of the commemoration of the Lesser Angle celebrates the
Yetziratic, formative aspect of Air, and gives an image of flames
shifting about under the influence of the wind.
The second line paraphrases the Key of the Lesser Angle in a manner
that emphasizes its two elemental natures. In "sword of conquest", the
"sword" is equivalent to the knife of Air, and "conquest" corresponds
to the sign Aries, cardinal fire. This phrase echoes the "god of
stretch-forth-and-conquer" of the Key. In "justice in action", justice
is Libra, cardinal Air, and action reflects the qualitative nature of
Fire. So the phrase as a whole connects elemental Fire and Air with
their primary cosmic equivalents, the Aries-Libra zodiacal axis.

The third line again echoes the Key of the Lesser Angle, paraphrasing
to emphasize the two functions of mind mentioned above. That is, the
mind drawing perceived events into a single formula or description,
and the mind using a formula to produce a multitude of events. The
sometimes paradoxical action of the mind is emphasized through the use
of the verb "to cleave", one of the few words to possess two diametri-
cally opposed meanings. The cleaver as an edged weapon again echoes
the knife of Air.

The final line conceives of Air of Fire as representing "information".
In describing the symbolism of Water of Fire, it was mentioned that
that sub-element represented the energy exchanges taking place within
an organized system. Overlaying energy exchange is information ex-
change, which also takes place continually in any organized system. In
fact a system can only be said to be "organized" to the extent that
information is transferred between its parts. However, information
transfer and energy transfer are not identical; all information is
energy, but not all energy contains information. Thus the two exchan-
ges are attributed to separate sub-elements.


Earthy Lesser Angle

Earth is Heh final of IHVH, associated with the Assiatic world, the
world of matter, where the creation which has developed through the
other three elements achieves a relative stability. Thus the first
line of the commemoration calls for manifestation. But OShIH, Assiah,
means "action" or "doing". It is not an inert and unchanging end-
product that is referred to by elemental Earth, but rather patterned
activity exhibited in matter, activity directed to reflect the intent
of the creative impulse. Elemental Earth exhibits a dynamism equal to
any of the other elements, paralleling exactly the intense patterned
activity which is the hallmark of the planet Earth in which we live.

Matter in itself is no less dynamic than the patterns Will imposes on
it. The apparent inertness which has caused it to be traditionally
associated with Saturn is purely superficial; beneath this surface
inactivity is a realm of unimaginably intense activity. Saturn's
influence limits our ability to perceive that world directly, but does
not affect that world itself. 

Perhaps the Enochian magickal system heralded this understanding,
several hundred years before it became clear, in the fact that it
places Fire after Earth in the progression of elements. But the
Enochian progression also reflects the general positioning of the
elements in the body of the planet Earth. The planet has a fiery core,
containing most of the heat available on the planet. The solid land on
which we live floats on this core, containing that heat and allowing
it to escape only slowly. Water lies in the hollows of the solid
shell, and air encloses them all.

The Key associated with this Lesser Angle of the Fire Tablet is the
last of the Keys directly associated with the Elemental Tablets. As
such, it represents an endpoint of the whole process. What was begun
in the First Key achieves full manifestation. The Key confirms this,
saying the powers of the angle "open the glory of God to the center of
the Earth". The second line of the commemoration echoes the Key,
affirming the nature of the god of the sub-elemental spirits.

Since we are at the end of the process there is nowhere to go except
back to the beginning; all elemental processes return to their origin
for a new cycle to begin. The end-product of the elemental processes
accurately reflects the original intent by which it was created, in
the same way in which a sigil is an accurate reflection of the force
it represents. All manifest things have such a sigil-like nature when
examined from the proper viewpoint. Thus, by observation of the
manifest we can come to an experience of its unmanifest source. The
third line of the commemoration expresses this idea.

The final line reflects the positioning of the elements in the Enoch-
ian scheme as mentioned above. It also reflects the fact that the heat
coming from the Earth's core is neccessary to maintaining the condi-
tions for life to exist on her surface. The heat of the Sun is inade-
quate to keep the climate within the proper range of temperatures for
life.

                                 -oOo-