From: Az0th
Subject: Enochian Magick
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 1993 17:06:16 GMT


Hi, Peggy!

Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.

>>Coincidentally, it is now possible, by working backward
>>from the names given in the _Mysteria Magica_, to arrive
>>at a consistent set of names appropriate to this Table.

>What do you do with these?

'I' personally, or 'I' in the abstract? };-] 

Several inconsistent significances have been attached to the names
derived from Dee's Enochian Tablets. Some of them are quite evidently
the names of particular entities, who may be expected to respond in
the affirmative when so addressed, They having been summoned by
Magickal operations involving, most likely, some use of the Enochian
Calls to get Their attention. In Dee's diaries, all of these entities
have special areas of expertise, which areas tend to reflect the
interests and requirements of a practicing Magus, metals and gems and
transmutations and such like. Other of the names extracted from the
Tablets are in the usual sense Words of Power, used either to Summon
or Command particular entities or classes of entities. Later
magickians have seen fit to reinterpret these latter as the names of
angelic entities in and of themselves. The difference may simply be
one of nomenclature, since they seem to be equivalent in practice.

Identical 'areas of expertise' obtain on each of the four quadrants of
the combined, or Great, Table, and Dee records an instruction that the
area of the world in which the magickian desires help, as viewed from
his physical location, determines _which_ quadrant of the Table should
supply the names to be used in conjuration. Hmmmm. Mathers came along
some 300 years later and added a veritable _bunch_ of astrological and
elemental and QBListic associations not only to the already defined
name set, but to each and every letter on each and every Tablet, such
that a pyramidal representation of the individul lettered squares
became necessary just to hold it all.  These were then color-coded
according to the various scales for ready reference, and further
correlated with Egyptian godforms, an absolutely brilliant scheme
which most folks find absolutely overwhelming, and all ultimately
derived by projecting YHVH all over the Tablets and noting the
interactions. Neat if you're an experienced QBList....but if you're
not?

The other set of names derivable from the Tablets have undergone a
somewhat more radical redefinition by later magickians. If you
superimpose another of Dee's documents, the chart of Symmetrical
Characters or sigilli, over the combined Enochian Tablets, 91
additional names can be had by tracing the lines and recording the
characters touched. In practice, this is not much fun, since some of
the sigilli have crossing lines...but I digress. These names Dee
called the 'Parts of the Earth as Divinely Given' and are patently
intended to correspond to actual geographical locations in this world,
and by extension, some part of those Aires above them. One may with
some justification speculate that Dee's Imperialistic imaginings
prompted him toward a scheme whereby information could be had and
influence focused on _this_ world, by opera magickal in a
higher. Major hmmmmmmm. We seem to have here a grand thaumaturgical
praxis for governing the world by Magick. Can you say 'Illuminati'? I
knew you could..... };-]

In our enlightened times, when patriotic world domination is not much
on anybody's mind (is it?), these 'governments' have been renamed
'Governors', and become (you guessed it) particular entities in charge
of Aethyrs which are theorised variously to extend from the lower
astral all the way 'up' to Deity. I certainly won't belabor
distinctions between maps and territories, which the very fluidity of
astral and spiritual realms makes problematic at best, but I will note
that this particular map, when applied to individual spiritual
territory, permits of a gradient scale of expansion of awareness
corresponding in modern terms to 'Initiation'. Or so say many who've
gone and done it, like Crowley.

So much for the abstract 'I'.... What do I _personally_ do with all
these wonderful Names? Not much, these days, but they make great
mneumonics for retaining the Tablets themselves, which I do use, along
with the Calls, in ongoing experiments investigating my subjective
perception of dimension, and its astral interface during evocation and
skrying. Portal stuff. };-]

But then I have other nasty habits as well, like associating the 3
linea of the Great Cross of each Tablet with Nuit, Hadit and
Ra-Hoor-Khu-it....

Love is the law, love under will.

Az0th




