                          THE ZODIACAL ROUND

                           BY BENJAMIN ROWE

                 Copyright 1990, 1992 by Benjamin Rowe


ORO (Pisces)

And God said: "The time has come to create again. Let the old forms be
banished. I begin anew."

IBAH (Aquarius)

And God said: "I bind my will in patterns, ordered, cyclic, yet never
the same. My Will evolves in Time."

AOZPI (Capricorn)

And God said: "The towers of My Will arise upon the base which I have
set. Level upon level they rise. Well-founded are they in matter, and
shall not fall while My Will continues to its end."

MPH (Sagittarius)

"Fabulous filigrees are wrapped about My towers by the ever-changing
movements that My Will evokes. Filigree upon filigree; filigree within
filigree; always similar, never identical, they blend the large
movements with the small, the small with the infinitesimal, until
scale is lost and none knows where ends and beginnings arise."

ARSL (Scorpio)

"From the blending of the scales does chance arise, the possibility of
change and unexpectedness within the pattern of My Will. The seeds of
new motions spontaneously arise; and none, not even I, know when and
where they will appear."

GAIOL (Libra)

"Yet My towers are one, balanced in the light and in the darkness;
that which arises shall always act within the bounds set by My Will."

OIP (Virgo)

And God looked upon his work and said: "But these are virgin houses:
none as yet have dwelt therein. Let the seeds of life be sown and let
them root and grow within the patterns of My thought."

TEAA (Leo)

And God said: "Let the lesser creators dwell within my towers. And let
them work within the patterns of My Will according to their own
creative arts, revealing unseen potential as does a sun entering into
a dark place."

PDOCE (Cancer)

"Let the living creatures worship the creators as visible gods within
the worlds. And let the lesser builders work their  wills as do My
angels when I speak my Word of Power."

MOR (Gemini)

And God said: "Let the thoughts of men blend with My thoughts, and
elaborate them in the worlds where I no longer go."

DIAL (Taurus)

"And let their work build upon My pattern; and let their works reflect
My evolving Will."

HCTGA (Aries)

"Let men work until matter and My Will are one. Then let them say: Thy
Will is done."


Seer's Comments:

These brief sayings were given to the seer during an exploration of
the Names of God for the Air Tablet. They are intended as meditations
on the significance of the twelve Names of God within a system of
attributes called the "Zodiacal Round". In this arrangement, the Names
from each Tablet are assigned to a quarter of the zodiac centered on
the fixed sign corresponding to the element of the Tablet. This puts
the groups of names in the same relative positions as are their
respective Tablets within the Great Table of the Watchtowers.

The Enochian "angels" have frequently dealt with zodiacal progressions
in our previous contacts, but their earlier statements have always
treated the progression in a more goal-oriented fashion. This is the
first purely cyclic expression they have provided. Like Finnegans Wake
it never actually ends, but curves back to begin again.

This is the second full set of zodiacal attributes the angels have
given me for the Names of God. The first set were provided in connec-
tion with the techniques described in the chapbook Enochian Temples.
In that set, the Three Names for each element were assigned respec-
tively to the mutable, fixed, and cardinal signs of that element. A
quote provides the angels' perspective on the question of how these
two sets of attributes interact:

"Now we would go in the way that you wish, and show the powers of the
individual squares, but you should be aware that the groups of squares
making up one of the Three Names have their attribute (as a group) to
one of the signs, and these are of more power in most instances than
the power of the individual squares.

"The Name ORO has its dual attributes to Pisces in the round of the
zodiac, and to Gemini in the construction of the Temples of God's
Will. The knife or sword of Zayin was shown in yesterday's brief
vision as cutting the cord between the fishes of Pisces. Hence in that
vision we showed how the two sets of attributes relate.

"First one encounters the attribute from the zodiacal round. As the
mind flies higher, then the attribute of the Temple is encountered. In
the course of initiation, the knowledge of the latter grows, is formed
out of, the experience of the former. Much in the way that the knife
of Air in the last vision was formed out of the tin of Jupiter and the
copper of Venus, who are ruler and exalted planet of Pisces."

"In the initiatory progression, one goes from the sign, the most basic
attribute, to the power of the ruling and exalted planets, to the
Temple attribute, to the ruling and exalted planets of the Temple
sign. This may seem complex, but the powers embodied in the Tablets
are a reflection of the powers of the universe, and the universe is a
very complex place on all levels."

This shift of attributes can be viewed in two ways. First, as a
transformation from a condition in which the zodiacal quadruplicities
dominate, to one in which the zodiacal triplicities dominate. Second,
as a ninety-degree shift in the positions of the mutable and cardinal
signs, counterclockwise for mutable, clockwise for cardinal. 

The angels state in another place that movement of the powers through
these various attributes produces two circular flows in the Great
Table of the Watchtowers. In both cases, the power represented by the
"Temple" attribute flows into the name whose Zodiacal Round attribute
is the same. For example, the powers of ORO flow in the way quoted
above, then the power flows into the Name MOR in the Earth Tablet,
which has Gemini as its Zodiacal Round attribute. The powers of the
fixed signs flow in both directions, since their attributes in both
sets is the same.

When using these attributes in invocations, the angels specify that
the Zodiacal Round is to be used in invocations of the angels of the
Lesser Angles, and in invocations involving the use of the Second
Call. The "Temple" attributes are to be used in invocations of the
Kings and Seniors, and those involving the use of the First Call. 

The powers of the Three Names are concentrated and formed into a
vortex by the King of the Tablet. The King connects with the Names
primarily through the first letter and the last two letters of his
name. These letters all come from the four-letter Name of God, which
is attributed to the element of the Tablet in both arrangements. So no
matter which set is used, the powers of the Three Names are funneled a
sign of the appropriate elemental character when they are used in
invocations of the lower powers of the Tablets.

For those who wish use these sayings for meditation, it should be
emphasized that the symbolism is almost purely astrological, with some
admixture of Tarot. Formulations based on the Tree of Life are not
present.

                                 -oOo-