<span class="p-small2"> </span>

[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index)  [9/11
Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Partial transcript of comments from the Thursday, September 13, 2001 edition of the "700 Club"

JERRY FALWELL: And I agree totally with you that the Lord has protected
us so wonderfully these 225 years. And since 1812, this is the first
time that we've been attacked on our soil and by far the worst results.
And I fear, as Donald Rumsfeld, the Secretary of Defense, said
yesterday, that this is only the beginning. And with biological warfare
available to these monsters - the Husseins, the Bin Ladens, the Arafats
- what we saw on Tuesday, as terrible as it is, could be miniscule if,
in fact - if, in fact - God continues to lift the curtain and allow the
enemies of America to give us probably what we deserve.

PAT ROBERTSON: Jerry, that's my feeling. I think we've just seen the
antechamber to terror. We haven't even begun to see what they can do to
the major population.

JERRY FALWELL: The ACLU's got to take a lot of blame for this.

PAT ROBERTSON: Well, yes.

JERRY FALWELL: And, I know that I'll hear from them for this. But,
throwing God out successfully with the help of the federal court system,
throwing God out of the public square, out of the schools. The
abortionists have got to bear some burden for this because God will not
be mocked. And when we destroy 40 million little innocent babies, we
make God mad. I really believe that the pagans, and the abortionists,
and the feminists, and the gays and the lesbians who are actively trying
to make that an alternative lifestyle, the ACLU, People For the American
Way - all of them who have tried to secularize America - I point the
finger in their face and say "you helped this happen."

PAT ROBERTSON: Well, I totally concur, and the problem is we have
adopted that agenda at the highest levels of our government. And so
we're responsible as a free society for what the top people do. And, the
top people, of course, is the court system.

JERRY FALWELL: Pat, did you notice yesterday the ACLU, and all the
Christ-haters, People For the American Way, NOW, etc. were totally
disregarded by the Democrats and the Republicans in both houses of
Congress as they went out on the steps and called out on to God in
prayer and sang "God Bless America" and said "let the ACLU be hanged"?
In other words, when the nation is on its knees, the only normal and
natural and spiritual thing to do is what we ought to be doing all the
time - calling upon God.

PAT ROBERTSON: Amen
