[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3602) 
[Next](sbe3604) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

#### THE QUESTIONS

###### OF

# KING MILINDA.

## BOOK IV.

### THE SOLVING OF DILEMMAS.

### CHAPTER 5.

### \[DILEMMA THE FORTY-FIRST. ON DWELLING-PLACES.\]

1\. \[**211**\] 'Venerable Nâgasena, the Blessed One said:  
In friendship of the world anxiety is born,  
In household life distraction's dust springs up,  
The state set free from home and friendship's ties,  
That, and that only, is the recluse's aim <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)."

 

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

'But on the other hand he said:

"Let therefore the wise man,  
Regarding his own weal,  
Have pleasant dwelling-places built,  
And lodge there learned men <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)."

Now, venerable Nâgasena, if the former of these two passages was really
spoken by the Tathâgata, then the second must be wrong. But if the
Tathâgata really said: "Have pleasant dwelling-places built," then the
former statement must be wrong. This too is a double-edged problem, now
put to you, which you have to solve.'

2\. \[**212**\] 'Both the passages you have quoted, O king, were spoken
by the Tathâgata. And the former is a statement as to the nature of
things, an inclusive statement, a statement which leaves no room for
anything to be supplemented to it, or to be added to it in the way of
gloss <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32), as to what is seemly and
appropriate and proper for a recluse, and as to the mode of life which a
recluse should adopt, the path he should walk along, and the practice he
should follow. For just, O king, as a deer in the forest, wandering in
the woods, sleeps wherever he desires, having no home and no

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

dwelling-place, so also should the recluse be of opinion that

"In friendship of the world anxiety is born,  
In household life distraction's dust springs up."

3\. 'But when the Blessed One said:

"Have pleasant dwelling-places built,  
And lodge there learned men,"

that was said with respect to two matters only. And what are those two?
The gift of a dwelling-place (Wihâra) has been praised and approved,
esteemed and highly spoken of, by all the Buddhas. And those who have
made such a gift shall be delivered from rebirth, old age, and death.
This is the first of the advantages in the gift of a dwelling-place. And
again, if there be a common dwelling place (a Wihâra) the sisters of the
Order will have a clearly ascertained place of rendezvous, and those who
wish to visit (the brethren of the Order) <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) will find it an easy matter to do so.
Whereas if there were no homes for the members of the Order it would be
difficult to visit them. This is the second of the advantages in the
gift of a dwelling-place (a Wihâra). It was with reference to these two
matters only that it was said by the Blessed One:

"Have pleasant dwelling-places built,  
And lodge there learned men."

\[**213**\] 'And it does not follow from that that the sons of the
Buddha <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34) should harbour longings after
the household life.'

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to dwelling-places.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE FORTY-SECOND.  
MODERATION IN FOOD.\]

4\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, the Blessed One said:

"Be not remiss as to (the rules to be observed) when standing up (to beg
for food). Be restrained in (matters relating to) the stomach <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)."

But on the other hand he said:

Now there were several days, Udâyin, on which I ate out of this bowl
when it was full to the brim, and ate even more <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36)."

'Now if the first rule be true, then the second statement must be false.
But if the statement be true, then the rule first quoted must be wrong.

.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

This too is a double-edged problem, now put to you, which you have to
solve.'

5\. 'Both the passages you have quoted, O king, were spoken by the
Blessed One. But the former passage \[**214**\] is a statement as to the
nature of things, an inclusive statement, a statement which leaves no
room for anything to be supplemented to it, or added to it in the way of
gloss, a statement of what is true and real and in accordance with the
facts, and that cannot be proved wrong, a declaration made by the
prophets, and sages, and teachers, and Arahats, and by the Buddhas who
are wise for themselves alone (Pa*kk*eka-Buddhas), a declaration made by
the Conquerors, and by the All-wise Ones, a declaration made too by the
Tathâgata, the Arahat, the Supreme Buddha himself. He who has no
self-control as regards the stomach, O king, will destroy living
creatures, will take possession of what has not been given to him, will
be unchaste, will speak lies, will drink strong drink, will put his
mother or his father to death, will slay an Arahat, will create a schism
in the Order, will even with malice aforethought wound a Tathâgata. Was
it not, O king, when without restraint as to his stomach, that Devadatta
by breaking up the Order, heaped up for himself karma that would endure
for a kalpa <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)? It was on calling to
mind this, O king, and many other things of the same kind, that the
Blessed One declared:

Be not remiss as to (the rules to be observed)

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

when standing up (to beg for food). Be restrained in (matters relating
to) the stomach."

6\. 'And he who has self-control as regards the stomach gains a clear
insight into the Four Truths, realises the Four Fruits of the life of
renunciation <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38), and attains to mastery
over the Four Discriminations <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39), the
Eight Attainments <span id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40), and the Six Modes
of Higher Knowledge <span id="fr_41"></span>[4](#fn_41), and fulfils all
that goes to constitute the life of the recluse. Did not the parrot
fledgling, O king, by self-restraint as to his stomach, cause the very
heaven of the great Thirty-Three to shake, and bring down Sakka, the
king of the gods, to wait upon him <span id="fr_42"></span>[5](#fn_42)?
It was on calling to mind this, O king, and many other things of a
similar kind, that the Blessed One declared:

"Be not remiss as to (the rules to be observed) when standing up (to beg
for food). Be restrained in (matters relating to) the stomach."

7\. 'But when, O king, the Blessed One said: "Now there were several
days, Udâyi, on which I ate out of this bowl when it was full to the
brim, and ate even more," that was said by him who had completed his
task, who had finished all that he had to do, who had accomplished the
end he set before him, who had overcome every obstruction, by the
self-dependent <span id="fr_43"></span>[6](#fn_43) Tathâgata himself
about himself.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Just, O king, as it is desirable that a sick man
to whom an emetic, or a purge, or a clyster has been administered,
should be treated with a tonic; \[**215**\] just so, O king, should the
man who is full of evil, and who has not perceived the Four Truths,
adopt the practice of restraint in the matter of eating. But just, O
king, as there is no necessity of polishing, and rubbing down <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44), and purifying a diamond gem of great
brilliancy, of the finest water, and of natural purity; just so, O king,
is there no restraint as to what actions he should perform, on the
Tathâgata, on him who hath attained to perfection in all that lies
within the scope of a Buddha <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45).'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to restraint in eating.\]

 

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

\[DILEMMA THE FORTY-THIRD.  
BAKKULA'S SUPERIORITY TO THE BUDDHA.\]

8\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it was said by the Blessed One:

"A Brahman am I, O brethren, devoted to self-sacrifice <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46), pure-handed at every time; this body that
I bear with me is my last, I am the supreme Healer and Physician <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47)."

'But on the other hand the Blessed One said:

"The chief, O brethren, among those who are disciples of mine, in the
matter of bodily health, is Bakkula <span
id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48)."

'Now it is well known that diseases arose several times in the body of
the Blessed One. So that if, Nâgasena, the Tathâgata was supreme, then
the statement he made about Bakkula's bodily health must be wrong. But
if the Elder named Bakkula was really chief among those who were
healthy, then that statement which I first quoted must be

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

wrong. This too is a double-edged problem, now put to you, which you
have to solve.'

9\. 'Both the quotations you have made, O king, are correct <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49). But what the Blessed One said about
Bakkula was said of those disciples who had learnt by heart the sacred
words, and studied them, and handed down the tradition, which in
reference to the characteristics (each of them in some one point) had in
addition to those which were found in him himself <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50). \[**216**\] For there were certain of the
disciples of the Blessed One, O king, who were "meditators on foot,"
spending a whole day and night in walking up and down in meditation. But
the Blessed One was in the habit of spending the day and night in
meditation, not only walking up and down but also sitting and lying
down. So such, O king, of the disciples as were "meditators on
foot <span id="fr_51"></span>[3](#fn_51)" surpassed him in that
particular. And there were certain of the disciples of the Blessed One,
O king, who were "eaters at one sitting," who would not, even to save
their lives, take more than one meal a day. But the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Blessed One was in the habit of taking a second,
or even a third. So such, O king, of the disciples as were "eaters at
one sitting" surpassed him in that particular. And in a similar way, O
king, a number of different things have been told, each one of one or
other of the disciples. But the Blessed One, O king, surpassed them all
in respect of uprightness, and of power of meditation, and of wisdom,
and of emancipation, and of that insight which arises out of the
knowledge of emancipation, and in all that lies within the scope of a
Buddha. It was with reference to that, O king, that he said:

"A Brahman am I, O brethren, devoted to self-sacrifice, pure-handed at
every time; this body that I bear with me is my last, I am the supreme
Healer and Physician."

10\. 'Now one man, O king, may be of good birth, and another may be
wealthy, and another full of wisdom, and another well educated, and
another brave, and another adroit; but a king, surpassing all these, is
reckoned supreme. just in that way, O king, is the Blessed One the
highest, the most worthy of respect, the best of all beings. And in so
far as the venerable Bakkula was healthy in body, that was by reason of
an aspiration (he had formed in a previous birth) <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52). For, O king, when Anoma-dassî, the
Blessed One, was afflicted with a disease, with wind in his stomach, and
again when Vipassî, the Blessed One, and sixty-eight thousand of his
disciples, were afflicted with a disease, with greenness of blood <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53), he,

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

being at those times an ascetic, had cured that disease with various
medicines, and attained (thereby) to such healthiness of body (in this
life) that it was said of him:

"The chief, O brethren, among those who are disciples of mine, in the
matter of bodily health, is Bakkula."

11\. 'But the Blessed One, O king, whether he be suffering, or not
suffering from disease; whether he have taken, or not taken, upon
himself the observance

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

of special vows <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54),--there is no being
like unto the Blessed One. \[**217**\] For this, O king, has been said
by the Blessed One, the god of gods, in the most excellent Sa*m*yutta
Nikâya <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55):

"Whatsoever beings, O brethren, there may be whether without feet, or
bipeds, or four-footed things, whether with a body, or without a body,
whether conscious or unconscious, or neither conscious nor not--the
Tathâgata is acknowledged to be the chief of all, the Arahat, the Buddha
Supreme."'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say <span
id="fr_56"></span>[3](#fn_56).'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the problem as to the superiority of Bakkula to the
Buddha.\]

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

\[DILEMMA, THE FORTY-FOURTH.  
THE ORIGINALITY OF THE BUDDHA'S TEACHING.\]

12\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it has been said by the Blessed One:

"The Tathâgata, O brethren, the Arahat, the Buddha supreme <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57), is the discoverer of a way that was
unknown <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58)."

'But on the other hand he said:

"Now I perceived, O brethren, the ancient way, the ancient path, along
which the previous Buddhas walked <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_58)."

'If, Nâgasena, the Tathâgata be the discoverer of a way not previously
found out, then it must be wrong that it was an ancient way that he
perceived, an ancient path along which previous Buddhas walked. But if
the way he perceived were an ancient way, then the statement that it was
unknown must be wrong. This too is a double-edged problem, now put to
you, which you have to solve.'

13\. 'Both the quotations you make, O king, are accurate. And both the
statements so made are correct. When the previous Tathâgatas, O king,
had disappeared, then, there being no teacher left, their way too
disappeared. And it was that way--though then broken up, crumbled away,
gone to ruin, closed in, no longer passable, quite lost to
view--\[**218**\] that the Tathâgata, having gained a

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

thorough knowledge of it, saw by the eye of his wisdom <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_59), (and knew it) as the way that previous
Buddhas trod. And therefore is it that he said:

"Now I perceived, O brethren, the ancient way, the ancient path along
which previous Buddhas walked."

'And it was a way which--there being, through the disappearance of
previous Tathâgatas, no teacher left--was a way then broken up, crumbled
away, gone to ruin, closed in, and lost to view, that the Tathâgata made
now passable again. And therefore is it that he said:

"The Tathâgata, O brethren, the Arahat, the Buddha supreme, is the
discoverer of a way that was unknown."

14\. 'Suppose, O king, that on the disappearance of a sovran overlord,
the mystic Gem of Sovranty lay concealed in a cleft on the mountain
peak, and that on another sovran overlord arriving at his supreme
dignity, it should appear to him. Would you then say, O king, that the
Gem was produced by him <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_60)?'

'Certainly not, Sir! The Gem would be in its original condition. But it
has received, as it were, a new birth through him.'

'Just so, O king, is it that the Blessed One, gaining a thorough
knowledge of it by the eye of'

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

his wisdom, brought back to life and made passable again the most
excellent eightfold way in its original condition as when it was walked
along by the previous Tathâgatas,--though that way, when there was no
teacher more, had become broken up, had crumbled away, had gone to ruin,
was closed in, and lost to view. And therefore is it that he said:

"The Tathâgata, O brethren, the Arahat, the Buddha supreme, is the
discoverer of a way that was unknown."

15\. 'It is, O king, as when a mother brings forth from her womb the
child that is already there, and the saying is that the mother has given
birth to the child. Just so, O king, did the Tathâgata, having gained a
thorough knowledge of it by the eye of his wisdom, bring into life, and
make passable again, a way that was already there, though then broken
up, crumbled away, gone to ruin, closed in, and lost to view.

'It is as when some man or other finds a thing that has been lost, and
the people use the phrase: "He has brought it back to life." \[**219**\]
And it is as when a man clears away the jungle, and sets free <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_61) a piece of land, and the people use the
phrase: "That is his land." But that land is not made by him. It is
because he has brought the land into use that he is called the owner of
the land. Just so, O king, did the Tathâgata, having gained a thorough
knowledge of it by the eye of his wisdom, bring back to life, and make
passable again, a way that was already there, though then broken up,
crumbled

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

away, gone to ruin, closed in, no longer passable, and lost to view. And
therefore is it that he said:

"The Tathâgata, O brethren, the Arahat, the Buddha supreme, is the
discoverer of a way that was unknown."'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the way of Nirvâ*n*a.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE FORTY-FIFTH.  
THE BUDDHA'S KINDNESS.\]

16\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it was said by the Blessed One:

"Already in former births when I was a man had I acquired the habit of
inflicting no hurt on living beings <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_62)."

But on the other hand it is said <span id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_63):

When he was Lomasa Kassapa, the Rishi, he had hundreds of living
creatures slain and offered the great sacrifice, the 'Drink of
Triumph <span id="fr_65"></span>[3](#fn_64).'"

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

'Now, Nâgasena, if it is true what the Buddha said, that, in his former
births as a man, he inflicted no hurt on living beings, then the saying
that, as Lomasa Kassapa, he had hundreds of living creatures slain must
be false. But if he had, then the saying that he inflicted no hurt on
living beings must be false. This too is a double-edged problem, now put
to you, which you have to solve.'

17\. 'The Blessed One did say, O king, that already in former births,
when he was a man, he had acquired the habit of inflicting no hurt on
living beings. And Lomasa Kassapa, the Rishi, did have hundreds of
living creatures slain, and offered the great sacrifice, the "Drink of
Triumph." \[**220**\] But that was done when he was out of his mind
through lust, and not when he was conscious of what he was doing.'

'There are these eight classes of men, Nâgasena, who kill living
beings--the lustful man through his lust, and the cruel man through his
anger, and the dull man through his stupidity, and the proud man through
his pride, and the avaricious man through his greed, and the needy man
for the sake of a livelihood, and the fool in joke, and the king in the
way of punishment. These, Nâgasena, are the eight classes of men who,
kill living beings. The Bodisat, venerable Nâgasena, must have been
acting in accordance with his natural disposition when he did so.'

'No, it was not, O king, an act natural to him that the Bodisat did
then. If the Bodisat had been led, by natural inclination, to offer the
great sacrifice, he would not have uttered the verse:

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

"Not the whole world, Sayha, the ocean girt,  
With all the seas and hills that girdle it,  
Would I desire to have, along with shame <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_65)."

'But though, O king, the Bodisat had said that, yet at the very sight of
*K*andavatî (Moon-face), the princess <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_66), he went out of his mind and lost command
of himself through love. And it was when thus out of his mind, confused
and agitated, that he, with his thoughts all perplexed, scattered and
wandering, thus offered the great sacrifice, the "Drink of
Triumph,"--and mighty was the outpour of blood from the necks of the
slaughtered beasts!

'Just, O king, as a madman, when out of his senses, will step into a
fiery furnace, and take hold of an infuriated venomous snake, and go up
to a rogue elephant, and plunge forwards into great waters, the further
shore of which he cannot see, and trample through dirty pools and muddy
places <span id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_67), and rush into thorny brakes,
and fall down precipices, and feed himself on filth, and go naked
through the streets, and do many other things improper to be done--just
so was it, O king, that at the very sight of *K*andavatî, the princess,
the Bodisat went out of his mind, and then only acted as I have
said <span id="fr_69"></span>[4](#fn_68).

18\. \[**221**\] 'Now an evil act done, O king, by one out of his mind,
is even in this present world not considered as a grievous offence, nor
is it so in

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

respect of the fruit that it brings about in a future life. Suppose, O
king, that a madman had been guilty of a capital offence, what
punishment would you inflict upon him?'

'What punishment is due to a madman? We should order him to be beaten
and set free. That is all the punishment he would have.'

'So then, O king, there is no punishment according to the offence of a
madman. It follows that there is no sin in the act done by a madman, it
is a pardonable act. And just so, O king, is it with respect to Lomasa
Kassapa, the Rishi, who at the mere sight of *K*andavatî, the princess,
went out of his mind, and lost command of himself through love. It was
when thus out of his mind, confused and agitated, that he, with his
thoughts all perplexed, scattered and wandering, thus offered the great
sacrifice, the "Drink of Triumph,"--and mighty was the outpour of blood
from the necks of the slaughtered beasts! But when he returned again to
his natural state, and recovered his presence of mind, then did he again
renounce the world, and having regained the five powers of insight,
became assured of rebirth in the Brahmâ world.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma about Lomasa Kassapa <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_69).\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[DILEMMA THE FORTY-SIXTH.  
THE MOCKING OF THE BUDDHA.\]

19\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it was said by the Blessed One of Six-tusks,
the elephant king,

"When he sought to slay him, and had reached him with his trunk,  
He perceived the yellow robe, the badge of a recluse,  
Then, though smarting with the pain, the thought possessed his
heart,--  
'He who wears the outward garb the Arahats wear  
Must be scatheless held, and sacred, by the good <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70).'"

'But on the other hand it is said:

"When he was *G*otipâla, the young Brahman, he reviled and abused
Kassapa the Blessed One, the Arahat, the Buddha supreme, with vile and
bitter words, calling him a shaveling and a good-for-nothing monk <span
id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_71)."

'Now if, Nâgasena, the Bodisat, even when he was an animal, respected
the yellow robe, \[222\] then the statement that as *G*otipâla, a
Brahman, he reviled and abused the Blessed One of that time, must be
false. But if as a Brahman, he reviled and abused the Blessed One, the
statement that when he was Six-tusks, the elephant king, he respected
the yellow robe, must be false. If when the Bodisat was an animal,
though he was suffering severe and cruel and bitter pain, he respected
the yellow robe

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

which the hunter had put on, how was it that when he was a man, a man
arrived at discretion, with all his knowledge mature, he did not pay
reverence, on seeing him, to Kassapa the Blessed One, the Arahat, the
Buddha supreme, one endowed with the ten powers, the leader of the
world, the highest of the high, round whom effulgence spread a fathom on
every side, and who was clad in most excellent and precious and delicate
Benares cloth made into yellow robes? This too is a double-edged
problem, now put to you, which you have to solve.'

20\. 'The verse you have quoted, O king, was spoken by the Blessed One.
And Kassapa the Blessed One, the Arahat, the Buddha supreme, was abused
and reviled by Gotipâla the young Brahman with vile and bitter words,
with the epithets of shaveling and good-for-nothing monk. But that was
owing to his birth and family surroundings. For *G*otipâla, O king, was
descended from a family of unbelievers, men void of faith. His mother
and father, his sisters and brothers, the bondswomen and bondsmen, the
hired servants and dependents in the house, were worshippers of Brahmâ,
reverers of Brahmâ; and harbouring the idea that Brahmans were the
highest and most honourable among men, they reviled and loathed those
others who had renounced the world. It was through hearing what they
said that *G*otipâla, when invited by Gha*t*îkâra the potter to visit
the teacher, replied: "What's the good to you of visiting that
shaveling, that good-for-nothing monk?"

\[**223**\] 21. 'Just, O king, as even nectar when mixed with poison
will turn sour, just as the coolest water in contact with fire will
become warm, so was

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

it that *G*otipâla, the young Brahman, having been born and brought up
in a family of unbelievers, men void of faith, thus reviled and abused
the Tathâgata after the manner of his kind. And just, O king, as a
flaming and burning mighty fire, if, even when at the height of its
glory, it should come into contact with water, would cool down, with its
splendour and glory spoilt, and turn to cinders, black as rotten
blighted <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_72) fruits-just so, O king,
*G*otipâla, full as he was of merit and faith, mighty as was the glory
of his knowledge, yet when reborn into a family of unbelievers, of men
void of faith, he became, as it were, blind, and reviled and abused the
Tathâgata. But when he had gone to him, and had come to know the virtues
of the Buddhas which he had, then did he become as his hired servant;
and having renounced the world and entered the Order under the system of
the Conqueror, he gained the fivefold power of insight, and the
eightfold power of ecstatic meditation, and became assured of rebirth
into the Brahmâ heaven.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma about Gotipâla.\]

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

\[DILEMMA THE FORTY-SEVENTH.  
THE HELPLESSNESS OF A BUDDHA.\]

22\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, this too has been said by the Blessed One:

"Gha*t*îkâra the potter's dwelling-place remained, the whole of it, for
three months open to the sky, and no rain fell upon it <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_73)."

'But on the other hand it is said:

"Rain fell on the hut of Kassapa the Tathâgata <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_73)."

'How was it, venerable Nâgasena, that the hut of a Tathâgata, the roots
of whose merits were so widely spread <span
id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_74), got wet? One would think that a Tathâgata
should have the power to prevent that. If, Nâgasena, Gha*t*îkâra the
potter's dwelling was kept dry when it was open to the sky, it cannot be
true that a Tathâgata's hut got wet. But if it did, then it must be
false that the potter's dwelling was kept dry. This too is a
double-edged problem, now put to you, which you have to solve.'

23\. 'Both the quotations you have made, O king, are correct.
\[**224**\] Gha*t*îkâra the potter was a good man, beautiful in
character, deeply rooted in merit, who supported his old and blind
mother and father. And when he was absent, the people, without so much
as asking his leave, took away the thatch from his dwelling to roof in
with it the hut of the Tathâgata. Then, unmoved and unshaken at his
thatch being thus removed, but filled rather

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

with a well-grounded and great joy the like of which cannot be found, an
immeasurable bliss sprang up in his heart at the thought: "May the
Blessed One, the chief of the world, have full confidence in me." And
thereby did he obtain merit which brought forth its good result even in
this present life.

24\. 'And the Tathâgata, O king, was not disturbed by that temporary
inconvenience (of the falling rain). Just, O king, as Sineru, the king
of the mountains, moves not, neither is shaken, by the onslaught of
innumerable gales <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_75)--just as the
mighty ocean, the home of the great waters, is not filled up, neither is
disturbed at all, by the inflow of innumerable great rivers--just so, O
king, is a Tathâgata unmoved at temporary inconvenience.

'And that the rain fell upon the Tathâgata's hut happened out of
consideration for the great masses of the people. For there are two
circumstances, O king, which prevent the Tathâgatas from themselves
supplying (by creative power) any requisite of which they may be in
need <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_76). And what are the two? Men and
gods, by supplying the requisites of a Buddha on the ground that he is a
teacher worthy of gifts, will thereby be set free from rebirth in states
of woe. And lest others should find fault, saying: "They seek their
livelihood by the working of miracles." If, O king, Sakka had kept that
hut dry, or even Brahmâ himself, even then that action would have been
faulty, wrong, and worthy of censure.

For people might then say: "These Buddhas by

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

their dexterity <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_77) befool and lord it
over the world." That is the reason why such action would have been
better left undone. The Tathâgatas, O king, do not ask for any
advantage; and it is because they ask for nothing that they are held
blameless.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma about Gha*t*îkâra the potter.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE FORTY-EIGHTH.  
WHY GOTAMA CLAIMED TO BE A BRAHMAN.\]

\[225\] 25. 'Venerable Nâgasena, this too was said by the Blessed One:

"A Brahman am I, O brethren, devoted to self-sacrifice <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_78)."

'But on the other hand he declared:

"A king am I, Sela <span id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_79)."

'If, Nâgasena, the Blessed One were a Brahman, then he must have spoken
falsely when he said he was a king. But if he were a king, then he must
have spoken falsely when he said he was a Brahman. He must have been
either a Khattiya or a Brahman. For he could not have belonged, in the
same birth, to two castes. This too is a double-edged problem, now put
to you, which you have to solve.'

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

26\. 'Both the quotations you have made, O king, are correct. But there
is good reason why the Tathâgata, should have been both Brahman and also
king.'

'Pray what, Nâgasena, can be that reason?'

'Because all evil qualities, not productive of merit, are in the
Tathâgata suppressed, abandoned, put away, dispelled, rooted out,
destroyed, come to an end, gone out, and ceased, therefore is it that
the Tathâgata is called a Brahman <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_80). A
Brahman <span id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_81), O king, means one who has
passed beyond hesitation, perplexity, and doubt. And it is because the
Tathâgata has done all this, that therefore also is he called a Brahman.
A Brahman, O king, means one who has escaped from every sort and class
of becoming, who is entirely set free from evil and from stain, who is
dependent on himself <span id="fr_84"></span>[3](#fn_82), and it is
because the Tathâgata is all of these things, that therefore also is he
called a Brahman. A Brahman, O king, means one who cultivates within
himself the highest and best of the excellent and supreme

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

conditions of heart <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_83). And it is
because the Tathâgata does this that therefore also is he called a
Brahman. A Brahman, O king, means one who carries on the line of the
tradition of the ancient instructions concerning the learning and the
teaching of sacred writ, concerning the acceptance of gifts, concerning
subjugation of the senses, self-control in conduct, and performance of
duty. And it is because the Tathâgata carries on the line of the
tradition of the ancient rules enjoined by the Conquerors <span
id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_84) regarding all these things, that therefore
also is he called a Brahman. \[**226**\] A Brahman, O king, means one
who enjoys the supreme bliss of the ecstatic meditation. And it is
because the Tathâgata does this, that therefore also is he called a
Brahman. A Brahman, O king, means one who knows the course and
revolution of births in all forms of existence. And it is because the
Tathâgata knows this, that therefore also is he called a Brahman. The
appellation "Brahman," O king, was not given to the Blessed One by his
mother, nor his father, not by his brother, nor his sister, not by his
friends, nor his relations, not by spiritual teachers of any sort, no,
not by the gods. It is by reason of their emancipation that this is the
name of the Buddhas, the Blessed Ones. From the moment when, under the
Tree of Wisdom, they had overthrown the armies of the Evil One, had
suppressed in themselves all evil qualities not productive of merit, and
had attained to the knowledge of the Omniscient

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ones, it was from the acquisition of this
insight, the appearance in them of this enlightenment, that this true
designation became applied to them,--the name of "Brahman." And that is
the reason why the Tathâgata is called a Brahman <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_85).'

27\. 'Then what is the reason why the Tathâgata is called a king?'

'A king means, O king, one who rules and guides the world, and the
Blessed One rules in righteousness over the ten thousand world systems,
he guides the whole world with its men and gods, its evil spirits and
its good ones <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_86), and its teachers,
whether Sama*n*as or Brahmans. That is the reason why the Tathâgata is
called a king. A king means, O king, one who, exalted above all ordinary
men, making those related to him rejoice, and those opposed to him
mourn; raises aloft the Sunshade of Sovranty, of pure and stainless
white, with its handle of firm hard wood <span
id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_87), and its many hundred ribs <span
id="fr_90"></span>[4](#fn_88),--the symbol of his mighty fame and glory.
And the Blessed One, O king, making the army of the Evil One, those
given over to false doctrine, mourn; filling the hearts of those, among
gods or men, devoted to sound doctrine, with joy; \[**227**\] raises
aloft over the ten thousand world systems the Sunshade of his Sovranty,
pure and stainless in the whiteness of emancipation,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

with its hundreds of ribs fashioned out of the highest wisdom, with its
handle firm and strong through long suffering,--the symbol of his mighty
fame and glory. That too is the reason why the Tathâgata is called a
king. A king is one who is held worthy of homage by the multitudes who
approach him, who come into his presence. And the Blessed One, O king,
is held worthy of homage by multitudes of beings, whether gods or men,
who approach him, who come into his presence. That too is the reason why
the Tathâgata is called a king. A king is one who, when pleased with a
strenuous servant, gladdens his heart by bestowing upon him, at his own
good pleasure, any costly gift the officer may choose <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_89). And the Blessed One, O king, when pleased
with any one who has been strenuous in word or deed or thought, gladdens
his heart by bestowing upon him, as a selected gift, the supreme
deliverance from all sorrow,--far beyond all material gifts <span
id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_90). That too is the reason why the Tathâgata
is called a king. A king is one who censures, fines <span
id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_91), or executes the man who transgresses

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the royal commands. And so, O king, the man who, in shamelessness or
discontent, transgresses the command of the Blessed One, as laid down in
the rules of his Order, that man, despised, disgraced and censured, is
expelled from the religion of the Conqueror. That too is the reason why
the Tathâgata is called a king. A king is one who in his turn
proclaiming laws and regulations according to the instructions laid down
in succession by the righteous kings of ancient times, and thus carrying
on his rule in righteousness, becomes beloved and dear to the people,
desired in the world, and by the force of his righteousness establishes
his dynasty long in the land. And the Blessed One, O king, proclaiming
in his turn laws and regulations according to the instructions laid down
in succession by the Buddhas of ancient times, and thus in righteousness
being teacher of the world,--he too is beloved and dear to both gods and
men, desired by them, and by the force of his righteousness he makes his
religion last long in the land. That too is the reason why the Tathâgata
is called a king.

'Thus, O king, so many are the reasons why the Tathâgata should be both
Brahman and also king, that the ablest of the brethren could scarcely in
an æon enumerate them all. Why then should I dilate any further? Accept
what I have said only in brief.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the Buddha belonging to two castes.\]

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

\[DILEMMA THE FORTY-NINTH.  
GIFTS TO THE BUDDHA.\]

\[**228**\] 28. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it has been said by the Blessed
One:

"Gifts chaunted for in sacred hymns  
  Are gifts I must not take.  
All those who see into the Truth  
  Do this their practice make.  
The Buddhas all refused to chaunt for wage;  
  This was their conduct still  
Whene'er the Truth prevailed  
  Through every age <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_92)."

'But on the other hand the Blessed One, when preaching the Truth, or
talking of it, was in the habit of beginning with the so-called
"preliminary discourse," in which giving has the first place, and
goodness only the second <span id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_93). So that
when gods and men heard this discourse of the Blessed One, the lord of
the whole world, they prepared and gave gifts, and the disciples partook
of the alms thus brought about. Now if, Nâgasena, it be true what the
Blessed One said, that he accepted no gifts earned by the chaunting of
sacred words, then it was wrong that the Blessed One put giving thus

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

into the foreground. But if he did rightly in so emphasizing the giving
of gifts, then it is not true that he accepted no gifts earned by the
utterance of sacred words. And why so? Because if any one worthy of
offerings should praise to the laity the good results to them of the
bestowal of alms, they, hearing that discourse, and pleased with it,
will proceed to give alms again and again. And then, whosoever enjoy
that gift, they are really enjoying that which has been earned by the
utterance of sacred words. This too is a double-edged problem, now put
to you, which you have to solve.'

29\. 'The stanza you quote, O king, was spoken by the Blessed One. And
yet he used to put the giving of alms into the forefront of his
discourse. But this is the custom of all the Tathâgatas--first by
discourse on almsgiving to make the hearts of hearers inclined towards
it, and then afterwards to urge them to righteousness. This is as when
men, O king, give first of all to young children things to play
with--\[**229**\] such as toy ploughs <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_94), tip-cat sticks <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_95), toy wind-mills <span
id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_96), measures made of leaves <span
id="fr_99"></span>[4](#fn_97), toy carts,

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

and bows and arrows--and afterwards appoint to each his separate task.
Or it is as when a physician first causes his patients to drink oil for
four or five days in order to strengthen them, and to soften their
bodies; and then afterwards administers a purge. The supporters of the
faith, O king, the lordly givers, have their hearts thus softened, made
tender, affected. Thereby do they cross over to the further shore of the
ocean of transmigration by the aid of the boat of their gifts, by the
support of the causeway of their gifts. And (the Buddha), by this
(method in his teaching), is not guilty of "intimation <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_98)."'

30\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, when you say "intimation" what are these
intimations?'

'There are two sorts, O king, of intimation--bodily and verbal. And
there is one bodily intimation which is wrong, and one that is not; and
there is one verbal intimation which is wrong, and one that is not.
Which is the bodily intimation which is wrong? Suppose any member of the
Order, in going his rounds for alms, should, when choosing a spot to
stand on, stand where there is no room <span
id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_99), that is a bodily intimation which is
wrong. The true members of the Order will not accept any alms so asked
for, and the individual who thus acts is despised, looked down upon, not
respected, held blameworthy, disregarded, not well thought of, in the
religion of the Noble Ones; he is reckoned as

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

one of those who have broken their (vows as to) means of livelihood. And
again, O king, suppose any member of the Order, in going his round for
alms, should stand where there is no room, and stretch out his neck like
a peacock on the gaze, in the hope: "Thus will the folk see me"--that
too is a bodily intimation which is wrong. True brethren will not accept
an alms so asked for, and he who thus acts is regarded like the last.
And again, O king, suppose any member of the Order should make a sign
with his jaw, or with his eyebrow, or with his finger--\[**230**\] that
too is a bodily intimation which is wrong. True brethren will not accept
an alms so asked for, and he who thus acts is regarded the same way.

31\. 'And which is the bodily intimation which is not wrong? If a
brother, on going his round for alms, be self-possessed, tranquil,
conscious of his acts; if he stand, wherever he may go, in the kind of
spot that is lawful; if he stand still where there are people desirous
to give, and where they are not so desirous, if he pass on <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_100) ;--that is a bodily intimation which is
not wrong. Of an alms so stood for the true members of the Order will
partake; and the individual who thus asks is, in the religion of the
Noble Ones, praised, thought highly of, esteemed, and reckoned among
those whose behaviour is without guile, whose mode of livelihood is
pure. For thus has it been said by the Blessed One, the god over all
gods:

"The truly wise beg not, for Arahats scorn to beg. <span id="page_35">p.
35</span>  
The good stand for their alms, thus only do they beg <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_101)."

32\. 'Which is the verbal intimation which is wrong? In case, O king, a
brother intimate his wish for a number of things, requisites of a member
of the Order--robes and bowls and bedding and medicine for the
sick--that is a verbal intimation which is wrong. Things so asked for
the true members of the Order (Ariyâ) will not accept; and in the
religion of the Noble Ones the individual who acts thus is despised,
looked down upon, not respected, held blameworthy, disregarded, not well
thought of--reckoned rather as one who has broken his (vows as to) means
of livelihood. And again, O king, in case a brother should, in the
hearing of others, speak thus: "I am in want of such and such a thing;"
and in consequence of that saying being heard by the others he should
then get that thing--that too is a verbal intimation which is wrong.
True members of the Order will not use a thing so obtained, and he who
acts thus is regarded like the last. And again, O king, in case a
brother, dilating in his talk <span id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_102),
give the people about him to understand: "Thus and thus should gifts be
given to the Bhikkhus,"

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

and in case they, on hearing that saying, should bring forth from their
store anything so referred to--that too is a verbal intimation which is
wrong. True members of the Order will not use a thing so obtained, and
he who acts thus is regarded like the last. \[**231**\] For when
Sâriputta, the Elder, O king, being ill in the night-time, after the sun
had set, and being questioned by Moggallâna, the Elder, as to what
medicine would do him good, broke silence; and through that breach of
silence obtained the medicine--did not Sâriputta then, saying to
himself: "This medicine has come through breach of silence; let not my
(adherence to the rules regarding) livelihood be broken," reject that
medicine, and use it not <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_103)? So that
too is a verbal intimation which is wrong. True members of the Order
will not use a thing so obtained, and he who acts thus is regarded like
the last.

33\. 'And what is the verbal intimation which is right? Suppose a
brother, O king, when there is necessity for it, should intimate among
families either related to him, or which had invited him to spend the
season of Was with him <span id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_104), that he is
in want of medicines--this is a verbal intimation which is not wrong.
True members of the Order will partake of things so asked for; and the
individual who acts thus is, in the religion of the Noble Ones, praised,
thought highly of, esteemed, reckoned among those whose mode of
livelihood is pure,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

approved of the Tathâgatas, the Arahats, the Supreme Buddhas. And the
alms that the Tathâgata, O king, refused to accept of Kasî-Bhâradvâ*g*a,
the Brahman <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_105), that was presented
for the sake of testing him with an intricate puzzle which he would have
to unwind <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_106), for the sake of pulling
him away, of convicting him of error, of making him acknowledge himself
in the wrong. Therefore was it that the Tathâgata refused that alms, and
would not partake thereof.'

34\. 'Nâgasena, was it always, whenever the Tathâgata was eating, that
the gods infused the Sap of Life from heaven into the contents of his
bowl, or was it only into those two dishes--the tender boar's flesh, and
the rice porridge boiled in milk--that they infused it <span
id="fr_109"></span>[3](#fn_107)?

'Whenever he was eating, O king, and into each morsel of food as he
picked it up--just as the royal cook takes the sauce and pours it over
each morsel in the dish while the king is partaking of it <span
id="fr_110"></span>[4](#fn_108). \[**232**\] And so at Vera*ñg*â, when
the Tathâgata was eating the cakes <span id="fr_111"></span>[5](#fn_109)
made of dried barley, the gods moistened each one with the Sap of Life,
as they placed it

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

near him <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_110). And thus was the body of
the Tathâgata fully refreshed.'

'Great indeed was the good fortune, Nâgasena, of those gods that they
were ever and always so zealous in their care for the body of the
Tathâgata! Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the problem as to the Buddha's mode of livelihood.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE FIFTIETH.  
ON THE BUDDHA'S AFTER-DOUBT <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_111).\]

35\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, your people say:

"The Tathâgata gradually, through millions of years, through æon after
æon <span id="fr_114"></span>[3](#fn_112), brought his omniscient wisdom
to perfection for the sake of the salvation of the great masses of the
people <span id="fr_115"></span>[4](#fn_113)."

'But on the other hand (they say) <span id="fr_116"></span>[5](#fn_114):

"Just after he had attained to omniscience his

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

heart inclined, not to the proclamation of the Truth, but to rest in
peace."

'So that, Nâgasena, just as if an archer, or an archer's pupil, who had
practised archery for many days with the object of fighting, should,
when the day of the great battle had come, draw back--just so did the
Tathâgata, who through countless ages had gradually matured his
omniscience for the sake of bringing safe to the shore (of salvation)
the great masses of the people, turn back, on the day when that
omniscience had been reached, from proclaiming the Truth. just as if a
wrestler who through many days had practised wrestling should, when the
day of the wrestling match <span id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_115) had
come, draw back--just so did the Tathâgata, who through countless ages
had gradually matured his omniscience for the sake of bringing safe to
the shore (of salvation) the great masses of the people, turn back, on
the day when that omniscience had been reached, from proclaiming the
Truth.

'Now was it from fear, Nâgasena, that the Tathâgata drew back, or was it
from inability to preach <span id="fr_118"></span>[2](#fn_116), or was
it from weakness, or was it because he had not, after all, attained to
omniscience? \[**233**\] What was the reason of this? Tell me, I pray,
the reason, that my doubts may be removed. For if for so long a time he
had perfected his wisdom with the object of saving the people, then the
statement that he hesitated to announce the Truth must be wrong. But if
that be true, then the other statement must be false. This too is a
double-edged problem,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

now put to you,--a problem profound, a knot hard to unravel,--which you
have to solve.'

36\. 'The statements in both the passages you quote, O king, are
correct. But that his heart inclined, not to the preaching of the truth,
but to inaction, was because he saw, on the one hand, how profound and
abstruse was the Doctrine <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_117), how
hard to grasp and understand, how subtle, how difficult to penetrate
into; and, on the other, how devoted beings are to the satisfaction of
their lusts, how firmly possessed by false notions of
Individualism <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_118). And so (he wavered)
at the thought: "Whom shall I teach? And how can I teach him?"--his mind
being directed to the idea of the powers of penetration which beings
possessed.

'Just, O king, as an able physician, when called in to a patient
suffering from a complication of diseases, might reflect: "What can be
the treatment, what the drug, by which this man's sickness can be
allayed?"--just so, O king, when the Tathâgata called to mind how
afflicted were the people by all the kinds of malady which arise from
sin, and how profound and abstruse was the Doctrine, how subtle, and how
difficult to grasp, then at the thought: "Whom can I teach? And how
shall I teach him?" did his heart incline rather to inaction than to
preaching--\[**234**\] his mind being directed to the powers of
penetration which beings possessed.

'And just, O king, as a king, of royal blood, an anointed monarch, when
he calls to mind the many

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

people who gain their livelihood in dependence on the king--the sentries
and the body-guard, the retinue of courtiers, the trading folk, the
soldiers and the royal messengers, the ministers and the nobles <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_119)--might be exercised at the thought: "How
now, in what way, shall I be able to conciliate them all?"--just so when
the Tathâgata called to mind how profound and abstruse was the Doctrine,
how subtle, and how difficult to grasp, and how devoted beings were to
the satisfaction of their lusts, how firmly possessed by false notions
of Individualism, then at the thought: "Whom shall I teach? And how
shall I teach him?" did his heart incline rather to inaction than to
preaching--his mind being directed to the powers of penetration which
beings possessed.

37\. 'And this, too, is an inherent necessity in all Tathâgatas that it
should be on the request of Brahmâ that they should proclaim the Dhamma.
And what is the reason for that? All men in those times, with the
ascetics and the monks, the wandering teachers and the Brahmans, were
worshippers of Brahmâ, reverers of Brahmâ, placed their reliance on
Brahmâ. And therefore, at the thought: "When so powerful and glorious,
so famous and renowned, so high and mighty a one has shown himself
inclined (to the Dhamma), then will the whole world of gods and men
become inclined to it, hold it fitting, have faith in it"--on this
ground, O king, the Tathâgatas preached the Dhamma when requested to do
so by Brahmâ. For just, O king, as what a sovran or a minister of state
shows homage to, or offers worship to, that will the rest of mankind, on

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

the ground of the homage of so powerful a personage, show homage to and
worship--just so, O king, when Brahmâ had paid homage to the Tathâgatas,
so would the whole world of gods and men. For the world, O king, is a
reverer of what is revered. And that is why Brahmâ asks of all
Tathâgatas that they should make known the Doctrine, and why, on so
being asked, they make it known <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_120).'

'Very good, Nâgasena! The puzzle has been well unravelled, most able has
been your exposition. That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the problem as to the Buddha's hesitation to make the
Doctrine known.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the Fifth Chapter.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[1:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_30) This is the opening
verse of the Muni Sutta (in the Sutta Nipâta I, 12). It is quoted again
below, p. 385 of the Pâli text. The second line is, in the original,
enigmatically terse, and runs simply, 'From a home dust arises.' This
Fausböll renders (in the S. B. E., vol. x, part ii, p. 33), 'From
household life arises defilement,' the word for dust (ra*g*o) being
often used figuratively in the sense of something that disfigures, is
out of place in the higher life. It is the distracting effect of
household cares that the recluse has to fear.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[2:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_31) This is a very famous
verse, found first in the Vinaya (*K*ullavagga VI, 1, 5), and quoted in
the Introduction to the *G*âtakas (Fausböll, vol. i, p. 93; compare vol.
iv., p. 354), translated in my 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' vol. i, p. 132.
Hîna*t*i-kumburê adds the context:

'Then shall they preach to him the Truth,  
The Truth dispelling every grief,  
Which Truth when here a man perceives,  
He's freed from stains, and dies away.'

<span id="fn_32"></span>[2:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_32) On these expressions
compare above, [p. 170](sbe3606.htm#page_170) (p. 113 of the text).

<span id="fn_33"></span>[3:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_33) The words in brackets
are added from Hîna*t*i-kumburê

<span id="fn_34"></span>[3:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_34) That is, the members of
the Order.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[4:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_35) This verse has not yet
been traced. The first half of it occurs in a different connection at
Dhammapada, verse 168, which I have rendered (at 'Buddhism,' p. 65),
'Rise up and loiter not!' without any reference at all to food. This was
in accordance with the view taken of the passage, both by Prof.
Fausböll, who renders it (p. 31 of his edition of the Pâli), 'Surgat, ne
sit socors,' and by Prof. Max Müller, who renders it (S. B. E, vol. x,
part i, p. 47), 'Rouse thyself, do not be idle!' And I still think
(especially noting such passages as Dhammapada, verses 231, 232, and the
verse quoted in the Commentary, p. 126 of Fausböll, from *G*âtaka IV,
496, &c.) that this was the original meaning in that connection. But
here the words must clearly be taken as referring to food, and it is
very remarkable that the commentator on the Dhammapada (see p. 335 of
Fausböll's edition) takes them in that sense also even in the other
connection. It is a striking instance of the way in which commentators
impart a purely technical sense into a general ethical precept.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[4:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_36) From the Mahâ Udâyi
Sutta (Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya, No. 77

<span id="fn_37"></span>[5:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_37) See above, p. 164 (p.
109 of the Pâli text). These passages show that Dr. Morris's note in the
'Journal of the Pâli Text Society.' 1885, requires modification. See
also below, IV, 8, 88, and the passages quoted by him in the 'Journal'
for 1886.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[6:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_38) Sâma*ññ*a.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[6:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_39) Pa*t*isambhidâ.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[6:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_40) Samâpatti.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[6:4](sbe3603.htm#fr_41) Abhi*ññ*â.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[6:5](sbe3603.htm#fr_42) This story will be
found in the two Suka *G*âtakas (Nos. 429 and 430 in Fausböll). I had
not succeeded in tracing it when the list at vol. i, p. xxvi, was drawn
up; it should therefore be added there.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[6:6](sbe3603.htm#fr_43) Sayambhunâ, 'whose
knowledge is not derived from anyone else.' (Sayambhu-*ñ*âna-wû says
Hîna*t*i-kumburê.) Burnouf's proposition ('Lotus,' p. 336) to take it in
the sense of 'who has no other substratum or raison d'être than himself'
cannot be accepted, in spite of Childers's approbation.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[7:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_44) Nigha*m*sanâ. Compare
the use of nigha*m*sati at *K*ullavagga V, 27, 2.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[7:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_45) This is much more than
a mere injunction not to gild refined gold. It comes very near to the
enunciation of the dangerous doctrine that the holy man is above the
law, and that nothing he does can be wrong. It is curious how frequently
one finds this proposition cropping up in the most unexpected places,
and the history of religious belief is full of instances of its
pernicious effect on the most promising movements. When one considers
the great influence of our author's work, it becomes especially
interesting to note how the doctrine has never, among the orthodox
Buddhists, who read the Pâli Scriptures, been extended from the Buddha
himself to his followers, and from moderation in food to matters of more
vital import in the life of a church. And this is the more remarkable as
the Tantra works of the corrupt Buddhism of Nepal and Tibet show how
fatal has been the result of the doctrine among those Buddhists who had
lost the guiding support of the older Scriptures.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[8:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_46) Yâ*k*ayogo. See Sutta
Nipâta III, 5, 1; A<u>n</u>guttara Nikâya III, 79, 2; and below, p. 225
(of the Pâli text).

<span id="fn_47"></span>[8:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_47) This passage has not
yet been traced in the Pi*t*akas, and the context is therefore unknown.
But the word Brahman must of course be applied to the Buddha here in the
sense, not of one belonging to the Brahman caste, but of Arahat.
Hîna*t*i-kumburê adds, as a gloss, bâhita-pâpa-brâhma*n*ayek, 'brahman
because he has suppressed evil in himself.' On this explanation see my
note to the forty-eighth dilemma, which is devoted to the discussion of
this difficulty.

On the Buddha as the Great Physician see Sutta Nipâta III, 7, 13;
Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya I, 429; Suma<u>n</u>gala Vilâsinî, 67, 255; and
Milinda, pp. 110, 169 (of the Pâli text).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[8:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_48) A<u>n</u>guttara Nikâya
I, 14, 4. The reading adopted by our author agrees with that of the
Si*m*halese MSS. put by Dr. Morris into the text.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[9:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_49) Here, as always, they
are repeated in full in the text.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[9:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_50) This passage is very
ambiguous. Hîna*t*i-kumburê renders it: 'with reference to what was
found in himself, and besides that (with reference) to the disciples who
had learnt &c. . . . . tradition.' He translates agamâna*m* and the two
following words, as relative compounds, by agama-dhâri-wû, &c., and in
this I have followed him. But he supplies an 'and' after the last, thus
taking them as accusatives in dependence on sandhâya, and that cannot be
right. It seems forced to separate bâhirâna*m* so much from the other
genitives with which it stands in the text, and yet it is so impossible
to make sense of the passage in any other way, that one would like to
know the readings of all the MSS.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[9:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_51) '*K*akkhupâla and
others' adds Hîna*t*i-kumburê. (For the story of *K*akkhupâla, see the
commentary on the Dhammapada, verse 1.)

<span id="fn_52"></span>[10:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_52) See, for other
instances of such aspirations, above, vol. i, p. 5.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[10:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_53) Ti*n*a-pupphaka-roga.
There is a flower called ti*n*a-puppha, and this may be a skin disease
named after it. But pupphaka at *G*âtaka III, 541, means blood, and the
disease may <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> be so called because the
blood was turned by it to the colour of grass (ti*n*a). Hîna*t*i-kumburê
(who gives these legends of the previous births of Bakkula at much
greater length, adding others from the time of the Buddhas Padumuttara
and Kassapa, and giving the story also of his present birth) says that
the disease arose from contact with wind which had been poisoned through
blowing over a Upas tree (p. 296 of the Si*m*halese version). But he
does not explain the name of the disease, which occurs only here.

In his present birth Bakkula is said to have been born at Kosâmbî, in a
wealthy family. His mother, understanding that to bathe a new-born child
in the Jumna would ensure him a long life, took him down to the river.
Whilst he was there being bathed, a huge fish swallowed him. But the
fish, caught at Benares, was sold to a wealthy but childless man there,
and on being cut open, the babe was found in it unhurt.

The mother hearing the news of this marvel, went in great state and with
haste to Benares and claimed the child. Thereupon an interesting lawsuit
arose, and the king of Benares, thinking it unjust to deprive the
purchaser of a fish of anything inside it, and also unjust to deprive a
mother of her child, decided that the child belonged equally to both. So
he became the heir of both families, and was therefore called Bak-kula,
'the two-family-one' (Bak = Ba = Dvâ). On the real derivation of
Bakkula, see Dr. Morris in the 'Journal of the Pâli Text Society,' 1886,
pp. 94-99. We need not quarrel with a false etymology which shows us so
clearly the origin of the legend. Then Bakkula enjoys great prosperity
in the orthodox three palaces, and at eighty years of age, being still
in vigorous health, enters the Order.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[12:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_54) The Dhutangas,
enumerated below, p. 351 (of the Pâli text).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[12:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_55) Sa*m*yutta Nikâya
XLIV, 103.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[12:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_56) This piece of
casuistry is not so entirely at variance with the context of the second
passage (quoted from the A<u>n</u>guttara I, 14) as would seem at first
sight. The answer practically amounts to this, that though each of many
disciples may be superior to the Buddha in certain bodily qualities, or
even in the special vows known as Dhutangas, yet he surpasses them in
the 'weightier matters of the law.' It is true that one of the instances
given, that of the *th*âna-ka<u>n</u>kamikâ, is not included in the list
of Dhutangas, and in the long enumeration in the A<u>n</u>guttara of
those of the disciples who were 'chief' in any way, 'weightier matters
of the law' are not overlooked. But 'meditation on foot' is of the same
nature as the acknowledged Dhutangas, and none of the five special
points in which Nâgasena places especially the superiority of the Buddha
(uprightness, &c.), is mentioned in the A<u>n</u>guttara. Nevertheless
the logical reply to the problem proposed would have been that in the
A<u>n</u>guttara the superiority spoken of is over other disciples, and
not over the Buddha.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[13:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_57) Supreme, that is, in
comparison with the Pakkeka Buddhas, 'Buddhas for themselves alone:'
whereas the 'altogether Buddha' can not only see the truth for himself,
but also persuade others of it.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[13:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_59) These two quotations
are from the Sa*m*yutta Nikâya XXI, 58 and X, 2, 65, says Mr. Trenckner,
but I cannot trace them in M. Feer's edition.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[14:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_60) 'The wisdom arising
from the perception of the Four Noble Truths' is Hîna*t*i-kumburê's
gloss.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[14:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_61) The wondrous
Gem-treasure of the king of kings (theVe*l*uriya, etymologically the
same as beryl, but probably meaning cat's-eye) is supposed, like the
other mystic treasures, to come to him of its own accord, on his
becoming sovran overlord. See my 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 256 (S. B. E.,
vol. xi).

<span id="fn_61"></span>[15:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_62) Nîharati. Âvara*n*aya
kara ganneya says Hîna*t*i-kumburê.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[16:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_63) This passage has not
yet been traced in the Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[16:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_64) The identical words
are not found, but they are a summary of the Lomasa Kassapa *G*âtaka
(No. 433 in Prof. Fausböll's edition, and see especially vol. iii, p.
517, line 25).

<span id="fn_64"></span>[16:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_65) Vâ*g*apeyya, which
Professor Fausböll (loc. cit., p. 518) spells vâ*k*apeyya, and a Burmese
MS. he quotes spells vâdhapeyya (characteristically enough,--the scribe
not understanding the word, and thinking it must have been derived from
vadha, makes what he thinks must be a correction). The Sanskrit form of
the word is vâ*k*apêya, the drink or draught of battle or victory, name
of that one of the seven Soma sacrifices which a king offered when
desirous of attaining to sovran overlordship. In the allied legend <span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> of king Lomapâda's sacrifice (Râmâya*n*a I, 8,
11 foll.) it is the a*s*va-medha, the horse sacrifice, which is offered.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[18:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_66) This verse is found
not only in the 433rd *G*âtaka (loc. cit.), but also in the Sayha
*G*âtaka, No. 310, a shorter recension of the same story.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[18:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_67) Hîna*t*i-kumburê here
summarises the whole story.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[18:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_68) *K*andanikâ and
o*l*igalla. See A<u>n</u>guttara III, 57, 1; Ma*ggh*ima I, 11, 448;
Thera Gâthâ 567; *K*ullavagga V, 17, 1. Hîna*t*i-kumburê spells the
second word with an ordinary l."

<span id="fn_68"></span>[18:4](sbe3603.htm#fr_69) The text repeats the
last paragraph.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[19:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_70) It is very instructive
to notice the way in which our author looks upon the historical Buddha
and the various heroes of the *G*âtaka Stories as so absolutely
identical that he feels obliged to defend the conduct of all the 'types'
as earnestly as he would that of the Buddha himself. There is no such
conception in the Pi*t*akas, and the whole tone of our author's argument
reveals the lateness of his date as compared with the Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[20:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_71) From the *Kh*addanta
*G*âtaka, No. 514 (Fausböll, vol. v, p. 49); with which compare the
Kâsâva *G*âtaka, No. 221 (vol. ii, p. 196).

<span id="fn_71"></span>[20:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_72) 'This has not been
found in these words, but Mr. Trenckner refers to Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya, No.
81. Compare also *G*âtaka I, 43.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[22:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_73) Niggu*nd*i, which
Hîna*t*i-kumburê merely repeats. See *G*âtaka III, 348; IV, 456;
Dhammapada Commentary, p. 209; A<u>n</u>guttara IV, 199; and Dr.
Morris's restoration of Dîpava*m*sa XII, 32, in the Introduction to vol.
ii of his A<u>n</u>guttara.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[23:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_75) Both these quotations
are from the Ma*ggh*ima, Nikâya, No. 31 (the Gha*t*îkâra Suttanta).

<span id="fn_74"></span>[23:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_76) Ussanna-kusala-mûla.
See *G*âtaka I, 145.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[24:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_77)
Aneka-sata-sahassa-vâta-sampahârena. Perhaps 'by the battle (raging
round it) of innumerable gales,' the onslaught of the winds being not
against it, but against one another.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[24:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_78) Literally 'from
receiving any self-created requisite.'

<span id="fn_77"></span>[25:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_79) Vibhûsa*m* katvâ.
Daksha-kriyâ ko*t*a says Hîna*t*i-kumburê. The expression has not been
found elsewhere.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[25:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_80) This passage has
already been quoted above (IV, 4, 55). It has not been traced in the
Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[25:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_81) These words from the
Sela Sutta (Sutta Nipâta III, 7, 7) have also been already discussed
above (IV, 3, 33, 34).

<span id="fn_80"></span>[26:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_82) This argument is based
on the false etymology that brâhma*n*o = bâhita-pâpo ('he in whom evil
is suppressed'), adopted by Hîna*t*i-kumburê above at IV, 4, 55.
Buddhaghosa, in the Suma<u>n</u>gala, p. 244, has another derivation:
Brahma*m* a*n*atîti brâhma*n*o. As Brahmam has not been found elsewhere
except as the accusative of Brahmâ the name of the god, and as a*n*ati
only occurs in this passage, it might be contended that Buddhaghosa
means an 'invoker of Brahmâ.' But I think he is correct in his
etymology, and intends to interpret the word Brahman as 'intoner of
prayer.'

<span id="fn_81"></span>[26:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_83) The Arahat-Brahman
says Hîna*t*i-kumburê.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[26:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_84) Asahâyo, literally
'has no friend.' I am not sure that I have rightly understood this term,
which I have not found elsewhere applied to the Arahat. Hîna*t*i-kumburê
merely repeats the word.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[27:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_85) Dibba-vihâro; rendered
divya-vihara*n*a by Hîna*t*i-kumburê. It cannot mean here 'state of
being a deva in the kamaloka' as rendered by Childers.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[27:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_86) That is, of course,
the previous Buddhas.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[28:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_87) This is a striking
instance of argument in a circle. The word Brahman is first interpreted
in its technical Buddhist sense of Arahat, and then the Buddha, as
Arahat, is called a Brahman. The only paragraph based on the real
transition of meaning in the term is that referring to the holding up of
tradition.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[28:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_88) Samâraka*m*
sabrahmaka*m*, 'with its Mâras and Brahmas.'

<span id="fn_87"></span>[28:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_89) Ara*t*u, says
Hîna*t*i-kumburê; that is wood from the heart of the tree.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[28:4](sbe3603.htm#fr_90) Salâkâ, which
Hîna*t*i-kumburê repeats, adding 'of the highest wisdom.'

<span id="fn_89"></span>[29:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_91) Varita*m* vara*m*. 'A
gift appropriate to the service approved of' says Hîna*t*i-kumburê. And
the word is not in Childers. But compare the use of vara*m* varati at
*G*âtaka III, 493.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[29:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_92) Asesa-kâma-varena, for
which Hîna*t*i-kumburê has asesa-kâmâva*k*araye*m*. Mr. Trenckner adds a
*k*a, which, as being entirely superfluous, he puts in brackets. There
can be but little doubt that the corrected reading is
asesa-kâmâva*k*arena, and that the literal rendering would be I gladdens
him by that which has left in it nothing connected with (life in) the
world of sense; to wit, deliverance from all sorrow' (that is
deliverance from sa*m*sara).

Parimutti, which I have not found in the Pi*t*akas, and which is not in
Childers, occurs above (p. 112 of the Pâli text) in the same connection.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[29:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_93) *G*âpeti. See my notes
above on vol. i, p. 2 40, and below on VII, 5, 10. The Si*m*halese has
here dhana-dânaya karanneya, where dânaya must be *g*âni.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[31:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_94) This stanza occurs no
less than five times in those portions of the Pi*t*akas already
published. See Sutta Nipâta I, 4, 6 and III, 4, 2 7, and Sa*m*yutta
Nikâya VII, 1, 8, VII, 1, 9, and VII, 2, 1. The rhythm of the Pâli is
strikingly beautiful, and is quite spoilt in the rendering.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[31:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_95) See, for instance,
Dîgha Nikâya V, 28; Mahâvagga I, 7, 5 and 10; V, X, 9; VI, 26, 8; and
*K*ullavagga VI, 4, 5. As there is a doubt about the spelling, Fausböll
at *G*âtaka I, 8, and I, 30, and our MSS. of the Dîgha reading
ânupubbi-kathâ, whereas Childers and Oldenberg read ânupubbi-kathâ, it
is perhaps worth mentioning that the Si*m*halese has the short a.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[32:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_96) All these articles are
mentioned in the Dîgha Nikâya I, r, 14. Buddhaghosa explains the first
word (va<u>n</u>kaka*m*) as toy ploughs. Hoops the Indian children do
not have, probably for want of suitable roads.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[32:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_97) Gha*t*ika*m*, which
is, according to Buddhaghosa, a game played by striking a short stick
with a long one; and according to Hîna*t*i-kumburê the game called in
Si*m*halese kalli. Clough has this word, but simply explains it as a
game so called.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[32:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_98) *K*ingulaka*m*, which
is, according to Buddhaghosa, a little wheel made of cocoa-nut leaves,
which is set turning by the impact of the wind. Hîna*t*i-kumburê says
'an œmbaruwa (twirling thing) made of cocoa-nut leaves.'

<span id="fn_97"></span>[32:4](sbe3603.htm#fr_99) Pattâ*lh*aka*m*.
Buddhaghosa and the Si*m*halese agree in rendering this 'toy measures.'

<span id="fn_98"></span>[33:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_100) Vi*ññ*atti. It is a
breach of rules for a member of the Order to ask, in words, for an alms.
For a Buddha to lay stress, in a discourse, on the advantages of
almsgiving does not, Nâgasena means, make him guilty of this offence.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[33:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_101) And thus cause an
obstruction, and attract attention to the fact that he is there. I do
not know of any such prohibition in the Vinaya.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[34:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_102) The author has
*K*ullavagga VIII, 5, 2 in his mind, where the signs (of their being
willing or not) are specified.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[35:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_103) From *G*âtaka III,
354. The words are there ascribed, not to the Buddha but to the Bodisat
in the story.

The word translated Arahats is Ariyâ, which is taken here, as elsewhere,
as a dissyllable, and pronounced Aryâ. It is the same as our word
Aryans, and is rendered above Noble Ones. I do not think that it is
applied exclusively to Arahats.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[35:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_104) Va*k*î-vipphârena.
The expression has not been found elsewhere, nor is it in Childers. The
Si*m*halese has: 'dilating on the words obtaining in this religion.' I
presume it means, that not content with praising almsgiving in general,
he particularises. Compare Mahâvagga VI, 37.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[36:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_105) 'This story has not
yet been traced; but the Si*m*halese (p. 317) gives it at great length.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[36:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_106) *Ñ*âti-pavâritesu
kulesu. Compare Pâ*k*ittiya 39 ('Vinaya Texts,' vol. i, p. 39).

<span id="fn_105"></span>[37:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_107) See Sutta Nipâta I,
4. The Si*m*halese always has a long î in Kasî.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[37:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_108) Âye*th*ana. Compare
the use of all these terms above, II, 1, 3 (vol. i, p. 46).

<span id="fn_107"></span>[37:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_109) There is nothing
about this infusion of the Sap of Life (dibba*m* oga*m*) in the
published texts of the Pi*t*akas. But it is mentioned in the account in
the *G*âtaka Commentary of the second meal referred to ('Buddhist Birth
Stories,' p. 92). The other is, of course, the Buddha's last meal, 'Book
of the Great Decease,' IV, 14-23 (in my 'Buddhist Suttas,' pp. V-73).

<span id="fn_108"></span>[37:4](sbe3603.htm#fr_110) Hîna*t*i-kumburê
gives here a great deal of additional matter (pp. 314-324).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[37:5](sbe3603.htm#fr_111) Pulake; which the
Si*m*halese renders peti.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[38:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_112) I am not sure what
meal is here referred to. The Buddha is twice said to have taken meals
at Vera*ñg*â (in the Sutta Vibha<u>n</u>ga, pp. 6, 11; Pârâ*g*ika I, 2
and I, 4). In neither case is there any mention of these cakes. But the
former of the two may be the one referred to, as it took place in a time
of drought.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[38:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_113) Compare my manual
'Buddhism,' p. 41.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[38:3](sbe3603.htm#fr_114) Literally 'through
four Asa<u>n</u>kheyyas and a lak of Kappas.'

<span id="fn_113"></span>[38:4](sbe3603.htm#fr_115) This passage has not
yet been traced in the Pi*t*akas, and the word samuddharanâ (rendered
'salvation') does not occur elsewhere in published texts. It means
literally 'bringing safe to shore.' Compare samuddha*t*a at
Saddhammopâyana 143 in the 'Journal of the Pâli Text Society' for 1887,
p. 44.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[38:5](sbe3603.htm#fr_116) See 'Vinaya Texts,'
vol. i, p. 85, and Sa*m*yutta Nikâya VI, i. The words are very slightly
different.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[39:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_117) Compare
Suma<u>n</u>gala Vilâsinî, p. 85.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[39:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_118) Apâka*t*atâya, not
found elsewhere. I follow the Si*m*halese, which has bœna kiya*nt*a no
dœnena bœwin.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[40:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_119) 'Of Arahatship' is
Hîna*t*i-kumburê's gloss.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[40:2](sbe3603.htm#fr_120) Sakkâya-di*tth*i.
The belief in being, instead of in becoming; the belief in the
permanence of individuality. See my 'Hibbert Lectures,' pp. 211-214.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[41:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_121) On this list see
below, IV, 6, 11.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[42:1](sbe3603.htm#fr_122) Hîna*t*i-kumburê
here gives a page of description--not found in the Pâli--of the episode
of Brahmâ's request to the Buddha. The oldest account of this episode
has been already translated in vol. xiii of the 'Sacred Books of the
East,' in 'Vinaya Texts,' part i, pp. 84-88.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](sbe3604)
