[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3604) 
[Next](sbe3606) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

# BOOK IV. CHAPTER 7.

\[DILEMMA THE SIXTY-FIRST.  
THE OBSTACLES.\]

1\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, the Blessed One said:

"Live, O brethren, devoted to and taking delight in that which has no
Papa*ñk*as (none of those states of mind which delay or obstruct a man
in his spiritual growth <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_230))."

'What is that which has no Papa*ñk*as?'

'The fruit of Conversion has no Papa*ñk*as, O king, the fruit of that
stage of the Path in which those live who will be only once, or not all
reborn, the fruit of Arahatship has no Papa*ñk*as.'

'But if that be so, Nâgasena, \[**263**\] then why do the brethren
concern themselves with recitation of, with asking questions about the
discourses, and the pieces in mixed prose and verse, and the
expositions, and the poems, and the outbursts of emotion, and the
passages beginning "Thus he said," and the birth-stories, and the tales
of wonder, and the extended treatises <span
id="fr_233"></span>[2](#fn_231)? Why do they trouble themselves about
new buildings <span id="fr_234"></span>[3](#fn_232) about gifts and
offerings to the order?'

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

2\. 'They who do all these things, O king, are working towards
attainment of freedom from the Papa*ñk*as, (that is of Arahatship <span
id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_233)). For whereas, O king, all those of the
brethren who are pure by nature, those upon whose hearts an impression
has been left by good deeds done in a former birth <span
id="fr_236"></span>[2](#fn_234), can (get rid of the Papa*ñk*as, can)
become Arahats, in a moment--those on the other hand whose minds are
much darkened by evil <span id="fr_237"></span>[3](#fn_235) can only
become Arahats by such means as these.

3\. 'Just, O king, as while one man who has sown a field and got the
seed to grow can, by the exertion of his own power, and without any
rampart or fence, reap the crop--whereas another man when he has got the
seed to grow must go into the woods, and cut down sticks and branches
and make a fence of them, and thus only reap the crop--in the same way
those who are pure by nature, upon whose hearts an impression has been
left by good deeds done in a former birth, can, in a moment, become
Arahats, like the man who gathers the crop without a fence. But those,
on the other hand, whose minds are darkened by the evil they have done
can only become Arahats by such means as these--like the man who can
only reap his crop if he builds the fence.

4\. 'Or just, O king, as there might be a bunch of fruits on the summit
of a lofty mango tree. Then

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

whoever possesses the power of Iddhi could take those fruits <span
id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_236), but whoever had not, he would have
first to cut sticks and creepers and construct a ladder, and by its
means climb up the tree and so get at the fruit. In the same way those
who are by nature pure, and upon whose hearts an impression has been
left by good deeds done in a former birth, may attain, in a moment, to
Arahatship, like the man getting the fruit by the power of Iddhi. But
those, on the other hand, whose minds are darkened by the evil they have
done can only become Arahats by such means as these, like the man who
only gets the fruit by means of the ladder he has made.

5\. \[**264**\] 'Or just, O king, as while one man who is clever in
business will go alone to his lord and conclude any business he has to
do, another man, rich though he may be, must by his riches bring others
to his service, and by their help get the business done--and it is for
the business' sake that he has to seek after them. In the same way those
who are by nature pure, upon whose hearts an impression has been left by
good deeds done in a former birth, may reach, in a moment, to the
attainment of the Six Transcendent Qualities <span
id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_237), like the man who does the business
alone by himself Whereas those brethren whose minds are darkened by the
evil they have done can only by such means as these realise the gains of
renunciation, like the man who through others' help brings his business
to the desired end.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

6\. 'For recitation is of great good, O king, and asking questions, and
superintending building work, and seeing to gifts and offerings is of
great good--each of them to one or other of the spiritual objects which
the brethren seek to obtain. just, O king, as there might be some one of
the ministers or soldiers or messengers or sentries or body-guards or
attendants who was especially serviceable and useful to the king, but
when he had any business given him to do they would all help him--just
so are all these things of assistance when those objects have to be
attained. When all men, O king, shall have become by nature pure, then
will there be nothing left for a teacher <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_238) to accomplish. But so long as there is
still need of discipleship <span id="fr_241"></span>[2](#fn_239), so
long will even such a man, O king, as the Elder Sâriputta himself
(though he had attained to the summit of wisdom by reason of his having
been, through countless ages, deeply rooted in merit), yet find it
impossible, without discipleship, to attain to Arahatship <span
id="fr_242"></span>[3](#fn_240). Therefore is it, O king, that hearing
(the Scriptures) is of use, and recitation of them, and asking questions
about them. And therefore is it that those also who are addicted to

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

these things, becoming free from the obstacles thereto, attain to
Arahatship <span id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_241).'

'Right well have you made me understand this puzzle, Nâgasena. That is
so, and I accept it as you say.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the obstacles.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE SIXTY-SECOND.  
THE LAY ARAHAT.\]

7\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, your people say:

"Whosoever has attained, as a layman, to Arahatship, one of two
conditions are possible to him, and no other--either that very day he
enters the Order, or he dies away, for beyond that day he cannot
last <span id="fr_244"></span>[2](#fn_242)."

\[**265**\] 'Now if, Nâgasena, he could not, on that day, procure a
teacher or preceptor, or a bowl and set of robes <span
id="fr_245"></span>[3](#fn_243), would he then, being an Arahat, admit
himself, or would he live over the day, or would some other Arahat
suddenly appear by the power of Iddhi and admit him, or would he die
away?'

'He could not, O king, because he is an Arahat, admit himself. For any
one admitting himself to

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the Order is guilty of theft <span id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_244). And
he could not last beyond that day. Whether another Arahat should happen,
or not, to arrive, on that very day would he die away.'

'Then, Nâgasena, by whatever means attained, the holy condition of
Arahatship is thereby also lost, for destruction of life is involved in
it.'

8\. 'It is the condition of laymanship which is at fault, O king. In
that faulty condition, and by reason of the weakness of the condition
itself, the layman who, as such, has attained to Arahatship must either,
that very day, enter the Order or die away. That is not the fault of
Arahatship, O king. It is laymanship that is at fault, through not being
strong enough.

'Just, O king, as food, that guards the growth and protects the life of
all beings, will, through indigestion, take away the life of one whose
stomach is unequal to it, whose internal fire is low and weak--just so
if a layman attains Arahatship when in that condition unequal to it,
then by reason of the weakness of the condition he must, that very day,
either enter the Order or die away.

'Or just, O king, as a tiny blade of grass when a heavy rock is placed
upon it will, through its weakness, break off and give way--just so when
a layman attains Arahatship, then, unable to support Arahatship in that
condition, he must, that very day, either enter the Order or die away.

'Or just, O king, as a poor weak fellow of low birth and little ability,
if he came into possession of

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

a great and mighty kingdom, would be unable to support the dignity of
it <span id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_245)--just so if a layman attains to
Arahatship, then is he unable, in that condition, to support it. \[266\]
And that is the reason why he must, on that very day, either enter the
Order or die away.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the lay Arahat.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA TEE SIXTY-THIRD.  
THE FAULTS OF THE ARAHAT.\]

9\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, can an Arahat be thoughtless <span
id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_246)?'

'The Arahats, O king, have put thoughtlessness far from them. They are
never inadvertent.'

'But can an Arahat be guilty of an offence?'

'Yes, O king.'

'In what respect?'

'In the construction of his cell <span id="fr_249"></span>[3](#fn_247),
or in his intercourse (with the other sex) <span
id="fr_250"></span>[4](#fn_248), or in imagining the wrong time (for the
midday meal) to be the right

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

time <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_249), or when he has been invited
(to a meal <span id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_250)) forgetting the
invitation, or in taking to be "left over <span
id="fr_253"></span>[3](#fn_251)" food which has not been left over.'

'But, venerable Nâgasena, your people say:

"Those who commit offences do so from one of two reasons, either out of
carelessness or out of ignorance <span id="fr_254"></span>[4](#fn_252)."

'Now, is the Arahat careless that he commits offences?'

'No, O king.'

'Then if the Arahat commits offences, and yet is not careless, he must
be capable of thoughtlessness.'

'He is not capable of thoughtlessness, and yet the Arahat may be guilty
of offences.'

'Convince me then by a reason. What is the reason of this?'

10\. 'There are two kinds of sins, O king--those which are a breach of
the ordinary moral law, and those which are a breach of the Rules (of
the Order). And what is a breach of the ordinary moral law? The ten
modes of evil action <span id="fr_255"></span>[5](#fn_253) (killing,
theft,

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

unchastity, lying, slander, harsh language, frivolous talk,
covetousness, malice, and false doctrine). These things are against the
moral law. And what is a breach of the Rules? Whatever is held in the
world as unfitting and improper for Samanas, but is not wrong for
laymen--things concerning which the Blessed One laid down rules for his
disciples, not to be transgressed by them their lives long. Eating after
sunturn, O king, is not wrong to those in the world, but is wrong to
those in the religion (the Order) of the Conquerors. Doing injury to
trees and shrubs is no offence in the eyes of the world, but it is wrong
in the religion. The habit of sporting in the water is no offence to a
layman, but it is wrong in the religion. And many other things of a
similar kind, O king, are right in the world, but wrong in the religion
of the Conquerors. This is what I mean by a breach of the Rules. Now the
Arahat (he in whom the Great Evils are destroyed) is incapable of
sinning against whatever is moral law, but he may unawares be guilty of
an offence against the rules of the Order. \[**267**\] It is not within
the province of every Arahat to know everything, nor indeed in his
power. He may be ignorant of the personal or family name of some woman
or some man. He may be ignorant of some road over the earth. But every
Arahat would know about emancipation, and the Arahat gifted with the six
modes of transcendental knowledge <span id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_254)
would know what lies within their scope, and an omniscient Tathâgata, O
king, would know all things.'

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the faults of the Arahat.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE SIXTY-FOURTH.  
WHAT IS, BUT NOT IN THE WORLD.

11\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, there are to be seen in the world Buddhas, and
Pa*kk*eka-Buddhas, and disciples of the Tathâgatas, and sovran
overlords, and kings over one country, and gods and men;--we find rich
and poor, happy and miserable;--we find men who have become women, and
women who have become men--there are good deeds and evil, and beings
experiencing the result of their virtue or their vice;--we find
creatures born from eggs, and in the water, and in sediment, or
springing into life by the mere apparitional birth; creatures without
feet, bipeds and quadrupeds, and creatures with many feet;--we find
Yakkhas and Rakkhasas, and Kumbha*nd*as, and Asuras, and Dânavas, and
Gandhabbas, and Petas and Pisâ*k*as, and Kinnaras, and Mahoragas, and
Nâgas and Supa*nn*as <span id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_255), and
magicians and sorcerers;--there are elephants, and horses, and cattle,
and buffaloes, and camels, and asses, and goats, and sheep, and deer,
and swine, and lions, and tigers, and leopards, and bears, and wolves,
and hyenas, and dogs, and jackals, and many kinds of birds;--there is
gold and silver, and the pearl, and

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

the diamond, and the chauk, and rock, and coral, and the ruby, and the
Masâra stone, and the cat's-eye, and crystal, and quartz, and iron
ore <span id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_256), and copper, and brass <span
id="fr_259"></span>[2](#fn_257), and bronze;--there is flax, and silk,
and cotton, and hemp <span id="fr_260"></span>[3](#fn_258), and
wool;--there is rice, and paddy, and barley, and millet, and kudrûsa
grain, and beans <span id="fr_261"></span>[4](#fn_259), and wheat, and
oilseed, and vetches;--there are perfumes prepared from roots, and sap,
and pith, and bark, and \[268\] leaves, and flowers, and fruit, and of
all other sorts;--we find grass, and creepers, and shrubs, and trees,
and medicinal herbs, and forests, and rivers, and mountains, and seas,
and fish, and tortoises,--all is in the world. Tell me, Sir, what there
is, then, which is not in the world.'

12\. 'There are three things, O king, which you cannot find in the
world. And what are the three? That which, whether conscious or
unconscious, is not subject to decay and death--that you will not find.
That quality of anything, (organic or inorganic), which is not
impermanent--that you will not find. And in the highest sense there is
no such thing as being possessed of being <span
id="fr_262"></span>[5](#fn_260).'

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the puzzle as to what is not in the world.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE SIXTY-FIFTH.  
THINGS WITHOUT A CAUSE.\]

13\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, there are found beings in the world who have
come into existence through Karma, and others who are the result of a
cause, and others produced by the seasons <span
id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_261). Tell me--is there any thing that does
not fall under any one of these three heads?'

' There are two such things, O king. And what are the two? Space, O
king, and Nirvâ*n*a.'

'Now do not spoil the word of the Conquerors, Nâgasena, nor answer a
question without knowing what you say!'

'What, pray, is it I have said, O king, that you should address me
thus?'

'Venerable Nâgasena, that is right what you said in respect of space.
But with hundreds of reasons

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

did the Blessed One proclaim to his disciples the way to the realisation
of Nirvâ*n*a. And yet you say that Nirvâ*n*a is not the result of any
cause!'

'No doubt, O king, the Blessed One gave hundreds of reasons for our
entering on the way to the realisation of Nirvâ*n*a. But he never told
us of a cause out of which Nirvâ*n*a could be said to be produced.'

14\. 'Now in this, Nâgasena, we have passed from darkness into greater
darkness, \[**269**\] from a jungle into a denser jungle, from a thicket
into a deeper thicket--inasmuch as you say there is a cause for the
realisation of Nirvâ*n*a, but no cause from which it can arise. If,
Nâgasena, there be a cause of the realisation of Nirvâ*n*a, then we must
expect to find a cause of the origin of Nirvâ*n*a. just, Nâgasena, as
because the son has a father, therefore we ought to expect that that
father had a father--or because the pupil has a teacher, therefore we
ought to expect that the teacher had a teacher--or because the plant
came from a seed, therefore we ought to expect that the seed too had
come from a seed <span id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_262)--just so,
Nâgasena, if there be a reason for the realisation of Nirvâ*n*a, we
ought to expect that there is a reason too for its origin,--just as if
we saw the top of a tree, or of a creeper, we should conclude that it
had a middle part, and a root.'

'Nirvâ*n*a, O king, is unproduceable, and no cause for its origin has
been declared.'

'Come now, Nâgasena, give me a reason for this. Convince me by argument,
so that I may know how

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

it is that while there is a cause that will bring about the realisation
of Nirvâ*n*a, there is no cause that will bring about Nirvâ*n*a itself.'

15\. 'Then, O king, give ear attentively, and listen well, and I will
tell you what the reason is. Could a man, O king, by his ordinary power,
go up from hence to the Himâlaya, the king of mountains?'

'Yes, Sir, he could.'

'But could a man, by his ordinary power, bring the Himâlaya mountains
here?'

'Certainly not, Sir.'

'Well! therefore is it that while a cause for the realisation of
Nirvâ*n*a can be declared, the cause of its origin can not. And could a
man, O king, by his ordinary power cross over the great ocean in a ship,
and so go to the further shore of it?'

'Yes, Sir, he could.'

'But could a man \[**270**\] by his ordinary power bring the further
shore of the ocean here?'

'Certainly not, Sir.'

'Well! so is it that while a cause for the realisation of Nirvâ*n*a can
be declared, the cause of its origin can not. And why not? Because
Nirvâ*n*a is not put together of any qualities.'

16\. 'What, Sir! is it not put together?'

'No, O king. It is uncompounded, not made of anything. Of Nirvâ*n*a, O
king, it cannot be said that it has been produced, or not been produced,
or that it can be produced <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_263), that
it is past or future or present, that it is perceptible by the eye or
the ear or the nose or the tongue, or by the sense of touch.'

'But if so, Nâgasena, then you are only showing

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

us how Nirvâ*n*a is a condition that does not exist <span
id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_264). There can be no such thing as
Nirvâ*n*a.'

'Nirvâ*n*a exists, O king. And it is perceptible to the mind. By means
of his pure heart, refined and straight, free from the obstacles <span
id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_265), free from low cravings, that disciple
of the Noble Ones who has fully attained can see Nirvâ*n*a.'

17\. 'Then what, Sir, is Nirvâ*n*a? Such a Nirvâ*n*a (I mean) as can be
explained by similes <span id="fr_268"></span>[3](#fn_266). Convince me
by argument how far the fact of its existence can be explained by
similes.'

'Is there such a thing, O king, as wind?'

'Yes, of course.'

'Show it me then, I pray you, O king--whether by its colour, or its
form, whether as thin or thick, or short or long!'

'But wind, Nâgasena, cannot be pointed out in that way <span
id="fr_269"></span>[4](#fn_267). It is not of such a nature that it can
be taken into the hand or squeezed. But it exists all the same.'

'If you can't show me the wind, then there can't be such a thing.'

'But I know there is, Nâgasena. That wind

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

exists I am convinced <span id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_268), \[**271**\]
though I cannot show it you.'

'Well! just so, O king, does Nirvâ*n*a exist, though it cannot be shown
to you in colour or in form <span id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_269).'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to Nirvâ*n*a.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE SIXTY-SIXTH.  
MODES OF PRODUCTION.\]

18\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, what are they who are said, in this
connection, to be "Karma-born," and "cause-born," and "season-born"? And
what is it that is none of these?'

'All beings, O king, who are conscious, are Karma-born (spring into
existence as the result of Karma). Fire, and all things growing out of
seeds, are cause-born (the result of a pre-existing material cause). The
earth, and the hills, water, and wind--all these are season-born (depend
for their existence on reasons connected with weather). Space and
Nirvâ*n*a exist independently alike of Karma, and cause,

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

and seasons. Of Nirvâ*n*a, O king, it cannot be said that it is
Karma-born or cause-born or season-born; that it has been, or has not
been, or can be produced, that it is past or future or present, that it
is perceptible by the eye or the nose or the ear or the tongue or by the
sense of touch. But it is perceptible, O king, by the mind. By means of
his pure heart, refined and straight, free from the obstacles, free from
low cravings, that disciple of the Noble Ones who has fully attained can
see Nirvâ*n*a.'

'Well has this delightful puzzle, venerable Nâgasena, been examined
into, cleared of doubt, brought into certitude. My perplexity has been
put an end to as soon as I consulted you, O best of the best of the
leaders of schools!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to modes of production.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE SIXTY-SEVENTH.  
DEAD DEMONS.\]

19\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, are there such things as demons (Yakkhâ) in
the world?'

'Yes, O king.'

'Do they ever leave that condition' (fall out of that phase of
existence)?

'Yes, they do.'

'But, if so, why is it that the remains of those dead Yakkhas are never
found, nor any odour of their corpses smelt? '

'\[**272**\] Their remains are found, O king, and an odour does arise
from their dead bodies. The remains of bad Yakkhas can be seen in the
form of

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

worms and beetles and ants and moths and snakes and scorpions and
centipedes, and birds and wild beasts.'

'Who else, O Nâgasena, could have solved this puzzle except one as wise
as you!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to dead demons.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE SIXTY-EIGHTH.  
THE METHOD OF PROMULGATING THE RULES.\]

20\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, those who were teachers of the doctors in
times gone by--Nârada <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_270), and
Dhammantari <span id="fr_273"></span>[2](#fn_271), and
A<u>n</u>gîrasa <span id="fr_274"></span>[3](#fn_272), and Kapila <span
id="fr_275"></span>[4](#fn_273), and Ka*nd*araggisâma, and Atula, and
Pubba Ka*kk*âyana <span id="fr_276"></span>[5](#fn_274)--all these
teachers knowing thoroughly, and of themselves, and without any
omission, the rise of disease and its cause and nature and progress and
cure and treatment and management <span
id="fr_277"></span>[6](#fn_275)--each of them composed his treatise en
bloc, taking time by the forelock, and pointing out that in such and
such a body such and such a disease would arise. Now no one of these

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

was omniscient. Why then did not the Tathâgata, who was omniscient, and
who knew by his insight of a Buddha what would happen in the future,
determining in advance that for such and such an occasion such and such
a rule would be required, lay down the whole code of rules at once;
instead of laying them down to his disciples from time to time as each
occasion arose, when the disgrace (of the wrong act) had been already
noised abroad, when the evil was already wide spread and grown great,
when the people were already filled with indignation <span
id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_276)?'

21\. 'The Tathâgata, O king, knew very well that in fulness of time the
whole of the hundred and fifty Rules <span
id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_277) would have to be laid down to those men.
But the Tathâgata, O king, thought thus: "If I were to lay down the
whole of the hundred and fifty Rules at once the people would be filled
with fear \[**273**\], those of them who were willing to enter the Order
would refrain from doing so, saying, 'How much is there here to be
observed! how difficult a thing is it to enter religion according to the
system of the Sama*n*a Gotama'--they would not trust my words, and
through their want of faith they would be liable to rebirth in states of
woe. As occasion arises therefore, illustrating it with a religious
discourse, will I lay down, when the evil has become manifest, each
Rule."'

'A wonderful thing is it in the Buddhas, Nâgasena, and a most marvellous
that the omniscience of the Tathâgata should be so great. That is just
so,

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

venerable Nâgasena. This matter was well understood by the
Tathâgata--how that hearing that so much was to be observed, men <span
id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_278) would have been so filled with fear that
not a single one would have entered religion according to the system of
the Conquerors. That is so, and I accept it as you say <span
id="fr_281"></span>[2](#fn_279).'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the method in which the Rules were laid
down.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE SIXTY-NINTH.  
THE HEAT OF THE SUN\]

22\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, does this sun always burn fiercely, or are
there times when it shines with diminished heat?'

'It always burns fiercely, O king, never gently.'

'But if that be so, how is it that the heat of the sun is sometimes
fierce, and sometimes not <span id="fr_282"></span>[3](#fn_280)?'

23\. 'There are four derangements <span id="fr_283"></span>[4](#fn_281),
O king, which happen to the sun, and affected by one or other of these
its heat is allayed. And what are the four? The clouds, O king, and
fog <span id="fr_284"></span>[5](#fn_282), and

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

smoke <span id="fr_285"></span>[1](#fn_283), and eclipses <span
id="fr_286"></span>[2](#fn_284)--these are the four derangements which
happen to the sun, and it is when affected by one or other of these that
its heat is allayed.'

'Most wonderful, Nâgasena, and most strange \[**274**\] that even the
sun, so transcendent in glory, should suffer from derangement-how much
more then other, lesser, creatures. No one else could have made this
explanation except one wise like you!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the heat of the sun.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[DILEMMA THE SEVENTIETH.  
THE SEASONS.\]

24\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, why is it that the heat of the sun is more
fierce in winter than in summer?'

'In the hot season, O king, dust is blown up <span
id="fr_287"></span>[3](#fn_285) into clouds, and pollen <span
id="fr_288"></span>[4](#fn_286) agitated by the winds rises up into the
sky, and clouds multiply in the heavens, and gales blow with exceeding
force. All these crowded and heaped together shut off the rays of the
sun, and so in the hot season the heat of the sun is diminished. But in
the cold season, O king, the earth below is at rest, the rains above are

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

in reserve <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_287), the dust is quiet, the
pollen wanders gently through the air, the sky is free from clouds, and
very gently do the breezes blow. Since all these have ceased to act the
rays of the sun become clear, and freed from every obstruction the sun's
heat glows and burns. This, O king, is the reason why the heat of the
sun is more fierce in winter than in summer.

'So it is when set free from the obstacles besetting it that the sun
burns fiercely, which it cannot do when the rains and so on are present
with it.'

\['Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say <span
id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_288).'\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma of the seasons <span
id="fr_291"></span>[3](#fn_289).\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the Seventh Chapter <span id="fr_292"></span>[4](#fn_290).

 

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_230"></span>[92:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_232) This passage has not
yet been traced in the Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[92:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_233) These are the
well-known navangâni, the nine divisions into which the Scriptures are
divided. See Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya I, 133; A<u>n</u>guttara Nikâya IV, 6,
&c.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[92:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_234) Navakammena
palibu*ggh*anti. The Si*m*halese adds
kha*nd*a-phulla-pa*t*isa*m*khara*n*ayen, 'repairing dilapidations.'

<span id="fn_233"></span>[93:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_235) This is (very
properly) added in the Si*m*halese, for the two are practically
identical. Hereafter it throughout renders nippapa*ñ*ko hoti by 'become
an Arahat.'

<span id="fn_234"></span>[93:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_236) Vâsita-vâsanâ. See
above, vol. i, p. 18.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[93:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_237) Mahârâ*g*akkhâ,
'evil done both in this and in former births' is here to be understood.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[94:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_238) By the simple
process of going through the air to the top of the tree.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[94:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_239) Chasu abhi*ññ*âsu
vasîbhâva*m* pâpu*n*anti.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[95:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_240) 'Who is a Buddha'
adds Hîna*t*i-kumburê (p. 372).

<span id="fn_239"></span>[95:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_241) Savanena, literally
'bearing.'

<span id="fn_240"></span>[95:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_242) Âsavakkhaya*m*,
literally 'to the destruction of the Âsavas;' that is, of the Great
Evils, which are lust, dulness, becoming, and ignorance. Mr. Trenckner
marks this passage as corrupt, but Hîna*t*i-kumburê seems to have had
the same reading before him as Mr. Trenckner has selected from his MSS.,
except that he has not had any mark of punctuation after the word hoti.

The particular occasion on which Sâriputta became finally free from the
Âsavas is related in the Dîgha-nakha Suttanta, No. 74 in the Ma*ggh*ima
Nikâya (vol. i, p. 50 of Mr. Trenckner's edition for the Pâli Text
Society).

<span id="fn_241"></span>[96:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_243) Literally 'therefore
is it that recitation, &c., is a condition free from the obstacles, and
unmade' (the Unmade being also one of the many epithets of Arahatship).

<span id="fn_242"></span>[96:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_244) This passage has not
yet been traced in the Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[96:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_245) All these are
necessary to one who is a candidate for admission to the Order--the
teacher and preceptor being, as it were, his proposer and seconder; and
no one being admitted who is not already provided with a bowl and a set
of robes.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[97:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_246) 'Inasmuch as he
would be taking a dress to which he was not entitled' is
Hîna*t*i-kumburê's gloss.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[98:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_247) We have had the same
simile above, IV, 6, 30.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[98:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_248) Compare the note on
*K*ullavagga V, 9, 5.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[98:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_249) Which must not
exceed certain dimensions, &c. See the 6th Sa*m*ghâdisesa ('Vinaya
Texts,' I, pp. 8, 9).

<span id="fn_248"></span>[98:4](sbe3605.htm#fr_250) Sa*ñk*aritte.
Perhaps only the 5th Sa*m*ghâdisesa (loc. cit.) is here referred to, but
Hîna*t*i-kumburê (p. 375) takes it in a much more extended sense, as
referring to all the restrictions, as to time and place, &c., laid down
for the guidance of the brethren in their relations with women.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[99:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_251) It is curious that
the well-known rule as to not eating solid food after sunturn at noon is
not expressly stated in the Pâtimokkha, or indeed anywhere in the
Vinaya. But it is often implied. See, for instance, the 37th Pâ*k*ittiya
Rule; Mahâvagga VI, 19, 2; VI, 33, 2; VI, 40, 3; *K*ullavagga V, 25, &c.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[99:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_252) See the Pâ*k*ittiya
Rules, Nos. 32 and 46.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[99:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_253) A Bhikkhu may not,
except for certain special reasons, such as sickness, either keep or eat
food which has been left over after the principal meal. See the 35th
Pâkittiya Rule. Hîna*t*i-kumburê (pp. 374-376) goes at great length into
the full meaning of these five technical terms of the Buddhist Canon
Law, giving examples under each.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[99:4](sbe3605.htm#fr_254) Not traced as yet.
'Ignorance of the Sikshâpadas' says the Si*m*halese (p. 376).

<span id="fn_253"></span>[99:5](sbe3605.htm#fr_255) Dasa
akusala-kamma-pathâ. See Childers sub voce.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[100:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_256)
Cha*l*abhiñño--which every Arahat is not.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[101:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_257) Fairies and goblins
of various degrees and powers, most of them not mentioned in the
Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[102:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_258) Kâ*l*a-loha, 'black
metal' (not found in the Pi*t*akas).

<span id="fn_257"></span>[102:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_259) Va*tt*a-loha,
'round metal.' I can only guess what this is. The Si*m*halese has simply
wa*t*aloha, which is equally unintelligible. The word occurs again below
(p. 331 of the Pâli), and Hîna*t*i-kumburê there renders it tœ*t*i,
which is a particular kind of brazen vessel.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[102:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_260) Two kinds are
mentioned, sâ*n*a and bha<u>n</u>ga. I don't know the difference between
them. The Si*m*halese has sana and ba<u>n</u>kâlpê.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[102:4](sbe3605.htm#fr_261) Three kinds of
Phaseoli are mentioned, Varaka, Mugga, and Mâsa.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[102:5](sbe3605.htm#fr_262) Paramatthena
sattûpaladdhi natthi. It is very curious <span id="page_103">p.
103</span> that both here, and in the analogous phrase at III, 5, 6 (p.
71 of the Pâli), Hîna*t*i-kumburê should merely repeat the words in the
text. Both of these curt summaries of the deepest Buddhist doctrine were
probably as ambiguous to him as they are to us. The literal translation
of the phrase here would be, 'In the highest sense there is no
acquisition of a being.' As in Buddhism being cannot strictly be
predicated of any thing, or of any god or animal or man,--each is really
only becoming--the sense probably meant must be very nearly as I have
ventured to render.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[103:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_263) Utu-nibbattâ; which
the Si*m*halese repeats. See the next dilemma on 'Karma-born,
cause-born, and season-born.'

<span id="fn_262"></span>[104:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_264) Compare the
argument based above, II, 3, 2, on this and similar series.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[105:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_265) The Si*m*halese is
here (p. 381) expanded.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[106:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_266) Natthidhamma*m*
nibbânam upadisatha. Compare the use of atthi-dhamma*m* nibbâna*m*, at
p. 316 (of the Pâli). I take the compound to mean either 'has the
quality (or condition) of not existing,' or 'is a condition that is
not.' And the latter is more in harmony with the analogous phrase
atthisattâ devâ (p. 3, 7 of the Pâli) since that can only mean 'gods,
which are beings that are.'

<span id="fn_265"></span>[106:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_267) Lust, malice,
pride, sloth, and doubt.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[106:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_268) Hîna*t*i-kumburê
puts the stop, not after nibbâna*m* as Mr. Trenckner does, but after
opammehi.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[106:4](sbe3605.htm#fr_269) On the connotation
of upadassayitu*m*, see pp. 316, 347, of the Pâli.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[107:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_270) Me hadaye
anupavi*tth*a*m*, literally 'has entered into my heart.' But
Hîna*t*i-kumburê takes *vâto atthîti* as dependent on *g*ânâmi, and
renders these three words by 'it (the wind) has entered into my heart,'
and then adds, by way of gloss, 'and has struck against my body, and
travels through the sky.' In another passage below, IV, 8, 65 (p. 317 of
the Pâli), this same word anupavi*tth*a*m* recurs in a clause the sense
of which is doubtful; and there Hîna*t*i-kumburê explains it quite
differently. It looks very much as if we had here an idiom peculiar to
our author; but one cannot of course be sure on any such point till the
Pi*t*akas are all published.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[107:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_271) The same simile is
used below, p. 317 (of the Pâli).

<span id="fn_270"></span>[109:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_272) No doubt the
celebrated Devârshi is meant, though it is odd to find him in a list of
physicians.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[109:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_273) In Sanskrit
Dhanvantarî, the physician of the gods. He is mentioned in the *G*âtaka
IV, 496, with Bho*g*a and Vetara*n*î, as a well-known physician of old
famous for the cure of snake-bite.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[109:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_274) The connection of
A<u>n</u>gîrasa with the physicians is due to the charms against disease
to be found in the Atharva-veda.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[109:4](sbe3605.htm#fr_275) Kapila is known in
the Brahman literature as a teacher of Philosophy rather than of
medicine.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[109:5](sbe3605.htm#fr_276) Probably 'the
Eastern Ka*kk*âyana,' but nothing is known of these last three names.
Hîna*t*i-kumburê calls all seven 'Rishis.'

<span id="fn_275"></span>[109:6](sbe3605.htm#fr_277) Siddhâsiddha*m*,
for which Hîna*t*i-kumburê (p. 385), who merely repeats all the other
terms, has sâdhyâsâdhya.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[110:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_278) This question has
already been discussed above, III, 6, 2 (I, 116).

<span id="fn_277"></span>[110:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_279) The rules of the
Pâtimokkha are 227 in number, but without the Sekhiyas they are 152.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[111:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_280) Sattâ, literally
'beings,' but that means human beings, men and women, as no others
(gods, Nâgas, animals, &c.) were admitted to the Order. See Mahâvagga I.
63; I, 76, 1; *K*ullavagga X, 117, 1.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[111:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_281) In the Introductory
Stories to the Rules it is often stated, how, when a Bhikkhu had done
some act, the people were indignant, the brethren heard that and
reported the matter to the Blessed One, who then, and then only, laid
down the Rule prohibiting that act. But these Introductory Stories are
really later than the Rules.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[111:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_282) Here
Hîna*t*i-kumburê (pp. 386-7) goes into great details, giving instances,
and quoting verses.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[111:4](sbe3605.htm#fr_283) Rogâ, literally
'diseases.'

<span id="fn_282"></span>[111:5](sbe3605.htm#fr_284) Mahikâ. Childers
gives frost as the only meaning of this word.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[112:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_285) Megho, literally
'rain-cloud.' But clouds of smoke are meant, as is clear from the
parallel passage loc. cit. which has dhumara*g*o, but see *K*ullavagga
XII, 1, 3 (from which the whole section IV, 7, 23 is derived).

<span id="fn_284"></span>[112:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_286) Râhu.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[112:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_287) Anupahata*m*.
Compare Dr. Morris's note in the Journal of the Pâli Text Society,'
1884, p. 75, on Therâ Gâthâ 625.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[112:4](sbe3605.htm#fr_288) Re*n*û. Perhaps
this should again be rendered dust. See the verse at *G*âtaka I, 117
(which is nearly the same as Divyâvadâna, p. 491).

<span id="fn_287"></span>[113:1](sbe3605.htm#fr_289) Mahâ-megho
upa*tth*ito hoti, which is very ambiguous. The Si*m*halese (p. 389) has
mahâ meghaya patan-gannâ-lada wanneya.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[113:2](sbe3605.htm#fr_290) Inserted from
Hîna*t*i-kumburê.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[113:3](sbe3605.htm#fr_291) There is great
uncertainty at present as to the views held, first in the Pi*t*akas and
later in the Commentaries, regarding the calculation of time and the
division of years into months and seasons. Our author here seems to
regard the year as divided into two seasons only, Hemanta and Gimha. But
Hemanta is usually supposed to last only from the 1st November (that is
the middle of Kattika) to the beginning of March (that is the middle of
Phagguni), Gimhâna for the next four months (March 1st--June 30th), and
Vassâna the remaining four (July-October)--the year being thus divided
into three equal cold. hot, and rainy seasons. At Mahâvagga VIII, 24, 3
there is a division of the year into unequal dry and wet seasons (utu
and vassâna), and at *G*âtaka I, 86 it is said that vasanta-samayo
begins when hemanta ends at the full moon of Phagguni. As our author
places the characteristic events of the rainy season in the hot season,
he cannot have had the division into three seasons in his mind.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[113:4](sbe3605.htm#fr_292) 'Of the excellent
Saddharmâdâsa' says the Si*m*halese.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](sbe3606)
