[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3609) 
[Next](sbe3611) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

# BOOK VII. CHAPTER 2.

## THE SIMILES (continued).

### 11. THE GOURD.

1\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, that one quality of the gourd which you say he
ought to take, which is it?'

'Just, O king, as the gourd, climbing up with its tendrils <span
id="fr_724"></span>[1](#fn_715) on to some other plant--whether a grass,
or a thorn, or a creeper--grows all over it; just so, O king, should the
strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort, who desires to grow up into
Arahatship, do so by climbing up with his mind over the ideas that
present themselves (as subjects for the Kamma*tth*âna meditations).
This, O king, is the one quality of the gourd which he ought to have.
For it was said, O king, by Sâriputta, the Elder, the Commander of the
Faith:

"As the gourd, clambering up with its tendrils, grows  
O'er the grass, or the thorn-bush, or creeper widespread,  
So the son of the Buddha on Ar'hatship bent,  
Climbs up o'er ideas, to perfection and peace <span
id="fr_725"></span>[2](#fn_716)."'

 

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

### 12. THE LOTUS.

2\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, those three qualities of the lotus which you
say he ought to take, which are they?'

\[**375**\] 'Just, O king, as the lotus, though it is born in the water,
and grows up in the water, yet remains undefiled by the water (for no
water adheres to it); just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu,
earnest in effort, remain undefiled by the support that he receives, or
by the following of disciples that he obtains, or by fame, or by honour,
or by veneration, or by the abundance of the requisites that he enjoys.
This, O king, is the first of the qualities of the lotus that he ought
to have.

3\. 'And again, O king, as the lotus remains lifted up far above the
water; just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort,
remain far above all worldly things. This, O king, is the second of the
qualities of the lotus that he ought to have.

4\. 'And again, O king, as the lotus trembles when blown upon by the
slightest breeze; just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest
in effort, exercise self-control in respect of the least of the evil
dispositions, perceiving the danger (in the least offence). This, O
king, is the third of the qualities of the lotus he ought to have. For
it was said, O king, by the Blessed One, the god over all gods:

"Seeing danger in the least offence, he takes upon himself, trains
himself in, the precepts <span id="fr_726"></span>[1](#fn_717)."'

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

### 13. THE SEED.

5\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, those two qualities of seed which you say he
ought to have, which are they?'

'Just, O king, as seed, tiny though it be, yet if sown in good soil, and
if the god rains aright, will give abundant fruit; just so, O king,
should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort, so conduct himself
aright that the righteousness of his life may give abundantly of the
fruits of Samanaship. This, O king, is the first quality of seed which
he ought to have.

6\. 'And again, O king, as seed planted in well-weeded soil comes
quickly to maturity; just so, O king, will his mind, when
well-mastered <span id="fr_727"></span>[1](#fn_718), and well-purified
in solitude, if it be cast by the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort,
into the excellent field of self-possession, come quickly to maturity.
This, O king, is the second quality of seed which he ought to have.
\[**376**\] For it was said, O king, by Anuruddha, the Elder:

"If seed be sown on a well-weeded field,  
Its fruit, abounding, will rejoice the sower.  
So the recluse's heart, in solitude made pure,  
Matures full fast in self-possession's field <span
id="fr_728"></span>[2](#fn_719)."'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### 14. THE SAL-TREE.

7\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, that one quality of the Sal-tree which you say
he ought to take, which is it?'

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

'Just, O king, as the Sal-tree grows within the ground to the depth of a
hundred cubits or more; just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu,
earnest in effort, perfect in solitude the four Fruits of Samanaship,
the four Discriminations, the six forms of transcendental Insight, and
all the qualities befitting a recluse. This, O king, is the one quality
of the Sal-tree he ought to have. For it was said, O king, by Râhula,
the Elder:

"The tree that's called the Sal-tree grows above the earth,  
And shoots beneath, a hundred cubits deep.  
As in the fullness of time, and at its highest growth  
That tree shoots in one day <span id="fr_729"></span>[1](#fn_720) a
hundred cubits high,  
Just so do I, O Buddha, like the Sal,  
Increase, in solitude, in inward good."'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### 15. THE SHIP.

8\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, those three qualities of the ship that you say
he ought to take, which are they?'

'Just, O king, as a ship, by the combination of the quantity of the
different kinds of timber of which it is composed, conveys many folk
across; just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in
effort, cross the whole world of existence, whether in heaven, or on
earth, by the combination of a number of qualities arising out of good
conduct, righteousness, virtue, and the performance of duty.

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

\[paragraph continues\] This, O king, is the first of the qualities of a
ship he ought to have.

9\. 'And again, O king, just as a ship \[**377**\] can bear the
onslaught of various thundering waves and of far-reaching whirlpools;
so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort, be able to
bear the onslaught of the waves of various evil inclinations, and the
onslaught of the waves of varied evils--veneration and contempt, support
and honour, praise and exaltation, offerings and homage, blame and
commendation in families not his own. This, O king, is the second of the
qualities of the ship he ought to have.

10\. 'And again, O king, as the ship journeys over the great ocean,
immeasurable and infinite though it be, without a further shore,
unshaken in its depths, roaring with a mighty noise, and filled with
crowds of fish and monsters and dragons of all sorts; just so, O king,
should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort, make his mind journey
through to penetration into the four Truths in their triple order, in
their twelvefold form <span id="fr_730"></span>[1](#fn_721). This, O
king, is the third of the qualities of the ship he ought to have. For it
was said, O king, by the Blessed One, the god over all gods, in the most
excellent Sa*m*yutta Nikâya, in the Sa*m*yutta on the Truths <span
id="fr_731"></span>[2](#fn_722):

"Whenever you are thinking, O Bhikkhus, you should think: 'Such is
sorrow,'--you should think 'Such is the origin of sorrow,'--you should
think: 'Such is the end of sorrow,'--you should think: 'Such is the path
that leads to the end of sorrow.'"'

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

### 16. THE ANCHOR.

11\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, those two qualities of the anchor which you
say he ought to take, which are they?'

'Just, O king, as the anchor, even in the mighty sea, in the expanse of
waters agitated by the crowding of ever-varying waves, will fasten the
ship, and keep it still, not letting the sea take it in one direction or
another; just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in
effort, keep his mind stedfast in the mighty struggle of thoughts, in
the waters of the waves of lust and malice and dullness, not letting
them divert it in one direction or another. This, O king, is the first
quality of the anchor he ought to have.

12\. 'And again, O king, as the anchor floats not, but sinks down, and
even in water a hundred cubits deep holds the ship fast, brings it to
rest; just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort,
when he receives support, and fame, and honour, and veneration, and
reverence, and offerings, and praise, \[**378**\] be not lifted up on
the summit of the support or the fame, but keep his mind fixed on the
idea of merely keeping his body alive. This, O king, is the second
quality of the anchor he ought to have. For it was said, O king, by
Sâriputta, the Elder, the Commander of the Faith:

"As the anchor floats not, but sinks down beneath the waves,  
So be abased, not lifted up, by praise or gifts <span
id="fr_732"></span>[1](#fn_723)."'

 

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

### 17. THE MAST.

13\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, that one quality of the mast which you say he
ought to take, which is it?'

'Just, O king, as the mast carries ropes and braces and sails <span
id="fr_733"></span>[1](#fn_724); just so should the strenuous Bhikshu,
earnest in effort, always have mindfulness and self-possession--when
going out or coming back, when looking ahead or looking round, when
stretching forth his arm or bending it back, when wearing clothes or
carrying his bowl, when eating or drinking or swallowing or tasting,
when easing himself or walking or standing or sitting, when asleep or
awake, when talking and when silent, never should he lose his
mindfulness and self-possession. This, O king, is the one quality of the
mast he ought to have <span id="fr_734"></span>[2](#fn_725). For it was
said, O king, by the Blessed One, the god over all gods:

"Mindful, my brethren, should the Bhikshu remain, and self-possessed.
This is my instruction to you <span id="fr_735"></span>[3](#fn_726)."'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### 18. THE PILOT.

14\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, those three qualities of the pilot which you
say he ought to take, which are they?'

'Just, O king, as the pilot, day and night, with

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

continuous and unceasing zeal and effort, navigates <span
id="fr_736"></span>[1](#fn_727) his ship; just so, O king, does the
strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort, when regulating his mind, continue
night and day unceasingly zealous and earnest in regulating his mind by
careful thought. This, O king, is the one quality of the pilot he ought
to have. For it was said, O king, by the Blessed One, the god over all
gods, in the Dhammapada (the Collection of scripture verses):

"Be full of zeal, watch over your own thoughts;  
Raise yourselves up out of the slough of endless births,  
As the strong elephant engulphed in depths of mud <span
id="fr_737"></span>[2](#fn_728)."

\[**379**\] 15. 'And again, O king, as the pilot knows all that is in
the sea, whether good or bad; just so, O king, should the strenuous
Bhikshu, earnest in effort, know good from evil, and what is an offence
from what is not, and what is mean from what is exalted, and what is
dark from what is light. This, O king, is the second quality of the
pilot he ought to have.

16\. 'And again, O king, as the pilot puts a seal on the steering
apparatus <span id="fr_738"></span>[3](#fn_729) lest any one should
touch it; so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort,
put the seal of self-control on his heart, lest any evil or wrong
thoughts should arise within it. This is the third quality of the pilot
he ought to have. For it was said, O king, by the

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

Blessed One, the god over all gods, in the most excellent Sa*m*yutta
Nikâya:

"Think, O Bhikshus, no evil or wrong thoughts, such as thoughts of lust,
or of malice, or of delusion <span id="fr_739"></span>[1](#fn_730)."'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### 19. THE SAILOR <span id="fr_740"></span>[2](#fn_731).

17\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, that one quality of the sailor which you say
he ought to take, which is it?'

'Just as the sailor on board ship, O king, thinks thus: "I am a
hireling, and am working for my wage on board this ship. By means of
this ship is it that I get food and clothing. I must not be lazy, but
zealously navigate the ship;" just so, O king, should the strenuous
Bhikshu, earnest in effort, think thus: "Gaining a thorough knowledge of
this body of mine, put together of the four elements, continuously and
unceasingly will I be self-possessed in mindfulness and thoughtfulness,
and tranquil and peaceful will exert myself to be set free from births,
old age, disease, and death, grief, lamentation, sorrow, suffering, and
despair." This, O king, is the one quality of the sailor he ought to
have. For it was said, O king, by Sâriputta, the Elder, the Commander of
the Faith:

"Understand what the body is, realise that again and again,  
Seeing the nature of the body, put an end to grief <span
id="fr_741"></span>[3](#fn_732)."'

 

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

### 20. THE SEA.

18\. \[**380**\] 'Venerable Nâgasena, those five qualities of the sea
you say he ought to take, which are they?'

'Just, O king, as the sea brooks no contact with a corpse <span
id="fr_742"></span>[1](#fn_733); just so, O king, should the strenuous
Bhikshu, earnest in effort, brook no association with the stains of
evil--lust and malice and dullness and pride and delusion, concealing
the faults one has and claiming virtues one has not <span
id="fr_743"></span>[2](#fn_734), envy and avarice, deceit and treachery
and trickiness, wickedness and sinfulness of life. This, O king, is the
first quality of the sea he ought to have.

19\. 'And again, O king, just as the sea carries within it stores of all
kinds of gems--pearls and diamonds and cat's-eyes, and chank shells, and
quartz <span id="fr_744"></span>[3](#fn_735), and coral, and crystal,
but conceals them all; just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu,
earnest in effort, though he have attained to the various gems of
character--the Path, and the Fruits

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

thereof, and the four *Gh*ânas, and the eight Vimokkhas, and Samâdhi,
and the five Attainments (forms of ecstatic contemplation and Insight),
and the six forms of Transcendental Knowledge <span
id="fr_745"></span>[1](#fn_736)--conceal them and not bring them to the
light. This, O king, is the second quality of the sea he ought to have.

20\. 'And again, O king, just as the sea associates with mighty
creatures; just so, O king, should the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in
effort, associate himself with a fellow-disciple who desires little and
is contented, who is pure in speech <span
id="fr_746"></span>[2](#fn_737), whose conduct is directed to the
eradication of evil, who is given to righteousness, modest, amiable,
dignified, venerable, a speaker of profitable words, meek, one who will
point out his associate's faults, and blame him when he does wrong,
clever in admonition, in instruction, and in education, able to arouse,
to incite, and to gladden--with such a man as a friend, in righteousness
should he dwell. This, O king, is the third quality of the sea he ought
to have.

21\. 'And again, O king, as the sea, though filled with the fresh water
brought down by the Ganges, and the Jumna, and the A*k*iravatî, and the
Sarabhû, and the Mahî, and by other rivers a hundred thousand in number,
and by the rains of heaven, yet

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

never overflows its shore; just so, O king, should the strenuous
Bhikshu, earnest in effort, never consciously transgress the precepts
for the sake of support, or fame, or praise, or salutations, or
reverence, or honour--no! not even for his life. This, O king, is the
fourth of the qualities of the sea he ought to have. \[**381**\] For it
was said, O king, by the Blessed One, the god over all gods <span
id="fr_747"></span>[1](#fn_738):

"Just, O king, as the great ocean has fixity as its characteristic, and
never overflows its shores; just so, O king, should my disciples never
overstep the regulations I have laid down for them--no! not even to save
themselves alive <span id="fr_748"></span>[2](#fn_739)."

22\. 'And again, O king, as the sea is not filled even by all the
rivers--the Ganges, and the Jumna, and the A*k*iravatî, and the Sarabhû,
and the Mahî--nor by the rains from heaven; just so, O king, should

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

the strenuous Bhikshu, earnest in effort, never be satisfied with
receiving instruction, with asking and answering questions, with
listening to the word, and learning it by heart, and examining into it,
with hearing the Abhidhamma and the Vinaya, and the deep sayings of the
Suttas, with analysis of forms, with learning the rules of right
composition, conjunction, and grammatical construction <span
id="fr_749"></span>[1](#fn_740), with listening to the ninefold teaching
of the Conqueror. This, O king, is the fifth quality of the sea he ought
to have. For it was said, O king, by the Blessed One, the god over all
gods, in the Sutasoma *G*âtaka <span id="fr_750"></span>[2](#fn_741):

"Just as the fire, in burning grass and sticks,  
Is never satisfied, nor the great sea  
Filled with the waters of all streams that flow--  
So are these students wise, O king of kings,  
Listening, ne'er sated with the words of truth <span
id="fr_751"></span>[3](#fn_742)."'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the Second Chapter.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_715"></span>[294:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_724) So*nd*ikâhi, which
must mean here the tentacles or feelers of the gourd-creeper. The
Si*m*halese has simply So*nd*i*m*. I have only found the word elsewhere
in the connection So*nd*ikâ kila*ñ*gâ at Ma*ggh*ima I, 228 and Samyutta
IV, 1, 6, 4.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[294:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_725) Not traced as yet.
The last line is literally, 'By climbing up on the âramma*n*as should
grow in the Fruit of those who have nothing left to learn' (that is, in
Arahatship).

<span id="fn_717"></span>[295:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_726) See Ma*ggh*ima
Nikâya I, 33; Dîgha II, 42, &c.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[296:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_727) Supariggahîta*m*,
which the Si*m*halese, p. 553, omits.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[296:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_728) Not in the
published texts.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[297:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_729) Ekâha*m*. I follow
the Si*m*halese (eka divasi*m*), but confess myself very doubtful as to
this being the meaning intended by the author.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[298:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_730) See 'Buddhist
Suttas,' pp. 150-152, and especially § 21, from which the expressions
here used are taken.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[298:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_731) This is the 55th
Sa*m*yutta.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[299:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_732) Not traced as yet.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[300:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_733) Lakâra. Childers
says 'a part of a ship,' Dr. Morris ('Journal of the Pâli Text Society,'
1884, p. 101, note) says 'a chain attached to a well.' I follow the
Si*m*halese, p. 556, which has ruwala. See *G*âtaka II, 112, and compare
IV, 21.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[300:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_734) The Si*m*halese has
here a page of matter not found in the Pâli.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[300:3](sbe3610.htm#fr_735) Dîgha Nikâya XVI,
2, 12.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[301:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_736) Sâreti, 'makes go.'
Not in Childers, but see A<u>n</u>guttara Nikâya III, 35, 4, and compare
*K*ullavagga V, 11, 2.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[301:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_737) Dhammapada, verse
327.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[301:3](sbe3610.htm#fr_738) Yanta, which the
Si*m*halese renders yantra (p. 559).

<span id="fn_730"></span>[302:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_739) Sa*m*yutta LV, 7.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[302:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_740) Kammakaro.
Hîna*t*i-kumburê translates this 'handyman, artisan, ship's carpenter.'

<span id="fn_732"></span>[302:3](sbe3610.htm#fr_741) Not traced as yet.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[303:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_742) This curious belief
has been made use of above, I, 259 of the translation. See also
Divyâvadana, p. 234.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[303:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_743) Makkho and
pâ*l*âso, 'hypocrisy and conceit.' See the notes above on IV, 8, 23.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[303:3](sbe3610.htm#fr_744) Silâ. Mr. Trenckner
prints the passage as if sa<u>n</u>khasilâ were to be taken together.
But the use of the nominatives sa<u>n</u>kho silâ in the corresponding
list at *K*ullavagga IX, 1, 3, 4 shows that by silâ, 'rock,' some kind
of gem. is meant. And that our author does not intend to deviate from
the earlier authority is clear from his own work (above, p. 267 of the
Pâli), where he also gives the two nominatives in a similar, though
longer, list of gems. What may be the particular gem referred to under
the name 'rock' is doubtful. Hîna*t*i-kumburê, p. 561, merely repeats
the word silâ; and Clough, besides 'rock,' gives as special meaning only
'arsenic.' At *K*ullavagga ('Vinaya Texts,' III, 304) I have rendered it
'rock,' but 'quartz' now seems to me preferable.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[304:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_745) It is very
characteristic of our author that his interpretation of the gems into
ethical conceptions is quite different from that of the *K*ullavagga,
and much more mystic. In the older passage they are translated into the
seven constituent characteristics of Arahatship. (See 'Vinaya Texts,'
loc. cit., p. 305.) Compare also Divyâvadâna, pp. 115, 229.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[304:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_746) Dhuta-vâdo, not in
Childers, and only found here. Perhaps ( who inculcates the keeping of
the extra vows.' Dhuta<u>n</u>ga-wadiwû, says Hîna*t*i-kumburê, p. 561.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[305:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_747) Devâtidevena. It is
not known when this epithet, which our author so constantly applies to
the Buddha, first came into use. It is not found in the Pi*t*akas, and
the Milinda is the oldest book in which it has been traced. It is given
in the Mahâvyutpatti, page 1, as a recognised epithet, but not in the
corresponding Pâli list of epithets in the Abhidhâna Padîpikâ (though
deva-deva occurs there). The origin of the appellation is solemnly
explained in the Divyâvadâna, p. 391. It is there said to have been
first bestowed on the Buddha (when, as a child, he was presented in the
temple), because all the gods bowed down before him. There is nothing
about this in the corresponding passage of the Lalita Vistara, pp.
136-138. The epithet is used of the Buddha in an inscription of Toramâna
Shâhi ('Epigraphia Indica' for October, 1889). It occurs also in a verse
preserved in the commentaries on the Dhammapada and the *G*âtaka
(*G*âtaka IV, 158 = Dhammapada 148)--a verse not found in the Pi*t*aka
versions of the same episode--and is used in a kind of pun in the
Mahâvamsa, chap. i, verse 56. But these three passages are all of the
fifth century A.D.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[305:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_748) Not traced as yet.
A similar parable is used at the passage already quoted from the
*K*ullavagga IX, 1, 3, 4.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[306:1](sbe3610.htm#fr_749) The translation is
here doubtful. The Si*m*halese apparently takes viggaha as qualifying
pada, though it renders the whole by 'learning the rules of resolving
words into their elements, and of building them up into compounds, and
of Sandhi, and of conjugation, and of declension.'

<span id="fn_741"></span>[306:2](sbe3610.htm#fr_750) Not reached as yet
in Professor Fausböll's edition. Mr. Trenckner says the verse quoted is
No. 47 in the 537th *G*âtaka.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[306:3](sbe3610.htm#fr_751) The Si*m*halese
reads Eva*m* hi me for Eva*m* h' ime, and renders 'listening to me.' Mr.
Trenckner points out that the *G*âtaka MSS. read Evam pi te.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](sbe3611)
