[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm07)  [Next](pnm09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

### AGRIPPA TO TRITHEMIUS.

<span class="smallcaps">To R. P. D. John Trithemius, an Abbot of Saint
James, in the Suburbs of Herbipolis, Henry Cornelius Agrippa of
Nettesheim Sendeth Greeting</span>:

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> I was of late, most reverend father,
for a while conversant with you in your Monastery of Herbipolis, we
conferred together of divers things concerning Chemistry, Magic, and
Cabala, and of other things, which as yet lie hid in Secret Sciences and
Arts; and then there was one great question amongst the rest—Why Magic,
whereas it was accounted by all ancient philosophers to be the chiefest
science, and by the ancient wise men and priests was always held in
great veneration, came at last, after the beginning of the Catholic
Church, to be always odious to and suspected by the holy Fathers, and
then exploded by Divines, and condemned by sacred Canons, and, moreover,
by all laws and ordinances forbidden? Now, the cause, as I conceive, is
no other than this, viz.: Because, by a certain fatal depravation of
times and men, many false philosophers crept in, and these, under the
name of Magicians, heaping together, through various sorts of errors and
factions of false religions, many cursed superstitions and dangerous
rites, and many wicked sacrileges, even to the perfection of Nature; and
the same set forth in many wicked and unlawful books, to which they have
by stealth prefixed the most honest name and title of Magic; hoping, by
this sacred title, to gain credit to their cursed and detestable
fooleries. Hence it is that this name of Magic, formerly so honorable,
is now become most odious to good and honest men, and accounted a

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

capital crime if any one dare profess himself to be a Magician, either
in doctrine or works, unless haply some certain old doting woman,
dwelling in the country, would be believed to be skillful and have a
divine power, that she (as saith Apuleis the satirist) "can throw down
the heaven, lift up the earth, harden fountains, wash away mountains,
raise up ghosts, cast down the Gods, extinguish the stars, illuminate
hell," or, as Virgil sings:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">She'll promise by her charms to cast great cares,  
Or ease the minds of men, and make the Stars  
For to go back, and rivers to stand still,  
And raise the nightly ghosts even at her will;  
To make the earth to groan, and trees to fall  
From the mountains—</span>

</div>

Hence those things which Lucan relates of Thessala the Magicianess, and
Homer of the omnipotency of Circe. Whereof many others, I confess, are
as well of a fallacious opinion as a superstitious diligence and
pernicious labor; for when they cannot come under a wicked art yet they
presume they may be able to cloak themselves under that venerable title
of Magic.

These things being so, I wondered much and was not less indignant that,
as yet, there had been no man who had either vindicated this sublime and
sacred discipline from the charge of impiety or had delivered it purely
and sincerely to us. What I have seen of our modern writers—Roger Bacon,
Robert of York, an Englishman, Peter Apponus, Albertus \[Magnus\] the
Teutonich, Arnoldas de villa Nova, Anselme the Parmensian. Picatrix the
Spaniard, Cicclus Asculus of Florence, and many other writers of an
obscure name—when they promise to treat of Magic do nothing but relate
irrational tales and superstitions unworthy of honest men. Hence my
spirit was moved, and, by reason partly of admiration, and partly of
indignation, I was willing to play

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

the philosopher, supposing that I should do no discommendable
work—seeing I have been always from my youth a curious and undaunted
searcher for wonderful effects and operations full of mysteries—if I
should recover that ancient Magic (the discipline of all wise men) from
the errors of impiety, purify and adorn it with its proper lustre, and
vindicate it from the injuries of calumniators; which thing, though I
long deliberated of it in my mind, I never durst undertake; but after
some conference betwixt us of these things, at Herbipolis, your
transcending knowledge and learning, and your ardent adhortation, put
courage and boldness into me. There selecting the opinions of
philosophers of known credit, and purging the introduction of the wicked
(who, dissemblingly, and with a counterfeited knowledge, did teach that
traditions of Magicians must be learned from very reprobate books of
darkness or from institutions of wonderful operations), and, removing
all darkness, I have at last composed three compendious books of Magic,
and titled them *Of Occult Philosophy*, being a title less offensive,
which books I submit (you excelling in the knowledge of these things) to
your correction and censure, that if I have wrote anything which may
tend either to the contumely of Nature, offending God, or injury of
religion, you may condemn the error; but if the scandal of impiety be
dissolved and purged, you may defend the Tradition of Truth; and that
you would do so with these books, and Magic itself, that nothing may be
concealed which may be profitable, and nothing approved of which cannot
but do hurt; by which means these three books, having passed your
examination with approbation, may at length be thought worthy to come
forth with good success in public, and may not be afraid to come under
the censure of posterity.

*Farewell, and pardon these my bold undertakings*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Trithemius to Agrippa](pnm09)
