[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm84)  [Next](pnm86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

### AGRIPPA AND THE ROSICRUCIANS.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> secrets to be talked over between
Cornelius and his friend related to that study of the mysteries of
knowledge in which the Theosophists assisted one another. Secret
societies, chiefly composed of curious and learned youths, had by this
time become numerous, and numerous especially among the Germans. Not
only the search after the philosopher's stone, which was then worthy to
be prosecuted by enlightened persons, but also the new realms of thought
laid open by the first glance at Greek literature, and by the still more
recent introduction of a study of the Hebrew language, occupied the
minds of these associated scholars. Such studies often carried those who
followed them within the borders of forbidden ground, and therefore
secrecy was a condition necessary to their freedom of inquiry. Towards
the close of the sixteenth century such associations (the foundation of
which had been a desire to keep thought out fetters) were developed into
the form of brotherhoods of Rosicrucians: Physician, Theosophist,
Chemist, and now, by the mercy of God, Rosicrucian, became then the
style in which a brother gloried. The brotherhoods of Rosicrucians are
still commonly remembered, but in the social history of Europe they are
less to be considered than those first confederations of Theosophists,
which nursed indeed mystical errors gathered from the Greeks and Jews,
but out of whose theories there was developed much of a pure
spiritualism that entered into strife with what was outwardly corrupt
and sensual in the body of the Roman Church, and thus prepared the way
for the more vital attacks of the Reformers.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When first Greek
studies were revived, the monks commonly regarded them as essentially
adverse to Roman interests, and the very language seemed to them
infected with the plague of heresy. In the Netherlands it became almost
a proverb with them that to be known for a grammarian was to be reputed
heretic. Not seldom, indeed, in later times, has John Reuchlin, who, for
his Greek and Hebrew scholarship was called, after the manner of his
day, the Phœnix of Germans, and who was the object of an ardent hero
worship to men like Cornelius Agrippa, been called also the Father of
the Reformation. Certainly Luther, Erasmus, and Melancthon had
instruction from him; by him it was that Schwartzerd had been taught to
call himself Melancthon; and many will remember how, after his death,
Erasmus, in a pleasant dialogue, raised his old friend to the rank of
saint, and prayed to him, "Oh, holy soul, be favorable to the languages;
be favorable to those that love honorers of the languages; be propitious
to the sacred tongues." But Reuchlin—for the taste of smoke in it,
Reuchlin *quasi* Reeki, his name was turned into the Greek form,
Capnio,—Reuchlin, or Capnio, never passed as a reformer beyond
detestation of the vices of the priesthood. Like Cornelius, who begun
his life before the public as a scholar by an act of homage to his
genius, Reuchlin loved liberty and independence, cherished the idol of
free conscience, but never fairly trusted himself to its guidance. To
the last an instinct of obedience to the church governed his actions,
and the spiritual gold he could extract from Plato, Aristotle, or the
wonderful Cabala of the Jews, was in but small proportion to the dross
fetched up with it from the same ancient mines.

A contemporary notion of the Reformation, not without some rude
significance in this respect, is said to have been obtruded upon Charles
V. by a

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

small body of unknown actors, who appeared before him in 1530, when he
was in Germany. He had been dining with his brother Ferdinand, and did
not refuse their offer to produce a comedy in dumb show. One dressed as
a scholar, labelled Capnio, brought before the emperor a bundle of
sticks—some crooked and some straight—laid them down in the highway, and
departed. Then entered another, who professed to represent Erasmus,
looked at the sticks, shook his head, made various attempts to
straighten the crooked ones, and finding that he could not do so, shook
his head over them again, put them down where he had found them, and
departed. Then came an actor, labelled Luther, with a torch, who set all
that was crooked in the bundle blazing. When he was gone entered one
dressed as an emperor, who tried in vain to put the fire out with his
sword. Last came Pope Leo X., to whom, grieving dismally over the
spectacle before him, there were two pails brought; one contained oil,
the other water. His holiness, to quell the fire, poured over it the
bucketful of oil, and while the flame attracted all eyes by the power,
beyond mastery, with which it shot up towards heaven, the actors made
their escape undetected.

Now, it was over the crooked sticks of Capnio, and many other matters
difficult of comprehension, that Cornelius and his confederates were
bent in curious and anxious study. "The bearer of the letters," said
Landulph, in excusing himself on the plea of illness, from a winter
journey to a friend at Avignon—"the bearer of these letters is a German,
native of Nuremberg, but dwelling at Lyons; and he is a curious inquirer
after hidden mysteries, a free man restrained by no fetters, who,
impelled by I know not what rumor concerning you, desires to sound your
depths." That the man himself might be sounded, as one likely to have
knowledge of some important

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

things, and that if it seemed fit, he should be made a member of their
brotherhood, was the rest of the recommendation of this person by
Landulph to his friend Agrippa.

At Lyons were assembled many members of his league, awaiting the arrival
of the young soldier-philosopher. His early taste for an inquiry into
mysteries had caused him to take all possible advantage, as a scholar,
of each change of place and each extension of acquaintance among learned
men who were possessors of rare books. He had searched every accessible
volume that might help him in the prosecution of the studies that had
then a fascination, not for him only, but for not a few of the acutest
minds in Christendom. At that time there was, in the modern sense, no
natural science; the naturalists of ancient Greece and Rome being the
sole authorities in whom the learned could put trust. Of the miraculous
properties of plants and animals, and parts of animals, even at the
close of the sixteenth century, careful and sober men placed as accepted
knowledge many extravagant ideas on record. At the beginning of the
century, when a belief in the influences of the stars, in the
interferences of demons, and in the most wonderful properties of bodies,
was the rule among learned and unlearned—Luther himself not excluded
from the number—an attempt to collect and group, if it might be,
according to some system, the most recondite secrets of what passed for
the divine ordering of Nature, was in no man's opinion foolish, though
in the opinion of the greater number criminal. Belief in the mysteries
of magic, not want of belief, caused men to regard with enmity and dread
researches into secrets that might give to those by whom they were
discovered subtle and superhuman power, through possessing which they
would acquire an influence, horrible to suspect, over their
fellow-creatures. Detaching their search into the mysteries

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

of the universe from all fear of this kind, the members of such secret
societies as that to which Cornelius belonged gathered whatever fruit
they could from the forbidden tree, and obtained mutual benefit by frank
exchange of information. Cornelius had already, by incessant search,
collected notes for a complete treatise upon magic, and of these not a
few were obtained from Reuchlin's Hebrew-Christian way of using the
Cabala.

From Avignon, after a short stay, Cornelius Agrippa went to Lyons, and
remaining there some weeks, compared progress with his friends, and no
doubt also formally divested himself of any further responsibility
connected with the Spanish enterprise. Towards the end of this year, a
friend at Cologne, Theodoric, Bishop of Cyrene, wrote, expressing
admiration of him, as of one among so many thousand Germans who at
sundry times and places had displayed in equal degree power to labor
vigorously as a man at arms as well as man of letters. Who does not
know, the bishop asks, how few of many thousands have done that' He
envies those who can thus earn the wreath of Mars without losing the
favor of Minerva, and calls the youth "in arms a man, in scholarship a
teacher." To escape the soldier's life of bondage seems to be now the
ambition of the scholar. With the world before him, in the twenty-third
year of his age, well born, distinguished among all who knew him for the
rare extent of his attainments, Cornelius, attended by his servant,
Stephen, quitted his friends at Lyons, and rode to Authun, where he was
received in the abbey of a liberal and hospitable man, physician,
theologian, and knight by turns, M. Champier, who, having been born at
Saint Saphorin-le-Chateau, near Lyons, was called Symphorianus Champier,
or Campegius, and who, not content with his own noble ancestry, assigned
himself, by right of the Campegius, to the

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

family of the Campegi of Bologna, and assumed its arms. He studied at
Paris *Litera humaniora*, at Montpellier medicine, and practiced at
Lyons. He lived to obtain great fame, deserving title, and losing after
his death all. It was not until five years after this visit from
Cornelius Agrippa that Symphorianus, acting as body physician to the
Duke of Lorraine, was knighted on the battle-field of Marignano. Among
his writings, those which most testify his sympathy with the inquiries
of Cornelius, are a book on the Miracles. of Scripture, a Life of Arnold
of Villeneuve, and a French version of Sibylline oracles. This Champier
then sympathized with the enthusiasm of the young theosophist, and under
his roof the first venture of Cornelius before the world of letters
seems to have been planned. In the last week of May, we find that he has
sent Stephen to fetch DeBrie from Dole, has summoned Antonius Xanthus
from Niverne, and wishes, in association with Symphorianus, to arrange a
meeting with Landulph, at any convenient place and time. He has
something in hand concerning which he wishes to take counsel with his
comrades. A few days afterwards he and Landulph are at Dole together;
and while Cornelius has left Dole for a short time to go to Chalon (sur
Saone), his friend sends word to him that he has engaged on his behalf
the interest of the Archbishop of Besancon (Antony I., probably not an
old man, since he was alive thirty years afterwards), who desires
greatly to see him, and boasts that he can give information of some
things unknown perhaps even to him. The archbishop is impatient to see
the person who has stored up from rare books, even those written in
Greek and Hebrew, so great a number of the secrets of the universe.
Landulph, to content him, antedates the time appointed for his friend's
return, and while reporting this, adds that there are many at Dole loud
in the

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

praise of Cornelius, and none louder than himself. The influence of his
associates is evidently at work on his behalf among the magnates of the
town and university of Dole, and learned men in the adjoining towns of
Burgundy, for it is at Dole that he has resolved to make his first
public appearance as a scholar, by expounding in a series of orations
Reuchlin's book on the Mirific Word. At Chalon, however, Cornelius fell
sick of a summer pestilence, from which he was recovering on the eighth
of July. As soon as health permitted he returned to Dole, where there
was prepared for him a cordial reception.

Dole is a pretty little town, and at that time possessed the university
which was removed in after years to Besancon. Its canton was called, for
its beauty and fertility, the Val d’Amour; and when Besancon was
independent of the lords of Burgundy, Dole was their capital. A pleasant
miniature capitol, with not four thousand inhabitants, a parliament, a
university, a church of Notre Dame whereof the tower could be seen from
distant fields, a princely residence—Dole la Joyeuse they called it
until thirty years before Cornelius Agrippa declaimed his orations
there; but after it had been, in 1479, captured and despoiled by a
French army, it was called Dole la Dolente.

Mistress of Dole and Burgundy was Maximilian's daughter, Margaret of
Austria, who, in this year of Agrippa's life, was twenty-nine years old.
She was already twice a widow. When affianced twice—once vainly to
France, a second time to Spain, and likely to perish in a tempest before
reaching her appointed husband—she had wit to write a clever epitaph
upon herself. Her Spanish husband died almost after the first embrace,
and she had since, after four years of wedded happiness, lost her true
husband, Philibert of Savoy. She was twenty-four years old when that
happened, and resolved to make an end of marrying.

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In 1506, after the
death of Archduke Philip, her father Maximilian being guardian of his
grandson Charles the Fifth, made Margaret his governor over the
Netherlands, and appointed her to rule also over Burgundy and the
Charolois. Thus she came to be, in the year 1509, mistress at Dole. A
clever, lively woman, opposed strongly to France, and always mindful of
the interests of that house of Austria, to which the family of young
Agrippa was attached, Margaret was well known for her patronage of
letters and her bounty towards learned men. It would be, therefore, a
pleasant transfer of his loyalty, Agrippa, thought, from Maximilian to
Margaret, if he could thereby get rid of what he regarded as camp
slavery under the one, and earn the favor of the other in the academic
grove. To earn Margaret's goodwill and help upon the royal road to
fortune was one main object of Cornelius when he announced at Dole that
he proposed to expound Reuchlin's book, on the Mirific Word, in
orations, to which, inasmuch as they were to be delivered in honor of
the most serene Princess Margaret, the whole public would have
gratuitous admission.

Poor youth! he could not possibly have made a more genuine and honest
effort, or one less proper to be used by evil men for the damnation of
his character. Margaret was the princess to whom of all others he was
able to pay unaffected homage, and Reuchlin, then the boast of Germans,
was the scholar of whom before every other, he, a German youth, might
choose to hold discourse to the Burgundians. Of Reuchlin, Ægidius, chief
of the Austin Friars, wrote, that he "had blessed him and all mortals by
his works." Philip Beroaldus, the younger, wrote to him: "Pope Leo X.
has read your Pythagorean book, as he reads all good books, greedily;
then it was read by the Cardinal de’ Medici, and I am expecting next to
have my turn." This book, which had been read by the

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pope himself with
eager pleasure, was a wonder of the day, and was in the most perfect
unison with the whole tone of Agrippa's mind; he really understood it
deeply, it was most dear to him as a theosophist, and he was not to be
blamed if he felt, also that of all books in the world there was none of
which the exposition would so fully serve his purpose of displaying the
extent and depth of his own store of knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exposition of the Cabala](pnm86)
