[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pnm79)  [Next](pnm81) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JP00/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philosophy of Natural Magic*, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de
Laurence ed. \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

### CHAPTER LXXI.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Of Many Words Joined Together, as in Sentences and Verses; and of the Virtues and Astrictions of Charms</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Besides</span> the virtues of words and names,
there is also a greater virtue found in sentences, from the truth
contained in them, which hath a very great power of impressing,
changing, binding, and establishing, so that being used it doth shine
the more, and being resisted is more confirmed and consolidated; which
virtue is not in simple words, but in sentences, by which anything is
affirmed or denied; of which sort are verses, enchantments,
imprecations, deprecations, orations, invocations, obtestations,
adjurations, conjurations, and such like. Therefore, in composing verses
and orations for attracting the virtue of any star or deity, you must
diligently consider what virtue any star contains, as, also, what
effects and operations, and to infer them in verses, by praising,
extolling, amplifying, and setting forth those things which such a kind
of star is wont to cause by way of its influence, and by vilifying and
dispraising those things which it is wont to destroy and hinder, and by
supplicating and begging for that which we desire to get, and by
condemning and detesting that which we would have destroyed and
hindered; and after the same manner to make an elegant oration, and duly
distinct, by articles, with competent numbers and proportions. Moreover,
magicians command that we call upon and pray by the names of the same
star, or name to them to whom such a verse belongs, by their wonderful
things, or miracles, by their courses and ways in their sphere, by their
light, by the dignity of their kingdom, by the beauty and brightness
that is in it, by their strong and powerful virtues, and by such like
things as these. As

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Psyche, in
Apuleius, prays to Ceres, saying, "I beseech thee by thy fruitful right
hand, I intreat thee by the joyful ceremonies of harvests, by the quiet
silence of thy chests, by the winged chariots of dragons, thy servants,
by the furrows of the Sicilian earth, the devouring wagon, the clammy
earth, by the place of going down into cellars at the light nuptials of
Proserpina, and returns at the light inventions of her daughter, and
other things which are concealed in her temple in the city of Eleusis,
in Attica." Besides, with the divers sorts of the names of the stars,
they command us to call upon them by the names of the Intelligences
ruling over the stars themselves, of which we shall speak more at large
in their proper place. They that desire further examples of these, let
them search into the hymns of Orpheus, than which nothing is more
efficacious in Natural Magic, if they, together with their
circumstances, which wise men know, be used according to a due harmony
with all attention. But to return to our purpose. Such like verses,
being aptly and duly made, according to the Rule of the Stars, and being
full of signification and meaning, and opportunely pronounced with
vehement affection (as according to the number and the proportion of
their articles, so according to the form resulting from the articles)
and, by the violence of imagination, do confer a very great power in the
enchanter, and sometimes transfers it upon the thing enchanted, to bind
and direct it to the same purpose for which the affections and speeches
of the enchanter are intended. Now, the instrument of enchanters is a
most pure, harmonical spirit—warm, breathing, living, bringing with it
motion, affection, and signification; composed of its parts, endued with
sense, and conceived by reason. By the quality, therefore, of this
spirit, and by the celestial similitude, thereof (besides those things
which have already been spoken

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

of) verses, also, from the opportunity of time, receive from above most
excellent virtues; and, indeed, are more sublime and efficacious than
spirits, and. vapors exhaling out of the vegetable life, such as herbs,
roots, gums, aromatical things, and fumes and such like. And, therefore,
magicians enchanting things, are wont to blow and breathe upon them the
words of the verse, or to breathe in the virtue with the spirit, that so
the whole virtue of the soul be directed to the thing enchanted, being
disposed for the receiving of said virtue. And here it is to be noted
that every oration, writing and words, as they induce accustomed motions
by their accustomed numbers, proportions, and form, so (besides their
usual order) being pronounced, or wrote backwards, move unto unusual
effects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXII. Of the Wonderful Power of Enchantments](pnm81)
