[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmt19)  [Next](dmt21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### III

#### A SHORT CREED BY AL-ASH‘ARI

Our doctrine which we teach and our religion (*diyana*) which we follow
consists in clinging fast to the Book of God and the Usage (*sunna*) of
His Prophet and to that which is handed down from the Companions, their
immediate followers (*tabi‘s*) and from the leaders (*imams*) in
tradition--with that we take refuge; and we teach that which Ahmad ibn
Hanbal--may God illumine his face, exalt his rank and make great his
reward--followed; and we shun that which is opposed to his doctrine. For
he is the excellent leader, the perfect chief, through whom God made
plain the truth, when error was made manifest, and showed the path and
smote down the innovations of the innovators, the deviations of the
deviators and the doubts of the doubters. So, the mercy of God be upon
him for an appointed leader and an instructed chief, and upon all the
leaders of the Muslims.

The sum of our doctrine is this, that we believe in God, His Angels, His
Books, His Apostles, in all that has come from God, and what trustworthy
men (*thiqat*) have reported from

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

the Apostles of God; we oppose nothing thereof. That God is One God,
Single, One, Eternal; beside Him no God exists; He has taken to Himself
no wife (*sahiba*), nor child (*walad*); and that Muhammad is His
Servant (*abd*) and His Apostle. That Paradise and Hell are Verity and
that the Hour (*as-sa‘a*) will come without doubt, and God will arouse
those that are in the graves. That God has settled Himself (*istawa*)
upon His throne, as He has said, (Qur. 20, 4); "the Rahman has settled
Himself upon His throne." That God has a countenance, as He has said,
(Qur. 55, 27); "and the countenance of thy Lord will abide, full of
majesty and glory;" and two hands, as He has said, (Qur. 5, 69); "much
more! both His hands are spread out," and (Qur. 38, 75); "that which I
have created with both My hands;" and two eyes, without asking how
(*bila kayfa*), as He has said, (Qur. 54, 14'); "which swims forth under
Our eyes." That whoever thinks that God's name is other than He, is in
error. That God has Knowledge (*ilm*), as He has said, (Qur. 35, 12);
"Not one woman becomes pregnant and brings forth, except by His
knowledge." We maintain that God has Power (*qudra*), as He has said,
(Qur. 41, 14); "and have they not seen that God who created them is
stronger than they?" We maintain that God has Hearing (*sam*) and Seeing
(*basar*) and do not deny it, as do the Mu‘tazilites, Jahmites and
Kharijites. We teach that God's Word (*kalam*) is uncreated, and that He
has never created anything except by saying to it, "Be!" and it
forthwith became, as He has said, (Qur, 16, 42); "Our speech to anything
when We willed it was, 'Be' and it was." Nothing exists upon earth, be
it good or bad, but that which, God wills; but all things are by God's
Will (*mashya*). No one is able to do anything before God does it,
neither is anyone independent of God, nor can he withdraw himself from
God's Knowledge. There is no Creator but God. The works (*amals*) of
creatures are created and predestined by God, as He said, (Qur. 37, 94);
"and God has created you and what ye do." Man is able to create nothing;
but they are created, as He has said, (Qur. 35, 31); "Is there any
Creator except God?" and (Qur. 16, 17)

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "and is He who
created like him who created not?" and (Qur. 52, 35); "were they created
out of nothing, or are they the creators?" and such passages are many in
the Qur’an. And God maintains the believers in obedience to Him, is
gracious unto them, cares for them, reforms them, and guides them
aright; but the unbelievers He leads astray, guides them not aright,
vouchsafes them not Faith (*iman*), by His Grace, as the People of error
and pride maintain. For should He be gracious unto them and help them
aright, then would they be pious, and should He guide them aright, then
would they allow themselves to be guided aright, as He has said, (Qur.
7, 177); "whom God guideth aright, he allows himself to be guided
aright, and whom He leads astray, they are he losers." God is able to
help the unbelieving aright and to be gracious unto thorn, so that they
shall become believing, but He wills that they shall be unbelieving as
is known. For He has made them impervious to all help and sealed their
hearts. Good and Evil happen according to the Destiny (*qada*) and
Decree (*qadar*) of God for good and. evil, for the sweet and the
bitter. We know that the misfortune that befalls us is not in order that
we may go astray, and that the good fortune which befalls us is not in
order that we may go aright. We have no control over that which is good
or hurtful to us, except so far as God wills. We flee from our anxieties
to God and commit at all times our distress and poverty to Him. We teach
that the Qur’an is God's Word, and that it is uncreated, and that
whosoever says that it is created is an unbeliever (*kafir*). We believe
that God at the Day of Resurrection (*yawm al-qiyama*) will be visible
to the eyes, as the moon is seen upon the night of the full moon; the
believers will see Him, according to traditions which have come down
from the Prophet. We teach that while the believers will see Him, the
unbelievers will be separated from Him by a wall of division, as God has
said, (Qur. 83, 15); "Surely not! They will be separated from their
Lord, upon that Day." We teach that Moses besought God that he might see
Him in this world; then God revealed Himself to the mountain and turned
it into

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

dust and taught Moses thereby that he could not see Him in this world
(Qur. 7, 139). We are of the opinion that we may not accuse anyone of
unbelief (*kufr*), who prays towards Mecca, on account of sin committed
by him, such as unchastity, theft, wine drinking, as the Kharijites
believe, who judge that these thereby become unbelievers. We teach that
whoever commits a great sin (*kabira*), or anything like it, holding it
to be allowed, is an unbeliever, since he does not believe in its
prohibition. We teach that Islam is a wider idea than Faith (*iman*), so
that not every Islam is Faith. We believe that God turns the hearts
upside down, and holds them between two of His fingers, that He lays the
heavens upon a finger and the earth upon a finger, according to the
tradition from the Prophet. We believe that God will not leave in Hell
any of those who confess His Unity (*muwahhid*) and hold fast to the
Faith, and that there is no Hell for him whom the Prophet has by his
witness appointed to Paradise. We hope for Paradise for sinners and fear
on their account, that they will be punished in Hell. We teach that God
will release a few out of Hell, on account of Muhammad's intercession
(*shafa‘a*) after they have been scorched there. We believe in the
punishment of the grave. We believe that the Tank (*hawd*) and the
Balance are Verities: that the Bridge *as-Sirat* is a Verity; that the
Arousing (*ba‘th*) after death is a Verity; that God will set up His
creatures in a place (*mawqif*) and will hold a reckoning with the
Believers. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) We believe that Faith
(*iman*) consists in word (*qawl*) and in work (*amal*) and that it
increases and diminishes. We trust in the sound Traditions handed down
from the Apostle of God, which trustworthy people (*thiqat*), just man
from just man, up to the Apostle, have transmitted. We hold by the love
of the early

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Believers
(*salaf*), whom God chose to be Companions to the Prophet, and we praise
them with the praise with which God praised them, and we carry on their
succession. We assert that the Imam succeeding the Apostle of God was
Abu Bakr; that God through him made the Religion (*din*) mighty, and
caused him to conquer the Apostates (*murtadds*). The Muslims made him
their Imam, just as Muhammad had made him Imam at prayers. Then followed
\[as legal Imam\] Umar ibn al-Khattab; then Uthman ibn Affan; his
murderers killed him out of wickedness and enmity; then Ali ibn Abi
Talib. These are the Imams after the Apostle, and their Khalifate is
that of the Prophetic office \[*i.e.*, they are, though not prophets,
successors of the Prophet\]. We bear witness of Paradise for the Ten
(*al-asharatu-l-mubashshara*), to whom the Apostle bore witness of it,
and we carry on the succession of the other Companions of the Prophet
and hold ourselves far from that which was in dispute between them. We
hold that the four Imams were in the true way, were rightly guided and
excellent, so that no one equals them in excellence. We hold as true the
traditions which the People of Tradition (*naql*) have established,
concerning the descent of God to the lowest heaven (*sama ad-dunya*),
and that the Lord will say, "Is there a supplicant? Is there a seeker
for forgiveness?" and the rest of that which they have handed down and
established, contrary to that which the mistaken and misled opine. We
ground ourselves in our opposition on the Qur’an, the Sunna of the
Prophet, the agreement of the Muslims and what is in accordance
therewith, but put forth no novelty (*bid‘a*) not sanctioned by God, and
opine of God nothing that we have not been taught. We teach that God
will come on the Day of Resurrection, as He has said, (Qur. 89, 23);
"When the earth shall be turned to dust, and the Lord shall appear and
the angels, rank on rank," and that God is near to His servants, in what
way (*kayfa*) He wills, as He has said, (Qur. 50, 15); "and We are
nearer to him than the artery in his neck;" and (Qur. 53, 8); "Then He
approached and came near and was two bows' length distant or even
nearer." To our Religion (*din*)

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

belongs further, that we on Fridays and on festival days pray behind
every person, pious and profane--so are the conditions for
congregational prayers, as it is handed down from Abd Allah ibn Umar
that he prayed behind al-Hajjaj. To our Religion belongs the wiping
(*mash*) of the inner boots (*khuffs*) upon a journey and at home, in
contradiction to the deniers of this. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)
We uphold the prayer for peace for the Imams of the Muslims, submission
to their office, and maintain the error of those who hold it right to
rise against them whenever there may be apparent in them a falling away
from right. We are against armed rebellion against them and civil war.

We believe in the appearance of anti-Christ (*ad-Dajjal*) according to
the tradition handed down from the Prophet; in the punishment of the
grave, and in Munkar and Nakir and in their questions to the buried in
their graves. We hold the tradition of the journey to heaven (*mi‘raj*,
Qur. 17) of Muhammad as true, and declare many of the visions in sleep
to be true, and we say that there is an explanation for them. We uphold
the alms for the dead of the Muslims and prayer for them, and believe
that God will help them therewith. We hold as true that there are
enchanters in the world, and that enchantment is and exists. We hold as
a religious duty the prayer which is held over the dead of those who
have prayed toward Mecca, whether they have been believers or godless;
we uphold also their right of testation. We acknowledge that Paradise
and Hell are created, and that whoever dies or is killed, dies or is
killed at his appointed time (*ajal*); that the articles of sustenance
(*rizq*) from God, with which He sustains His creatures, are permitted
(*halal*) and forbidden (*haram*); <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md)
that Satan makes evil suggestions to men, and puts

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

them in doubt, and causes them to be possessed, contrary to that which
the Mu‘tazilites and the Jahmites maintain, as God said, (Qur. 2, 276);
"Those who take usury will \[at the Resurrection\] stand there like one
whom Satan causes to be possessed by madness," and (Qur. 114, 4 *ff*.);
"I take my refuge in God, from the evil suggestion, from the stealthy
one who makes suggestions in the hearts of men, by means of men and
Jinn." We affirm that God may distinguish the pious by signs which He
manifests through them. Our teaching concerning the little children of
the polytheists (*mushriqs*) is this, that God will kindle a fire in the
other world for them, and will say, "Run in there;"--as the tradition
says. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) We believe that God knows what
men do and what they will to do, what happens and how that which does
not happen, if it should happen, would happen. We believe in the
obedience of the Imams and in their counsel of the Muslims. We consider
right the separation from every inciter to innovation (*bid‘a*) and the
turning aside from the People of wandering desires (*ahl
al-ahwa*).--*Translated from the Arabic text in Spitta's Zur Geschichte
al-As‘ari's*, pp. 133 *ff*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[296:1](dmt20.htm#fr_0.md) For Muslim eschatology
reference may still he made to Sale's introduction to the Qur’an, § 4.
The punishment of the grave is what, in the case of unbelievers, follows
the inquisition by the two angels *Munkar* and *Nakir*; see on them
Lane's *Modern Egyptians*, chap. xxviii; on the whole subject, see
translations by Gautier and Wolff and tractate by Rüling (Bibliography,
p. 367)

<span id="fn_1"></span>[298:1](dmt20.htm#fr_1.md) This, one of the dividing
questions between Sunnites and Shi’ites, belongs to theology as well as
law. See [p. 314](dmt22.htm#page_314.md) and Goldziher, *Zur
Literaturgeschichte der Si‘a*, p. 87.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[298:2](dmt20.htm#fr_2.md) The Mu‘tazilites held
that articles of sustenance of a forbidden nature, such as pork or wine,
could not be called *rizq* in this technical sense; that God could not
so use them. The orthodox retorted <span id="page_299">p. 299</span>
that a man might live his life out on forbidden things; had he then been
independent of God as to his sustenance? The Mu‘tazilites defined *rizq*
as "a possession which its possessor eats" and as "that from which one
is not hindered from profiting"; the orthodox, as a name for that which
God sends to man and the other animals and they eat it and profit by it.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[299:1](dmt20.htm#fr_3.md) Some will run into the
fire and find themselves immediately in Paradise; these would have been
believers. Others will refuse, and will be treated as their parents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV: A Short Creed by Al-Ghazzali](dmt21.md)
