[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmt26)  [Next](dmt28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

### II

### ON MUSLIM HISTORY AND ON PRESENT CONDITION OF MUSLIM WORLD

AUGUST MÜLLER: *Die Beherrscher der Gläubigen*. Berlin, 1882. A very
brightly written sketch based on thorough knowledge.

GUSTAV WEIL: *Geschichte der Chalifen*. 3 vols. Mannheim, 1846-1851.

SIR WILLIAM MUIR: *The Caliphate, its Rise, Decline and Fall*. London,
1891.

THEODOR NÖLDEKE: *Zur tendentiösen Gestaltung der Urgeschichte des
Islâms*. ZDMG, lii, pp. 16 ff. All Nöldeke's papers on the early history
of Islam are worthy of the most careful study.

G. VON VLOTEN: *Zur Abbasiden Geschichte*. ZDMG, lii, pp. 213 ff. On the
early Abbasids.

R. E. BRÜNNOW: *De Charidschiten unter den ersten Omayyaden*. Leyden,
1884.

EDUARD SACHAU: *Über eine Arabische Chronik aus Zanzibar*. Mitth. a.d.
Sem. f. Orient. Sprachen. Berlin, 1898. On Ibadites.

GEORGE PERCY BADGER: *History of the Imams and Seyyids of Oman*, by
Salîl-ibn-Razîk. London: Hakluyt Society, 1871. Valuable for Ibadite
history, law and theology.

M. J. DE GOEJE: *Mémoire sur les Carmathes du Bahraïn et les Fatimides*.
Leyden, 1886.

JOHN NICHOLSON: *An Account of the Establishment of the Fatemite Dynasty
in Africa*. Tübingen and Bristol, 1840.

QUATREMÈRE: *Mémoires historiques sur la dynastie des Khalifes
Fatimites*. JA, 3, ii.

SYLVESTRE DE SACY: *Exposé de la religion des Druzes et la vie du
Khalife Hakem-biamr-allah*. 2 vols. Paris, 1838.

F. WÜSTENFELD: *Geschichte der Fatimiden-Khalifen*. Göttingen, 1881.

STANLEY LANE-POOLE: *A History of Egypt in the Middle Ages*. New York,
1901. For the origin and founding of the Fatimid Dynasty, the Khalifa
al-Hakim, etc.

H. L. FLEISCHER: *Briefwechsel zwischen den Anführern der Wahhabiten und
dem Pasha von Damaskus*. *Kleinere Schriften*, iii, pp. 341 ff. First
published in ZDMG for year 1857.

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

E. REHATSEK; *The History of the Wahhabys in Arabia and In India*.
Journal of Asiatic Society of Bengal. No. xxxviii (read January, 1880).

*Turkey in Europe*, by "Odysseus." London, 1900. The present situation,
with its historical antecedents in European Turkey and the Balkans
generally.

H. O. DWIGHT: *Constantinople and its Problems*. New York, 1901.

A. S. WHITE: *The Expansion of Egypt*. London, 1899. The present
situation in Egypt and its historical antecedents.

W. W. HUNTER: *Our Indian Mussulmans*. London, 1871.

SIR LEWIS PELLY: *The Miracle Play of Hasan and Husain*. London, 1879.

W. S. BLUNT: *The Future of Islam*. London, 1880.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. On Muslim Traditions and Law](dmt28.md)
