[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kmu02)  [Next](kmu04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428628258/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Kundalini, The Mother of the Universe*, by Rishi Singh Gherwal,
\[1930\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### INTRODUCTION

#### KUNDALINI, THE MOTHER OF THE UNIVERSE.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"O God of Gods, Thou art a  
Father, Mother, kinsman, friend.  
Knowledge, riches, all—I find in Thee,  
All good Thy being comprehends."

</div>

India is the mysterious land chosen as her own by Kundalini, The Mother
of the Universe. What we read in old histories and Holy Bibles, and the
records, can be seen there today.

In India there are Yogis who perform such marvelous feats that Doctors,
Scientists and Chemists are unable to solve them, and I may say, are
unable to understand them. For instance, such feats, as lying down upon
blazing logs of fire; walking over red hot fire that has been especially
prepared by burning ten tons of wood,—twenty men walked over this
without a burn—not even a hair on their feet; also feats of levitation,
walking on water, etc., equally as astonishing.

Yogi Haridas, at Lahore, willingly permitted

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

himself to be buried alive for forty days under fifteen feet of earth.
After that length of time, he was taken out as normal as ever. Such as
that, and standing on one leg for years; head buried in the earth with
both legs up in the air for days; living without food for forty
years,—these and many other things can be seen in India today.

Any one wishing to read further about this may obtain the author's
booklet entitled: "Marvelous feats performed by Yogis through Yoga."

I have received many letters asking: "How can that be done?" The answer
is, they always do this through the Kundalini (The Divine Mother) by
awakening her from her sleep, for then any one can have supernatural
power—this is her gift with unfoldment.

"Kundalini the Giver of Health"; "Kundalini the Giver of Wealth";
"Kundalini the Giver of Joy and Happiness"; "Kundalini the Giver of
Faith"; "Kundalini the Giver of Bliss, Life, and Powers."

By awakening her, seeming miracles can be performed by men and women.
The resurrection came as a living faith; see "The Great Masters of the
Himalayas"—by the author.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

The Kundalini is always back of all powers and feats of seeming
miracles. She is the All in All.

Swami Vivekananda says: "Whenever there is any manifestation of what is
ordinarily called supernatural power or wisdom, there must have been a
little (control over the) current of Kundalini which found its way into
the Sushumna. Only, in the vast majority of such cases of
supernaturalism, they ignorantly stumble on some practice which set
free, (and made them conscious of) a minute portion, (of the control) of
the coiled up Kundalini."

The Kundalini (Divine Mother), always keeps for herself a chosen
country, in which her higher wisdom is preserved from all dangers.

That land is India. When she wanted to see the play of helplessness,
weakness and ignorance of the world, she chose that land. When the
Kundalini again wants to raise up from ignorance to Mighty Wisdom, and a
Blissful state, she chooses India again, for the purpose of raising
India once more to the highest of Pure Wisdom.

In ages past the greatest Avatars, of India—Sri Rama Chandar, Ram Sri,
Sri Krishna,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King Janak,
[Yajnavalkya](errata.htm#1), Guru [Nanak](errata.htm#2), Buddha and
countless others. The present day we have Saint Mahatma Gandhi.

Why does the Kundalini choose India? To perfect her being and for the
purpose of perfecting harmony. That only can save the world from misery
of selfishness and hate.

Only India can find harmony. That harmony is by change of heart. Such
change and harmony comes by Yoga. Yoga can and will change the mind,
heart, and action; this change is from within; not from without.

Not by politics nor by creeds but by the realization of the Goddess
Kundalini, remodeling life by pure Wisdom—not by knowledge. This Divine
Harmony is not alone for suffering humanity, but for even the smallest
insects, animals, etc.

That change of heart, that Blessed Harmony, the son of Mother India,
Mahatma Gandhi, has shown the world.

Have I lost my sense of understanding to make a statement about India?
Not so, I am conscious and seeing with clear vision. The India that has
kept true to Spirituality, in the past ages against all storms of
material opposition, is now the chosen land of Mother Kundalini.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

I sincerely trust that my many friends and seekers of Truth, who are
looking to California for the future Spiritual Teacher of the world,
will not be hurt by the above statement. Truth is Truth, although it
hurts many, many times.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Lo, in the East this Wisdom's showering Light  
Adorable, hath sprung from out the night;  
Now may the Dawns, heaven daughters, spread  
Shining afar, a path for man to tread."

</div>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

"If I were to look over the whole world to find out the country most
richly endowed with all the wealth, power and beauty that nature can
bestow, in some parts a very paradise on earth—I should point to India.
If I were asked under what sky the human mind has most fully developed
some of its choicest gifts, has most deeply pondered on the greatest
problems of life, and has found solutions of some of them which well
deserved the attention even of those who have studied Plato and Kant, I
should point to India. If I were to ask myself from

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

what literature we, here in Europe, may draw the corrective which is
most wanted in order to make our inner life more perfect, more
universal, in fact more truly human, again I should point to India."

—MAX MULLER.

Pope Pius IX says:—"India alone has remained true to the heart of the
spiritual motives." (From Sir Woodroffe's book—"Is India Civilized?")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Yoga and its Object](kmu04)
