[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kmu07)  [Next](kmu09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428628258/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Kundalini, The Mother of the Universe*, by Rishi Singh Gherwal,
\[1930\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### THE POWER OF THE PRANAYAMA YOGA.

What is Pranayama? It is the stepping stone of the Yogi, or in other
words the foundation, the helpmate of the Yogi in controlling his
enemies—freeing him from diseases. The Pranayama is the means by which
the Yogi masters levitation, walks upon the water, and also the means of
living buried alive for years. Pranayama is the Master Key by which
Yogis open the door of liberation, and master all the forces.

Pranayama is the best method for suffering humanity to overcome
diseases, conquer fear, overcome nervousness or despondency. It opens
the door of Blessed Peace, it gives hope to the hopeless, power to the
poor, faith to the faithless. There is no other way to control the mind,
as mind is nothing without desire or thought; desires and thoughts are
nothing without Prana.

What is Prana? Prana is everything. "Prana is Fire; Prana is the Sun;
the Cloud; the Wind; Prana is the Killer of Demons;

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prana is the
Earth. It is what is and is not, immortal. \* \* \* Prana is the center
of everything. "—Prasna Upanishad.

Prana is like the forces of electricity. Everything that moves is moved
by Prana. Prana moves the lungs, then air goes in and out as breath.
Prana is back of everything as force. The mind is lord of the senses and
the organs—the Prana is lord of the mind: The mind is the motor—the
Prana is the power that moves the motor.

The Prana is the great power of the Mother Kundalini. From the Prana
there are born other Pranas, namely,—Apana, Samana, Vyana, and Udana.
These are in the various parts of the body, but Prana is the power back
of All and All.

How do Yogis control this power? By Pranayama. Prana is the Vital or
life force—Yama, how to control it. This is why Yogis call Pranayama the
stepping stone, or helpmate.

Let us see what H. Y. Pradipika, the most famous, says: "When the breath
is irregular, the mind wanders, but when the breath is under control the
mind is also under control. Because of this, Yogis live as long as they
want to."

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Everyone should learn to control the breath, by the practice of
Pranayama. "Man lives as long as he has breath in his body. When the
breath goes out he is said to be dead."

"As long as the Nadis (nerves) are not pure, the Prana can not go
through the Sushumna, and as long as Prana does not go through the
Sushumna there is no success for the Yogi. As soon as the Nadis are
purified, the Yogi succeeds in doing Pranayama, and then his body
becomes slender and light. This is the sign of Pranayama success, for
then the Prana goes through the Sushumna.

"There is no success without purification of the Nadis, and there is no
purification of the Nadis without Pranayama.

"The Brahma (God of Creation), devotes himself to the practice of
Pranayama, and is free from the fear of death.

"When Prana goes through the Sushumna, the mind becomes one-pointed.
This is called Unmani Avastha (the steadiness of the mind).

"It is through the practice of Pranayama Yoga, that Yogi attains Sidhis
(master over

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nature's Forces,
Levitation, etc.).

"By forcing the Prana downward and raising the Apana upward, the Yogi
becomes young, though he be old in years."

There are eight different Pranayamas, that should be learned from a
teacher who has mastered them. Any of the Pranayama practice can cure
the diseases of the nervous system, as countless testimonial letters on
file will show, as Rev. A. K. Burkland, Miss E. Lindsay and others.

The same authority says further: "When Pranayama, called Kevala
Kumbhaka, has been mastered, there is nothing in the three worlds that
can not be attained."

It is by the power of Pranayama that the Yogis do the wonderful feats of
levitation, walking on water, etc. This is not their goal—they only want
liberation—but there is no liberation without awakening the Kundalini.

If the busy people of the world will practice Pranayama just a few
months, they will be happily surprised to see its effect upon the body
and mind. The body will become light and active. Idleness will vanish
like darkness before the light.

Pranayama is easy to practice. Any one

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

can do it, the young, the old, diseased or maimed. It is the key to
everlasting youth.

"Pranayama will have a wonderfully soothing effect on one whenever they
are at war with themselves. They will gain instantaneous peace. Is the
world going hard with you? Do you feel you are losing out in the race of
life? Then I say, practice Pranayama; after the practice you will emerge
wonderfully renewed and renascent, ready to forge ahead in the battle of
life, with new vigour, new faith in yourself and new hope. Are you face
to face with a problem that requires a cool brain and clear thinking,
profound and mature judgement? My advice to you is that before tackling
the problem, attain mental poise by practicing Pranayama. There is
nothing like it for giving poise, peace and balance. In the midst of the
greatest stress and storm, in the thick of the battle, steady yourself
for a supreme effort by practicing Pranayama. Practice this daily
without fail, and you will notice how marvelously, your mental, physical
and spiritual powers, are developed. You will then always be master of
yourself and of the situation. You will always have a tremendous amount
of surplus energy, mentally, physically

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

and spiritually, upon which to draw.

"This will make your life natural and peaceful, free from nervous
exhaustion and worry, because it will enable you to keep your vital
force of life ever renewed and [reinforced](errata.htm#7). It will
enable you to charge your battery, to electrify it every day. Today you
resemble a small boat tossing on the waves of a stormy life without
oars, at the mercy of wind and wave, always in danger of rocks and
shoals. Practice Pranayama and you will plough thru the vast sea of life
like a giant dreadnought.

"Learn Pranayama—practice Pranayama, and be master of yourself and your
circumstances." Excerpt from the Author's Pranayama—Lessons Three and
Four.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Power of Dharana, Dhiyana, and Samyama Yoga](kmu09)
