[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kmu12)  [Next](kmu14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428628258/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Kundalini, The Mother of the Universe*, by Rishi Singh Gherwal,
\[1930\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### WHY WE WORSHIP SIVA

#### (BY UMESH CHANDRA CHAKRAVARTY)

From time immemorial the Hindus are worshipping God Siva who is master
of truth, beauty and bliss. From the highest Himalayas on the north down
to Rameswar in the south and from Chandranath hill on the east to Dwarka
on the west the whole of India is filled up with Siva-temples here and
there. So it is quite needless to give any acquaintance of God Siva to
the Indians whom they are ever-familiar with. Their ins and outs are
ever-filled up with the attributes of Siva and hearts ever spring with
joy in His very worship! This Siva-worship is not only an object of
outward form of Hindu-worship, but the Greatest Saint Acharya Sankara
who perfectly realised within himself the true meaning of Indian worship
of God Siva, declared quite clearly in one of the hymns called "Nirvana
Shatkam" as follows:—"I am beyond all imaginations and forms, I do not
obey any sense but all senses obey Me; there is nothing without Me, I am
Siva Himself in the very Shape of Soul and Joy. This is the real
description of Siva, the worshippers who proceed in their way with this
true acquaintance of the worshipped

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

are surely blessed. His worship required no particular arrangement,—He
is ever satisfied with two little prayers and offerings,—a drop of
water, a leaf of bel and cheek-slap sounds only please Him the most. We
have no second thing to offer to Him, the Atman or Soul is the only
object of His offer. In His well-known hymn of salutation we find the
following expression:—'We bow Thee down O God, full of infinite
[welfare](errata.htm#36) and calmness and the root cause of all the
three worlds. I offer my soul unto Thee. Thou God of gods and Goal of
all." Surrendering of the Self is His only mode of worship, which
transform an earthly being to Divine being full of heavenly bliss. Hence
a blessed holy person sing most loudly the highly esteemed song "Am Siva
Himself am Siva Himself in the very shape of Soul and Joy!"

#### TRUE SIGNIFICANCE

Siva worship does not require the exact image of Siva as depicted in the
hymn of Holy Scripture, but it prefers a bright symbol of Divinity
widely known as "Siva-Lingam"!

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What is Lingam? We
must think deeply and make out its real explanation. Lingam means sign
or symbol. Worship of Such Divine Symbol is a current usage amongst all
nations of the world. The Hindus worship Lingam, the Bouddhas, Stupa,
the Mahomedans, a Blue Stone Pulpit in Kaba and the Christians a Cross
Staff; thus almost every great nation worships a Divine symbol of
whatever shape it may be. The modern historians are of opinion that the
Buddhistic Stupa or Pagoda was transformed into Siva Lingam by mighty
influence of Acharya Sankara. But actually the worship of Siva Lingam is
being practised by the Hindus from unknown pre-historic time. We find
the origin of its history in the last chapter of 'Dharma Samhita' of
'Siva Maha Puranam' that when the world was totally destroyed and there
was nothing but unending flood of water and three original
representations of Godhood namely Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra, Brahma and
Vishnu requested Rudra most fervently for recreation of the universe.
Rudra gladly consented and immersed Himself in a long deep meditation.
Some thousand years being passed in this way and

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

finding no possibility of creation by Him, Vishnu asked Brahma to
perform the task, who finished it instantly. Rudra then rose from the
meditation and finding everything already created by Brahma, because
fired with wrath and at once attempted to destroy. At this Brahma and
Vishnu came before Him and extinguished His wrath by entreaties, and
singing long prayer ire His praise. Easily pleased He was gladdened
instantly with that and with the request of Brahma and others, He threw
off His fiery vigour produced through wrath unto the Sun, who got the
splendid illumination to light up the world. The Divine Vigour of God
Siva, placed thus in the Sun is worshipped thrice a day by all as
Gavatri, Savitri and Saraswati. Thereafter Siva who secured endless life
seeds for the creation through long meditation, put off the Lingam or
Symbol which is the stock of life-seeds and threw it down on the earth.
Thus being thrown off it began to expand both downward and upward and
made unbearable horror to the world. Vishnu went downward and Brahma
upward to get two ends of the same but being utterly unsuccessful were
staying quite unhappy. At this

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

moment some words were heard to be uttered in the
[Ethereal](errata.htm#37) plane that "If this blazing Symbol of Divine
vigour be worshipped by all it would be pleased and the horrible temper
would be transformed into broad calmness to the entire welfare of the
world. By worshipping the Symbol all would worship God Siva. Thereupon
all did the same whole-heartedly and happiness of the world was restored
for ever and the worshippers were filled up with the spirit of Divinity
and fully realised within themselves the perfect Godhood of Siva.

#### THREE DIVINE FORMS

From the very time of this well-known fact about the origin of Effulgent
and Eternal Lingam or Symbol, the Hindus have been worshipping God Siva
in Pure and Divine Symbol. Siva is not only the lord of destruction, a
description in the 'Sivastakam' composed by Acharya Sankara gives out
the perfectness of God Siva in three Divine forms for three divisions of
work, namely Brahma as Creator, Vishnu as Supporter and Rudra as
Destroyer. His symbol is ever-embraced by the Symbol of Nature, the
World Mother. Here lies a very high idea of Hindu system of worship
which express

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

as clear as daylight the true meaning of worshipping Fatherhood and
Motherhood of God symbolized together. Everyone being the child of
Father God and Mother Nature possesses full right to worship what
symbolize Them both. Is it not? Yes, actually this is the universal
system of worship not at all confined in any country, community or sect.
This is quite natural just as a child pays its due respect to the father
and mother.

In other words it is the worship of Self or Atman and the realization of
Godhood within the worshipper himself. The spinal column standing on the
plexus which is triangular in form is the symbol of that worship. From
the plexus right up comes the hollow canal called Susumna or Antarasunya
and from the left and the right sides come two fine nerves known as Ida
and Pingala coiled round this hollow canal or the spinal column forming
vertebra. These are the upper end or terminus of the hollow canal
wherein to be found a mesh work of fine nerve tissues which is on the
central part of the brain, otherwise called cerebellum apart from
cerebrum and medulla oblongata. In mythological language this mesh or
network of tissues is called the

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

thousand [petalled](errata.htm#38) lotus or Sahasrar.

This is what we find in physiological structures. Inside the hollow
canal known as Susumna three concentric nerve tissues equally hollow
inside are also mentioned in the book. The first or the outer one is
called Vazra-naree or Indra-naree. The second one inside the first
casing is called Surya-naree or Solar canal and still further inside
another hollow canal mentioned is known as Brahmanaree or the hollow
canal for Divinity.

#### SYMBOLIC DRIFT

This whole physiological representation is symbolized in stone image
known as Sthanu and Gauripatta. The worshipper is to unloosen a bit of
clog or small globule on the top of the Sthanu and then the worship will
begin, because it is supposed that the internal passage to the higher
plane is naturally blocked up which must be removed, so that the
internal flow or the passage of energy might come up to the highest
plane known as Sahasrar. To put in Psychological language the Atman or
the Ego which is supposed to be inside the hollow canal or Susumna of
the person is to be worshipped or meditated upon. From

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

the down plexus six stages are mentioned as lotuses. These lotuses and
stages are to be traversed by rigid meditation upon one's own Self and
the adjoining nerve tissues of the centre are called particular lotuses.
We have Muludhara, Swadhisthana, Manipura; Bisuddha Chakra, Anahata,
Ajna Chakra and Sahasrar. Thus worshipping these representations one is
worshipping his Ownself or Ego. Hence no rigid ritualities are ordained
neither any caste distinction nor speciality of persons are required.
Every person can worship Siva quite independently. It is the most
non-sectarian, non-bigoted form of worship. This worship is the worthy
self projection or super-imposition of one's own Self or Adhyas of the
Atman as symbolized in some material casing or stone representation.

Now in the Bamachari period when everything was explained out through
the symbol of creative agencies known as Brahma-Vija and Sristhi Vija,
the vertebra or the Sthanu is called the male symbol or Phallus of
creation and the plexus or Gouripatta is called the female symbol or
Phallus of production. Thus the creative aspect of the original idea is
well-preserved in the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

representation which form an alter mode of explanation. The Sthanu is
the representation of the Eternal column or Image known as Jyotirmoy or
Effulgent Image and the Gouripatta is represented receptivity of the
Divine Energy which brings forth the creation. In Common parlance it is
called Firmament and Earth or Creative Father and Mother in procreation.

March 2, 1930.

From The A. B. Patrika

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rev. Leadbeater Off the Trail](kmu14)
