[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo01)  [Next](sdo03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

The Siouan words in this paper are of the Teton dialect as it is spoken
by the Oglala, the letters in them having the same values as in English,
except that those in the following table represent only the sounds
indicated therein:--

a as a in far  
e as a in fate  
i as e in me  
o as o in no  
u as u in move  
c as ch in chin  
g as gu in gull  
n as n in no, when it begins a syllable  
n as n in ink, when it does not begin a syllable  
s as sh in she  
h as h in he, when it begins a word  
h as a guttural aspirate, vocalized, when it does not begin a word

The capitalization, other than that required by English, is to indicate
that the things capitalized were considered sacred by the Oglala.

During many years, the vocation of the author brought him into intimate
relation with the Oglala, and during that time, for his personal
gratification, he gathered all the information he could get, relative to
the aboriginal state of the Lakota, receiving it from many persons, at
times and places far apart. He cultivated the friendship of the shamans,
and became a shaman, thus receiving information that it was impossible
to get otherwise. The notes taken at these times are largely fragmentary
and contain much repetition and irrelevant matter, but their substantial
agreement indicates the authenticity of the information and that the
subjects had been formalized for a sufficient length of time to
eliminate incongruities. In this paper the author has tried to arrange
the information he secured relative to the Sun Dance and other special
ceremonies, as conducted according to the point of view of an Oglala
Shaman, giving the reasons why and the manner in which the successive
steps in the ceremonies should be performed, as well as expressing the
concepts of the informants as the author understood them. The chief aim
is to present a full account of the Oglala Sun Dance, giving the
information as it was received, as nearly as may be, when irrelevant
matter is eliminated and it is systematized. The principal informants
were old Oglala who professed to have participated in the ceremony, some
of

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

whom were Shamans who claimed to have conducted the Sun dance ceremony
in its fullest form. These informants are now all dead.

The Shamans were the custodians of the mythological and ceremonial lore
of the Lakota and they hid much of this in an esoteric language,
revealing it only to one who was to become a Shaman. Consequently, the
people now know but little of this lore and have abandoned the Shamans
and their doctrines. The remaining Shamans are all old men, so that
there are now but few who know the ancient mythology and ceremonials.
Even many of the names of their ancient deities have been forgotten by
the people. These names, as given in this paper, are those used in the
ceremonial language of the Shamans.

While the Shamans recognized a scheme in their mythology and a system in
their ceremonials, they had never formulated them into a single whole.
No one Shaman was found who could give them in a comprehensive or
sequential manner. Aided by the Shamans, the scheme of their mythology
was formulated and this was approved by every informant to whom it was
submitted. In the same manner, the system of the ceremonials was
formulated and approved. In former times, the Oglala had ceremonies that
pertained to almost every act of their lives. The simplest was the
passing of the pipe and the most complex, the Sun Dance. In performing
these ceremonies every word or movement is a formal rite that has
reference to the in Mythology. Therefore, to understand the ceremonies,
one must know the rites and something of the mythology. The Oglala did
not worship their deities and their ceremonials were not devotional.
They considered their Gods as merely superhuman, whose aid could be
invoked, or who could be pleased so that they would grant favors, or who
could be displeased so that they would punish.

The professional story-tellers were of material assistance in getting
information. They were important constituents of the social organization
of the Lakota winter camp, for they were the custodians of the legendary
lore and told the legends, both for entertainment and instruction.
Usually these story-tellers were Shamans. A few of these legends that
deal with the mythology are appended to this paper.

The greatest difficulty encountered in gathering information was due to
the misinterpretation of the concepts expressed by the informants. This
difficulty is apt to occur to anyone who attempts to get information
from the old Lakota, because, owing to the paucity of the old Lakota
vocabulary, it is often necessary to express widely varying concepts by
the same word or phrase, the comprehension of the concept depending oil
the association of correct ideas with the expression. The phrases were
conventional, but not fixed, for they could be modified by the addition,
subtraction, or interjection

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

of words. When the white people heard these phrases they assumed that
they were words and wrote them as such. In translating English into
Lakota, there was often no Lakota word equivalent to the English word
and in such cases a Lakota word was used to express a concept that was
foreign to it. Thus, in written Lakota, the phrases became fixed as
words and insusceptible to modification so that many words were given
new meanings. Thus was brought about a marked transition of the
language, both in structure and meaning, so that there are now both old
and modern forms of speech. Thus, influenced by education received from
white people, the younger generation of the Oglala adopted the modern
form of the language, and abandoned the Shamans and their ceremonials,
and nearly all the customs of the old Lakota. Yet, the old people when
speaking in a formal manner, or of formal things, still use the old
forms of speech. Naturally, the interpreters, who are of the younger
generation, do not understand all of the modified phrases peculiar to
the old forms of speech and are apt to give erroneous and misleading
interpretations. The Lakota term *Wakan Tanka*, and the English term
Great Spirit illustrate these difficulties. In modern Lakota
*Wakantanka* is one word, correctly interpreted as the Great Spirit,
for, as now used, it designates Jehova, the God of Christians. In old
Lakota *Wakan Tanka*, is two words, and designates a class of Gods, and
through them all the Gods. It is never used to designate a single God;
but the interpreters invariably interpret the term *Wakan Tanka* as the
Great Spirit.

Again, my informants used the term *Nagi Tanka* and it was also
interpreted as the Great Spirit, the interpreters asserting that *Wakan
Tanka* and *Nagi Tanka* were synonymous terms; but upon inquiry, it
appeared that the informants had only asserted that *Nagi Tanka* was one
of the *Wakan Tanka*. Then some informants used the terms *Tokan*,
*Skan*, and *Taku Skanskan* to designate Gods. These were interpreted as
the Sky, the Moving, and What Moves. The information given with these
interpretations was confusing and often contradictory. Other informants
used the terms *Wikan*, *Makakan*, and *Inyankan* to designate Gods, and
they were interpreted as the Sun, the Earth, and the Rock. It developed
that *Wikan* was the shamanistic term for *Wakan Tanka Wi* and this term
was interpreted as the Great Spirit, the Sun. With these
misinterpretations, the mythology and ceremonials of the Lakota appeared
to be indefinite, vague, and puzzling. But after some years, it was
found the *Tokan*, *Skan*, and *Taku Skanskan* were appellatives of
*Nagi Tanka*, the Great Spirit, according to that God's attributes, and
that *Wakan Tanka* designated the Gods, *Wi Skan*, *Maka*, and *Inyan*,
considered as a whole, and through them including all other Benevolent
Gods. The Shamans also used the term *Tob-tob* as if to designate a God.
This term was interpreted as four-four, but it puzzled

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

us until it was learned that the term Tob-tob differs from the term
*Wakan Tanka* only in that it considers all the Benevolent Gods, each of
four classes and four in each class, as one whole. Now, when these basic
conceptions were comprehended, investigation relative to ceremonials and
mythology was easy.

The Oglala make a wide distinction between the ceremony of the Sun Dance
and the sun dance itself, for the dance is but a culminating rite of the
ceremony. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) The ceremony is graduated
according to the purposes of the dancers, each grade having all the
rites of the grade below it and additional rites. The highest grade is
performed for a dancer who dances for the purpose of becoming a Shaman.
It is not necessary to dance in the Sun Dance to become a Shaman, but
those who do so are most highly esteemed, and only they can possess a
Fetish with the potency of *Wakan Tanka*. As should be expected of a
people who had no literature, no ceremony was invariable, but it was
required that in each ceremony each rite should be performed always in
the same manner as nearly as the circumstances would permit. In any
ceremony, a Shaman could perform additional rites according to his will.
The ceremony of the Sun Dance was given for the benefit of both the
dancer and the people and could not be carried out without the
participation of the latter.

The author is indebted to many Oglala for information, especially to
Little-wound, American-horse, Bad-wound, Short-bull, No-flesh,
Ringing-shield, Tyon, and Sword. Little-wound was the first to agree to
tell the secret lore of the Shamans, but be died before he could do so.
American-horse gave much information relative to the war customs of the
Lakota. Bad-wound, No-flesh, and Ringing-shield gave information
relative to the doctrines of the Oglala. Short-bull gave information and
painted two large pictures of the ceremonial camp for the Sun dance in
which each detail is significant. Tyon spoke and wrote in English
poorly, but he was the most valuable interpreter, for he knew of the old
customs, ceremonials, and language

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

of the Lakota, and could comprehend most of the information given by the
Shamans. For the benefit of the author, he wrote many Lakota texts upon
which parts of this paper are based. He was a professional story-teller
and had a large fund of Lakota legends.

Sword was a man of marked ability with a philosophical trend far beyond
the average Oglala. He could neither write nor speak English, but wrote
much in old Lakota and the translations of his texts have been used in
the preparation of this paper. As but few Oglala can, he was able to
talk interestingly of the former habits and conduct of his people, so as
to give distinct ideas of their daily lives. He began an autobiography
which promised to be of historical value, but died before completing it.

A few days before the author left the Oglala he interviewed Finger, an
old Shaman, who at that time gave information which clearly indicates
that the Shaman's concept of the God *Skan*, or the Great Spirit, is a
vague concept of force, or energy. We had no opportunity for verifying
this information. The notes taken at this interview are appended to this
paper.

J. R. WALKER, M. D.

December, 1916.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[58:1](sdo02.htm#fr_0) This account of the Sun
Dance Is based exclusively upon original data and not in any way
influenced by previous writers. The published accounts so far available
are as follows:--

Alice C. Fletcher, The Sun Dance of the Ogalalla Sioux (*Proceedings,
American Association for the Advancement of Science, thirty-first
meeting*, pp. 580-584, Salem, 1883).

Edward S. Curtis, *The North American Indian*, vol. 3. Cambridge, 1908.

Gideon H. Pond, Dakota Superstitions (*Collections, Minnesota Historical
Society*, vol. 2, pp. 215-255, St. Paul, 1889).

J. Owen Dorsey, A Study of Siouan Cults (*Eleventh Annual Report, Bureau
of American Ethnology*, Washington, 1894).

None of these present so complete an outline of the ceremony as is to be
found in the succeeding pages. So far we have noted no important
contradiction in the several accounts. For this reason, and since the
presentation here is from the point of view of the native conductor of
the ceremony rather then from that of an onlooker, all specific
references to parallels in the earlier accounts will be
omitted.--*Editor*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sun Dance](sdo03)
