[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo11)  [Next](sdo13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE JOURNEY OF THE BANDS TO THE SUN DANCE SITE.

The location of the ceremonial camp circle is selected by common
consent. The requisites are promixity to water, growing cottonwood, and
sufficient wood. The site for the circle should be nearly level so that
there will be no obstructions to the rites. It should be chosen and
announced in time for all bands that are to attend the ceremony to
journey to it in a leisurely fashion.

Each band should canvas this journey so that the magistrate may know its
pleasure in regard to the movement. He should appoint the marshals and
scouts of the movement and the day for the beginning of the journey,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

so that it will be completed not less than four days before the
ceremonial camp ought to be established. From the time this journey
begins, until the band locates its camp after leaving the place where
the ceremony is performed, each day is a holiday for the band. Then the
potency of the Whirlwind pervades the movements and encampments and all
are bent on pleasure. The people jest and have sports that all may be
merry; the old men sound their rattles to ward against *Iktomi* and his
pranks; the young men woo; and the old women make incense of twigs or
bark of cottonwood to foil *Anog Ite*.

Before beginning each day's journey, the magistrate, the marshals of
movement, and the scouts should go apart from the people, and the
magistrate should offer smoke to the Four Winds and pray to him for good
weather; and to the Sky and pray for His care while the band is moving.
When all are ready, the magistrate should send the scouts ahead on the
route he has chosen and the marshals of the movement back to the people.
Then the ordinary organization of the camp is in abeyance until the
people are again encamped. The magistrate should lead the movement of
the band and the marshals should maintain compliant with the Oglala
customs that govern such movements. The movement of the band should not
be faster than the slowest member of the band can travel and it may be
as leisurely as the distance will permit. At the end of each fourth of
the distance to be traveled in a day the magistrate should sit and light
his pipe. This is the signal for all to unburden for rest and
refreshment. When the fourth signal is given the people should encamp.
When the tipis are set up, the ordinary organization of the camp is
resumed.

The band should journey in this manner each day until it arrives at the
place for the ceremonial camp. If two bands come together on their
journey they should coalesce, according to the customs of the Oglala;
but as bands, they may each contend with the other in friendly contests
and games.

During the journey and until they enter the Sacred Lodge, the Candidates
should keep aloof from the people and have no part in their levities.
All who intend to participate in the ceremony should complete this,
journey so as to coalesce with the other bands on the day when the Moon
is four hands' breadth above the edge of the world, when the Sun goes
down out of sight, for on that day the preliminary Sun Dance camp should
be established, its council lodge erected, and a council fire built. The
preliminary camp is for the purpose of completing the organization to
take effect at dawn of the day when the ceremonial camp is to be
established. The duration of the preliminary camp should be four days
preceding the establishment of the ceremonial camp and during these four
days the people

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

may spend their time in social intercourse and merry-making. Then young
women should seek spears of grama grass that bear four heads, for their
possession insures good luck in love affairs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Day's Ceremony](sdo13)
