[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo21)  [Next](sdo23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GREETING THE SUN.

When the second holy day dawns the red herald should proclaim that
*Anp*, the forerunner of the Sun announces that it will be a blue day,
or if the dawn indicates that clouds will hide the face of the Sun when
He begins His daily journey, then the herald should proclaim that the
forerunner, Anp, tells that the Sun will hide His face because of some
offense in the camp. Then the escort, and such others as wish to join
them, should immediately do battle on the area and about the tipis
against the *Can Oti*, *Ungla*, and *Gica*, and other malevolent beings
that may chance to lurk in or about the camp. While they are doing so
the Superior and Mentors, each carrying his Fetish in his hand, should
march in procession, accompanied by the red herald and red marshals,
around inside the camp circle, and each should invoke his Fetish to
remove from the camp all causes of offense to the Sun. The herald should
proclaim that if anyone knows himself to be unworthy to appear before
the Sun, he must withdraw from the camp. If the marshals know of one
whose reputation is such as to be offensive to the Sun they should expel
him from the camp. These things should be done each morning of the holy
days. When they are done all should await the pleasure of the Sun which
He will manifest by showing His face. If on any day He should not show
His face then that day is not counted as a holy day, but enough days are
so counted as to make four. Each holy day when the Sun first shows His
face the Superior and Mentors should formally greet Him and beg His
favor for that day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Capture of the Tree](sdo23)
