[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo28)  [Next](sdo30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE BUFFALO DANCE.

The remaining rites are the dances, of which there must be two, though
there may be others. These two are the Buffalo Dance and the Sun-Gazing
Dance. These dances are divided into periods. The Buffalo Dance has four
periods and the Sun-Gazing Dance must have four and may have an
indefinite number of periods. A period consists of the dance proper and
the intermission. The (lancing must take place while the music is
sounded; an intermission is the interval between the (lancing. The
leader should give the signal for the musicians to begin sounding the
music for each period and the musicians should repeat the song for each
period four times.

The Buffalo Dance should be danced only by those who are to dance the
second, third, or the fourth form of the Sun Dance and by those who have
danced this dance on some former occasion. It is danced as follows:--The
leader should go to the altar and feign three times to lift the
ornamented buffalo head; the fourth time he should lift it and place it
on the uncovered

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

space so that the dancers can surround it. The dancers should form in a
circle about this head when the leader should signal for the music to
begin and when it does, the dancers should dance the step of the Buffalo
Dance. This step should be synchronous with the beat of the drum, each
second beat being emphatic; at the emphatic beat the feet are
alternately brought to the ground with a scraping motion. This is done
to imitate the pawing of a buffalo bull in rage or defiance and to
manifest a defiant bravery of the dancers equal to that of the buffalo
bull. During this dance those who are to dance the Sun Dance must keep
the whistles in their mouths, but should not sound them. While dancing
they must gaze continually at the ornamented buffalo head. The red
marshals should watch them, and if one of them ceases to gaze at this
head they should admonish him; and if he persists in looking away from
it they should conduct him to his robe. One thus removed from this dance
loses the privilege of becoming a buffalo man. Those who dance the four
periods of this dance become buffalo men. The red herald should proclaim
that they are buffalo men and the people should shout and sing, lauding
them with such praises as these:--"You now belong to the people of the
Sun; you now will not have to pay the price when you take a woman for
your wife; you now will have many children who will honor you; you now
may receive a communication from the Sun."

The attendants should then each give to his dancer one of the buffalo
tails attached to a handle and the buffalo men should sit about the
dried buffalo skin and when they sing should drum on it with the tails.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Piercing Children's Ears](sdo30)
