[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo19)  [Next](sdo21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BUILDING THE SUN LODGE.

As soon as the tipis are set up to form the ceremonial camp circle, the
bands should detail a number of men as workmen who should immediately
begin the erection of the Dance Lodge and work at it continuously until
it is completed, which should be not later than midday of the third holy
day. The people should bring the material provided for the erection of
the Dance Lodge and help the workmen. The red marshals should supervise
the erection of the lodge and have it made large enough to accommodate
all who may participate in the ceremonies to be performed in it. It
should be circular in form with the Sacred Spot as its center. It should
enclose a covered space that surrounds an uncovered space with an
uncovered entrance toward the south.

The covered space should be made by placing two rows of forked posts
upright in the ground, the rows four arms' length apart and the posts so
placed that poles can be laid from the fork of one to the fork of
another and so that the poles on the outer row of posts will be as high
as a short man can reach and the poles on the inner row as high as a
tall man can reach. Poles should be laid from post to post and other
poles on these, so as to form a support for leafy branches that should
be placed so as to form a sheltering cover. Poles should be tied from
post to post of the outer row, so as to make a support for leafy
branches that should be attached so as to form an outer wall for the
lodge.

While the workmen erect the Dance Lodge, the digger should dig the
Sacred Spot with his wooden digging implement and there make a hole in
which the Sacred Pole should be erected. Then he should make a large
altar near this hole, between it and the place of honor in the Dance
Lodge.

During the time of the erection and preparation of the Dance Lodge, no
one should loiter in or about it.

The various societies represented in the ceremonial camp may erect their
lodges anywhere on the area, except at the entrance, the chief place, or
the places for the Sacred and Dance Lodges.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Buffalo Feast](sdo21)
