[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo44)  [Next](sdo46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PAINTING AND EXCHANGING CLOTHING.

The Conductor then removed the ear of corn from the altar, giving it to
the one who had charge of it and replaced the buffalo skull on the
altar. He then took red paint from his pouch and said, "This paint is
sacred for I prepared it ceremonially. Its potency is benevolent." He
then gave the paint to the Recorder and told him to paint the skull. The
Recorder painted a red stripe on the skull, from the right eye socket to
the nasal cavity and then painted red the upper part of the stone that
supported the skull. The Conductor then gave him black paint with which
he painted a black stripe parallel to and behind the red stripe on the
skull. The Conductor

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

explained that the red stripe signified that the spirit of the buffalo
was *Hunka* to all *Hunkayapi* and the black stripe signified that the
spirit of the buffalo was an authority among the *Hunkayapi*.

The Assistant made incense with sweetgrass and the Conductor took the
lean meat from the scaffold and cutting it into bits gave it to the
younger man, telling him to give it to the people, but to keep a bit for
himself. He did so, and the Conductor did the same with the fat meat.
When the younger man was seated after distributing the meat the
Conductor bade all to eat. When the younger man had the meat in his
mouth the Conductor said, "I am hungry. Give me some meat." The younger
man said, "I have no meat." The Conductor said, "You have meat in your
mouth. You should take it from your mouth and divide it with me." The
younger man did so. Then the Conductor said, "My moccasins are old and
my feet are sore." After a pause, as if waiting, he said to the young
man, "You should give me your moccasins." The younger man did so. Then
the Conductor said, "My body is naked and I am cold." The younger man
took off his shirt and gave it to the Conductor who said, "My leggings
are old and ragged." The younger man took off his leggings and gave them
to the Conductor.

The Conductor then said, "My friends, this man has done as a *Hunka*
should do. He has given of all that he had. He took the food from his
mouth and divided it with me. He gave me his moccasins, his shirt, and
his leggings, and now he is naked and has nothing. I will put the red
stripe on his face for he is *Hunka*. I put this stripe on his face so
that the people may see it and know that he has given all his
possessions away, and know that they should give to him. I will put the
stripe on his face and on the face of his *Hunka* so that they will
remember this day, and when they see one in want they will give to that
one."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Secret Ceremony](sdo46)
