[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo58)  [Next](sdo60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FOUR GREAT VIRTUES.

The four great virtues that all Lakota should practise are, bravery,
generosity, truthfulness, and begetting children.

Bravery is the greatest virtue a Lakota can practise. If one is brave,
he may transgress in many other things and still keep his tipi in the
camp circle and sit in the council of the camp. A brave man is eligible
to the positions of *blotaunka* (leader of a war party), *wakiconza*
(magistrate or leader of civil matters), *mihunka* (elder or arbitrator)
and *akicita* (marshal). His voice will be listened to with respect by
everyone and all will do him honor. If he has earned the right to wear
the quills of the eagle, he will be consulted in all matters relative to
the common welfare, and if he may carry the scalp staff or coup stick,
the women will sing songs in his praise.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

Generosity is a virtue second only to bravery. A generous man will be
forgiven all transgressions except that of being a coward or a liar. By
giving of his possessions a man shows his generosity and by giving to
the shamans he is sacrificing to the Gods and thereby gains their favor.
A man who gives to the needy is respected by all. If he gives all his
possessions he shows bravery and the Gods will not let him want. The
Buffalo will provide for him and give him women and children and he will
be successful in the chase. His spirit will go on the spirit trail
endowed with many goods and he will enter the spirit world with honor
and be esteemed there.

To be truthful to friends is the third great virtue that every Lakota
should practise. If one is a liar his voice will not be listened to by
anyone and he cannot lead in anything. Even the Gods will forsake him
and the winds will hide the spirit trail from his spirit.

To beget children is a great virtue that every Lakota should practise.
To have many children is pleasing to *Woniya Tanka*, *Skanskan*, who is
the *Wanagi Tanka*. He gives the breath of life and the spirit to every
child that is born alive and he judges the spirit upon the testimony
given by the ghost after death. A Lakota's spirit is honored in the
spirit world in proportion to the number of children he has, for he will
be the chief of their spirits. The Buffalo god presides over love and
the chastity and fecundity of women, and therefore a man should placate
this god, and secure his favor, so that his women may bear him many
children and be true to him. The Buffalo god also presides over
generosity and the chase. One who has the favor of this god may have
plenty of meat and robes and can be generous as well as have many
children. A Lakota should beget children only with his own women, for if
he violates the chastity of a woman who does not belong to him, or
begets a child by such, the Buffalo god will plague him in this life and
his ghost will bear testimony against him before the *Wanagi Tanka*, the
Great Spirit, *Skanskan*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Causes of Diseases](sdo60)
