[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pots03)  [Next](pots05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803270089/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Punishment of the Stingy and Other Indian Stories*, by George Bird
Grinnell, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### The Bluejay Stories

ON the shores of the ocean which washes our northwest coast live many
tribes of a hardy, seafaring people. Their houses stand along the beach
just above high-water mark, and behind them the wooded mountains rise
sharply. The waters at their feet yield them the chief share of their
living. The salmon that each year come to the rivers to spawn, the great
shoals of little herrings that visit the beach, the halibut that lie at
the bottom far at sea, the seals, the sea-lions, the porpoises, and the
whales, all provide something towards the tribe's support. Or, if for a
while all these fail, there are flat-fish on the shoals, clams in the
mud flats, and mussels clinging to the rocks. In the stories told by
this race of seafarers, the incidents have to do with the common events
of their lives, and the scenes are commonly laid

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

on the water or at the water's edge. Thus they treat of the hunting of
the sea-lion, of the catching of the salmon, most often of the search
for food

Most of the stories to be related here are very old, and date from a
period when men and animals were far more closely related than they seem
to be to-day; when, as the tales clearly show, each could understand the
other's language, and when friendly intercourse between them was common.
Although in recent years all the conditions of the lives of these people
have changed, stories such as these may still be heard, if one can gain
the confidence of the aged men and women who yet retain this legendary
lore. In somewhat different form, the Bluejay Stories, in the original
tongue, may be found in the Chinook Texts, collected by that eminent
ethnologist, Dr. Franz Boas, whose studies of American tribes have
yielded such important and valuable results.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Punishment of the Stingy](pots05)
