<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu023)  [Next](deu025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 24

<span id="an_deu:24:1">1</span> When a man taketh a wife, and marrieth
her, then it cometh to pass, if she find no favour in his eyes, because
he hath found some unseemly thing in her, that he writeth her a bill of
divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his
house, <span id="an_deu:24:2">2</span> and she departeth out of his

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

house, and goeth and becometh another man's wife, <span
id="an_deu:24:3">3</span> and the latter husband hateth her, and writeth
her a bill of divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her
out of his house; or if the latter husband die, who took her to be his
wife; <span id="an_deu:24:4">4</span> her former husband, who sent her
away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled;
for that is abomination before the LORD; and thou shalt not cause the
land to sin, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

<span id="an_deu:24:5">5</span> When a man taketh a new wife, he shall
not go out in the host, neither shall he be charged with any business;
he shall be free for his house one year, and shall cheer his wife whom
he hath taken.

<span id="an_deu:24:6">6</span> No man shall take the mill or the upper
millstone to pledge; for he taketh a man's life to pledge.

<span id="an_deu:24:7">7</span> If a man be found stealing any of his
brethren of the children of Israel, and he deal with him as a slave, and
sell him; then that thief shall die; so shalt thou put away the evil
from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_deu:24:8">8</span> Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that
thou observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests the
Levites shall teach you, as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.
<span id="an_deu:24:9">9</span> Remember what the LORD thy God did unto
Miriam, by the way as ye came forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_deu:24:10">10</span> When thou dost lend thy neighbour any
manner of loan, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge.
<span id="an_deu:24:11">11</span> Thou shalt stand without, and the man
to whom thou dost lend shall bring forth the pledge without unto thee.
<span id="an_deu:24:12">12</span> And if he be a poor man, thou shalt
not sleep with his pledge; <span id="an_deu:24:13">13</span> thou shalt
surely restore to him the pledge when the sun goeth down, that he may
sleep in his garment, and bless thee; and it shall be righteousness unto
thee before the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_deu:24:14">14</span> Thou shalt not oppress a hired servant
that is poor and needy; whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy
strangers that are in thy land within thy gates. <span
id="an_deu:24:15">15</span> In the same day thou shalt give him his
hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth
his heart upon it; lest he cry against thee unto the LORD, and it be sin
in thee.

<span id="an_deu:24:16">16</span> The fathers shall not be put to death
for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the
fathers; every man shall be put to death for his own sin.

<span id="an_deu:24:17">17</span> Thou shalt not pervert the justice due
to the stranger, or to the fatherless; nor take the widow's raiment to
pledge. <span id="an_deu:24:18">18</span> But thou shalt remember that
thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee thence;
therefore I command thee to do this thing.

<span id="an_deu:24:19">19</span> When thou reapest thy harvest in thy
field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go back to
fetch it; it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the
widow; that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy
hands.

<span id="an_deu:24:20">20</span> When thou beatest thine olive-tree,
thou shalt not go over the boughs again; it shall be for the stranger,
for the fatherless, and for the widow. <span
id="an_deu:24:21">21</span> When thou gatherest the grapes of thy
vineyard, thou shalt not glean it after thee; it shall he for the
stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow. <span
id="an_deu:24:22">22</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast a
bondman in the land of Egypt; therefore I command thee to do this thing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 25](deu025.md)

</div>
