<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](num036)  [Next](deu002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

# DEUTERONOMY

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 1

‏דברים‎

<span id="an_deu:1:1">1</span> THESE are the words which Moses spoke
unto all Israel beyond the Jordan; in the wilderness, in the Arabah,
over against Suph, between Paran and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth,
and Di-zahab. <span id="an_deu:1:2">2</span> It is eleven days' journey
from Horeb unto Kadesh-barnea by the way of mount Seir. <span
id="an_deu:1:3">3</span> And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in
the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spoke unto
the children of Israel, according unto all that the LORD had given him
in commandment unto them; <span id="an_deu:1:4">4</span> after he had
smitten Sihon the king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the
king of Bashan, who dwelt in Ashtaroth, at Edrei; <span
id="an_deu:1:5">5</span> beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab, took
Moses upon him to expound this law, saying:

<span id="an_deu:1:6">6</span> The LORD our God spoke unto us in Horeb,
saying: \`Ye have dwelt long enough in this mountain; <span
id="an_deu:1:7">7</span> turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
hill-country of the Amorites and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in
the Arabah, in the hill-country, and in the Lowland, and in the South,
and by the sea-shore; the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as
the great river, the river Euphrates. <span
id="an_deu:1:8">8</span> Behold, I have set the land before you: go in
and possess the land which the LORD swore unto your fathers, to Abraham,
to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them.'

<span id="an_deu:1:9">9</span> And I spoke unto you at that time,
saying: \`I am not able to bear you myself alone; <span
id="an_deu:1:10">10</span> the LORD your God hath multiplied you, and,
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.—<span
id="an_deu:1:11">11</span> The LORD, the God of your fathers, make you a
thousand times so many more as ye are, and bless you, as He hath
promised you!— <span id="an_deu:1:12">12</span> How can I myself alone
bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife? <span
id="an_deu:1:13">13</span> Get you, from each one of your tribes, wise
men, and understanding, and full of knowledge, and I will make them
heads over you.' <span id="an_deu:1:14">14</span> And ye answered me,
and said: \`The thing which thou hast spoken is good for us to do.'
<span id="an_deu:1:15">15</span> So I took the heads of your tribes,
wise men, and full of knowledge, and made them heads over you, captains
of thousands, and captains of hundreds, and captains of fifties, and
captains of tens, and officers, tribe by tribe. <span
id="an_deu:1:16">16</span> And I charged your judges at that time,
saying: \`Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously
between a man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. <span
id="an_deu:1:17">17</span> Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; ye
shall hear the small and the great alike; ye shall not be afraid of the
face of any man; for the judgment is God's; and the cause that is too
hard for you ye shall bring unto me, and I will hear it.' <span
id="an_deu:1:18">18</span> And I commanded you at that time all the
things which ye should do.

<span id="an_deu:1:19">19</span> And we journeyed from Horeb, and went
through all that great and

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

dreadful wilderness which ye saw, by the way to the hill-country of the
Amorites, as the LORD our God commanded us; and we came to
Kadesh-barnea. <span id="an_deu:1:20">20</span> And I said unto you:
\`Ye are come unto the hill-country of the Amorites, which the LORD our
God giveth unto us. <span id="an_deu:1:21">21</span> Behold, the LORD
thy God hath set the land before thee; go up, take possession, as the
LORD, the God of thy fathers, hath spoken unto thee; fear not, neither
be dismayed.' <span id="an_deu:1:22">22</span> And ye came near unto me
every one of you, and said: \`Let us send men before us, that they may
search the land for us, and bring us back word of the way by which we
must go up, and the cities unto which we shall come.' <span
id="an_deu:1:23">23</span> And the thing pleased me well; and I took
twelve men of you, one man for every tribe; <span
id="an_deu:1:24">24</span> and they turned and went up into the
mountains, and came unto the valley of Eshcol, and spied it out. <span
id="an_deu:1:25">25</span> And they took of the fruit of the land in
their hands, and brought it down unto us, and brought us back word, and
said: \`Good is the land which the LORD our God giveth unto us.' <span
id="an_deu:1:26">26</span> Yet ye would not go up, but rebelled against
the commandment of the LORD your God; <span
id="an_deu:1:27">27</span> and ye murmured in your tents, and said:
\`Because the LORD hated us, He hath brought us forth out of the land of
Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us. <span
id="an_deu:1:28">28</span> Whither are we going up? our brethren have
made our heart to melt, saying: The people [are](errata.htm#0.md) greater
and taller than we; the cities are great and fortified up to heaven; and
moreover we have seen the sons of the Anakim there.' <span
id="an_deu:1:29">29</span> Then I said unto you: \`Dread not, neither be
afraid of them. <span id="an_deu:1:30">30</span> The LORD your God who
goeth before you, He shall fight for you, according to all that He did
for you in Egypt before your eyes; <span id="an_deu:1:31">31</span> and
in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the LORD thy God bore
thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye
came unto this place. <span id="an_deu:1:32">32</span> Yet in this thing
ye do not believe the LORD your God, <span
id="an_deu:1:33">33</span> who went before you in the way, to seek you
out a place to pitch your tents in: in fire by night, to show you by
what way ye should go, and in the cloud by day.'

<span id="an_deu:1:34">34</span> And the LORD heard the voice of your
words, and was wroth, and swore, saying: <span
id="an_deu:1:35">35</span> \`Surely there shall not one of these men,
even this evil generation, see the good land, which I swore to give unto
your fathers, <span id="an_deu:1:36">36</span> save Caleb the son of
Jephunneh, he shall see it; and to him will I give the land that he hath
trodden upon, and to his children; because he hath wholly followed the
LORD.' <span id="an_deu:1:37">37</span> Also the LORD was angry with me
for your sakes, saying: \`Thou also shalt not go in thither; <span
id="an_deu:1:38">38</span> Joshua the son of Nun, who standeth before
thee, he shall go in thither; encourage thou him, for he shall cause
Israel to inherit it. <span id="an_deu:1:39">39</span> Moreover your
little ones, that ye said should be a prey, and your children, that this
day have no knowledge of good or evil, they shall go in thither, and
unto them will I give it, and they shall possess it. <span
id="an_deu:1:40">40</span> But as for you, turn you, and take your
journey into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.' <span
id="an_deu:1:41">41</span> Then ye answered and said unto me: \`We have
sinned against the LORD, we will go up and fight, according to all that
the LORD our God commanded us.' And ye girded on every man his weapons
of war, and deemed it a light thing to go up into the hill-country.
<span id="an_deu:1:42">42</span> And the LORD said unto me: \`Say unto
them: Go not up,

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

neither fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten before your
enemies.' <span id="an_deu:1:43">43</span> So I spoke unto you, and ye
hearkened not; but ye rebelled against the commandment of the LORD, and
were presumptuous, and went up into the hill-country. <span
id="an_deu:1:44">44</span> And the Amorites, that dwell in that
hill-country, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and beat
you down in Seir, even unto Hormah. <span id="an_deu:1:45">45</span> And
ye returned and wept before the LORD; but the LORD hearkened not to your
voice, nor gave ear unto you. <span id="an_deu:1:46">46</span> So ye
abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye abode there.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 2](deu002.md)

</div>
