<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu001)  [Next](deu003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 2

<span id="an_deu:2:1">1</span> Then we turned, and took our journey into
the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea, as the LORD spoke unto me; and
we compassed mount Seir many days.

<span id="an_deu:2:2">2</span> And the LORD spoke unto me, saying: <span
id="an_deu:2:3">3</span> \`Ye have compassed this mountain long enough;
turn you northward. <span id="an_deu:2:4">4</span> And command thou the
people, saying: Ye are to pass through the border of your brethren the
children of Esau, that dwell in Seir; and they will be afraid of you;
take ye good heed unto yourselves therefore; <span
id="an_deu:2:5">5</span> contend not with them; for I will not give you
of their land, no, not so much as for the sole of the foot to tread on;
because I have given mount Seir unto Esau for a possession. <span
id="an_deu:2:6">6</span> Ye shall purchase food of them for money, that
ye may eat; and ye shall also buy water of them for money, that ye may
drink. <span id="an_deu:2:7">7</span> For the LORD thy God hath blessed
thee in all the work of thy hand; He hath known thy walking through this
great wilderness; these forty years the LORD thy God hath been with
thee; thou hast lacked nothing.' <span id="an_deu:2:8">8</span> So we
passed by from our brethren the children of Esau, that dwell in Seir,
from the way of the Arabah, from Elath and from Ezion-geber.

And we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab. <span
id="an_deu:2:9">9</span> And the LORD said unto me: \`Be not at enmity
with Moab, neither contend with them in battle; for I will not give thee
of his land for a possession; because I have given Ar unto the children
of Lot for a possession.— <span id="an_deu:2:10">10</span> The Emim
dwelt therein aforetime, a people great, and many, and tall, as the
Anakim; <span id="an_deu:2:11">11</span> these also are accounted
Rephaim, as the Anakim; but the Moabites call them Emim. <span
id="an_deu:2:12">12</span> And in Seir dwelt the Horites aforetime, but
the children of Esau succeeded them; and they destroyed them from before
them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of his
possession, which the LORD gave unto them.— <span
id="an_deu:2:13">13</span> Now rise up, and get you over the brook
Zered.' And we went over the brook Zered. <span
id="an_deu:2:14">14</span> And the days in which we came from
Kadesh-barnea, until we were come over the brook Zered, were thirty and
eight years; until all the generation, even the men of war, were
consumed from the midst of the camp, as the LORD swore unto them. <span
id="an_deu:2:15">15</span> Moreover the hand of the LORD was against
them, to discomfit them from the midst of the camp, until they were
consumed.

<span id="an_deu:2:16">16</span> So it came to pass, when all the men of
war were consumed and dead from among the people, <span
id="an_deu:2:17">17</span> that the LORD spoke unto me, saying: <span
id="an_deu:2:18">18</span> \`Thou art this day to pass over the border
of Moab, even Ar; <span id="an_deu:2:19">19</span> and when thou comest
nigh over against the children of Ammon, harass them not, nor contend
with them; for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon
for a possession; because I have given it unto the children of Lot

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

for a possession.— <span id="an_deu:2:20">20</span> That also is
accounted a land of Rephaim: Rephaim dwelt therein aforetime; but the
Ammonites call them Zamzummim, <span id="an_deu:2:21">21</span> a people
great, and many, and tall, as the Anakim; but the LORD destroyed them
before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead; <span
id="an_deu:2:22">22</span> as He did for the children of Esau, that
dwell in Seir, when He destroyed the Horites from before them; and they
succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead even unto this day; <span
id="an_deu:2:23">23</span> and the Avvim, that dwelt in villages as far
as Gaza, the Caphtorim, that came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them,
and dwelt in their stead.— <span id="an_deu:2:24">24</span> Rise ye up,
take your journey, and pass over the valley of Arnon; behold, I have
given into thy hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land;
begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle. <span
id="an_deu:2:25">25</span> This day will I begin to put the dread of
thee and the fear of thee upon the peoples that are under the whole
heaven, who, when they hear the report of thee, shall tremble, and be in
anguish because of thee.'

<span id="an_deu:2:26">26</span> And I sent messengers out of the
wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace,
saying: <span id="an_deu:2:27">27</span> \`Let me pass through thy land;
I will go along by the highway, I will neither turn unto the right hand
nor to the left. <span id="an_deu:2:28">28</span> Thou shalt sell me
food for money, that I may eat; and give me water for money, that I may
drink; only let me pass through on my feet; <span
id="an_deu:2:29">29</span> as the children of Esau that dwell in Seir,
and the Moabites that dwell in Ar, did unto me; until I shall pass over
the Jordan into the land which the LORD our God giveth us.' <span
id="an_deu:2:30">30</span> But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us
pass by him; for the LORD thy God hardened his spirit, and made his
heart obstinate, that He might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth
this day.

<span id="an_deu:2:31">31</span> And the LORD said unto me: \`Behold, I
have begun to deliver up Sihon and his land before thee; begin to
possess his land.' <span id="an_deu:2:32">32</span> Then Sihon came out
against us, he and all his people, unto battle at Jahaz. <span
id="an_deu:2:33">33</span> And the LORD our God delivered him up before
us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people. <span
id="an_deu:2:34">34</span> And we took all his cities at that time, and
utterly destroyed every city, the men, and the women, and the little
ones; we left none remaining; <span id="an_deu:2:35">35</span> only the
cattle we took for a prey unto ourselves, with the spoil of the cities
which we had taken. <span id="an_deu:2:36">36</span> From Aroer, which
is on the edge of the valley of Arnon, and from the city that is in the
valley, even unto Gilead, there was not a city too high for us: the LORD
our God delivered up all before us. <span
id="an_deu:2:37">37</span> Only to the land of the children of Ammon
thou camest not near; all the side of the river Jabbok, and the cities
of the hill-country, and wheresoever the LORD our God forbade us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 3](deu003.md)

</div>
