<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu009)  [Next](deu011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 10

<span id="an_deu:10:1">1</span> At that time the LORD said unto me:
\`Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first, and come up unto Me
into the mount; and make thee an ark of wood. <span
id="an_deu:10:2">2</span> And I will write on the tables the words that
were on the first tables which thou didst break, and thou shalt put them
in the ark.' <span id="an_deu:10:3">3</span> So I made an ark of
acacia-wood, and hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and went
up into the mount, having the two tables in my hand. <span
id="an_deu:10:4">4</span> And He wrote on the tables, according to the
first writing, the ten words, which the LORD spoke unto you in the mount
out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly; and the LORD
gave them unto me. <span id="an_deu:10:5">5</span> And I turned and came
down from the mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made;

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

and there they are, as the LORD commanded me.— <span
id="an_deu:10:6">6</span> And the children of Israel journeyed from
Beeroth-benejaakan to Moserah; there Aaron died, and there he was
buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
stead. <span id="an_deu:10:7">7</span> From thence they journeyed unto
Gudgod; and from Gudgod to Jotbah, a land of brooks of water.— <span
id="an_deu:10:8">8</span> At that time the LORD separated the tribe of
Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the
LORD to minister unto Him, and to bless in His name, unto this day.
<span id="an_deu:10:9">9</span> Wherefore Levi hath no portion nor
inheritance with his brethren; the LORD is his inheritance, according as
the LORD thy God spoke unto him.— <span id="an_deu:10:10">10</span> Now
I stayed in the mount, as at the first time, forty days and forty
nights; and the LORD hearkened unto me that time also; the LORD would
not destroy thee. <span id="an_deu:10:11">11</span> And the LORD said
unto me: \`Arise, go before the people, causing them to set forward,
that they may go in and possess the land, which I swore unto their
fathers to give unto them.'

<span id="an_deu:10:12">12</span> And now, Israel, what doth the LORD
thy God require of thee, but to fear the LORD thy God, to walk in all
His ways, and to love Him, and to serve the LORD thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul; <span id="an_deu:10:13">13</span> to keep
for thy good the commandments of the LORD, and His statutes, which I
command thee this day? <span id="an_deu:10:14">14</span> Behold, unto
the LORD thy God belongeth the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, the
earth, with all that therein is. <span id="an_deu:10:15">15</span> Only
the LORD had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and He chose their
seed after them, even you, above all peoples, as it is this day. <span
id="an_deu:10:16">16</span> Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your
heart, and be no more stiffnecked. <span id="an_deu:10:17">17</span> For
the LORD your God, He is God of gods, and Lord of lords, the great God,
the mighty, and the awful, who regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.
<span id="an_deu:10:18">18</span> He doth execute justice for the
fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and
raiment. <span id="an_deu:10:19">19</span> Love ye therefore the
stranger; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_deu:10:20">20</span> Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God; Him shalt
thou serve; and to Him shalt thou cleave, and by His name shalt thou
swear. <span id="an_deu:10:21">21</span> He is thy glory, and He is thy
God, that hath done for thee these great and tremendous things, which
thine eyes have seen. <span id="an_deu:10:22">22</span> Thy fathers went
down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons; and now the LORD thy
God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 11](deu011.md)

</div>
