<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu010)  [Next](deu012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 11

<span id="an_deu:11:1">1</span> Therefore thou shalt love the LORD thy
God, and keep His charge, and His statutes, and His ordinances, and His
commandments, alway. <span id="an_deu:11:2">2</span> And know ye this
day; for I speak not with your children that have not known, and that
have not seen the chastisement of the LORD your God, His greatness, His
mighty hand, and His outstretched arm, <span
id="an_deu:11:3">3</span> and His signs, and His works, which He did in
the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his
land; <span id="an_deu:11:4">4</span> and what He did unto the army of
Egypt, unto their horses, and to their chariots; how He made the water
of the Red Sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how the
LORD hath destroyed them unto this day; <span
id="an_deu:11:5">5</span> and what He did unto you in the wilderness,
until ye came unto this place; <span id="an_deu:11:6">6</span> and what
He did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben; how
the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their households,
and their tents, and every living substance

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

that followed them, in the midst of all Israel; <span
id="an_deu:11:7">7</span> but your eyes have seen all the great work of
the LORD which He did. <span id="an_deu:11:8">8</span> Therefore shall
ye keep all the [commandments](errata.htm#2) which I command thee this
day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land, whither ye
go over to possess it; <span id="an_deu:11:9">9</span> and that ye may
prolong your days upon the land, which the LORD swore unto your fathers
to give unto them and to their seed, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_deu:11:10">10</span> For the land, whither thou goest in to
possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where
thou didst sow thy seed, and didst water it with thy foot, as a garden
of herbs; <span id="an_deu:11:11">11</span> but the land, whither ye go
over to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water
as the rain of heaven cometh down; <span id="an_deu:11:12">12</span> a
land which the LORD thy God careth for; the eyes of the LORD thy God are
always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the
year.

<span id="an_deu:11:13">13</span> And it shall come to pass, if ye shall
hearken diligently unto My commandments which I command you this day, to
love the LORD your God, and to serve Him with all your heart and with
all your soul, <span id="an_deu:11:14">14</span> that I will give the
rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter rain,
that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. <span
id="an_deu:11:15">15</span> And I will give grass in thy fields for thy
cattle, and thou shalt eat and be satisfied. <span
id="an_deu:11:16">16</span> Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be
deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them;
<span id="an_deu:11:17">17</span> and the anger of the LORD be kindled
against you, and He shut up the heaven, so that there shall be no rain,
and the ground shall not yield her fruit; and ye perish quickly from off
the good land which the LORD giveth you. <span
id="an_deu:11:18">18</span> Therefore shall ye lay up these My words in
your heart and in your soul; and ye shall bind them for a sign upon your
hand, and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes. <span
id="an_deu:11:19">19</span> And ye shall teach them your children,
talking of them, when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou walkest
by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. <span
id="an_deu:11:20">20</span> And thou shalt write them upon the
door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates; <span
id="an_deu:11:21">21</span> that your days may be multiplied, and the
days of your children, upon the land which the LORD swore unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.

<span id="an_deu:11:22">22</span> For if ye shall diligently keep all
this commandment which I command you, to do it, to love the LORD your
God, to walk in all His ways, and to cleave unto Him, <span
id="an_deu:11:23">23</span> then will the LORD drive out all these
nations from before you, and ye shall dispossess nations greater and
mightier than yourselves. <span id="an_deu:11:24">24</span> Every place
whereon the sole of your foot shall tread shall be yours: from the
wilderness, and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto
the hinder sea shall be your border. <span
id="an_deu:11:25">25</span> There shall no man be able to stand against
you: the LORD your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you
upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as He hath spoken unto you.

‏ראה‎

<span id="an_deu:11:26">26</span> Behold, I set before you this day a
blessing and a curse: <span id="an_deu:11:27">27</span> the blessing, if
ye shall hearken unto the commandments of the LORD your God, which I
command you this day; <span id="an_deu:11:28">28</span> and the curse,
if ye shall not hearken unto the commandments of the LORD your God, but
turn aside out of the way which

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I command you this
day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known.

<span id="an_deu:11:29">29</span> And it shall come to pass, when the
LORD thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to
possess it, that thou shalt set the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the
curse upon mount Ebal. <span id="an_deu:11:30">30</span> Are they not
beyond the Jordan, behind the way of the going down of the sun, in the
land of the Canaanites that dwell in the Arabah, over against Gilgal,
beside the terebinths of Moreh? <span id="an_deu:11:31">31</span> For ye
are to pass over the Jordan to go in to possess the land which the LORD
your God giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein. <span
id="an_deu:11:32">32</span> And ye shall observe to do all the statutes
and the ordinances which I set before you this day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 12](deu012)

</div>
