<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu004)  [Next](deu006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 5

<span id="an_deu:5:1">1</span> And Moses called unto all Israel, and
said unto them:

Hear, O Israel, the statutes and the ordinances which I speak in your
ears this day, that ye may learn them, and observe to do them. <span
id="an_deu:5:2">2</span> The LORD our God made a covenant with us in
Horeb. <span id="an_deu:5:3">3</span> The LORD made not this covenant
with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive
this day. <span id="an_deu:5:4">4</span> The LORD spoke with you face to
face in the mount out of the midst of the fire— <span
id="an_deu:5:5">5</span> I stood between the LORD and you at that time,
to declare unto you the word of the LORD; for ye were afraid because of
the fire, and went not up into the mount—saying:

<span id="an_deu:5:6">6</span> I am the LORD thy God, who brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_deu:5:7">7</span> Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.
<span id="an_deu:5:8">8</span> Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven
image, even any manner of likeness, of any thing that is in heaven
above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under
the earth. <span id="an_deu:5:9">9</span> Thou shalt not bow down unto
them, nor serve them; for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the third and
upon the fourth generation of them that hate Me, <span
id="an_deu:5:10">10</span> and showing mercy unto the thousandth
generation of them that love Me and keep My commandments.

<span id="an_deu:5:11">11</span> Thou shalt not take the name of the
LORD thy God in vain; for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that
taketh His name in vain.

<span id="an_deu:5:12">12</span> Observe the sabbath day, to keep it
holy, as the LORD thy God commanded thee. <span
id="an_deu:5:13">13</span> Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy
work; <span id="an_deu:5:14">14</span> but the seventh day is a sabbath
unto the LORD thy God, in it thou shalt not do any manner of work, thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy
maid-servant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass,

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that
thy man-servant and thy maid-servant may rest as well as thou. <span
id="an_deu:5:15">15</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast a
servant in the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy God brought thee out
thence by a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm; therefore the LORD
thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.

<span id="an_deu:5:16">16</span> Honour thy father and thy mother, as
the LORD thy God commanded thee; that thy days may be long, and that it
may go well with thee, upon the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_deu:5:17">17</span> Thou shalt not murder.

Neither shalt thou commit adultery.

Neither shalt thou steal.

Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.

<span id="an_deu:5:18">18</span> Neither shalt thou covet thy
neighbour's wife; neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's house, his
field, or his man-servant, or his maid-servant, his ox, or his ass, or
any thing that is thy neighbour's.

<span id="an_deu:5:19">19</span> These words the LORD spoke unto all
your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud,
and of the thick darkness, with a great voice, and it went on no more.
And He wrote them upon two tables of stone, and gave them unto me. <span
id="an_deu:5:20">20</span> And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice
out of the midst of the darkness, while the mountain did burn with fire,
that ye came near unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your
elders; <span id="an_deu:5:21">21</span> and ye said: \`Behold, the LORD
our God hath shown us His glory and His greatness, and we have heard His
voice out of the midst of the fire; we have seen this day that God doth
speak with man, and he liveth. <span id="an_deu:5:22">22</span> Now
therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us; if we
hear the voice of the LORD our God any more, then we shall die. <span
id="an_deu:5:23">23</span> For who is there of all flesh, that hath
heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire,
as we have, and lived? <span id="an_deu:5:24">24</span> Go thou near,
and hear all that the LORD our God may say; and thou shalt speak unto us
all that the LORD our God may speak unto thee; and we will hear it, and
do it.' <span id="an_deu:5:25">25</span> And the LORD heard the voice of
your words, when ye spoke unto me; and the LORD said unto me: \`I have
heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto
thee; they have well said all that they have spoken. <span
id="an_deu:5:26">26</span> Oh that they had such a heart as this alway,
to fear Me, and keep all My commandments, that it might be well with
them, and with their children for ever! <span
id="an_deu:5:27">27</span> Go say to them: Return ye to your tents.
<span id="an_deu:5:28">28</span> But as for thee, stand thou here by Me,
and I will speak unto thee all the commandment, and the statutes, and
the ordinances, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in
the land which I give them to possess it.' <span
id="an_deu:5:29">29</span> Ye shall observe to do therefore as the LORD
your God hath commanded you; ye shall not turn aside to the right hand
or to the left. <span id="an_deu:5:30">30</span> Ye shall walk in all
the way which the LORD your God hath commanded you, that ye may live,
and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong your days in
the land which ye shall possess.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 6](deu006.md)

</div>
