<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu029)  [Next](deu031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 30

<span id="an_deu:30:1">1</span> And it shall come to pass, when all
these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I
have set before thee, and thou shalt bethink thyself among all the
nations, whither the LORD thy God hath driven thee, <span
id="an_deu:30:2">2</span> and shalt return unto the LORD thy God, and
hearken to His voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou
and thy children, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul; <span
id="an_deu:30:3">3</span> that then the LORD thy God will turn thy
captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather
thee from all the peoples, whither the LORD thy God hath scattered thee.
<span id="an_deu:30:4">4</span> If any of thine that are dispersed be in
the uttermost parts of heaven, from thence will the LORD thy God gather
thee, and from thence will He fetch thee. <span
id="an_deu:30:5">5</span> And the LORD thy God will bring thee into the
land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and He will
do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers. <span
id="an_deu:30:6">6</span> And the LORD thy God will circumcise thy
heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the LORD thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul; that thou mayest live. <span
id="an_deu:30:7">7</span> And the LORD thy God will put all these curses
upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, that persecuted thee.
<span id="an_deu:30:8">8</span> And thou shalt return and hearken to the
voice of the LORD, and do all His commandments which

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I command thee
this day. <span id="an_deu:30:9">9</span> And the LORD thy God will make
thee overabundant in all the work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body,
and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy land, for good;
for the LORD will again rejoice over thee for good, as He rejoiced over
thy fathers; <span id="an_deu:30:10">10</span> if thou shalt hearken to
the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep His commandments and His statutes
which are written in this book of the law; if thou turn unto the LORD
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_deu:30:11">11</span> For this commandment which I command
thee this day, it is not too hard for thee, neither is it far off. <span
id="an_deu:30:12">12</span> It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest
say: \`Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, and make
us to hear it, that we may do it?' <span
id="an_deu:30:13">13</span> Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou
shouldest say: \`Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us,
and make us to hear it, that we may do it?' <span
id="an_deu:30:14">14</span> But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

<span id="an_deu:30:15">15</span> See, I have set before thee this day
life and good, and death and evil, <span id="an_deu:30:16">16</span> in
that I command thee this day to love the LORD thy God, to walk in His
ways, and to keep His commandments and His statutes and His ordinances;
then thou shalt live and multiply, and the LORD thy God shall bless thee
in the land whither thou goest in to possess it. <span
id="an_deu:30:17">17</span> But if thy heart turn away, and thou wilt
not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve
them; <span id="an_deu:30:18">18</span> I declare unto you this day,
that ye shall surely perish; ye shall not prolong your days upon the
land, whither thou passest over the Jordan to go in to possess it. <span
id="an_deu:30:19">19</span> I call heaven and earth to witness against
you this day, that I have set before thee life and death, the blessing
and the curse; therefore choose life, that thou mayest live, thou and
thy seed; <span id="an_deu:30:20">20</span> to love the LORD thy God, to
hearken to His voice, and to cleave unto Him; for that is thy life, and
the length of thy days; that thou mayest dwell in the land which the
LORD swore unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 31](deu031)

</div>
