<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu015)  [Next](deu017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 16

<span id="an_deu:16:1">1</span> Observe the month of Abib, and keep the
passover unto the LORD thy God; for in the month of Abib the LORD thy
God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night. <span
id="an_deu:16:2">2</span> And thou shalt sacrifice the passover-offering
unto the LORD thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the
LORD shall choose to cause His name to dwell there. <span
id="an_deu:16:3">3</span> Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it;
seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of
affliction; for in haste didst thou come forth out of the land of Egypt;
that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land
of Egypt all the days of thy life. <span id="an_deu:16:4">4</span> And
there shall be no leaven seen with thee in all thy borders seven days;
neither shall any of the flesh, which thou sacrificest the first day at
even, remain all night until the morning. <span
id="an_deu:16:5">5</span> Thou mayest not sacrifice the
passover-offering within any of thy gates, which the LORD thy God giveth
thee; <span id="an_deu:16:6">6</span> but at the place which the LORD
thy God shall choose to cause His name to dwell in, there thou shalt
sacrifice the passover-offering at even, at the going down of the sun,
at the season that thou camest forth out of Egypt. <span
id="an_deu:16:7">7</span> And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place
which the LORD thy God shall choose; and thou shalt turn in the morning,
and go unto thy tents. <span id="an_deu:16:8">8</span> Six days thou
shalt eat unleavened bread; and on the seventh day shall be a solemn
assembly to the LORD thy God; thou shalt do no work therein.

<span id="an_deu:16:9">9</span> Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee;
from the time the sickle is first put to the standing corn shalt thou
begin to number seven weeks. <span id="an_deu:16:10">10</span> And thou
shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the LORD thy God after the measure of
the freewill-offering of thy hand, which thou shalt give, according as
the LORD thy God blesseth thee. <span id="an_deu:16:11">11</span> And
thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that
is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the
widow, that are in the midst of thee, in the place which the LORD thy
God shall choose to cause His name to dwell there. <span
id="an_deu:16:12">12</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast a
bondman in Egypt; and thou shalt observe and do these statutes.

<span id="an_deu:16:13">13</span> Thou shalt keep the feast of
tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in from thy
threshing-floor and from thy winepress. <span
id="an_deu:16:14">14</span> And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou,
and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy
maid-servant, and the Levite, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and
the widow, that are within thy gates. <span
id="an_deu:16:15">15</span> Seven days shalt thou keep a feast unto the
LORD thy God in the place which the LORD shall choose; because the LORD
thy God shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the work of
thy hands, and thou shalt be altogether joyful. <span
id="an_deu:16:16">16</span> Three times in a year shall all thy males
appear before the LORD thy God in the place which He shall choose: on
the feast of unleavened bread, and on the feast of weeks, and on the
feast of tabernacles; and they shall not appear before the LORD empty;
<span id="an_deu:16:17">17</span> every man shall give as he is able,
according to the blessing of the LORD thy God which He hath given thee.

 

‏שפטים‎

<span id="an_deu:16:18">18</span> Judges and officers shalt thou make
thee in all thy gates, which the LORD

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

thy God giveth thee, tribe by tribe; and they shall judge the people
with righteous judgment. <span id="an_deu:16:19">19</span> Thou shalt
not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons; neither shalt thou
take a gift; for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the
words of the righteous. <span id="an_deu:16:20">20</span> Justice,
justice shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land
which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_deu:16:21">21</span> Thou shalt not plant thee an Asherah
of any kind of tree beside the altar of the LORD thy God, which thou
shalt make thee. <span id="an_deu:16:22">22</span> Neither shalt thou
set thee up a pillar, which the LORD thy God hateth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 17](deu017)

</div>
