<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu028)  [Next](deu030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 29

<span id="an_deu:29:1">1</span> And Moses called unto all Israel, and
said unto them:

Ye have seen all that the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt
unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land; <span
id="an_deu:29:2">2</span> the great trials which thine eyes saw, the
signs and those great wonders; <span id="an_deu:29:3">3</span> but the
LORD hath not given you a heart to know, and eyes to see, and ears to
hear, unto this day. <span id="an_deu:29:4">4</span> And I have led you
forty years in the wilderness; your clothes are not waxen old upon you,
and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot. <span
id="an_deu:29:5">5</span> Ye have not eaten bread, neither have Ye drunk
wine or strong drink; that ye might know that I am the LORD your God.
<span id="an_deu:29:6">6</span> And when ye came unto this place, Sihon
the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us unto
battle, and we smote them. <span id="an_deu:29:7">7</span> And we took
their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto the Reubenites, and to
the Gadites, and to the half-tribe of the Manassites. <span
id="an_deu:29:8">8</span> Observe therefore the words of this covenant,
and do them, that ye may make all that ye do to prosper.

 

‏נצבים‎

<span id="an_deu:29:9">9</span> Ye are standing this day all of you
before the LORD your God: your heads, your tribes, your elders, and your
officers, even all the men of Israel, <span
id="an_deu:29:10">10</span> your little ones, your wives, and thy
stranger that is in the midst of thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood
unto the drawer of thy water; <span id="an_deu:29:11">11</span> that
thou shouldest enter into the covenant of the LORD thy God—and into His
oath—which the LORD thy God maketh with thee this day; <span
id="an_deu:29:12">12</span> that He may establish thee this day unto
Himself for a people, and that He may be unto thee a God, as He spoke
unto thee, and as He swore unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and
to Jacob. <span id="an_deu:29:13">13</span> Neither with you only do I
make this covenant and this oath; <span id="an_deu:29:14">14</span> but
with him that standeth here with us this day before the LORD our God,
and also with him that is not here with us this day— <span
id="an_deu:29:15">15</span> for ye know how we dwelt in the land of
Egypt; and how we came through the midst of the nations through which ye
passed; <span id="an_deu:29:16">16</span> and ye have seen their
detestable things, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold,
which were with them— <span id="an_deu:29:17">17</span> lest there
should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart
turneth away this day from the LORD our God, to go to serve the gods of

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

those nations; lest there should be among you a root that beareth gall
and wormwood; <span id="an_deu:29:18">18</span> and it come to pass,
when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his
heart, saying: \`I shall have peace, though I walk in the stubbornness
of my heart—that the watered be swept away with the dry'; <span
id="an_deu:29:19">19</span> the LORD will not be willing to pardon him,
but then the anger of the LORD and His jealousy shall be kindled against
that man, and all the curse that is written in this book shall lie upon
him, and the LORD shall blot out his name from under heaven; <span
id="an_deu:29:20">20</span> and the LORD shall separate him unto evil
out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the
covenant that is written in this book of the law. <span
id="an_deu:29:21">21</span> And the generation to come, your children
that shall rise up after you, and the foreigner that shall come from a
far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and the
sicknesses wherewith the LORD hath made it sick; <span
id="an_deu:29:22">22</span> and that the whole land thereof is
brimstone, and salt, and a burning, that it is not sown, nor beareth,
nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah,
Admah and Zeboiim, which the LORD overthrew in His anger, and in His
wrath; <span id="an_deu:29:23">23</span> even all the nations shall say:
\`Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto this land? what meaneth the
heat of this great anger?' <span id="an_deu:29:24">24</span> then men
shall say: \`Because they forsook the covenant of the LORD, the God of
their fathers, which He made with them when He brought them forth out of
the land of Egypt; <span id="an_deu:29:25">25</span> and went and served
other gods, and worshipped them, gods that they knew not, and that He
had not allotted unto them; <span id="an_deu:29:26">26</span> therefore
the anger of the LORD was kindled against this land, to bring upon it
all the curse thai is written in this book; <span
id="an_deu:29:27">27</span> and the LORD rooted them out of their land
in anger, and in wrath, and in grea indignation, and cast them into
another land, as it is this day'.— <span id="an_deu:29:28">28</span> The
secret things belong unto the LORD our God; but the things that are
revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all
the words of this law.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 30](deu030)

</div>
