<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu003)  [Next](deu005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 4

<span id="an_deu:4:1">1</span> And now, O Israel, hearken unto the
statutes and unto the ordinances, which I teach you, to do them; that ye
may live, and go in and possess the land which the LORD, the God of your
fathers, giveth you. <span id="an_deu:4:2">2</span> Ye shall not add
unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish from it,
that ye may keep the commandments of the LORD your God which I command
you. <span id="an_deu:4:3">3</span> Your eyes have seen what the LORD
did in Baal-peor; for all the men that followed the Baal of Peor, the
LORD thy God hath destroyed them from the midst of thee. <span
id="an_deu:4:4">4</span> But ye that did cleave unto the LORD your God
are alive every one of you this day. <span
id="an_deu:4:5">5</span> Behold, I have taught you statutes and
ordinances, even as the LORD my God commanded me, that ye should do so
in the midst of the land whither ye go in to possess it. <span
id="an_deu:4:6">6</span> Observe therefore and do them; for this is your
wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the peoples, that, when
they hear all these statutes, shall say: \`Surely this great nation is a
wise and understanding people.' <span id="an_deu:4:7">7</span> For what
great nation is there, that hath God so nigh unto them, as the LORD our
God is whensoever we call upon Him? <span id="an_deu:4:8">8</span> And
what great nation is there, that hath statutes and ordinances so
righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day? <span
id="an_deu:4:9">9</span> Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul
diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes saw, and lest
they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; but make them known
unto thy children and thy children's children; <span
id="an_deu:4:10">10</span> the day that thou stoodest before the LORD
thy God in Horeb, when the LORD said unto me: \`Assemble Me the people,
and I will make them hear My words, that they may learn to fear Me all
the days that they live upon the earth, and that they may teach their
children.' <span id="an_deu:4:11">11</span> And ye came near and stood
under the mountain; and the mountain burned with fire unto the heart of
heaven, with darkness, cloud, and thick darkness. <span
id="an_deu:4:12">12</span> And the LORD spoke unto you out of the midst
of the fire; ye heard the voice of words, but ye saw no form; only a
voice. <span id="an_deu:4:13">13</span> And He declared unto you His
covenant, which He commanded you to perform, even the ten words; and He
wrote them upon two tables of stone. <span
id="an_deu:4:14">14</span> And the LORD commanded me at that time to
teach you statutes and ordinances, that ye might do them in the land
whither ye go over to possess it. <span id="an_deu:4:15">15</span> Take
ye therefore good heed unto yourselves—for ye saw no manner of form on
the day that the LORD spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the
fire—<span id="an_deu:4:16">16</span> lest ye deal corruptly, and make
you a graven image, even the form of any figure, the likeness of male or
female, <span id="an_deu:4:17">17</span> the likeness of any beast that
is on the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the
heaven, <span id="an_deu:4:18">18</span> the likeness of any thing that
creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water
under the earth; <span id="an_deu:4:19">19</span> and lest thou lift up
thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun and the moon and the
stars, even all the host of heaven, thou be drawn away and

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

worship them, and serve them, which the LORD thy God hath allotted unto
all the peoples under the whole heaven. <span
id="an_deu:4:20">20</span> But you hath the LORD taken and brought forth
out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be unto Him a people of
inheritance, as ye are this day. <span id="an_deu:4:21">21</span> Now
the LORD was angered with me for your sakes, and swore that I should not
go over the Jordan, and that I should not go in unto that good land,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance; <span
id="an_deu:4:22">22</span> but I must die in this land, I must not go
over the Jordan; but ye are to go over, and possess that good land.
<span id="an_deu:4:23">23</span> Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye
forget the covenant of the LORD your God, which He made with you, and
make you a graven image, even the likeness of any thing which the LORD
thy God hath forbidden thee. <span id="an_deu:4:24">24</span> For the
LORD thy God is a devouring fire, a jealous God.

<span id="an_deu:4:25">25</span> When thou shalt beget children, and
children's children, and ye shall have been long in the land, and shall
deal corruptly, and make a graven image, even the form of any thing, and
shall do that which is evil in the sight of the LORD thy God, to provoke
Him; <span id="an_deu:4:26">26</span> I call heaven and earth to witness
against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the
land whereunto ye go over the Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong
your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed. <span
id="an_deu:4:27">27</span> And the LORD shall scatter you among the
peoples, and ye shall be left few in number among the nations, whither
the LORD shall lead you away. <span id="an_deu:4:28">28</span> And there
ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which
neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. <span
id="an_deu:4:29">29</span> But from thence ye will seek the LORD thy
God; and thou shalt find Him, if thou search after Him with all thy
heart and with all thy soul. <span id="an_deu:4:30">30</span> In thy
distress, when all these things are come upon thee, in the end of days,
thou wilt return to the LORD thy God, and hearken unto His voice; <span
id="an_deu:4:31">31</span> for the LORD thy God is a merciful God; He
will not fail thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy
fathers which He swore unto them. <span id="an_deu:4:32">32</span> For
ask now of the days past, which were before thee, since the day that God
created man upon the earth, and from the one end of heaven unto the
other, whether there hath been any such thing as this great thing is, or
hath been heard like it? <span id="an_deu:4:33">33</span> Did ever a
people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as
thou hast heard, and live? <span id="an_deu:4:34">34</span> Or hath God
assayed to go and take Him a nation from the midst of another nation, by
trials, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and
by an outstretched arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the
LORD your God did for you in Egypt before thine eyes? <span
id="an_deu:4:35">35</span> Unto thee it was shown, that thou mightest
know that the LORD, He is God; there is none else beside Him. <span
id="an_deu:4:36">36</span> Out of heaven He made thee to hear His voice,
that He might instruct thee; and upon earth He made thee to see His
great fire; and thou didst hear His words out of the midst of the fire.
<span id="an_deu:4:37">37</span> And because He loved thy fathers, and
chose their seed after them, and brought thee out with His presence,
with His great power, out of Egypt, <span id="an_deu:4:38">38</span> to
drive out nations from before thee greater and mightier than thou, to
bring thee in, to give thee their land for an inheritance, as it is this
day; <span id="an_deu:4:39">39</span> know this day, and lay it to thy
heart, that the LORD, He is God in heaven above and upon the earth
beneath; there is none else.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span id="an_deu:4:40">40</span> And thou shalt keep His statutes, and
His commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may go well
with thee, and with thy children after thee, and that thou mayest
prolong thy days upon the land, which the LORD thy God giveth thee, for
ever.

 

<span id="an_deu:4:41">41</span> Then Moses separated three cities
beyond the Jordan toward the sun-rising; <span
id="an_deu:4:42">42</span> that the manslayer might flee thither, that
slayeth his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in time past; and that
fleeing unto one of these cities he might live: <span
id="an_deu:4:43">43</span> Bezer in the wilderness, in the table-land,
for the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, for the Gadites; and Golan in
Bashan, for the Manassites.

 

<span id="an_deu:4:44">44</span> And this is the law which Moses set
before the children of Israel; <span id="an_deu:4:45">45</span> these
are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which Moses
spoke unto the children of Israel, when they came forth out of Egypt;
<span id="an_deu:4:46">46</span> beyond the Jordan, in the valley over
against Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt
at Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel smote, when they came
forth out of Egypt; <span id="an_deu:4:47">47</span> and they took his
land in possession, and the land of Og king of Bashan, the two kings of
the Amorites, who were beyond the Jordan toward the sun-rising; <span
id="an_deu:4:48">48</span> from Aroer, which is on the edge of the
valley of Arnon, even unto mount Sion—the same is Hermon— <span
id="an_deu:4:49">49</span> and all the Arabah beyond the Jordan
eastward, even unto the sea of the Arabah, under the slopes of Pisgah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 5](deu005)

</div>
