<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu017)  [Next](deu019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 18

<span id="an_deu:18:1">1</span> The priests the Levites, even all the
tribe of Levi, shall have no portion nor inheritance with Israel; they
shall eat the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and His inheritance.
<span id="an_deu:18:2">2</span> And they shall have no inheritance among
their brethren; the LORD is their inheritance, as He hath spoken unto
them.

<span id="an_deu:18:3">3</span> And this shall be the priests' due from
the people, from them that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep,
that they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks,
and the maw. <span id="an_deu:18:4">4</span> The first-fruits of thy
corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy
sheep, shalt thou give him. <span id="an_deu:18:5">5</span> For the LORD
thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in
the name of the LORD, him and his sons for ever.

<span id="an_deu:18:6">6</span> And if a Levite come from any of thy
gates out of all Israel, where he sojourneth, and come with all the
desire of his soul unto the place which the LORD shall choose; <span
id="an_deu:18:7">7</span> then he shall minister in the name of the LORD
his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, who stand there before the
LORD. <span id="an_deu:18:8">8</span> They shall have like portions to
eat, beside that which is his due according to the fathers' houses.

<span id="an_deu:18:9">9</span> When thou art come into the land which
the LORD thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the
abominations of those nations. <span id="an_deu:18:10">10</span> There
shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter
to pass through the fire, one that useth divination, a soothsayer, or an
enchanter, or a sorcerer, <span id="an_deu:18:11">11</span> or a
charmer, or one that consulteth a ghost or a familiar spirit, or a
necromancer. <span id="an_deu:18:12">12</span> For whosoever doeth these
things is an abomination unto the LORD; and because of these
abominations the LORD thy God is driving them out from before thee.
<span id="an_deu:18:13">13</span> Thou shalt be whole-hearted with the
LORD thy God. <span id="an_deu:18:14">14</span> For these nations, that
thou art to dispossess, hearken unto soothsayers, and unto diviners; but
as for thee, the LORD thy God hath not suffered thee so to do. <span
id="an_deu:18:15">15</span> A prophet will the LORD thy God raise up
unto thee, from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto
him ye shall hearken; <span id="an_deu:18:16">16</span> according to all
that thou didst desire of the LORD thy God in Horeb in the day of the
assembly, saying: \`Let me not hear again the voice of the LORD my God,
neither let me see this great fire any more, that I die not.' <span
id="an_deu:18:17">17</span> And the LORD said unto me: \`They

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

have well said that which they have spoken. <span
id="an_deu:18:18">18</span> I will raise them up a prophet from among
their brethren, like unto thee; and I will put My words in his mouth,
and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. <span
id="an_deu:18:19">19</span> And it shall come to pass, that whosoever
will not hearken unto My words which he shall speak in My name, I will
require it of him. <span id="an_deu:18:20">20</span> But the prophet,
that shall speak a word presumptuously in My name, which I have not
commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other gods,
that same prophet shall die.' <span id="an_deu:18:21">21</span> And if
thou say in thy heart: \`How shall we know the word which the LORD hath
not spoken?' <span id="an_deu:18:22">22</span> When a prophet speaketh
in the name of the LORD, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that
is the thing which the LORD hath not spoken; the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously, thou shalt not be afraid of him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 19](deu019.md)

</div>
