<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu013)  [Next](deu015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 14

<span id="an_deu:14:1">1</span> Ye are the children of the LORD your
God: ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your
eyes for the dead. <span id="an_deu:14:2">2</span> For thou art a holy
people unto the LORD thy God, and the LORD hath chosen thee to be His
own treasure out of all peoples that are upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_deu:14:3">3</span> Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.
<span id="an_deu:14:4">4</span> These are the beasts which ye may eat:
the ox, the sheep, and the goat, <span id="an_deu:14:5">5</span> the
hart, and the gazelle, and the roebuck, and the wild goat,

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

and the pygarg, and the antelope, and the mountain-sheep. <span
id="an_deu:14:6">6</span> And every beast that parteth the hoof, and
hath the hoof wholly cloven in two, and cheweth the cud, among the
beasts, that ye may eat. <span id="an_deu:14:7">7</span> Nevertheless
these ye shall not eat of them that only chew the cud, or of them that
only have the hoof cloven: the camel, and the hare, and the rock-badger,
because they chew the cud but part not the hoof, they are unclean unto
you; <span id="an_deu:14:8">8</span> and the swine, because he parteth
the hoof but cheweth not the cud, he is unclean unto you; of their flesh
ye shall not eat, and their carcasses ye shall not touch.

<span id="an_deu:14:9">9</span> These ye may eat of all that are in the
waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales may ye eat; <span
id="an_deu:14:10">10</span> and whatsoever hath not fins and scales ye
shall not eat; it is unclean unto you.

<span id="an_deu:14:11">11</span> Of all clean birds ye may eat. <span
id="an_deu:14:12">12</span> But these are they of which ye shall not
eat: the great vulture, and the bearded vulture, and the ospray; <span
id="an_deu:14:13">13</span> and the glede, and the falcon, and the kite
after its kinds; <span id="an_deu:14:14">14</span> and every raven after
its kinds; <span id="an_deu:14:15">15</span> and the ostrich, and the
night-hawk, and the sea-mew, and the hawk after its kinds; <span
id="an_deu:14:16">16</span> the little owl, and the great owl, and the
horned owl; <span id="an_deu:14:17">17</span> and the pelican, and the
carrion-vulture, and the cormorant; <span
id="an_deu:14:18">18</span> and the stork, and the heron after its
kinds, and the hoopoe, and the bat. <span
id="an_deu:14:19">19</span> And all winged swarming things are unclean
unto you; they shall not be eaten. <span id="an_deu:14:20">20</span> Of
all clean winged things ye may eat.

<span id="an_deu:14:21">21</span> Ye shall not eat of any thing that
dieth of itself; thou mayest give it unto the stranger that is within
thy gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it unto a foreigner;
for thou art a holy people unto the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe
a kid in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_deu:14:22">22</span> Thou shalt surely tithe all the
increase of thy seed, that which is brought forth in the field year by
year. <span id="an_deu:14:23">23</span> And thou shalt eat before the
LORD thy God, in the place which He shall choose to cause His name to
dwell there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and
the firstlings of thy herd and of thy flock; that thou mayest learn to
fear the LORD thy God always. <span id="an_deu:14:24">24</span> And if
the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to carry it,
because the place is too far from thee, which the LORD thy God shall
choose to set His name there, when the LORD thy God shall bless thee;
<span id="an_deu:14:25">25</span> then shalt thou turn it into money,
and bind up the money in thy hand, and shalt go unto the place which the
LORD thy God shall choose. <span id="an_deu:14:26">26</span> And thou
shalt bestow the money for whatsoever thy soul desireth, for oxen, or
for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul
asketh of thee; and thou shalt eat there before the LORD thy God, and
thou shalt rejoice, thou and thy household. <span
id="an_deu:14:27">27</span> And the Levite that is within thy gates,
thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no portion nor inheritance with
thee.

<span id="an_deu:14:28">28</span> At the end of every three years, even
in the same year, thou shalt bring forth all the tithe of thine
increase, and shalt lay it up within thy gates. <span
id="an_deu:14:29">29</span> And the Levite, because he hath no portion
nor inheritance with thee, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the
widow, that are within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be
satisfied; that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy
hand which thou doest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 15](deu015)

</div>
