<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu005)  [Next](deu007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 6

<span id="an_deu:6:1">1</span> Now this is the commandment, the
statutes, and the ordinances, which the LORD your God commanded to teach
you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it—
<span id="an_deu:6:2">2</span> that thou mightest fear the LORD thy God,
to keep all His statutes and His commandments,

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days
of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged. <span
id="an_deu:6:3">3</span> Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it;
that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the
LORD, the God of thy fathers, hath promised unto thee— a land flowing
with milk and honey.

<span id="an_deu:6:4">4</span> HEAR, O ISRAEL: THE LORD OUR GOD, THE
LORD IS ONE. <span id="an_deu:6:5">5</span> And thou shalt love the LORD
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
might. <span id="an_deu:6:6">6</span> And these words, which I command
thee this day, shall be upon thy heart; <span
id="an_deu:6:7">7</span> and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy
children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house, and
when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou
risest up. <span id="an_deu:6:8">8</span> And thou shalt bind them for a
sign upon thy hand, and they shall he for frontlets between thine eyes.
<span id="an_deu:6:9">9</span> And thou shalt write them upon the
door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

<span id="an_deu:6:10">10</span> And it shall be, when the LORD thy God
shall bring thee into the land which He swore unto thy fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee— great and goodly cities,
which thou didst not build, <span id="an_deu:6:11">11</span> and houses
full of all good things, which thou didst not fill, and cisterns hewn
out, which thou didst not hew, vineyards and olive-trees, which thou
didst not plant, and thou shalt eat and be satisfied— <span
id="an_deu:6:12">12</span> then beware lest thou forget the LORD, who
brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage. <span id="an_deu:6:13">13</span> Thou shalt fear the LORD thy
God; and Him shalt thou serve, and by His name shalt thou swear. <span
id="an_deu:6:14">14</span> Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods
of the peoples that are round about you; <span
id="an_deu:6:15">15</span> for a jealous God, even the LORD thy God, is
in the midst of thee; lest the anger of the LORD thy God be kindled
against thee, and He destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

<span id="an_deu:6:16">16</span> Ye shall not try the LORD your God, as
ye tried Him in Massah. <span id="an_deu:6:17">17</span> Ye shall
diligently keep the commandments of the LORD your God, and His
testimonies, and His statutes, which He hath commanded thee. <span
id="an_deu:6:18">18</span> And thou shalt do that which is right and
good in the sight of the LORD; that it may be well with thee, and that
thou mayest go in and possess the good land which the LORD swore unto
thy fathers, <span id="an_deu:6:19">19</span> to thrust out all thine
enemies from before thee, as the LORD hath spoken.

<span id="an_deu:6:20">20</span> When thy son asketh thee in time to
come, saying: \`What mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the
ordinances, which the LORD our God hath commanded you?' <span
id="an_deu:6:21">21</span> then thou shalt say unto thy son: \`We were
Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt; and the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a
mighty hand. <span id="an_deu:6:22">22</span> And the LORD showed signs
and wonders, great and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his
house, before our eyes. <span id="an_deu:6:23">23</span> And He brought
us out from thence, that He might bring us in, to give us the land which
He swore unto our fathers. <span id="an_deu:6:24">24</span> And the LORD
commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the LORD our God, for our
good always, that He might preserve us alive, as it is at this day.
<span id="an_deu:6:25">25</span> And it shall be righteousness unto us,
if we observe to do all this commandment before the LORD our God, as He
hath commanded us.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 7](deu007.md)

</div>
