<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu025)  [Next](deu027.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 26

‏כי תבוא‎

<span id="an_deu:26:1">1</span> And it shall be, when thou art come in
unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and
dost possess it, and dwell therein; <span id="an_deu:26:2">2</span> that
thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the ground, which thou
shalt bring in from thy land that the LORD thy God giveth thee; and thou
shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto the place which the LORD thy
God shall choose to cause His name to dwell there. <span
id="an_deu:26:3">3</span> And thou shalt come unto the priest that shall

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

be in those days, and say unto him: \`I profess this day unto the LORD
thy God, that I am come unto the land which the LORD swore unto our
fathers to give us.' <span id="an_deu:26:4">4</span> And the priest
shall take the basket out of thy hand, and set it down before the altar
of the LORD thy God. <span id="an_deu:26:5">5</span> And thou shalt
speak and say before the LORD thy God: \`A wandering Aramean was my
father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there, few in number;
and he became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous. <span
id="an_deu:26:6">6</span> And the Egyptians dealt ill with us, and
afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage. <span
id="an_deu:26:7">7</span> And we cried unto the LORD, the God of our
fathers, and the LORD heard our voice, and saw our affliction, and our
toil, and our oppression. <span id="an_deu:26:8">8</span> And the LORD
brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an
outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and with
wonders. <span id="an_deu:26:9">9</span> And He hath brought us into
this place, and hath given us this land, a land flowing with milk and
honey. <span id="an_deu:26:10">10</span> And now, behold, I have brought
the first of the fruit of the land, which Thou, O LORD, hast given me.'
And thou shalt set it down before the LORD thy God, and worship before
the LORD thy God. <span id="an_deu:26:11">11</span> And thou shalt
rejoice in all the good which the LORD thy God hath given unto thee, and
unto thy house, thou, and the Levite, and the stranger that is in the
midst of thee.

<span id="an_deu:26:12">12</span> When thou hast made an end of tithing
all the tithe of thine increase in the third year, which is the year of
tithing, and hast given it unto the Levite, to the stranger, to the
fatherless, and to the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be
satisfied, <span id="an_deu:26:13">13</span> then thou shalt say before
the LORD thy God: \`I have put away the hallowed things out of my house,
and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the
fatherless, and to the widow, according to all Thy commandment which
Thou hast commanded me; I have not transgressed any of Thy commandments,
neither have I forgotten them. <span id="an_deu:26:14">14</span> I have
not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I put away thereof, being
unclean, nor given thereof for the dead; I have hearkened to the voice
of the LORD my God, I have done according to all that Thou hast
commanded me. <span id="an_deu:26:15">15</span> Look forth from Thy holy
habitation, from heaven, and bless Thy people Israel, and the land which
Thou hast given us, as Thou didst swear unto our fathers, a land flowing
with milk and honey.'

<span id="an_deu:26:16">16</span> This day the LORD thy God commandeth
thee to do these statutes and ordinances; thou shalt therefore observe
and do them with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. <span
id="an_deu:26:17">17</span> Thou hast avouched the LORD this day to be
thy God, and that thou wouldest walk in His ways, and keep His statutes,
and His commandments, and His ordinances, and hearken unto His voice.
<span id="an_deu:26:18">18</span> And the LORD hath avouched thee this
day to be His own treasure, as He hath promised thee, and that thou
shouldest keep all His commandments; <span
id="an_deu:26:19">19</span> and to make thee high above all nations that
He hath made, in praise, and in name, and in glory; and that thou mayest
be a holy people unto the LORD thy God, as He hath spoken.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 27](deu027.md)

</div>
