<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu018)  [Next](deu020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 19

<span id="an_deu:19:1">1</span> When the LORD thy God shall cut off the
nations, whose land the LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou dost succeed
them, and dwell in their cities, and in their houses; <span
id="an_deu:19:2">2</span> thou shalt separate three cities for thee in
the midst of thy land, which the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it.
<span id="an_deu:19:3">3</span> Thou shalt prepare thee the way, and
divide the borders of thy land, which the LORD thy God causeth thee to
inherit, into three parts, that every manslayer may flee thither. <span
id="an_deu:19:4">4</span> And this is the case of the manslayer, that
shall flee thither and live: whoso killeth his neighbour unawares, and
hated him not in time past; <span id="an_deu:19:5">5</span> as when a
man goeth into the forest with his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand
fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the head
slippeth from the helve, and lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die;
he shall flee unto one of these cities and live; <span
id="an_deu:19:6">6</span> lest the avenger of blood pursue the
manslayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and smite him mortally; whereas he was not deserving of death,
inasmuch as he hated him not in time past. <span
id="an_deu:19:7">7</span> Wherefore I command thee, saying: \`Thou shalt
separate three cities for thee.' <span id="an_deu:19:8">8</span> And if
the LORD thy God enlarge thy border, as He hath sworn unto thy fathers,
and give thee all the land which He promised to give unto thy fathers—
<span id="an_deu:19:9">9</span> if thou shalt keep all this commandment
to do it, which I command thee this day, to love the LORD thy God, and
to walk ever in His ways—then shalt thou add three cities more for thee,
beside these three; <span id="an_deu:19:10">10</span> that innocent
blood be not shed in the midst of thy land, which the LORD thy God
giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be upon thee.

<span id="an_deu:19:11">11</span> But if any man hate his neighbour, and
lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally
that he die; and he flee into one of these cities; <span
id="an_deu:19:12">12</span> then the elders of his city shall send and
fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood,
that he may die. <span id="an_deu:19:13">13</span> Thine eye shall not
pity him, but thou shalt put away the blood of the innocent from Israel,
that it may go well with thee.

<span id="an_deu:19:14">14</span> Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's
landmark, which they of old time have set, in thine inheritance which
thou shalt inherit, in the land that the LORD thy God giveth thee to
possess it.

<span id="an_deu:19:15">15</span> One witness shall not rise up against
a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth; at
the mouth of two witnesses, or at

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

the mouth of three witnesses, shall a matter be established. <span
id="an_deu:19:16">16</span> If an unrighteous witness rise up against
any man to bear perverted witness against him; <span
id="an_deu:19:17">17</span> then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the LORD, before the priests and the
judges that shall be in those days. <span
id="an_deu:19:18">18</span> And the judges shall inquire diligently;
and, behold, if the witness be a false witness, and hath testified
falsely against his brother; <span id="an_deu:19:19">19</span> then
shall ye do unto him, as he had purposed to do unto his brother; so
shalt thou put away the evil from the midst of thee. <span
id="an_deu:19:20">20</span> And those that remain shall hear, and fear,
and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil in the midst of thee.
<span id="an_deu:19:21">21</span> And thine eye shall not pity: life for
life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 20](deu020.md)

</div>
