<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu019)  [Next](deu021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 20

<span id="an_deu:20:1">1</span> When thou goest forth to battle against
thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, and a people more than
thou, thou shalt not be afraid of them; for the LORD thy God is with
thee, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_deu:20:2">2</span> And it shall be, when ye draw nigh unto the
battle, that the priest shall approach and speak unto the people, <span
id="an_deu:20:3">3</span> and shall say unto them: \`Hear, O Israel, ye
draw nigh this day unto battle against your enemies; let not your heart
faint; fear not, nor be alarmed, neither be ye affrighted at them; <span
id="an_deu:20:4">4</span> for the LORD your God is He that goeth with
you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you. <span
id="an_deu:20:5">5</span> And the officers shall speak unto the people,
saying: \`What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath not
dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man dedicate it. <span id="an_deu:20:6">6</span> And
what man is there that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not used the
fruit thereof? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man use the fruit thereof, <span
id="an_deu:20:7">7</span> And what man is there that hath betrothed a
wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest
he die in the battle, and another man take her.' <span
id="an_deu:20:8">8</span> And the officers shall speak further unto the
people, and they shall say: \`What man is there that is fearful and
faint-hearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's
heart melt as his heart.' <span id="an_deu:20:9">9</span> And it shall
be, when the officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, that
captains of hosts shall be appointed at the head of the people.

<span id="an_deu:20:10">10</span> When thou drawest nigh unto a city to
fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. <span
id="an_deu:20:11">11</span> And it shall be, if it make thee answer of
peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that
are found therein shall become tributary unto thee, and shall serve
thee. <span id="an_deu:20:12">12</span> And if it will make no peace
with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it.
<span id="an_deu:20:13">13</span> And when the LORD thy God delivereth
it into thy hand, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of
the sword; <span id="an_deu:20:14">14</span> but the women, and the
little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the
spoil thereof, shalt thou take for a prey unto thyself; and thou shalt
eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.
<span id="an_deu:20:15">15</span> Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities
which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these
nations. <span id="an_deu:20:16">16</span> Howbeit of the cities of
these peoples, that the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance,
thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth, <span
id="an_deu:20:17">17</span> but thou shalt utterly destroy them: the
Hittite, and the Amorite, the

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Canaanite, and the
Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite; as the LORD thy God hath
commanded thee; <span id="an_deu:20:18">18</span> that they teach you
not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their
gods, and so ye sin against the LORD your God.

<span id="an_deu:20:19">19</span> When thou shalt besiege a city a long
time, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the
trees thereof by wielding an axe against them; for thou mayest eat of
them, but thou shalt not cut them down; for is the tree of the field
man, that it should be besieged of thee? <span
id="an_deu:20:20">20</span> Only the trees of which thou knowest that
they are not trees for food, them thou mayest destroy and cut down, that
thou mayest build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee,
until it fall.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 21](deu021.md)

</div>
