<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu026)  [Next](deu028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 27

<span id="an_deu:27:1">1</span> And Moses and the elders of Israel
commanded the people, saying: \`Keep all the commandment which I command
you this day. <span id="an_deu:27:2">2</span> And it shall be on the day
when ye shall pass over the Jordan unto the land which the LORD thy God
giveth thee,

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

that thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaster them with plaster.
<span id="an_deu:27:3">3</span> And thou shalt write upon them all the
words of this law, when thou art passed over; that thou mayest go in
unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, a land flowing with
milk and honey, as the LORD, the God of thy fathers, hath promised thee.
<span id="an_deu:27:4">4</span> And it shall be when ye are passed over
the Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this
day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaster them with plaster. <span
id="an_deu:27:5">5</span> And there shalt thou build an altar unto the
LORD thy God, an altar of stones; thou shalt lift up no iron tool upon
them. <span id="an_deu:27:6">6</span> Thou shalt build the altar of the
LORD thy God of unhewn stones; and thou shalt offer burnt-offerings
thereon unto the LORD thy God. <span id="an_deu:27:7">7</span> And thou
shalt sacrifice peace-offerings, and shalt eat there; and thou shalt
rejoice before the LORD thy God. <span id="an_deu:27:8">8</span> And
thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very
plainly.'

<span id="an_deu:27:9">9</span> And Moses and the priests the Levites
spoke unto all Israel, saying: \`Keep silence, and hear, O Israel; this
day thou art become a people unto the LORD thy God. <span
id="an_deu:27:10">10</span> Thou shalt therefore hearken to the voice of
the LORD thy God, and do His commandments and His statutes, which I
command thee this day.'

<span id="an_deu:27:11">11</span> And Moses charged the people the same
day, saying: <span id="an_deu:27:12">12</span> \`These shall stand upon
mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye are passed over the Jordan:
Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin;
<span id="an_deu:27:13">13</span> and these shall stand upon mount Ebal
for the curse: Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.
<span id="an_deu:27:14">14</span> And the Levites shall speak, and say
unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice:

<span id="an_deu:27:15">15</span> Cursed be the man that maketh a graven
or molten image, an abomination unto the LORD, the work of the hands of
the craftsman, and setteth it up in secret. And all the people shall
answer and say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:16">16</span> Cursed be he that dishonoureth his
father or his mother. And all the people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:17">17</span> Cursed be he that removeth his
neighbour's landmark. And all the people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:18">18</span> Cursed be he that maketh the blind to
go astray in the way. And all the people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:19">19</span> Cursed be he that perverteth the
justice due to the stranger, fatherless, and widow. And all the people
shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:20">20</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
father's wife; because he hath uncovered his father's skirt. And all the
people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:21">21</span> Cursed be he that lieth with any
manner of beast. And all the people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:22">22</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. And
all the people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:23">23</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
mother-in-law. And all the people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:24">24</span> Cursed be he that smiteth his
neighbour in secret. And all the people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:25">25</span> Cursed be he that taketh a bribe to
slay an innocent person. And all the people shall say: Amen.

<span id="an_deu:27:26">26</span> Cursed be he that confirmeth not the
words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say: Amen.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 28](deu028)

</div>
