<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu027)  [Next](deu029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 28

<span id="an_deu:28:1">1</span> And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt
hearken diligently unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do
all His commandments which I command thee this

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

day, that the LORD thy God will set thee on high above all the nations
of the earth. <span id="an_deu:28:2">2</span> And all these blessings
shall come upon thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the
voice of the LORD thy God. <span id="an_deu:28:3">3</span> Blessed shalt
thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the field. <span
id="an_deu:28:4">4</span> Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and
the fruit of thy land, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy
kine, and the young of thy flock. <span
id="an_deu:28:5">5</span> Blessed shall be thy basket and thy
kneading-trough. <span id="an_deu:28:6">6</span> Blessed shalt thou be
when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out.
<span id="an_deu:28:7">7</span> The LORD will cause thine enemies that
rise up against thee to be smitten before thee; they shall come out
against thee one way, and shall flee before thee seven ways. <span
id="an_deu:28:8">8</span> The LORD will command the blessing with thee
in thy barns, and in all that thou puttest thy hand unto; and He will
bless thee in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee. <span
id="an_deu:28:9">9</span> The LORD will establish thee for a holy people
unto Himself, as He hath sworn unto thee; if thou shalt keep the
commandments of the LORD thy God, and walk in His ways. <span
id="an_deu:28:10">10</span> And all the peoples of the earth shall see
that the name of the LORD is called upon thee; and they shall be afraid
of thee. <span id="an_deu:28:11">11</span> And the LORD will make thee
overabundant for good, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy
cattle, and in the fruit of thy land, in the land which the LORD swore
unto thy fathers to give thee. <span id="an_deu:28:12">12</span> The
LORD will open unto thee His good treasure the heaven to give the rain
of thy land in its season, and to bless all the work of thy hand; and
thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow. <span
id="an_deu:28:13">13</span> And the LORD will make thee the head, and
not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be
beneath; if thou shalt hearken unto the commandments of the LORD thy
God, which I command thee this day, to observe and to do them; <span
id="an_deu:28:14">14</span> and shalt not turn aside from any of the
words which I command you this day, to the right hand, or to the left,
to go after other gods to serve them.

<span id="an_deu:28:15">15</span> But it shall come to pass, if thou
wilt not hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do
all His commandments and His statutes which I command thee this day;
that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. <span
id="an_deu:28:16">16</span> Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed
shalt thou be in the field. <span id="an_deu:28:17">17</span> Cursed
shall be thy basket and thy kneading-trough. <span
id="an_deu:28:18">18</span> Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and
the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the young of thy
flock. <span id="an_deu:28:19">19</span> Cursed shalt thou be when thou
comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out. <span
id="an_deu:28:20">20</span> The LORD will send upon thee cursing,
discomfiture, and rebuke, in all that thou puttest thy hand unto to do,
until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the
evil of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken Me. <span
id="an_deu:28:21">21</span> The LORD will make the pestilence cleave
unto thee, until He have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou
goest in to possess it. <span id="an_deu:28:22">22</span> The LORD will
smite thee with consumption, and with fever, and with inflammation, and
with fiery heat, and with drought, and with blasting, and with mildew;
and they shall pursue thee until thou perish. <span
id="an_deu:28:23">23</span> And thy heaven that is over thy head shall
be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron. <span
id="an_deu:28:24">24</span> The LORD will make the rain of thy land
powder and dust; from heaven shall it come down

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

upon thee, until thou be destroyed. <span
id="an_deu:28:25">25</span> The LORD will cause thee to be smitten
before thine enemies; thou shalt go out one way against them, and shalt
flee seven ways before them; and thou shalt be a horror unto all the
kingdoms of the earth. <span id="an_deu:28:26">26</span> And thy
carcasses shall be food unto all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts
of the earth, and there shall be none to frighten them away.

<span id="an_deu:28:27">27</span> The LORD will smite thee with the boil
of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch,
whereof thou canst not be healed. <span id="an_deu:28:28">28</span> The
LORD will smite thee with madness, and with blindness, and with
astonishment of heart. <span id="an_deu:28:29">29</span> And thou shalt
grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not
make thy ways prosperous; and thou shalt be only oppressed and robbed
alway, and there shall be none to save thee. <span
id="an_deu:28:30">30</span> Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man
shall lie with her; thou shalt build a house, and thou shalt not dwell
therein; thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not use the fruit
thereof. <span id="an_deu:28:31">31</span> Thine ox shall be slain
before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof; thine ass shall be
violently taken away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to
thee; thy sheep shall be given unto thine enemies; and thou shalt have
none to save thee. <span id="an_deu:28:32">32</span> Thy sons and thy
daughters shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look,
and fail with longing for them all the day; and there shall be nought in
the power of thy hand. <span id="an_deu:28:33">33</span> The fruit of
thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat
up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed alway; <span
id="an_deu:28:34">34</span> so that thou shalt be mad for the sight of
thine eyes which thou shalt see. <span id="an_deu:28:35">35</span> The
LORD will smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore boil,
whereof thou canst not be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the
crown of thy head. <span id="an_deu:28:36">36</span> The LORD will bring
thee, and thy king whom thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation that
thou hast not known, thou nor thy fathers; and there shalt thou serve
other gods, wood and stone. <span id="an_deu:28:37">37</span> And thou
shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all the
peoples whither the LORD shall lead thee away.

<span id="an_deu:28:38">38</span> Thou shalt carry much seed out into
the field, and shalt gather little in; for the locust shall consume it.
<span id="an_deu:28:39">39</span> Thou shalt plant vineyards and dress
them, but thou shalt neither drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes;
for the worm shall eat them. <span id="an_deu:28:40">40</span> Thou
shalt have olive-trees throughout all thy borders, but thou shalt not
anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olives shall drop off. <span
id="an_deu:28:41">41</span> Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but
they shall not be thine; for they shall go into captivity. <span
id="an_deu:28:42">42</span> All thy trees and the fruit of thy land
shall the locust possess.

<span id="an_deu:28:43">43</span> The stranger that is in the midst of
thee shall mount up above thee higher and higher; and thou shalt come
down lower and lower. <span id="an_deu:28:44">44</span> He shall lend to
thee, and thou shalt not lend to him; he shall be the head, and thou
shalt be the tail. <span id="an_deu:28:45">45</span> And all these
curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee,
till thou be destroyed; because thou didst not hearken unto the voice of
the LORD thy God, to keep His commandments and His statutes which He
commanded thee. <span id="an_deu:28:46">46</span> And they shall be upon
thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever; <span
id="an_deu:28:47">47</span> because thou didst not serve the

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> LORD thy God with
joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, by reason of the abundance of
all things; <span id="an_deu:28:48">48</span> therefore shalt thou serve
thine enemy whom the LORD shall send against thee, in hunger, and in
thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things; and he shall put a
yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.

<span id="an_deu:28:49">49</span> The LORD will bring a nation against
thee from far, from the end of the earth, as the vulture swoopeth down;
a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand; <span
id="an_deu:28:50">50</span> a nation of fierce countenance, that shall
not regard the person of the old, nor show favour to the young. <span
id="an_deu:28:51">51</span> And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle,
and the fruit of thy ground, until thou be destroyed; that also shall
not leave thee corn, wine, or oil, the increase of thy kine, or the
young of thy flock, until he have caused thee to perish. <span
id="an_deu:28:52">52</span> And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates,
until thy high and fortified walls come down, wherein thou didst trust,
throughout all thy land; and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates
throughout all thy land, which the LORD thy God hath given thee. <span
id="an_deu:28:53">53</span> And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own
body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters whom the LORD thy God
hath given thee; in the siege and in the straitness, wherewith thine
enemies shall straiten thee. <span id="an_deu:28:54">54</span> The man
that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil
against his brother, and against the wife of his bosom, and against the
remnant of his children whom he hath remaining; <span
id="an_deu:28:55">55</span> so that he will not give to any of them of
the flesh of his children whom he shall eat, because he hath nothing
left him; in the siege and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemy
shall straiten thee in all thy gates. <span
id="an_deu:28:56">56</span> The tender and delicate woman among you, who
would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for
delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil against the husband
of her bosom, and against her son, and against her daughter; <span
id="an_deu:28:57">57</span> and against her afterbirth that cometh out
from between her feet, and against her children whom she shall bear; for
she shall eat them for want of all things secretly; in the siege and in
the straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall straiten thee in thy gates.

<span id="an_deu:28:58">58</span> If thou wilt not observe to do all the
words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear
this glorious and awful Name, the LORD thy God; <span
id="an_deu:28:59">59</span> then the LORD will make thy plagues
wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long
continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance. <span
id="an_deu:28:60">60</span> And He will bring back upon thee all the
diseases of Egypt, which thou wast in dread of; and they shall cleave
unto thee. <span id="an_deu:28:61">61</span> Also every sickness, and
every plague, which is not written in the book of this law, them will
the LORD bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed. <span
id="an_deu:28:62">62</span> And ye shall be left few in number, whereas
ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou didst not
hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God. <span
id="an_deu:28:63">63</span> And it shall come to pass, that as the LORD
rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the LORD will
rejoice over you to cause you to perish, and to destroy you; and ye
shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest in to possess it.
<span id="an_deu:28:64">64</span> And the LORD shall scatter thee among
all peoples, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of
the earth; and there thou shalt serve other gods,

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

which thou hast not known, thou nor thy fathers, even wood and stone.
<span id="an_deu:28:65">65</span> And among these nations shalt thou
have no repose, and there shall be no rest for the sole of thy foot; but
the LORD shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes,
and languishing of soul. <span id="an_deu:28:66">66</span> And thy life
shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear night and day, and
shalt have no assurance of thy life. <span
id="an_deu:28:67">67</span> In the morning thou shalt say: \`Would it
were even!' and at even thou shalt say: \`Would it were morning!' for
the fear of thy heart which thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine
eyes which thou shalt see. <span id="an_deu:28:68">68</span> And the
LORD shall bring thee back into Egypt in ships, by the way whereof I
said unto thee: \`Thou shalt see it no more again'; and there ye shall
sell yourselves unto your enemies for bondmen and for bondwomen, and no
man shall buy you.

<span id="an_deu:28:69">69</span> These are the words of the covenant
which the LORD commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in
the land of Moab, beside the covenant which He made with them in Horeb.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 29](deu029.md)

</div>
