<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo022)  [Next](exo024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 23

<span id="an_exo:23:1">1</span> Thou shalt not utter a false report; put
not thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. <span
id="an_exo:23:2">2</span> Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil;
neither shalt thou bear witness in a cause to turn aside after a
multitude to pervert justice; <span id="an_exo:23:3">3</span> neither
shalt thou favour a poor man in his cause.

<span id="an_exo:23:4">4</span> If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass
going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.

<span id="an_exo:23:5">5</span> If thou see the ass of him that hateth
thee lying under its burden, thou shalt forbear to pass by him; thou
shalt surely release it with him.

<span id="an_exo:23:6">6</span> Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy
poor in his cause. <span id="an_exo:23:7">7</span> Keep thee far from a
false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not; for I will
not justify the wicked. <span id="an_exo:23:8">8</span> And thou shalt
take no gift; for a gift blindeth them that have sight, and perverteth
the words of the righteous. <span id="an_exo:23:9">9</span> And a
stranger shalt thou not oppress; for ye know the heart of a stranger,
seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_exo:23:10">10</span> And six years thou shalt sow thy land,
and gather in the increase thereof; <span
id="an_exo:23:11">11</span> but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest
and lie fallow, that the poor of thy people may eat; and what they leave
the beast of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with
thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard. <span
id="an_exo:23:12">12</span> Six days thou shalt do thy work, but on the
seventh day thou shalt rest; that thine ox and thine ass may have rest,
and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed. <span
id="an_exo:23:13">13</span> And in all things that I have said unto you
take ye heed; and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let
it be heard out of thy mouth.

<span id="an_exo:23:14">14</span> Three times thou shalt keep a feast
unto Me in the year. <span id="an_exo:23:15">15</span> The feast of
unleavened bread shalt thou keep; seven days thou shalt eat unleavened
bread, as I commanded thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib—for
in it thou earnest out from Egypt; and none shall appear before Me
empty; <span id="an_exo:23:16">16</span> and the feast of harvest, the
first-fruits of thy labours, which thou sowest in the field; and the
feast of ingathering, at the end of the year, when thou gatherest in thy
labours out of the field. <span id="an_exo:23:17">17</span> Three times
in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_exo:23:18">18</span> Thou shalt not offer the blood of My
sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of My feast remain
<span id="page_93">p. 93</span> all night until the morning. <span
id="an_exo:23:19">19</span> The choicest first-fruits of thy land thou
shalt bring into the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a
kid in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_exo:23:20">20</span> Behold, I send an angel before thee,
to keep thee by the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have
prepared. <span id="an_exo:23:21">21</span> Take heed of him, and
hearken unto his voice; be not rebellious against him; for he will not
pardon your transgression; for My name is in him. <span
id="an_exo:23:22">22</span> But if thou shalt indeed hearken unto his
voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine
enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries. <span
id="an_exo:23:23">23</span> For Mine angel shall go before thee, and
bring thee in unto the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and
the Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite; and I will cut them off.
<span id="an_exo:23:24">24</span> Thou shalt not bow down to their gods,
nor serve them, nor do after their doings; but thou shalt utterly
overthrow them, and break in pieces their pillars. <span
id="an_exo:23:25">25</span> And ye shall serve the LORD your God, and He
will bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from
the midst of thee. <span id="an_exo:23:26">26</span> None shall
miscarry, nor be barren, in thy land; the number of thy days I will
fulfil. <span id="an_exo:23:27">27</span> I will send My terror be fore
thee, and will discomfit all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I
will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee. <span
id="an_exo:23:28">28</span> And I will send the hornet before thee,
which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from
before thee. <span id="an_exo:23:29">29</span> I will not drive them out
from before thee in one year, lest the land become desolate, and the
beasts of the field multiply against thee. <span
id="an_exo:23:30">30</span> By little and little I will drive them out
from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land. <span
id="an_exo:23:31">31</span> And I will set thy border from the Red Sea
even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness unto
 <span id="fr_90"></span>[a](#fn_87) the River; for I will deliver the
inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out
before thee. <span id="an_exo:23:32">32</span> Thou shalt make no
covenant with them, nor with their gods. <span
id="an_exo:23:33">33</span> They shall not dwell in thy land—lest they
make thee sin against Me, for thou wilt serve their gods—for they will
be a snare unto thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[93:a](exo023.htm#fr_90) That is, the Euphrates.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 24](exo024)

</div>
