<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo017)  [Next](exo019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‏יתרו‎

### EXODUS CHAPTER 18

<span id="an_exo:18:1">1</span> Now Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’
father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel
His people, how that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt. <span
id="an_exo:18:2">2</span> And Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took
Zipporah, Moses’ wife, after he had sent her away, <span
id="an_exo:18:3">3</span> and her two sons; of whom the name of the one
was Gershom; for he said: 'I have been a stranger in a strange land';
<span id="an_exo:18:4">4</span> and the name of the other was  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[d](#fn_83) Eliezer: 'for the God of my father was my
help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.' <span
id="an_exo:18:5">5</span> And Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, came with
his sons and his wife unto Moses into the wilderness where he was
encamped, at the mount of God; <span id="an_exo:18:6">6</span> and; he
said unto Moses: 'I thy father-in-law Jethro am coming unto thee, thy
wife, and her two sons with her.' <span id="an_exo:18:7">7</span> And
Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and bowed down and kissed him;
and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent.
<span id="an_exo:18:8">8</span> And Moses told his father-in-law all
that the LORD had done unto Pharaoh and to the. Egyptians for Israel's
sake, all the travail that had come upon them by way, and how the LORD
delivered; them. <span id="an_exo:18:9">9</span> And Jethro rejoiced for
all the goodness which the LORD had done; to Israel, in that He had
delivered; them out of the hand of the Egyptians. <span
id="an_exo:18:10">10</span> And Jethro said: 'Blessed be the LORD, who
hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand
of Pharaoh; who hath delivered the people from under the hand of the
Egyptians. <span id="an_exo:18:11">11</span> Now I know that the LORD is
greater than all gods; yea, for that they dealt proudly against them.'
<span id="an_exo:18:12">12</span> And Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took
a burnt-offering <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> and sacrifices for God;
and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses’
father-in-law before God. <span id="an_exo:18:13">13</span> And it came
to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people; and the
people stood about Moses from the morning unto the evening. <span
id="an_exo:18:14">14</span> And when Moses’ father in law saw all that
he did to the people, he said: 'What is this thing that thou doest to
the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand
about thee from morning unto even?' <span
id="an_exo:18:15">15</span> And Moses said unto his father-in-law:
'Because the people come unto me to inquire of God; <span
id="an_exo:18:16">16</span> when they have a matter, it cometh unto me;
and I judge between a man and his neighbour, and I make them know the
statutes of God, and His laws.' <span id="an_exo:18:17">17</span> And
Moses’ father-in-law said unto him: 'The thing that thou doest is not
good. <span id="an_exo:18:18">18</span> Thou wilt surely wear away, both
thou, and this people that is with thee; for the thing is too heavy for
thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone. <span
id="an_exo:18:19">19</span> Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee
counsel, and God be with thee: be thou for the people before God, and
bring thou the causes unto God. <span id="an_exo:18:20">20</span> And
thou shalt teach them the statutes and the laws, and shalt show them the
way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do. <span
id="an_exo:18:21">21</span> Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the
people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating unjust gain; and
place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds,
rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens. <span
id="an_exo:18:22">22</span> And let them judge the people at all
seasons; and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto
thee, but every small matter they shall judge themselves; so shall they
make it easier for thee and bear the burden with thee. <span
id="an_exo:18:23">23</span> If thou shalt do this thing, and God command
thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people also
shall go to their place in peace.' <span id="an_exo:18:24">24</span> So
Moses hearkened to the voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he
had said. <span id="an_exo:18:25">25</span> And Moses chose able men out
of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands,
rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens. <span
id="an_exo:18:26">26</span> And they judged the people at all seasons:
the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they
judged themselves. <span id="an_exo:18:27">27</span> And Moses let his
father-in-law depart; and he went his way into his own land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[86:d](exo018.htm#fr_84) Heb. *El*, God, and
*ezer*, help.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 19](exo019)

</div>
