<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo035)  [Next](exo037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 36

<span id="an_exo:36:1">1</span> <span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> And Bezalel and Oholiab shall work, and every
wise-hearted man, in whom the LORD hath put wisdom and understanding to
know how to work all the work for the service of the sanctuary,
according to all that the LORD hath commanded.'

<span id="an_exo:36:2">2</span> And Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab,
and every wise-hearted man, in whose heart the LORD had put wisdom, even
every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it.
<span id="an_exo:36:3">3</span> And they received of Moses all the
offering, which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the
service of the sanctuary, wherewith to make it. And they brought yet
unto him freewill-offerings every morning. <span
id="an_exo:36:4">4</span> And all the wise men, that wrought all the
work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they wrought.
<span id="an_exo:36:5">5</span> And they spoke unto Moses, saying: 'The
people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which
the LORD commanded to make.' <span id="an_exo:36:6">6</span> And Moses
gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the
camp, saying: 'Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the
offering of the sanctuary.' So the people were restrained from bringing.
<span id="an_exo:36:7">7</span> For the stuff they had was sufficient
for all the work to make it, and too much.

<span id="an_exo:36:8">8</span> And every wise-hearted man among them
that wrought the work made the tabernacle with ten curtains: of fine
twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubim the work
of the skilful workman made he them. <span id="an_exo:36:9">9</span> The
length of each curtain was eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of
each curtain four cubits all the curtains had one measure. <span
id="an_exo:36:10">10</span> And he coupled five curtains one to another;
and the other five curtains he coupled one to another. <span
id="an_exo:36:11">11</span> And he made loops of blue upon the edge of
the one curtain that was outmost in the first set; likewise he made in
the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the second set. <span
id="an_exo:36:12">12</span> Fifty loops made he in the one curtain, and
fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain that was in the second
set; the loops. were opposite one to another. <span
id="an_exo:36:13">13</span> And he made fifty clasps of gold, and
coupled the curtains one to another with the clasps; so the tabernacle
was one.

<span id="an_exo:36:14">14</span> And he made curtains of goats’ hair
for a tent over the tabernacle; eleven curtains he made them. <span
id="an_exo:36:15">15</span> The length of each curtain was thirty
cubits, and four cubits the breadth of <span id="page_111">p. 111</span>
each curtain; the eleven curtains had one measure. <span
id="an_exo:36:16">16</span> And he coupled five curtains by themselves,
and six curtains by themselves. <span id="an_exo:36:17">17</span> And he
made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the
first set, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which
was outmost in the second set. <span id="an_exo:36:18">18</span> And he
made fifty clasps of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be
one. <span id="an_exo:36:19">19</span> And he made a covering for the
tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering of sealskins' above.

<span id="an_exo:36:20">20</span> And he made the boards for the
tabernacle of acacia-wood, standing up. <span
id="an_exo:36:21">21</span> Ten cubits was the length of a hoard, and a
cubit and a half the breadth of each board. <span
id="an_exo:36:22">22</span> Each board had two tenons, joined one to
another. Thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle. <span
id="an_exo:36:23">23</span> And he made the boards for the tabernacle;
twenty boards for the south side southward. <span
id="an_exo:36:24">24</span> And he made forty sockets of silver under
the twenty boards: two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and
two sockets under another board for its two tenons. <span
id="an_exo:36:25">25</span> And for the second side of the tabernacle,
on the north side, he made twenty boards, <span
id="an_exo:36:26">26</span> and their forty sockets of silver: two
sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. <span
id="an_exo:36:27">27</span> And for the hinder part of the tabernacle
westward he made six boards. <span id="an_exo:36:28">28</span> And two
boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the hinder part;
<span id="an_exo:36:29">29</span> that they might be double beneath, and
in like manner they should be complete unto the top thereof unto the
first ring. Thus he did to both of them in the two corners. <span
id="an_exo:36:30">30</span> And there were eight boards, and their
sockets of silver, sixteen sockets: under every board two sockets. <span
id="an_exo:36:31">31</span> And he made bars of acacia-wood: five for
the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, <span
id="an_exo:36:32">32</span> and five bars for the boards of the other
side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle
for the hinder part westward. <span id="an_exo:36:33">33</span> And he
made the middle bar to pass through in the midst of the boards from the
one end to the other. <span id="an_exo:36:34">34</span> And he overlaid
the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold for holders for the
bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.

<span id="an_exo:36:35">35</span> And he made the veil of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; with cherubim the work of
the skilful workman made he it. <span id="an_exo:36:36">36</span> And he
made thereunto four pillars of acacia, and overlaid them with gold,
their hooks being of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver.
<span id="an_exo:36:37">37</span> And he made a screen for the door of
the Tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the
work of the weaver in colours; <span id="an_exo:36:38">38</span> and the
five pillars of it with their hooks; and he overlaid their capitals and
their fillets with gold; and their five sockets were of brass.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 37](exo037)

</div>
