<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo028)  [Next](exo030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 29

<span id="an_exo:29:1">1</span> And this is the thing that thou shalt do
unto them to hallow them, to minister unto Me in the priest's office:
take one young bullock and two rams without blemish, <span
id="an_exo:29:2">2</span> and unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened
mingled with oil, and wafers unleavened spread with oil; of fine wheaten
flour shalt thou make them. <span id="an_exo:29:3">3</span> And thou
shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the
bullock and the two rams. <span id="an_exo:29:4">4</span> And Aaron and
his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tent of meeting, and
shalt wash them with water. <span id="an_exo:29:5">5</span> And thou
shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the tunic, and the robe of
the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the
skilfully woven band of the ephod. <span id="an_exo:29:6">6</span> And
thou shalt set the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the
mitre. <span id="an_exo:29:7">7</span> Then shalt thou take the
anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him. <span
id="an_exo:29:8">8</span> And thou shalt bring his sons, and put tunics
upon them. <span id="an_exo:29:9">9</span> And thou shalt gird them with
girdles, Aaron and his sons, and bind head-tires on them; and they shall
have the priesthood by a perpetual statute; and thou shalt consecrate
Aaron and his sons. <span id="an_exo:29:10">10</span> And thou shalt
bring the bullock before the tent of meeting; and Aaron and his sons
shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock. <span
id="an_exo:29:11">11</span> And thou shalt kill the bullock before the
LORD, at the door of the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_exo:29:12">12</span> And thou shalt take of the blood of the
bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger; and
thou shalt pour out all the remaining blood at the base of the altar
<span id="an_exo:29:13">13</span> And thou shalt take all the fat that
covereth the inwards, and the lobe above the liver, and the two kidneys
and the fat that is upon them, and make them smoke upon the altar <span
id="an_exo:29:14">14</span> But the flesh of the bullock, and its skin,
and its dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp; it is
sin-offering. <span id="an_exo:29:15">15</span> Thou shalt also take the
one ram; and Aaron and his son shall lay their hands upon the head of
the ram. <span id="an_exo:29:16">16</span> And thou shalt slay the ram,
and thou shalt take its blood, and dash it round about against the
altar. <span id="an_exo:29:17">17</span> And thou shalt cut the ram into
its pieces, and wash its inwards, and its legs, and put them with its
pieces, and with its head. <span id="an_exo:29:18">18</span> And thou
shalt make the whole ram smoke upon the altar; it is a burnt-offering
unto the LORD; it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the
LORD. <span id="an_exo:29:19">19</span> And thou shalt take the other
ram; and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the
ram. <span id="an_exo:29:20">20</span> Then shalt thou kill the ram, and
take of its blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron,
and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb <span
id="page_101">p. 101</span> of their right hand, and upon the great toe
of their right foot, and dash the blood against the altar round about.
<span id="an_exo:29:21">21</span> And thou shalt take of the blood that
is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron,
and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his
sons with him; and he and his garments shall be hallowed, and his sons
and his sons’ garments with him. <span id="an_exo:29:22">22</span> Also
thou shalt take of the ram the fat, and the fat tail, and the fat that
covereth the inwards, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys,
and the fat that is upon them, and the right thigh; for it is a ram of
consecration; <span id="an_exo:29:23">23</span> and one loaf of bread,
and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, out of the basket of
unleavened bread that is before the LORD. <span
id="an_exo:29:24">24</span> And thou shalt put the whole upon the hands
of Aaron, and upon the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for a
wave-offering before the LORD. <span id="an_exo:29:25">25</span> And
thou shalt take them from their hands, and make them smoke on the altar
upon the burnt-offering, for a sweet savour before the LORD; it is an
offering made by fire unto the LORD. <span
id="an_exo:29:26">26</span> And thou shalt take the breast of Aaron's
ram of consecration, and wave it for a wave-offering before the LORD;
and it shall be thy portion. <span id="an_exo:29:27">27</span> And thou
shalt sanctify the breast of the wave-offering, and the thigh of the
heave-offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of
consecration, even of that which is Aaron's, and of that which is his
sons’. <span id="an_exo:29:28">28</span> And it shall be for Aaron and
his sons as a due for ever from the children of Israel; for it is a
heave-offering; and it shall be a heave-offering from the children of
Israel of their sacrifices of peace-offerings, even their heave-offering
unto the LORD. <span id="an_exo:29:29">29</span> And the holy garments
of Aaron shall be for his sons after him, to be anointed in them, and to
be consecrated in them. <span id="an_exo:29:30">30</span> Seven days
shall the son that is priest in his stead put them on, even he who
cometh into the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place. <span
id="an_exo:29:31">31</span> And thou shalt take the ram of consecration,
and seethe its flesh in a holy place. <span
id="an_exo:29:32">32</span> And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh
of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, at the door of the tent
of meeting. <span id="an_exo:29:33">33</span> And they shall eat those
things wherewith atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them;
but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy. <span
id="an_exo:29:34">34</span> And if aught of the flesh of the
consecration, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt
burn the remainder with fire; it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.
<span id="an_exo:29:35">35</span> And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and
to his sons, according to all that I have commanded thee; seven days
shalt thou consecrate them. <span id="an_exo:29:36">36</span> And every
day shalt thou offer the bullock of sin-offering, beside the other
offerings of atonement; and thou shalt do the purification upon the
altar when thou makest atonement for it; and thou shalt anoint it, to
sanctify it. <span id="an_exo:29:37">37</span> Seven days thou shalt
make atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; thus shall the altar be
most holy; whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy.

<span id="an_exo:29:38">38</span> Now this is that which thou shalt
offer upon the altar: two lambs of the first year day by day
continually. <span id="an_exo:29:39">39</span> The one lamb thou shalt
offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at dusk. <span
id="an_exo:29:40">40</span> And with the one lamb a tenth part of an
ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten oil;
and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink-offering. <span
id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="an_exo:29:41">41</span> And the
other lamb thou shalt offer at dusk, and shalt do thereto according to
the meal-offering of the morning, and according to the drink-offering
thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
<span id="an_exo:29:42">42</span> It shall be a continual burnt-offering
throughout your generations at the door of the tent of meeting before
the LORD, where I will meet with you, to speak there unto thee. <span
id="an_exo:29:43">43</span> And there I will meet with the children of
Israel; and \[the Tent\] shall be sanctified by My glory. <span
id="an_exo:29:44">44</span> And I will sanctify the tent of meeting, and
the altar; Aaron also and his sons will I sanctify, to minister to Me in
the priest's office. <span id="an_exo:29:45">45</span> And I will dwell
among the children of Israel, and will be their God. <span
id="an_exo:29:46">46</span> And they shall know that I am the LORD their
God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell
among them. I am the LORD their God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 30](exo030)

</div>
