<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo015)  [Next](exo017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 16

<span id="an_exo:16:1">1</span> And they took their journey from Elim,
and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the
wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day
of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
<span id="an_exo:16:2">2</span> And the whole congregation of the
children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the
wilderness; <span id="an_exo:16:3">3</span> and the children of Israel
said unto them: 'Would that we had died by the hand of the LORD in the
land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we did eat bread to
the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill
this whole assembly with hunger.'

<span id="an_exo:16:4">4</span> Then said the LORD unto Moses: 'Behold,
I will cause to rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go
out and gather a day's portion every day, that I may prove them, whether
they will walk in My law, or not. <span id="an_exo:16:5">5</span> And it
shall come to pass on the sixth day that they shall prepare that which
they bring in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.'
<span id="an_exo:16:6">6</span> And Moses and Aaron said unto all the
children of Israel: 'At even, then ye shall know that the LORD hath
brought you out from the land of Egypt; <span
id="an_exo:16:7">7</span> and in the morning, then ye shall see the
glory of the LORD; for that He hath heard your murmurings against the
LORD; and what are we, that ye murmur against us?' <span
id="an_exo:16:8">8</span> And Moses said: 'This shall be, when the LORD
shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to
the full; for that the LORD heareth your murmurings which ye murmur
against Him; and what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but
against the LORD.' <span id="an_exo:16:9">9</span> And Moses said unto
Aaron: 'Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel: Come
near before the LORD; for He hath heard your murmurings.' <span
id="an_exo:16:10">10</span> And it came to pass, as Aaron spoke unto the
whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they looked toward
the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of the LORD appeared in the
cloud. <span id="an_exo:16:11">11</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses,
saying: <span id="an_exo:16:12">12</span> 'I have heard the murmurings
of the children of Israel. Speak unto them, saying: At dusk ye shall eat
flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall
know that I am the LORD your God.' <span id="an_exo:16:13">13</span> And
it came to pass at even, that the quails came up, and covered the camp;
and in the morning there was a layer of dew round about the camp. <span
id="an_exo:16:14">14</span> And when the layer of dew was gone up,
behold upon the face of the wilderness a fine, scale-like thing, fine as
the hoar-frost on the ground. <span id="an_exo:16:15">15</span> And when
the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another:  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[a](#fn_78.md) 'What is it?'—for they knew not what it
was. And Moses said unto them: 'It is the bread which the LORD hath
given you to eat. <span id="an_exo:16:16">16</span> This is the thing
which the LORD hath commanded: Gather ye of it every man according to
his eating; an omer a head, according to the number of your persons,
shall ye take it, every man for them that are in his tent.' <span
id="an_exo:16:17">17</span> And the children of Israel did so, and
gathered some more, some less. <span id="an_exo:16:18">18</span> And
when they did mete it with an omer, <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> he
that gathered much had nothing ever, and he that gathered little had no
lack; they gathered every man according to his eating. <span
id="an_exo:16:19">19</span> And Moses said unto them: 'Let no man leave
of it till the morning.' <span
id="an_exo:16:20">20</span> Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto
Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms,
and rotted; and Moses was wroth with them. <span
id="an_exo:16:21">21</span> And they gathered it morning by morning,
every man according to his eating; and as the sun waxed hot, it melted.
<span id="an_exo:16:22">22</span> And it came to pass that on the sixth
day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each one; and all
the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses. <span
id="an_exo:16:23">23</span> And he said unto them: 'This is that which
the LORD hath spoken: To-morrow is a solemn rest, a holy sabbath unto
the LORD. Bake that which ye will bake, and seethe that which ye will
seethe; and all that remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the
morning.' <span id="an_exo:16:24">24</span> And they laid it up till the
morning, as Moses bade; and it did not rot, neither was there any worm
therein. <span id="an_exo:16:25">25</span> And Moses said: 'Eat that
to-day; for to-day is a sabbath unto the LORD; to-day ye shall not find
it in the field. <span id="an_exo:16:26">26</span> Six days ye shall
gather it; but on the seventh day is the sabbath, in it there shall be
none.' <span id="an_exo:16:27">27</span> And it came to pass on the
seventh day, that there went out some of the people to gather, and they
found none. <span id="an_exo:16:28">28</span> And the LORD said unto
Moses: 'How long refuse ye to keep My commandments and My laws? <span
id="an_exo:16:29">29</span> See that the LORD hath given you the
sabbath; therefore He giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days;
abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the
seventh day.' <span id="an_exo:16:30">30</span> So the people rested on
the seventh day. <span id="an_exo:16:31">31</span> And the house of
Israel called the name thereof  <span id="fr_80"></span>[a](#fn_79.md)
Manna; and it was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was
like wafers made with honey. <span id="an_exo:16:32">32</span> And Moses
said: 'This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded: Let an omerful
of it be kept throughout your generations; that they may see the bread
wherewith I fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth from the
land of Egypt.' <span id="an_exo:16:33">33</span> And Moses said unto
Aaron: Take a jar, and put an omerful of manna therein, and lay it up
before the LORD, to be kept throughout your generations.' <span
id="an_exo:16:34">34</span> As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron laid
it up before the Testimony, to be kept. <span
id="an_exo:16:35">35</span> And the children of Israel did eat the manna
forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat the
manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan. <span
id="an_exo:16:36">36</span> Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[84:a](exo016.htm#fr_79.md) Heb. *Man hu*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[85:a](exo016.htm#fr_80.md) Heb. *Man*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 17](exo017.md)

</div>
