<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo038)  [Next](exo040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 39

<span id="an_exo:39:1">1</span> And of the blue, and purple, and
scarlet, they made plaited garments, for ministering in the holy place,
and made the holy garments for Aaron, as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:39:2">2</span> And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. <span
id="an_exo:39:3">3</span> And they did beat the gold into thin plates,
and cut it into threads, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and
in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, the work of the skilful workman.
<span id="an_exo:39:4">4</span> They made shoulder-pieces for it, joined
together; at the two ends was it joined together. <span
id="an_exo:39:5">5</span> And the skilfully woven band, that was upon
it, wherewith to gird it on, was of the same piece and like the work
thereof: of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined
linen, as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:39:6">6</span> And they wrought the onyx stones,
inclosed in settings of gold, graven with the engravings of a signet, ac
cording to the names of the children of Israel. <span
id="an_exo:39:7">7</span> And he put them on the shoulder-pieces of the
ephod, to be stones of memorial for the children of Israel, as the LORD
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:39:8">8</span> And he made the breastplate, the work of
the skilful workman, like the work of the ephod: of gold, of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. <span
id="an_exo:39:9">9</span> It was four-square; they made the breastplate
double: a span was the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof,
being double. <span id="an_exo:39:10">10</span> And they set in it four
rows of stones: a row of carnelian, topaz, and smaragd was the first
row. <span id="an_exo:39:11">11</span> And the second row, a carbuncle,
a sapphire, and an emerald. <span id="an_exo:39:12">12</span> And the
third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst. <span
id="an_exo:39:13">13</span> And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a
jasper; they were inclosed in fittings of gold in their settings.

<span id="an_exo:39:14">14</span> And the stones were according to the
names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like
the engravings of a signet, every one, according to his name, for the
twelve tribes. <span id="an_exo:39:15">15</span> And they made upon the
breastplate plaited chains, of wreathen work of pure gold. <span
id="an_exo:39:16">16</span> And they made two settings of gold, and two
gold rings; and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
<span id="an_exo:39:17">17</span> And they put the two wreathen chains
of gold on the two rings at the ends of the breastplate. <span
id="an_exo:39:18">18</span> And the other two ends of the two wreathen
chains they put on the two settings, and put them on the shoulder-pieces
of the ephod, in the forepart thereof. <span
id="an_exo:39:19">19</span> And they made two rings of gold, and put
them upon the two ends of the breast-plate, <span id="page_115">p.
115</span> upon the edge thereof, which was toward the side of the ephod
inward. <span id="an_exo:39:20">20</span> And they made two rings of
gold, and put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath,
in the forepart thereof, close by the coupling thereof, above the
skilfully woven band of the ephod. <span id="an_exo:39:21">21</span> And
they did bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the
ephod with a thread of blue, that it might be upon the skilfully woven
band of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the
ephod; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:39:22">22</span> And he made the robe of the ephod of
woven work, all of blue; <span id="an_exo:39:23">23</span> and the hole
of the robe in the midst thereof, as the hole of a coat of mail, with a
binding round about the hole of it, that it should not be rent. <span
id="an_exo:39:24">24</span> And they made upon the skirts of the robe
pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen. <span
id="an_exo:39:25">25</span> And they made bells of pure gold, and put
the bells between the pomegranates upon the skirts of the robe round
about, between the pomegranates: <span id="an_exo:39:26">26</span> a
bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the
robe round about, to minister in; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:39:27">27</span> And they made the tunics of fine linen
of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons, <span
id="an_exo:39:28">28</span> and the mitre of fine linen, and the goodly
head-tires of fine linen, and the linen breeches of fine twined linen,
<span id="an_exo:39:29">29</span> and the girdle of fine twined linen,
and blue, and purple, and scarlet, the work of the weaver in colours; as
the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:39:30">30</span> And they made the plate of the holy
crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like the engravings of
a signet: HOLY TO THE LORD. <span id="an_exo:39:31">31</span> And they
tied unto it a thread of blue, to fasten it upon the mitre above; as the
LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:39:32">32</span> Thus was finished all the work of the
tabernacle of the tent of meeting; and the children of Israel did
according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they.

<span id="an_exo:39:33">33</span> And they brought the tabernacle unto
Moses, the Tent, and all its furniture, its clasps, its boards, its
bars, and its pillars, and its sockets; <span
id="an_exo:39:34">34</span> and the covering of rams’ skins dyed red,
and the covering of sealskins, and the veil of the screen; <span
id="an_exo:39:35">35</span> the ark of the testimony, and the staves
thereof, and the ark-cover; <span id="an_exo:39:36">36</span> the table,
all the vessels thereof, and the showbread; <span
id="an_exo:39:37">37</span> the pure candlestick, the lamps thereof,
even the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the
oil for the light; <span id="an_exo:39:38">38</span> and the golden
altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the screen for
the door of the Tent; <span id="an_exo:39:39">39</span> the brazen
altar, and its grating of brass, its staves, and all its vessels, the
laver and its base; <span id="an_exo:39:40">40</span> the hangings of
the court, its pillars, and its sockets, and the screen for the gate of
the court, the cords thereof, and the pins thereof, and all the
instruments of the service of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting;
<span id="an_exo:39:41">41</span> the plaited garments for ministering
in the holy place; the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the
garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office. <span
id="an_exo:39:42">42</span> According to all that the LORD commanded
Moses, so the children of Israel did all the work. <span
id="an_exo:39:43">43</span> And Moses saw all the work, and, behold,
they had done it; as the LORD had commanded, even so had they done it.
And Moses blessed them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 40](exo040)

</div>
