<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo039)  [Next](lev001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 40

<span id="an_exo:40:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_exo:40:2">2</span> 'On the first day of the first month
shalt thou rear up the <span id="page_116">p. 116</span> tabernacle of
the tent of meeting. <span id="an_exo:40:3">3</span> And thou shalt put
therein the ark of the testimony, and thou shalt screen the ark with the
veil. <span id="an_exo:40:4">4</span> And thou shalt bring in the table,
and set in order the bread that is upon it; and thou shalt bring in the
candlestick, and light the lamps thereof. <span
id="an_exo:40:5">5</span> And thou shalt set the golden altar for
incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the screen of -the door
to the tabernacle. <span id="an_exo:40:6">6</span> And thou shalt set
the altar of burnt-offering before the door of the tabernacle of the
tent of meeting. <span id="an_exo:40:7">7</span> And thou shalt set the
laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and shalt put water
therein. <span id="an_exo:40:8">8</span> And thou shalt set up the court
round about, and hang up the screen of the gate of the court. <span
id="an_exo:40:9">9</span> And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and
anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and
all the furniture thereof; and it shall be holy. <span
id="an_exo:40:10">10</span> And thou shalt anoint the altar of
burnt-offering, and all its vessels, and sanctify the altar; and the
altar shall be most holy. <span id="an_exo:40:11">11</span> And thou
shalt anoint the laver and its base, and sanctify it. <span
id="an_exo:40:12">12</span> And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto
the door of the tent of meeting, and shalt wash them with water. <span
id="an_exo:40:13">13</span> And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy
garments; and thou shalt anoint him, and sanctify him, that he may
minister unto Me in the priest's office. <span
id="an_exo:40:14">14</span> And thou shalt bring his sons, and put
tunics upon them. <span id="an_exo:40:15">15</span> And thou shalt
anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister
unto Me in the priest's office; and their anointing shall be to them for
an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.' <span
id="an_exo:40:16">16</span> Thus did Moses; according to all that the
LORD commanded him, so did he.

<span id="an_exo:40:17">17</span> And it came to pass in the first month
in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle
was reared up. <span id="an_exo:40:18">18</span> And Moses reared up the
tabernacle, and laid its sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put
in the bars thereof, and reared up its pillars. <span
id="an_exo:40:19">19</span> And he spread the tent over the tabernacle,
and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the LORD commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_exo:40:20">20</span> And he took and put the testimony into
the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the ark-cover above upon
the ark. <span id="an_exo:40:21">21</span> And he brought the ark into
the tabernacle, and set up the veil of the screen, and screened the ark
of the testimony; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:40:22">22</span> And he put the table in the tent of
meeting, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the veil.
<span id="an_exo:40:23">23</span> And he set a row of bread in order
upon it before the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:40:24">24</span> And he put the candlestick in the tent
of meeting, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle
southward. <span id="an_exo:40:25">25</span> And he lighted the lamps
before the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:40:26">26</span> And he put the golden altar in the
tent of meeting before the veil; <span id="an_exo:40:27">27</span> and
he burnt thereon incense of sweet spices; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:40:28">28</span> And he put the screen of the door to
the tabernacle. <span id="an_exo:40:29">29</span> And the altar of
burnt-offering he set at the door of the tabernacle of the tent of
meeting, and offered upon it the burnt-offering and the meal-offering;
as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:40:30">30</span> And he set the laver between the tent
of meeting and the altar, and put water therein, wherewith to wash;
<span id="an_exo:40:31">31</span> that Moses and Aaron and his sons
<span id="page_117">p. 117</span> might wash their hands and their feet
thereat; <span id="an_exo:40:32">32</span> when they went into the tent
of meeting, and when they came near unto the altar, they should wash; as
the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_exo:40:33">33</span> And he reared up the court round about
the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the screen of the gate of the
court. So Moses finished the work.

<span id="an_exo:40:34">34</span> Then the cloud covered the tent of
meeting, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle. <span
id="an_exo:40:35">35</span> And Moses was not able to enter into the
tent of meeting, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the
LORD filled the tabernacle.—<span id="an_exo:40:36">36</span> And
whenever the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children
of Israel went onward, throughout all their journeys. <span
id="an_exo:40:37">37</span> But if the cloud was not taken up, then they
journeyed not till the day that it was taken up. <span
id="an_exo:40:38">38</span> For the cloud of the LORD was upon the
tabernacle by day, and there was fire therein by night, in the sight of
all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.—

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 1](lev001.md)

</div>
