<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo012)  [Next](exo014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 13

<span id="an_exo:13:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_exo:13:2">2</span> 'Sanctify unto Me all the first-born,
whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man
and of beast, it is Mine.'

<span id="an_exo:13:3">3</span> And Moses said unto the people:
'Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of
bondage; for by strength of hand the LORD brought you out from this
place; there shall no leavened bread be eaten. <span
id="an_exo:13:4">4</span> This day ye go forth in the month Abib. <span
id="an_exo:13:5">5</span> And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee
into the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and
the Hivite, and the Jebusite, which He swore unto thy fathers to give
thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this
service in this month. <span id="an_exo:13:6">6</span> Seven days thou
shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to
the LORD. <span id="an_exo:13:7">7</span> Unleavened bread shall be
eaten throughout the seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be
seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee, in all thy
borders. <span id="an_exo:13:8">8</span> And thou shalt tell thy son in
that day, saying: It is because of that which the LORD did for me when I
came forth out of Egypt. <span id="an_exo:13:9">9</span> And it shall be
for a sign unto thee upon thy hand, and for a memorial between thine
eyes, that the law of the LORD may be in thy mouth; for with a strong
hand hath the LORD brought thee out of Egypt. <span
id="an_exo:13:10">10</span> Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in
its season from year to year.

<span id="an_exo:13:11">11</span> And it shall be when the LORD shall
bring thee into the land of the Canaanite, as He swore unto thee and to
thy fathers, and shall give it thee, <span
id="an_exo:13:12">12</span> that thou shalt set apart unto the LORD all
that openeth the womb; every firstling that is a male, which thou hast
coming of a beast, shall be the LORD'S. <span
id="an_exo:13:13">13</span> And every firstling of an ass thou shalt
redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt
break its neck; and all the first-born of man among thy sons shalt thou
redeem. <span id="an_exo:13:14">14</span> And it shall be when thy son
asketh thee in time to come, saying: What is this? that thou shalt say
unto him: By strength of hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from
the house of bondage; <span id="an_exo:13:15">15</span> and it came to
pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the LORD slew all the
firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the first-born of man, and the
first-born of beast; therefore I sacrifice to the LORD all that openeth
the womb, being males; but all the first-born of my sons I redeem. <span
id="an_exo:13:16">16</span> And it shall be for a sign upon thy hand,
and for frontlets between thine eyes; for by strength of hand the LORD
brought us forth out of Egypt.'

‏בשלה‎

<span id="an_exo:13:17">17</span> And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had
let the people go, that God led them not by the way of the land of the
Philistines, although that was near; for God said: 'Lest peradventure
the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt.' <span
id="an_exo:13:18">18</span> But God <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> led
the people about, by the way of the wilderness by the Red Sea; and the
children of Israel went up armed out of the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_exo:13:19">19</span> And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him;
for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying: 'God will
surely remember you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with
you.' <span id="an_exo:13:20">20</span> And they took their journey from
Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness. <span
id="an_exo:13:21">21</span> And the LORD went before them by day in a
pillar of cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire,
to give them light; that they might go by day and by night: <span
id="an_exo:13:22">22</span> the pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar
of fire by night, departed not from before the people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 14](exo014)

</div>
