<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo003)  [Next](exo005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 4

<span id="an_exo:4:1">1</span> And Moses answered and said: 'But,
behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice; for they
will say: The LORD hath not appeared unto thee.' <span
id="an_exo:4:2">2</span> And the LORD said unto him: 'What is that in
thy hand?' And he said: 'A rod.' <span id="an_exo:4:3">3</span> And He
said: 'Cast it on the ground.' And he cast it on the ground, and it
became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it. <span
id="an_exo:4:4">4</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Put forth thy
hand, and take it by the tail—and he put forth his hand, and laid hold
of it, and it became a rod in his hand<span
id="an_exo:4:5">5</span> that they may believe that the LORD, the God of
their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, hath appeared unto thee.' <span id="an_exo:4:6">6</span> And the
LORD said furthermore unto him: 'Put now thy hand into thy bosom.' And
he put his hand into his bosom; and when he took it out, behold, his
hand was leprous, as white as snow. <span id="an_exo:4:7">7</span> And
He said: 'Put thy hand back into thy bosom.—And he put his hand back
into his bosom; and when he took it out of his bosom, behold, it was
turned again as his other flesh.—<span id="an_exo:4:8">8</span> And it
shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to
the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the
latter sign. <span id="an_exo:4:9">9</span> And it shall come to pass,
if they will not believe even these two signs, neither hearken unto thy
voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon
the dry land; and the water which thou takest out of the river shall
become blood upon the dry land.' <span id="an_exo:4:10">10</span> And
Moses said unto the LORD: 'Oh Lord, I am not a man of words, neither
heretofore, nor since Thou hast spoken unto Thy servant; for I am slow
of speech, and of a slow tongue.' <span id="an_exo:4:11">11</span> And
the LORD said unto him: 'Who hath made man's mouth? or who maketh a man
dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? is it not I the LORD? <span
id="an_exo:4:12">12</span> Now therefore go, and I will be with thy
mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt speak.' <span
id="an_exo:4:13">13</span> And he said: 'Oh Lord, send, I pray Thee, by
the hand of him whom Thou wilt send.' <span
id="an_exo:4:14">14</span> And the anger of the LORD was kindled against
Moses, and He said: 'Is there not Aaron thy brother the Levite? I know
that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee;
and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart. <span
id="an_exo:4:15">15</span> And thou shalt speak unto him, and put the
words in his mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth,
and will teach you what ye shall do. <span
id="an_exo:4:16">16</span> And he shall be thy spokesman unto the
people; and it shall come to pass, that he shall be to thee a mouth, and
thou shalt be to him in God's stead. <span
id="an_exo:4:17">17</span> And thou shalt take in thy hand this rod,
wherewith thou shalt do the signs.'

<span id="an_exo:4:18">18</span> And Moses went and returned to  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[a](#fn_75.md) Jethro his father-in-law, and said unto
him: 'Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren that are in
Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive.' And Jethro said to Moses:
<span id="page_69">p. 69</span> 'Go in peace.' <span
id="an_exo:4:19">19</span> And the LORD said unto Moses in Midian: 'Go,
return into Egypt; for all the men are dead that sought thy life.' <span
id="an_exo:4:20">20</span> And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set
them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt; and Moses took
the rod of God in his hand. <span id="an_exo:4:21">21</span> And the
LORD said unto Moses: 'When thou goest back into Egypt, see that thou do
before Pharaoh all the wonders which I have put in thy hand; but I will
harden his heart, and he will not let the people go. <span
id="an_exo:4:22">22</span> And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh: Thus saith
the LORD: Israel is My son, My firstborn. <span
id="an_exo:4:23">23</span> And I have said unto thee: Let My son go,
that he may serve Me; and thou hast refused to let him go. Behold, I
will slay thy son, thy first-born.'—<span id="an_exo:4:24">24</span> And
it came to pass on the way at the lodging-place, that the LORD met him,
and sought to kill him. <span id="an_exo:4:25">25</span> Then Zipporah
took a flint, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his
feet; and she said: Surely a bridegroom of blood art thou to me.' <span
id="an_exo:4:26">26</span> So He let him alone. Then she said: 'A
bridegroom of blood in regard of the circumcision.'

<span id="an_exo:4:27">27</span> And the LORD said to Aaron: 'Go into
the wilderness to meet Moses.' And he went, and met him in the mountain
of God, and kissed him. <span id="an_exo:4:28">28</span> And Moses told
Aaron all the words of the LORD wherewith He had sent him, and all the
signs wherewith He had charged him. <span id="an_exo:4:29">29</span> And
Moses and Aaron went and gathered together, all the elders of the
children of Israel. 'And Aaron spoke all the words which the LORD had
spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people. <span
id="an_exo:4:31">31</span> And the people believed; and when they heard
that the LORD had remembered the children of Israel, and that He had
seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[68:a](exo004.htm#fr_76.md) Heb. *Jether*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 5](exo005.md)

</div>
