<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo032)  [Next](exo034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 33

<span id="an_exo:33:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses: 'Depart,
go up hence, thou and the people that thou hast brought up out of the
land of Egypt, unto the land of which I swore unto Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob, saying: Unto thy seed will I give it—<span
id="an_exo:33:2">2</span> and I will send an angel before thee; and I
will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the
Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite—<span
id="an_exo:33:3">3</span> unto a land flowing with milk and honey; for I
will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiff-necked people;
lest I consume thee in the way.' <span id="an_exo:33:4">4</span> And
when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned; and no man did
put on him his ornaments. <span id="an_exo:33:5">5</span> And the LORD
said unto Moses: 'Say unto the children of Israel: Ye are a stiffnecked
people; if I go up into the midst of thee for one moment, I shall
consume thee; therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may
know what to do unto thee.' <span id="an_exo:33:6">6</span> And the
children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments from mount
Horeb onward.

<span id="an_exo:33:7">7</span> Now Moses used to take the tent and to
pitch it without the camp, afar off from the camp; and he called it The
tent of meeting. And it came to pass, that every one that sought the
LORD went out unto the tent of meeting, which was without this camp.
<span id="an_exo:33:8">8</span> And it came to pass, when Moses went out
unto the Tent, that all the people rose up, and stood, every man at his
tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the Tent.
<span id="an_exo:33:9">9</span> And it came to pass, when Moses entered
into the Tent, the pillar of cloud descended, and stood at the door of
the Tent; and \[the LORD\] spoke with Moses. <span
id="an_exo:33:10">10</span> And when all the people saw the pillar of
cloud stand at the door of the Tent, all the people rose up and
worshipped, every man at his tent door. <span
id="an_exo:33:11">11</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses face to face,
as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he would return into the camp;
but his minister Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out
of the Tent.

<span id="an_exo:33:12">12</span> And Moses said unto the LORD: 'See,
Thou sayest unto me: Bring up this people; and Thou hast not let me know
whom Thou wilt send with me. Yet Thou hast said: I know thee by name,
and thou hast also found grace in My sight. <span
id="an_exo:33:13">13</span> Now therefore, I pray Thee, if I have found
grace in Thy sight, show me now Thy ways, that I may know Thee, to the
end that I may find grace in Thy sight; and consider that this nation is
Thy people.' <span id="an_exo:33:14">14</span> And He said: 'My presence
shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.' <span
id="an_exo:33:15">15</span> And he said unto Him: 'If Thy presence go
not with me, carry us not up hence. <span
id="an_exo:33:16">16</span> For wherein now shall it be known that I
have found <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> grace in Thy sight, I and
Thy people? is it not in that Thou goest with us, so that we are
distinguished, I and Thy people, from all the people that are upon the
face of the earth?'

<span id="an_exo:33:17">17</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'I will
do this thing also that thou hast spoken, for thou hast found grace in
My sight, and I know thee by name.' <span
id="an_exo:33:18">18</span> And he said: 'Show me, I pray Thee, Thy
glory.' <span id="an_exo:33:19">19</span> And He said: 'I will make all
My goodness pass before thee, and will proclaim the name of the LORD
before thee; and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will
show mercy on whom I will show mercy.' <span
id="an_exo:33:20">20</span> And He said: 'Thou canst not see My face,
for man shall not see Me and live.' <span
id="an_exo:33:21">21</span> And the LORD said: 'Behold, there is a place
by Me, and thou shalt stand upon the rock. <span
id="an_exo:33:22">22</span> And it shall come to pass, while My glory
passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover
thee with My hand until I have passed by. <span
id="an_exo:33:23">23</span> And I will take away My hand, and thou shalt
see My back; but My face shall not be seen.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 34](exo034)

</div>
