<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo027)  [Next](exo029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 28

<span id="an_exo:28:1">1</span> And bring thou near unto thee Aaron thy
brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that
they may minister unto Me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons. <span
id="an_exo:28:2">2</span> And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron
thy brother, for splendour and for beauty. <span
id="an_exo:28:3">3</span> And thou shalt speak unto all that are
wise-hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they
make Aaron's garments to sanctify him, that he may minister unto Me in
the priest's office. <span id="an_exo:28:4">4</span> And these are the
garments which they shall make: a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe,
and a tunic of chequer work, a mitre, and a girdle; and they shall make
holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister
unto Me in the priest's office. <span id="an_exo:28:5">5</span> And they
shall take the gold, and the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, and
the fine linen.

<span id="an_exo:28:6">6</span> And they shall make the ephod of gold,
of blue, and purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the
skilful workman. <span id="an_exo:28:7">7</span> It shall have two
shoulder-pieces joined to the two ends thereof, that it maybe joined
together. <span id="an_exo:28:8">8</span> And the skilfully woven band,
which is upon it, wherewith to gird it on, shall be like the work
thereof and of the same piece: of gold, of blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine twined linen. <span id="an_exo:28:9">9</span> And thou
shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children
of Israel: <span id="an_exo:28:10">10</span> six of their names on the
one stone, and the names of the six that remain on the other stone,
according to their birth. <span id="an_exo:28:11">11</span> With the
work of an engrave in stone, like the engravings of signet, shalt thou
engrave the two stones, according to the names of the children of
Israel; thou shalt make them to be inclosed in settings of gold. <span
id="an_exo:28:12">12</span> And thou shalt put the two stones upon the
shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the children
of Israel; and Aaron shall bear their names before the LORD upon a his
two shoulders for a memorial.

<span id="an_exo:28:13">13</span> And thou shalt make settings of gold;
<span id="an_exo:28:14">14</span> and two chains of pure gold; of
plaited thread shalt thou make them, of wreathen work; and thou shalt
put the wreathen chains on the settings.

<span id="an_exo:28:15">15</span> And thou shalt make a breastplate of
judgment, the work of the skilful workman; like the work of the ephod
thou shalt make it: of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet and, fine
twined linen, shalt thou make it. <span
id="an_exo:28:16">16</span> Four-square it shall be and double: a span
shall be the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof. <span
id="an_exo:28:17">17</span> And thou shalt set in it settings of stones,
<span id="page_99">p. 99</span> four rows of stones: a row of carnelian,
topaz, and smaragd shall be the first row; <span
id="an_exo:28:18">18</span> and the second row a carbuncle, a sapphire,
and an emerald; <span id="an_exo:28:19">19</span> and the third row a
jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; <span
id="an_exo:28:20">20</span> and the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and
a jasper; they shall be inclosed in gold in their settings. <span
id="an_exo:28:21">21</span> And the stones shall be according to the
names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names; like
the engravings of a signet, every one according to his name, they shall
be for the twelve tribes. <span id="an_exo:28:22">22</span> And thou
shalt make upon the breastplate plaited chains of wreathen work of pure
gold. <span id="an_exo:28:23">23</span> And thou shalt make upon the
breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two
ends of the breastplate. <span id="an_exo:28:24">24</span> And thou
shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold on the two rings at the ends
of the breastplate. <span id="an_exo:28:25">25</span> And the other two
ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt put on the two settings, and
put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, in the forepart thereof.
<span id="an_exo:28:26">26</span> And thou shalt make two rings of gold,
and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the
edge thereof, which is toward the side of the ephod inward. <span
id="an_exo:28:27">27</span> And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and
shalt put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in
the forepart thereof, close by the coupling thereof, above the skilfully
woven band of the ephod. <span id="an_exo:28:28">28</span> And they
shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the
ephod with a thread of blue, that it may be upon the skilfully woven
band of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the
ephod. <span id="an_exo:28:29">29</span> And Aaron shall bear the names
of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart,
when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the LORD
continually. <span id="an_exo:28:30">30</span> And thou shalt put in the
breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon
Aaron's heart, when he goeth in before the LORD; and Aaron shall bear
the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD
continually.

<span id="an_exo:28:31">31</span> And thou shalt make the robe of the
ephod all of blue. <span id="an_exo:28:32">32</span> And it shall have a
hole for the head in the midst thereof; it shall have a binding of woven
work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of a coat of mail,
that it be not rent. <span id="an_exo:28:33">33</span> And upon the
skirts of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of
scarlet, round about the skirts thereof; and hells of gold between them
round about: <span id="an_exo:28:34">34</span> a golden bell and a
pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the
robe round about. <span id="an_exo:28:35">35</span> And it shall be upon
Aaron to minister; and the sound thereof shall be heard when he goeth in
unto the holy place before the LORD, and when he cometh out, that he die
not.

<span id="an_exo:28:36">36</span> And thou shalt make a plate of pure
gold, and engrave upon it, like the engravings of a signet: HOLY TO THE
LORD. <span id="an_exo:28:37">37</span> And thou shalt put it on a
thread of blue, and it shall be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of
the mitre it shall be. <span id="an_exo:28:38">38</span> And it shall be
upon Aaron's forehead, and Aaron shall bear the iniquity committed in
the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow, even in all
their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they
may be accepted before the LORD. <span id="an_exo:28:39">39</span> And
thou shalt weave the tunic in chequer work of fine linen, and thou shalt
make a mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make a girdle, the work of
the weaver in colours. <span id="an_exo:28:40">40</span> And for Aaron's
sons <span id="page_100">p. 100</span> thou shalt make tunics, and thou
shalt make for them girdles, and head-tires shalt thou make for them,
for splendour and for beauty. <span id="an_exo:28:41">41</span> And thou
shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and upon his sons with him; and
shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may
minister unto Me in the priest's office. <span
id="an_exo:28:42">42</span> And thou shalt make them linen breeches to
cover the flesh of their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs
they shall reach. <span id="an_exo:28:43">43</span> And they shall be
upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they go in unto the tent of meeting,
or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place;
that they bear not iniquity, and die; it shall be a statute for ever
unto him and unto his seed after him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 29](exo029)

</div>
