<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo029)  [Next](exo031.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 30

<span id="an_exo:30:1">1</span> And thou shalt make an altar to burn
incense upon; of acacia-wood shalt thou make it. <span
id="an_exo:30:2">2</span> A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a
cubit the breadth thereof; four-square shall it be; and two cubits shall
be the height thereof; the horns thereof shall be of one piece with it.
<span id="an_exo:30:3">3</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure
gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns
thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about. <span
id="an_exo:30:4">4</span> And two golden rings shalt thou make for it
under the crown thereof, upon the two ribs thereof, upon the two sides
of it shalt thou make them; and they shall be for places for staves
wherewith to bear it. <span id="an_exo:30:5">5</span> And thou shalt
make the staves of acacia-wood, and overlay them with gold. <span
id="an_exo:30:6">6</span> And thou shalt put it before the veil that is
by the ark of the testimony, before the ark-cover that is over the
testimony, where I will meet with thee. <span
id="an_exo:30:7">7</span> And Aaron shall burn thereon incense of sweet
spices; every morning, when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn it.
<span id="an_exo:30:8">8</span> And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at
dusk, he shall burn it, a perpetual incense before the LORD throughout
your generations. <span id="an_exo:30:9">9</span> Ye shall offer no
strange incense thereon, nor burnt offering, nor meal-offering; and ye
shall pour no drink-offering thereon. <span
id="an_exo:30:10">10</span> And Aaron shall make atonement upon the
horns of it once in the year; with the blood of the sin-offering of
atonement once in the year shall he make atonement for it throughout
your generations; it is most holy unto the LORD.'

‏כי תשא‎

<span id="an_exo:30:11">11</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_exo:30:12">12</span> 'When thou takest the sum of the
children of Israel, according to their number, then shall they give
every man a ransom for his soul unto the LORD, when thou numberest them;
that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them. <span
id="an_exo:30:13">13</span> This they shall give, every one that passeth
among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the
sanctuary—the shekel is twenty gerahs—half a shekel for an offering to
the LORD. <span id="an_exo:30:14">14</span> Every one that passeth among
them that are numbered, from twenty years old and upward, shall give the
offering of the LORD. <span id="an_exo:30:15">15</span> The rich shall
not give more, and the poor shall not give less, than the half shekel,
when they give the offering of the LORD, to make atonement for your
souls. <span id="an_exo:30:16">16</span> And thou shalt take the
atonement money from the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for
the service of the tent of meeting, that it may be a memorial for the
<span id="page_103">p. 103</span> children of Israel before the LORD, to
make atonement for your souls.'

<span id="an_exo:30:17">17</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_exo:30:18">18</span> 'Thou shalt also make a laver of
brass, and the base thereof of brass, whereat to wash; and thou shalt
put it between the tent of meeting and the altar, and thou shalt put
water therein. <span id="an_exo:30:19">19</span> And Aaron and his sons
shall wash their hands and their feet thereat; <span
id="an_exo:30:20">20</span> when they go into the tent of meeting, they
shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the
altar to minister, to cause an offering made by fire to smoke unto the
LORD; <span id="an_exo:30:21">21</span> so they shall wash their hands
and their feet, that they die not; and it shall be a statute for ever to
them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.'

<span id="an_exo:30:22">22</span> Moreover the LORD spoke unto Moses,
saying: <span id="an_exo:30:23">23</span> 'Take thou also unto thee the
chief spices, of flowing myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet
cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty, and of sweet calamus
two hundred and fifty, <span id="an_exo:30:24">24</span> and of cassia
five hundred, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of olive oil a hin.
<span id="an_exo:30:25">25</span> And thou shalt make it a holy
anointing oil, a perfume compounded after the art of the perfumer; it
shall he a holy anointing oil. <span id="an_exo:30:26">26</span> And
thou shalt anoint therewith the tent of meeting, and the ark of the
testimony, <span id="an_exo:30:27">27</span> and the table and all the
vessels thereof, and the candlestick and the vessels thereof, and the
altar of incense, <span id="an_exo:30:28">28</span> and the altar of
burnt-offering with all the vessels thereof, and the laver and the base
thereof. <span id="an_exo:30:29">29</span> And thou shalt sanctify them,
that they may be most holy; whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.
<span id="an_exo:30:30">30</span> And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his
sons, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto Me in the priest's
office. <span id="an_exo:30:31">31</span> And thou shalt speak unto the
children of Israel, saying: This shall be a holy anointing oil unto Me
throughout your generations. <span id="an_exo:30:32">32</span> Upon the
flesh of man shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any like it,
according to the composition thereof; it is holy, and it shall be holy
unto you. <span id="an_exo:30:33">33</span> Whosoever compoundeth any
like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, he shall be cut
off from his people.'

<span id="an_exo:30:34">34</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Take
unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; sweet spices
with pure frankincense; of each shall there be a like weight. <span
id="an_exo:30:35">35</span> And thou shalt make of it incense, a perfume
after the art of the perfumer, seasoned with salt, pure and holy. <span
id="an_exo:30:36">36</span> And thou shalt beat some of it very small,
and put of it before the testimony in the tent of meeting, where I will
meet with thee; it shall be unto you most holy. <span
id="an_exo:30:37">37</span> And the incense which thou shalt make,
according to the composition thereof ye shall not make for yourselves;
it shall be unto thee holy for the LORD. <span
id="an_exo:30:38">38</span> Whosoever shall make like unto that, to
smell thereof, he shall be cut off from his people.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 31](exo031.md)

</div>
