<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo031)  [Next](exo033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 32

<span id="an_exo:32:1">1</span> And when the people saw that Moses
delayed to come down from the mount, the people gathered themselves
together unto Aaron, and said unto him: 'Up, make us a god who shall go
before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the
land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.' <span
id="an_exo:32:2">2</span> And Aaron; said unto them: 'Break off the
golden rings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of
your daughters, and bring them unto me.' <span
id="an_exo:32:3">3</span> And all the people broke off the golden rings
which were in their ears, and, brought them unto Aaron. <span
id="an_exo:32:4">4</span> And he received it at their hand, and
fashioned it with a graving tool, and made it a molten calf; and they
said: 'This is thy god, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land
of Egypt.' <span id="an_exo:32:5">5</span> And when Aaron saw this, he
built an altar before it; and Aaron made, proclamation, and said:
'To-morrow shall be a feast to the LORD.' <span
id="an_exo:32:6">6</span> And they rose up early on the morrow, and
offered burnt-offerings, and brought peace-offerings; and the people sat
down to eat and to drink, and rose up to make merry.

<span id="an_exo:32:7">7</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses: 'Go, get
thee down; for thy people, that thou broughtest up out of the land of
Egypt, have dealt corruptly; <span id="an_exo:32:8">8</span> they have
turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them; they have
made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed
unto it, and said: This is thy god, O Israel, which brought. thee up out
of the land of Egypt.' <span id="an_exo:32:9">9</span> And the LORD said
unto Moses: 'I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked
people. <span id="an_exo:32:10">10</span> Now therefore let Me alone,
that My wrath may wax <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> hot against
them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of thee a great
nation.' <span id="an_exo:32:11">11</span> And Moses besought the LORD
his God, and said: 'LORD, why doth Thy wrath wax hot against Thy people,
that Thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power
and with a mighty hand? <span id="an_exo:32:12">12</span> Wherefore
should the Egyptians speak, saying: For evil did He bring them forth, to
slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the
earth? Turn from Thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against Thy
people. <span id="an_exo:32:13">13</span> Remember Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, Thy servants, to whom Thou didst swear by Thine own self, and
saidst unto them: I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and
all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they
shall inherit it for ever.' <span id="an_exo:32:14">14</span> And the
LORD repented of the evil which He said He would do unto His people.

<span id="an_exo:32:15">15</span> And Moses turned, and went down from
the mount, with the two tables of the testimony in his hand; tables that
were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were
they written. <span id="an_exo:32:16">16</span> And the tables were the
work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the
tables. <span id="an_exo:32:17">17</span> And when Joshua heard the
noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses: 'There is a
noise of war in the camp.' <span id="an_exo:32:18">18</span> And he
said: 'It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it
the voice of them that cry for being overcome, but the noise of them
that sing do I hear.' <span id="an_exo:32:19">19</span> And it came to
pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf and
the dancing; and Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of
his hands, and broke them beneath the mount. <span
id="an_exo:32:20">20</span> And he took the calf which they had made,
and burnt it with fire, and ground it to powder, and strewed it upon the
water, and made the children of Israel drink of it. <span
id="an_exo:32:21">21</span> And Moses said unto Aaron: 'What did this
people unto thee, that thou hast brought a great sin upon them?' <span
id="an_exo:32:22">22</span> And Aaron said: 'Let not the anger of my
lord wax hot; thou knowest the people, that they are set on evil. <span
id="an_exo:32:23">23</span> So they said unto me: Make us a god, which
shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up
out of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him. <span
id="an_exo:32:24">24</span> And I said unto them: Whosoever hath any
gold, let them break it off; so they gave it me; and I cast it into the
fire, and there came out this calf.' <span
id="an_exo:32:25">25</span> And when Moses saw that the people were
broken loose—for Aaron had let them loose for a derision among their
enemies—<span id="an_exo:32:26">26</span> then Moses stood in the gate
of the camp, and said: 'Whoso is on the LORD'S side, let him come unto
me.' And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.
<span id="an_exo:32:27">27</span> And he said unto them: 'Thus saith the
LORD, the God of Israel: Put ye every man his sword upon his thigh, and
go to and fro from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man
his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour.'
<span id="an_exo:32:28">28</span> And the sons of Levi did according to
the word of Moses; and there fell of the people that day about three
thousand men. <span id="an_exo:32:29">29</span> And Moses said:
'Consecrate yourselves to-day to the LORD, for every man hath been
against his son and against his brother; that He may also bestow upon
you a blessing this day.' <span id="an_exo:32:30">30</span> And it came
to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the people: 'Ye have sinned
a great sin; and now I will go <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> up unto
the LORD, peradventure I shall make atonement for your sin.' <span
id="an_exo:32:31">31</span> And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said:
'Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them a god of
gold. <span id="an_exo:32:32">32</span> Yet now, if Thou wilt forgive
their sin—; and if not, blot me, I pray Thee, out of Thy book which Thou
hast written.' <span id="an_exo:32:33">33</span> And the LORD said unto
Moses: 'Whosoever hath sinned against Me, him will I blot out of My
book. <span id="an_exo:32:34">34</span> And now go, lead the people unto
the place of which I have spoken unto thee; behold, Mine angel shall go
before thee; nevertheless in the day when I visit, I will visit their
sin upon them.' <span id="an_exo:32:35">35</span> And the LORD smote the
people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 33](exo033)

</div>
