<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen006)  [Next](gen008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 7

<span id="an_gen:7:1">1</span> And the LORD said unto Noah: 'Come thou
and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before Me
in this generation. <span id="an_gen:7:2">2</span> Of every clean beast
thou shalt take to thee seven and seven, each with his mate; and of the
beasts that are not clean two \[and two\], each with his mate; <span
id="an_gen:7:3">3</span> of the fowl also of the air, seven and seven,
male and female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
<span id="an_gen:7:4">4</span> For yet seven days, and I will cause it
to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living
substance that I have made will I blot out from off the face of the
earth.' <span id="an_gen:7:5">5</span> And Noah did according unto all
that the LORD commanded him.

<span id="an_gen:7:6">6</span> And Noah was six hundred years old when
the flood of waters was upon the earth. <span
id="an_gen:7:7">7</span> And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife,
and his sons’ wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the
flood. <span id="an_gen:7:8">8</span> Of clean beasts, and of beasts
that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon
the ground, <span id="an_gen:7:9">9</span> there went in two and two
unto Noah into the ark, male and female, as God commanded Noah. <span
id="an_gen:7:10">10</span> And it came to pass after the seven days,
that the waters of the flood were upon the earth. <span
id="an_gen:7:11">11</span> In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in
the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on the same day
were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of
heaven were opened. <span id="an_gen:7:12">12</span> And the rain was
upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

<span id="an_gen:7:13">13</span> In the selfsame day entered Noah, and
Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the
three wives of his sons with them, into the ark; <span
id="an_gen:7:14">14</span> they, and every beast after its kind, and all
the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon
the earth after its kind, and every fowl after its kind, every bird of
every sort. <span id="an_gen:7:15">15</span> And they went in unto Noah
into the ark, two and two of all flesh wherein is the breath of life.
<span id="an_gen:7:16">16</span> And they that went in, went in male and
female of all flesh, as God commanded him; and the LORD shut him in.
<span id="an_gen:7:17">17</span> And the flood was forty days upon the
earth; and the waters increased, and bore up the ark, and it was lifted
up above the earth. <span id="an_gen:7:18">18</span> And the waters
prevailed, and increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon
the face of the waters. <span id="an_gen:7:19">19</span> And the waters
prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high mountains that
were under the whole heaven were covered. <span
id="an_gen:7:20">20</span> Fifteen <span id="page_10">p. 10</span>
cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.
<span id="an_gen:7:21">21</span> And all flesh perished that moved upon
the earth, both fowl, and cattle, and beast, and every swarming thing
that swarmeth upon the earth, and every man; <span
id="an_gen:7:22">22</span> all in whose nostrils was the breath of the
spirit of life, whatsoever was in the dry land, died. <span
id="an_gen:7:23">23</span> And He blotted out every living substance
which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and
creeping thing, and fowl of the heaven; and they were blotted out from
the earth; and Noah only was left, and they that were with him in the
ark. <span id="an_gen:7:24">24</span> And the waters prevailed upon the
earth a hundred and fifty days.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 8](gen008)

</div>
