<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen044)  [Next](gen046.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 45

<span id="an_gen:45:1">1</span> Then Joseph could not refrain himself
before all them that stood by him; and he cried: 'Cause every man to go
out from me.' And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself
known unto his brethren. <span id="an_gen:45:2">2</span> And he wept
aloud; and the Egyptians heard, and the house of Pharaoh heard. <span
id="an_gen:45:3">3</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren: 'I am
Joseph; doth my father yet live?' And his brethren could not answer him;
for they were affrighted at his presence. <span
id="an_gen:45:4">4</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren: 'Come near
to me, I pray you.' And they came near. And he said: 'I am Joseph your
brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. <span id="an_gen:45:5">5</span> And
now be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold <span
id="page_57">p. 57</span> me hither; for God did send me before you to
preserve life. <span id="an_gen:45:6">6</span> For these two years hath
the famine been in the land; and there are yet five years, in which
there shall he neither plowing nor harvest. <span
id="an_gen:45:7">7</span> And God sent me before you to give you a
remnant on the earth, and to save you alive for a great deliverance.
<span id="an_gen:45:8">8</span> So now it was not you that sent me
hither, but God; and He hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of
all his house, and ruler over all the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_gen:45:9">9</span> Hasten ye, and go up to my father, and say
unto him: Thus saith thy son Joseph: God hath made me lord of all Egypt;
come down unto me, tarry not. <span id="an_gen:45:10">10</span> And thou
shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou,
and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy
herds, and all that thou hast; <span id="an_gen:45:11">11</span> and
there will I sustain thee; for there are yet five years of famine; lest
thou come to poverty, thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast.
<span id="an_gen:45:12">12</span> And, behold, your eyes see, and the
eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.
<span id="an_gen:45:13">13</span> And ye shall tell my father of all my
glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall hasten and
bring down my father hither.' <span id="an_gen:45:14">14</span> And he
fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon
his neck. <span id="an_gen:45:15">15</span> And he kissed all his
brethren, and wept upon them; and after that his brethren talked with
him.

<span id="an_gen:45:16">16</span> And the report thereof was heard in
Pharaoh's house, saying: 'Joseph's brethren are come'; and it pleased
Pharaoh well, and his servants. <span id="an_gen:45:17">17</span> And
Pharaoh said unto Joseph: 'Say unto thy brethren: This do ye: lade your
beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan; <span
id="an_gen:45:18">18</span> and take your father and your households,
and come unto me; and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and
ye shall eat the fat of the land. <span id="an_gen:45:19">19</span> Now
thou art commanded, this do ye: take you wagons out of the land of Egypt
for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and
come. <span id="an_gen:45:20">20</span> Also, regard not your stuff; for
the good things of all the land of Egypt are yours.' <span
id="an_gen:45:21">21</span> And the sons of Israel did so; and Joseph
gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them
provision for the way. <span id="an_gen:45:22">22</span> To all of them
he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three
hundred shekels of silver, and five changes of raiment. <span
id="an_gen:45:23">23</span> And to his father he sent in like manner ten
asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she-asses laden with
corn and bread and victual for his father by the way. <span
id="an_gen:45:24">24</span> So he sent his brethren away, and they
departed; and he said unto them: 'See that ye fall not out by the way.'
<span id="an_gen:45:25">25</span> And they went up out of Egypt, and
came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father. <span
id="an_gen:45:26">26</span> And they told him, saying: 'Joseph is yet
alive, and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt.' And his heart
fainted, for he believed them not. <span id="an_gen:45:27">27</span> And
they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them; and
when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of
Jacob their father revived. <span id="an_gen:45:28">28</span> And Israel
said: 'It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive; I will go and see him
before I die.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 46](gen046.md)

</div>
