<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen019)  [Next](gen021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 20

<span id="an_gen:20:1">1</span> And Abraham journeyed from thence toward
the land of the South, and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur; and he
sojourned in Gerar. <span id="an_gen:20:2">2</span> And Abraham said of
Sarah his wife: 'She is my sister.' And Abimelech king of Gerar sent,
and took Sarah. <span id="an_gen:20:3">3</span> But God came to
Abimelech in a dream of the night, and said to him: 'Behold, thou shalt
die, because of the woman whom thou hast taken; for she is a man's
wife.' <span id="an_gen:20:4">4</span> Now Abimelech had not come near
her; and he said: 'Lord, wilt Thou slay even a righteous nation? <span
id="an_gen:20:5">5</span> Said he not himself unto me: She is my sister?
and she, even she herself said: He is my brother. In the simplicity of
my heart and the innocency of my hands have I done this.' <span
id="an_gen:20:6">6</span> And God said unto him in the dream: 'Yea, I
know that in the simplicity of thy heart thou hast done this, and I also
withheld thee from sinning against Me. Therefore suffered I thee not to
touch her. <span id="an_gen:20:7">7</span> Now therefore restore the
man's wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou
shalt live; and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt
surely die, thou, and all that are thine.' <span
id="an_gen:20:8">8</span> And Abimelech rose early in the morning, and
called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears; and
the men were sore afraid. <span id="an_gen:20:9">9</span> Then Abimelech
called Abraham, and said unto him: 'What hast thou done unto us? and
wherein have I sinned against thee, that thou hast brought on me and on
my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to
be done.' <span id="an_gen:20:10">10</span> And Abimelech said unto
Abraham: 'What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?' <span
id="an_gen:20:11">11</span> And Abraham said: 'Because I thought: Surely
the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my
wife's sake. <span id="an_gen:20:12">12</span> And moreover she is
indeed my sister, the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my
mother; and so she became my wife. <span id="an_gen:20:13">13</span> And
it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house,
that I said unto her: This is thy kindness which thou shalt show unto
me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me: He is my brother.'
<span id="an_gen:20:14">14</span> And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and
men-servants and women-servants, and gave them unto Abraham, and
restored him Sarah his wife. <span id="an_gen:20:15">15</span> And
Abimelech said: 'Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it pleaseth
thee.' <span id="an_gen:20:16">16</span> And unto Sarah he said:
'Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver; behold,
it is for thee a covering of the eyes to all that are with thee; and
before all men thou art righted.' <span id="an_gen:20:17">17</span> And
Abraham prayed unto God; and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his
maid-servants; and they bore children. <span
id="an_gen:20:18">18</span> For the LORD had fast <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of
Sarah Abraham's wife.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 21](gen021.md)

</div>
