<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen042)  [Next](gen044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 43

<span id="an_gen:43:1">1</span> And the famine was sore in the land.
<span id="an_gen:43:2">2</span> And it came to pass, when they had eaten
up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, that their <span
id="page_54">p. 54</span> father said unto them: 'Go again, buy us a
little food.' <span id="an_gen:43:3">3</span> And Judah spoke unto him,
saying: 'The man did earnestly forewarn us, saying: Ye shall not see my
face, except your brother be with you. <span
id="an_gen:43:4">4</span> If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will
go down and buy thee food; <span id="an_gen:43:5">5</span> but if thou
wilt not send him, we will not go down, for the man said unto us: Ye
shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.' <span
id="an_gen:43:6">6</span> And Israel said: 'Wherefore dealt ye so ill
with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?' <span
id="an_gen:43:7">7</span> And they said: 'The man asked straitly
concerning ourselves, and concerning our kindred, saying: Is your father
yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according to the
tenor-of these words; could we in any wise know that he would say: Bring
your brother down?' <span id="an_gen:43:8">8</span> And Judah said unto
Israel his father: 'Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go, that
we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.
<span id="an_gen:43:9">9</span> I will be surety for him; of my hand
shalt thou require him; if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before
thee, then let me bear the blame for ever. <span
id="an_gen:43:10">10</span> For except we had lingered, surely we had
now returned a second time.' <span id="an_gen:43:11">11</span> And their
father Israel said unto them: 'If it be so now, do this: take of the
choice fruits of the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a
present, a little balm, and a little honey, spicery and ladanum, nuts,
and almonds; <span id="an_gen:43:12">12</span> and take double money in
your hand; and the money that was returned in the mouth of your sacks
carry back in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight; <span
id="an_gen:43:13">13</span> take also your brother, and arise, go again
unto the man; <span id="an_gen:43:14">14</span> and God Almighty give
you mercy before the man, that he may release unto you your other
brother and Benjamin. And as for me, if I be bereaved of my children, I
am bereaved.'

<span id="an_gen:43:15">15</span> And the men took that present, and
they took double money in their hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and
went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph. <span
id="an_gen:43:16">16</span> And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he
said to the steward of his house: 'Bring the men into the house, and
kill the beasts, and prepare the meat; for the men shall dine with me at
noon.' <span id="an_gen:43:17">17</span> And the man did as Joseph bade;
and the man brought the men into Joseph's house. <span
id="an_gen:43:18">18</span> And the men were afraid, because they were
brought into Joseph's house; and they said: 'Because of the money that
was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he
may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen;
and our asses.' <span id="an_gen:43:19">19</span> And they came near to
the steward of Joseph's house, and they spoke unto him at the door of
the house, <span id="an_gen:43:20">20</span> and said: 'Oh my lord, we
came indeed down at the first time to buy food. <span
id="an_gen:43:21">21</span> And it came to pass, when we came to the
lodging-place, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man's money
was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight; and we have
brought it back in our hand. <span id="an_gen:43:22">22</span> And other
money have we brought down in our hand to buy food. We know not who put
our money in our sacks.' <span id="an_gen:43:23">23</span> And he said:
'Peace be to you, fear not; your God, and the God of your father, hath
given you treasure in your sacks; I had your money.' And he brought
Simeon out unto them. <span id="an_gen:43:24">24</span> And the man
brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them water, and they
washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender. <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span id="an_gen:43:25">25</span> And they
made ready the present against Joseph's coming at noon; for they heard
that they should eat bread there. <span id="an_gen:43:26">26</span> And
when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their
hand into the house, and bowed down to him to the earth. <span
id="an_gen:43:27">27</span> And he asked them of their welfare, and
said: 'Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spoke? Is he yet
alive?' <span id="an_gen:43:28">28</span> And they said: 'Thy servant
our father is well, he is yet alive.' And they bowed the head, and made
obeisance. <span id="an_gen:43:29">29</span> And he lifted up his eyes,
and saw Benjamin his brother, his mother's son, and said: 'Is this your
youngest brother of whom ye spoke unto me?' And he said: 'God be
gracious unto thee, my son.' <span id="an_gen:43:30">30</span> And
Joseph made haste; for his heart yearned toward his brother; and he
sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.
<span id="an_gen:43:31">31</span> And he washed his face, and came out;
and he refrained himself, and said: 'Set on bread.' <span
id="an_gen:43:32">32</span> And they set on for him by himself, and for
them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, that did eat with him, by
themselves; because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews;
for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians. <span
id="an_gen:43:33">33</span> And they sat before him, the first-born
according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth;
and the men marvelled one with another. <span
id="an_gen:43:34">34</span> And portions were taken unto them from
before him; but Benjamin's portion was five times so much as any of
theirs. And they drank, and were merry with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 44](gen044)

</div>
