<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen039)  [Next](gen041.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 40

<span id="an_gen:40:1">1</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker offended their lord
the king of Egypt. <span id="an_gen:40:2">2</span> And Pharaoh was wroth
against his two officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against
the chief of the bakers. <span id="an_gen:40:3">3</span> And he put them
in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the
place where Joseph was bound. <span id="an_gen:40:4">4</span> And the
captain of the guard charged Joseph to be with them, and he ministered
unto them; and they continued a season in ward. <span
id="an_gen:40:5">5</span> And they dreamed a dream both of them, each
man his dream, in one night, each man according to the interpretation of
his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were bound
in the prison. <span id="an_gen:40:6">6</span> And Joseph came in unto
them in the morning, and saw them, and, behold, they were sad. <span
id="an_gen:40:7">7</span> And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with
him in the ward of his master's house, saying: 'Wherefore look ye so sad
to-day?' <span id="an_gen:40:8">8</span> And they said unto him: 'We
have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it.' And
Joseph said unto them: 'Do not interpretations belong to God? tell it
me, I pray you.' <span id="an_gen:40:9">9</span> And the chief butler
told his dream to Joseph, and said to him: 'In my dream, behold, a vine
was before me; <span id="an_gen:40:10">10</span> and in the vine were
three branches; and as it was budding, its blossoms shot forth, and the
clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes; <span
id="an_gen:40:11">11</span> and Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and I took
the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into
Pharaoh's hand.' <span id="an_gen:40:12">12</span> And Joseph said unto
him: 'This is the interpretation of it: the three branches are three
days; <span id="an_gen:40:13">13</span> within yet three days shall
Pharaoh lift up thy head, and restore thee unto thine office; and thou
shalt give Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner when
thou wast his butler. <span id="an_gen:40:14">14</span> But have me in
thy remembrance when it shall be well with thee, and show kindness, I
pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me
out of this house. <span id="an_gen:40:15">15</span> For indeed I was
stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews; and here also have I done
nothing that they should put me into <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> the
dungeon.' <span id="an_gen:40:16">16</span> When the chief baker saw
that the interpretation was good he said unto Joseph: 'I also saw in my
dream, and, behold, three baskets of white bread were on my head; <span
id="an_gen:40:17">17</span> and in the uppermost basket there was of all
manner of baked food for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the
basket upon my head.' <span id="an_gen:40:18">18</span> And Joseph
answered and said: 'This is the interpretation thereof: the three
baskets are three days; <span id="an_gen:40:19">19</span> within yet
three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang
thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.' <span
id="an_gen:40:20">20</span> And it came to pass the third day, which was
Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants; and he
lifted up the head of the chief butler and the head of the chief baker
among his servants. <span id="an_gen:40:21">21</span> And he restored
the chief butler back unto his butlership; and he gave the cup into
Pharaoh's hand. <span id="an_gen:40:22">22</span> But he hanged the
chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to them. <span
id="an_gen:40:23">23</span> Yet did not the chief butler remember
Joseph, but forgot him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 41](gen041.md)

</div>
