<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](jpslaw)  [Next](gen002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

‏בראשית‎

# GENESIS

### CHAPTER 1

<span id="an_gen:1:1">1</span> IN the beginning God created the heaven
and the earth. <span id="an_gen:1:2">2</span> Now the earth was unformed
and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep; and the spirit of
God hovered over the face of the waters. <span
id="an_gen:1:3">3</span> And God said: 'Let there be light.' And there
was light. <span id="an_gen:1:4">4</span> And God saw the light, that it
was good; and God divided the light from the darkness. <span
id="an_gen:1:5">5</span> And God called the light Day, and the darkness
He called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, one day.

<span id="an_gen:1:6">6</span> And God said: 'Let there be a firmament
in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the
waters.' <span id="an_gen:1:7">7</span> And God made the firmament, and
divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which
were above the firmament; and it was so. <span
id="an_gen:1:8">8</span> And God called the firmament Heaven. And there
was evening and there was morning, a second day.

<span id="an_gen:1:9">9</span> And God said: 'Let the waters under the
heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land
appear.' And it was so. <span id="an_gen:1:10">10</span> And God called
the dry land Earth, and the gathering together of the waters called He
Seas; and God saw that it was good. <span id="an_gen:1:11">11</span> And
God said: 'Let the earth put forth grass, herb yielding seed, and
fruit-tree bearing fruit after its kind, wherein is the seed thereof,
upon the earth.' And it was so. <span id="an_gen:1:12">12</span> And the
earth brought forth grass, herb yielding seed after its kind, and tree
bearing fruit, wherein is the seed thereof, after its kind; and God saw
that it was good. <span id="an_gen:1:13">13</span> And there was evening
and there was morning, a third day.

<span id="an_gen:1:14">14</span> And God said: 'Let there be lights in
the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let
them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days and years; <span
id="an_gen:1:15">15</span> and let them be for lights in the firmament
of the heaven to give light upon the earth.' And it was so. <span
id="an_gen:1:16">16</span> And God made the two great lights: the
greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night;
and the stars. <span id="an_gen:1:17">17</span> And God set them in the
firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth, <span
id="an_gen:1:18">18</span> and to rule over the day and over the night,
and to divide the light from the darkness; and God saw that it was good.
<span id="an_gen:1:19">19</span> And there was evening and there was
morning, a fourth day.

<span id="an_gen:1:20">20</span> And God said: 'Let the waters swarm
with swarms of living creatures, and let fowl fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven.' <span id="an_gen:1:21">21</span> And God
created the great sea-monsters, and every living creature that creepeth,
wherewith the waters swarmed, after its kind, and every winged fowl
after its kind; and God saw that it was good. <span
id="an_gen:1:22">22</span> And God blessed them, saying: 'Be fruitful,
and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in
the earth.' <span id="an_gen:1:23">23</span> And there was evening and
there was morning, a fifth day.<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span id="an_gen:1:24">24</span> And God said: 'Let the earth bring
forth the living creature after its kind, cattle, and creeping thing,
and beast of the earth after its kind.' And it was so. <span
id="an_gen:1:25">25</span> And God made the beast of the earth after its
kind, and the cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth
upon the ground after its kind; and God saw that it was good. <span
id="an_gen:1:26">26</span> And God said: 'Let us make man in our image,
after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the
earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.'
<span id="an_gen:1:27">27</span> And God created man in His own image,
in the image of God created He him; male and female created He them.
<span id="an_gen:1:28">28</span> And God blessed them; and God said unto
them: 'Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue
it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over every living thing that creepeth upon the earth.' <span
id="an_gen:1:29">29</span> And God said: 'Behold, I have given you every
herb yielding seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every
tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed—to you it shall be
for food; <span id="an_gen:1:30">30</span> and to every beast of the
earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth
upon the earth, wherein there is a living soul, \[I have given\] every
green herb for food.' And it was so. <span
id="an_gen:1:31">31</span> And God saw every thing that He had made,
and, behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was
morning, the sixth day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 2](gen002.md)

</div>
