<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen038)  [Next](gen040.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 39

<span id="an_gen:39:1">1</span> And Joseph was brought down to Egypt;
and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard, an
Egyptian, bought him of the hand of the Ishmaelites, that had brought
him down thither. <span id="an_gen:39:2">2</span> And the LORD was with
Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his
master the Egyptian. <span id="an_gen:39:3">3</span> And his master saw
that the LORD was with him, and that the LORD made all that he did to
prosper in his hand. <span id="an_gen:39:4">4</span> And Joseph found
favour in his sight, and lie ministered unto him. And he appointed him
overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand. <span
id="an_gen:39:5">5</span> And it came to pass from the time that he
appointed him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the
LORD blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of
the LORD was upon all that he had, in the house and in the field. <span
id="an_gen:39:6">6</span> And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand;
and, having him, he knew not aught save the bread which he did eat. And
Joseph was of beautiful form, and fair to look upon.

<span id="an_gen:39:7">7</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said: 'Lie
with me.' <span id="an_gen:39:8">8</span> But he refused, and said unto
his master's wife: 'Behold, my master, having me, knoweth not what is in
the house, and he hath put all that he hath into my hand; <span
id="an_gen:39:9">9</span> he is not greater in this house than I;
neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art
his wife. How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?'
<span id="an_gen:39:10">10</span> And it came to pass, as she spoke to
Joseph. day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to
be with her. <span id="an_gen:39:11">11</span> And it came to pass on a
certain day, when he went into the house to do his work, and there was
none of the men of the house there within, <span
id="an_gen:39:12">12</span> that she caught him by his garment, saying:
'Lie with me.' And he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got
him out. <span id="an_gen:39:13">13</span> And it came to pass, when she
saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth, <span
id="an_gen:39:14">14</span> that she called unto the men of her house,
and spoke unto them, saying: 'See, <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> he
hath brought in a Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie
with me, and I cried with a loud voice. <span
id="an_gen:39:15">15</span> And it came to pass, when he heard that I
lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment by me, and fled,
and got him out.' <span id="an_gen:39:16">16</span> And she laid up his
garment by her, until his master came home. <span
id="an_gen:39:17">17</span> And she spoke unto him according to these
words, saying: 'The Hebrew servant, whom thou hast brought unto us, came
in unto me to mock me. <span id="an_gen:39:18">18</span> And it came to
pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment by me,
and fled out.' <span id="an_gen:39:19">19</span> And it came to pass,
when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spoke unto him,
saying: 'After this manner did thy servant to me'; that his wrath was
kindled. <span id="an_gen:39:20">20</span> And Joseph's master took him,
and put him into the prison, the place where the king's prisoners were
bound; and he was there in the prison. <span
id="an_gen:39:21">21</span> But the LORD was with Joseph, and showed
kindness unto him, and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the
prison. <span id="an_gen:39:22">22</span> And the keeper of the prison
committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that were in the prison;
and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it. <span
id="an_gen:39:23">23</span> The keeper of the prison looked not to any
thing that was under his hand, because the LORD was with him; and that
which he did, the LORD made it to prosper.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 40](gen040.md)

</div>
