<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen036)  [Next](gen038.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‏וישב‎

### GENESIS CHAPTER 37

<span id="an_gen:37:1">1</span> And Jacob dwelt in the land of his
father's sojournings, in the land of Canaan. <span
id="an_gen:37:2">2</span> These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph,
being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren,
being still a lad, even with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of
Zilpah, his father's wives; and Joseph brought evil report of them unto
their father. <span id="an_gen:37:3">3</span> Now Israel loved Joseph
more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age; and
he made him a coat of many colours. <span id="an_gen:37:4">4</span> And
when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his
brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him. <span
id="an_gen:37:5">5</span> And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it to
his brethren; and they hated him yet the more. <span
id="an_gen:37:6">6</span> And he said unto them: 'Hear, I pray you, this
dream which I have dreamed: <span id="an_gen:37:7">7</span> for, behold,
we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also
stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves came round about, and bowed
down to my sheaf.' <span id="an_gen:37:8">8</span> And his brethren said
to him: 'Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have
dominion over us?' And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> and for his words. <span
id="an_gen:37:9">9</span> And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it
to his brethren, and said: 'Behold, I have dreamed yet a dream: and,
behold, the sun and the moon and eleven stars bowed down to me.' <span
id="an_gen:37:10">10</span> And he told it to his father, and to his
brethren; and his father rebuked him, and said unto him: 'What is this
dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren
indeed come to bow down to thee to the earth?' <span
id="an_gen:37:11">11</span> And his brethren envied him; but his father
kept the saying in mind.

<span id="an_gen:37:12">12</span> And his brethren went to feed their
father's flock in Shechem. <span id="an_gen:37:13">13</span> And Israel
said unto Joseph: 'Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem? come,
and I will send thee unto them.' And he said to him: 'Here am I.' <span
id="an_gen:37:14">14</span> And he said to him: Go now, see whether it
is well with thy brethren, and well with the flock; and bring' me back
word.' So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.
<span id="an_gen:37:15">15</span> And a certain man found him, and,
behold, he was wandering in the field. And the man asked him, saying:
'What seekest thou?' <span id="an_gen:37:16">16</span> And he said: 'I
seek my brethren. Tell me, I pray thee, where they are feeding the
flock.' <span id="an_gen:37:17">17</span> And the man said: 'They are
departed hence; for I heard them say: Let us go to Dothan.' And Joseph
went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan. <span
id="an_gen:37:18">18</span> And they saw him afar off, and before he
came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him. <span
id="an_gen:37:19">19</span> And they said one to another: 'Behold, this
dreamer cometh. <span id="an_gen:37:20">20</span> Come now therefore,
and let us slay him, and cast him into one of the pits, and we will say:
An evil beast hath devoured him; and we shall see what will become of
his dreams.' <span id="an_gen:37:21">21</span> And Reuben heard it, and
delivered him out of their hand; and said: 'Let us not take his life.'
<span id="an_gen:37:22">22</span> And Reuben said unto them: 'Shed no
blood; cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, but lay no hand
upon him'—that he might deliver him out of their hand, to restore him to
his father. <span id="an_gen:37:23">23</span> And it came to pass, when
Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stripped Joseph of his
coat, the coat of many colours that was on him; <span
id="an_gen:37:24">24</span> and they took him, and cast him into the
pit—and the pit was empty, there was no water in it. <span
id="an_gen:37:25">25</span> And they sat down to eat bread; and they
lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a caravan of Ishmaelites
came from Gilead, with their camels bearing spicery and balm and
ladanum, going to carry it down to Egypt. <span
id="an_gen:37:26">26</span> And Judah said unto his brethren: 'What
profit is it if we slay our brother and conceal his blood? <span
id="an_gen:37:27">27</span> Come, and let us sell him to the
Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother,
our flesh.' And his brethren hearkened unto him. <span
id="an_gen:37:28">28</span> And there passed by Midianites, merchantmen;
and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to
the Ishmaelites for twenty shekels of silver. And they brought Joseph
into Egypt. <span id="an_gen:37:29">29</span> And Reuben returned unto
the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his
clothes. <span id="an_gen:37:30">30</span> And he returned unto his
brethren, and said: 'The child is not; and as for me, whither shall I
go?' <span id="an_gen:37:31">31</span> And they took Joseph's coat, and
killed a he-goat, and dipped the coat in the blood; <span
id="an_gen:37:32">32</span> and they sent the coat of many colours, and
they brought it to their father; and said: 'This have we found. Know now
whether it is thy son's coat or not.' <span
id="an_gen:37:33">33</span> And he knew it, and said: 'It is my son's
coat; an evil beast hath <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> devoured him;
Joseph is without doubt torn in pieces.' <span
id="an_gen:37:34">34</span> And Jacob rent his garments, and put
sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days. <span
id="an_gen:37:35">35</span> And all his sons and all his daughters rose
up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said: 'Nay,
but I will go down to the grave to my son mourning.' And his father wept
for him. <span id="an_gen:37:36">36</span> And the  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[a](#fn_63.md) Midianites sold him into Egypt unto
Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[47:a](gen037.htm#fr_64.md) Heb. *Medanites*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 38](gen038.md)

</div>
