<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg005)  [Next](jdg007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 6

<span id="an_jdg:6:1">1</span> And the children of Israel did that which
was evil in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD delivered them into the
hand of Midian seven years. <span id="an_jdg:6:2">2</span> And the hand
of Midian prevailed against Israel; and because of Midian the children
of Israel made them the dens which are in the mountains, and the caves,
and the strongholds. <span id="an_jdg:6:3">3</span> And so it was, when
Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and
the children of the east; they came up against them; <span
id="an_jdg:6:4">4</span> and they encamped against them, and destroyed
the produce of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no
sustenance in Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass. <span
id="an_jdg:6:5">5</span> For they came up with their cattle and their
tents, and they came in as locusts for multitude; both they and their
camels were without number; and they came into the land to destroy it.
<span id="an_jdg:6:6">6</span> And Israel was brought very low because
of Midian; and the children of Israel cried unto the LORD.

<span id="an_jdg:6:7">7</span> And it came to pass, when the children of
Israel cried unto the LORD because of Midian, <span
id="an_jdg:6:8">8</span> that the LORD sent a prophet unto the children
of Israel; and he said unto them: \`Thus saith the LORD, the God of
Israel: I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the
house of bondage; <span id="an_jdg:6:9">9</span> and I delivered you out
of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed
you, and drove them out from before you, and gave you their land. <span
id="an_jdg:6:10">10</span> And I said unto you: I am the LORD your God;
ye shall not fear the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but
ye have not hearkened unto My voice.'

<span id="an_jdg:6:11">11</span> And the angel of the LORD came, and sat
under the terebinth which was in Ophrah, that belonged unto Joash the
Abiezrite; and his son Gideon was beating out wheat in the winepress, to
hide it from the Midianites. <span id="an_jdg:6:12">12</span> And the
angel of the LORD appeared unto him, and said unto him: \`The LORD is
with thee, thou mighty man of valour.' <span
id="an_jdg:6:13">13</span> And Gideon said unto him: \`Oh, my lord, if
the LORD be with us, why then [has](errata.htm#4.md) all this befallen us?
and where are all His wondrous works which our fathers told us of,
saying: Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt? but now the LORD hath
cast us off, and delivered us into the hand of Midian.' <span
id="an_jdg:6:14">14</span> And the LORD turned towards him, and said:
\`Go in this

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

thy might, and save Israel from the hand of Midian; have not I sent
thee?' <span id="an_jdg:6:15">15</span> And he said unto him: \`Oh, my
lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? behold, my family is the poorest in
Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house.' <span
id="an_jdg:6:16">16</span> And the LORD said unto him: \`Surely I will
be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man.' <span
id="an_jdg:6:17">17</span> And he said unto him: \`If now I have found
favour in thy sight, then show me a sign that it is thou that talkest
with me. <span id="an_jdg:6:18">18</span> Depart not hence, I pray thee,
until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and lay it before
thee.' And he said: \`I will tarry until thou come back.' <span
id="an_jdg:6:19">19</span> And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and
unleavened cakes of an ephah of meal; the flesh he put in a basket, and
he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the
terebinth, and presented it. <span id="an_jdg:6:20">20</span> And the
angel of God said unto him: \`Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes,
and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth.' And he did so.
<span id="an_jdg:6:21">21</span> Then the angel of the LORD put forth
the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the
unleavened cakes; and there went up fire out of the rock, and consumed
the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and the angel of the LORD departed
out of his sight. <span id="an_jdg:6:22">22</span> And Gideon saw that
he was the angel of the LORD; and Gideon said: \`Alas, O Lord God!
forasmuch as I have seen the angel of the LORD face to face.' <span
id="an_jdg:6:23">23</span> And the LORD said unto him: \`Peace be unto
thee; fear not; thou shalt not die.' <span
id="an_jdg:6:24">24</span> Then Gideon built an altar there unto the
LORD, and called it  <span id="fr_111"></span>[a](#fn_108.md)
\`Adonai-shalom'; unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

<span id="an_jdg:6:25">25</span> And it came to pass the same night,
that the LORD said unto him: \`Take thy father's bullock, and the second
bullock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy
father hath, and cut down the Asherah that is by it; <span
id="an_jdg:6:26">26</span> and build an altar unto the LORD thy God upon
the top of this stronghold, in the ordered place, and take the second
bullock, and offer a burnt-offering with the wood of the Asherah which
thou shalt cut down.' <span id="an_jdg:6:27">27</span> Then Gideon took
ten men of his servants, and did as the LORD had spoken unto him; and it
came to pass, because he feared his father's household and the men of
the city, so that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night.
<span id="an_jdg:6:28">28</span> And when the men of the city arose
early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was broken down, and the
Asherah was cut down that was by it, and the second bullock was offered
upon the altar that was built. <span id="an_jdg:6:29">29</span> And they
said one to another: \`Who hath done this thing?' And when they inquired
and asked, they said: Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing.'
<span id="an_jdg:6:30">30</span> Then the men of the city said unto
Joash: \`Bring out thy son, that he may die; because he hath broken down
the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the Asherah that was by
it.' <span id="an_jdg:6:31">31</span> And Joash said unto all that stood
against him: \`Will ye contend for Baal? or will ye save him? he that
will contend for him, shall be put to death before morning; if he be a
god, let him contend for himself, because one hath broken down his
altar.' <span id="an_jdg:6:32">32</span> Therefore on that day he was
called  <span id="fr_112"></span>[b](#fn_109.md) Jerubbaal, saying: \`Let
Baal contend against him, because he hath broken down his altar.'

<span id="an_jdg:6:33">33</span> Now all the Midianites and the
Amalekites and the children of the east assembled themselves together;
and they passed over, and pitched in the valley of Jezreel. <span
id="an_jdg:6:34">34</span> But the spirit

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

of the LORD clothed Gideon; and he blew a horn; and Abiezer was gathered
together after him. <span id="an_jdg:6:35">35</span> And he sent
messengers throughout all Manasseh; and they also were gathered together
after him; and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto
Naphtali; and they came up to meet them. <span
id="an_jdg:6:36">36</span> And Gideon said unto God: \`If Thou wilt save
Israel by my hand, as Thou hast spoken, <span
id="an_jdg:6:37">37</span> behold, I will put a fleece of wool on the
threshing-floor; if there be dew on the fleece only, and it be dry upon
all the ground, then shall I know that Thou wilt save Israel by my hand,
as Thou hast spoken.' <span id="an_jdg:6:38">38</span> And it was so;
for he rose up early on the morrow, and pressed the fleece together, and
wrung dew out of the fleece, a bowlful of water. <span
id="an_jdg:6:39">39</span> And Gideon said unto God: \`Let not Thine
anger be kindled against me, and I will speak but this once: let me make
trial, I pray Thee, but this once with the fleece; let it now be dry
only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew.' <span
id="an_jdg:6:40">40</span> And God did so that night; for it was dry
upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[301:a](jdg006.htm#fr_111.md) That is, *The LORD
is peace*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[301:b](jdg006.htm#fr_112.md) That is, *Let Baal
contend*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 7](jdg007.md)

</div>
