<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg013)  [Next](jdg015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 14

<span id="an_jdg:14:1">1</span> And Samson went down to Timnah, and saw
a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistines. <span
id="an_jdg:14:2">2</span> And he came up, and told his father and his
mother, and said: \`I have seen a woman in Timnah of the daughters of
the Philistines; now therefore get her for me to wife.' <span
id="an_jdg:14:3">3</span> Then his father and his mother said unto him:
\`Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among
all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised
Philistines?' And Samson said unto his father:

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \`Get her for me;
for she pleaseth me well.' <span id="an_jdg:14:4">4</span> But his
father and his mother knew not that it was of the LORD; for he sought an
occasion against the Philistines. Now at that time the Philistines had
rule over Israel.

<span id="an_jdg:14:5">5</span> Then went Samson down, and his father
and his mother, to Timnah, and came to the vineyards of Timnah; and,
behold, a young lion roared against him. <span
id="an_jdg:14:6">6</span> And the spirit of the LORD came mightily upon
him, and he rent him as one would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in
his hand; but he told not his father or his mother what he had done.
<span id="an_jdg:14:7">7</span> And he went down, and talked with the
woman; and she pleased Samson well. <span id="an_jdg:14:8">8</span> And
after a while he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see the
carcass of the lion; and, behold, there was a swarm of bees in the body
of the lion, and honey. <span id="an_jdg:14:9">9</span> And he scraped
it out into his hands, and went on, eating as he went, and he came to
his father and mother, and gave unto them, and they did eat; but he told
them not that he had scraped the honey out of the body of the lion.
<span id="an_jdg:14:10">10</span> And his father went down unto the
woman; and Samson made there a feast; for so used the young men to do.
<span id="an_jdg:14:11">11</span> And it came to pass, when they saw
him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him. <span
id="an_jdg:14:12">12</span> And Samson said unto them: \`Let me now put
forth a riddle unto you; if ye can declare it me within the seven days
of the feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty linen
garments and thirty changes of raiment; <span
id="an_jdg:14:13">13</span> but if ye cannot declare it me, then shall
ye give me thirty linen garments and thirty changes of raiment.' And
they said unto him: \`Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.' <span
id="an_jdg:14:14">14</span> And he said unto them:

Out of the eater came forth food,  
And out of the strong came forth sweetness.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And they could not
in three days declare the riddle. <span id="an_jdg:14:15">15</span> And
it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson's wife:
\`Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we
burn thee and thy father's house with fire; have ye called us hither to
impoverish us?' <span id="an_jdg:14:16">16</span> And Samson's wife wept
before him, and said: \`Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not; thou
hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and wilt thou
not tell it me?' And he said unto her: \`Behold, I have not told it my
father nor my mother, and shall I tell thee?' <span
id="an_jdg:14:17">17</span> And she wept before him the seven days,
while their feast lasted; and it came to pass on the seventh day, that
he told her, because she pressed him sore; and she told the riddle to
the children of her people. <span id="an_jdg:14:18">18</span> And the
men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the sun went
down:

What is sweeter than honey?  
And what is stronger than a lion?  
And he said unto them:  
If ye had not plowed with my heifer,  
Ye had not found out my riddle.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_jdg:14:19">19</span> And the spirit of the LORD came mightily
upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, and smote thirty men of them,
and took their spoil, and gave the changes of raiment unto them that
declared the riddle. And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his
father's house. <span id="an_jdg:14:20">20</span> But Samson's wife was
given to his companion, whom he had had for his friend.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 15](jdg015)

</div>
