<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg020)  [Next](sa1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

### JUDGES CHAPTER 21

<span id="an_jdg:21:1">1</span> Now the men of Israel had sworn in
Mizpah, saying: \`There shall not any of us give his daughter unto
Benjamin to wife.' <span id="an_jdg:21:2">2</span> And the people came
to Beth-el, and sat there till even before God, and lifted up their
voices, and wept sore. <span id="an_jdg:21:3">3</span> And they said:
\`O LORD, the God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that
there should be to-day one tribe lacking in Israel?' <span
id="an_jdg:21:4">4</span> And it came to pass on the morrow that the
people rose early, and built there an altar, and offered burnt-offerings
and peace-offerings. <span id="an_jdg:21:5">5</span> And the children of
Israel said: \`Who is there among all the tribes of Israel that came not
up in the assembly unto the LORD?' For they had made a great oath
concerning him that came not up unto the LORD to Mizpah, saying: \`He
shall surely be put to death.' <span id="an_jdg:21:6">6</span> And the
children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said:
\`There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day. <span
id="an_jdg:21:7">7</span> How shall we do for wives for them that
remain, seeing we have sworn by the LORD that we will not give them of
our daughters to wives?' <span id="an_jdg:21:8">8</span> And they said:
\`What one is there of the tribes of Israel that came not up unto the
LORD to Mizpah?' And, behold, there came none to the camp from
Jabesh-gilead to the assembly. <span id="an_jdg:21:9">9</span> For when
the people were numbered, behold, there were none of the inhabitants of
Jabesh-gilead there. <span id="an_jdg:21:10">10</span> And the
congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the valiantest, and
commanded them, saying: \`Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead
with the edge of the sword, with the women and the little ones. <span
id="an_jdg:21:11">11</span> And this is the thing that ye shall do: ye
shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that hath lain by
man.' <span id="an_jdg:21:12">12</span> And they found among the
inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins, that had not
known man by lying with him; and they brought them unto the camp to
Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_jdg:21:13">13</span> And the whole congregation sent and
spoke to the children of Benjamin that were in the rock of Rim-mon, and
proclaimed peace unto them. <span id="an_jdg:21:14">14</span> And
Benjamin returned at that time; and they gave them the women whom they
had saved alive of the women of Jabesh-gilead; and yet so they sufficed
them not. <span id="an_jdg:21:15">15</span> And the people repented them
for Benjamin, because that the LORD had made a breach in the tribes of
Israel.

<span id="an_jdg:21:16">16</span> Then the elders of the congregation
said: \`How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing the women
are destroyed out of Benjamin?' <span id="an_jdg:21:17">17</span> And
they said: \`They that are escaped must be as an inheritance for
Benjamin, that a tribe be not blotted out from Israel. <span
id="an_jdg:21:18">18</span> Howbeit we may not give them wives of our
daughters.' For the children of Israel had sworn, saying: \`Cursed be he
that giveth a wife to Benjamin.' <span id="an_jdg:21:19">19</span> And
they said: \`Behold, there is the feast of the LORD from year to year in
Shiloh, which is on the north of Beth-el, on the east side of the
highway that goeth up from Beth-el to Shechem, and on the south of
Lebonah.' <span id="an_jdg:21:20">20</span> And they commanded the
children of Benjamin, saying: \`Go and lie in wait in the vineyards;
<span id="an_jdg:21:21">21</span> and see, and, behold, if the daughters
of Shiloh come out to dance in the dances, then come ye out of the
vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh,
and go to the land of Benjamin. <span id="an_jdg:21:22">22</span> And it
shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come to strive with us,
that

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

we will say unto them: Grant them graciously unto us; because we took
not for each man of them his wife in battle; neither did ye give them
unto them, that ye should now be guilty.' <span
id="an_jdg:21:23">23</span> And the children of Benjamin did so, and
took them wives, according to their number, of them that danced, whom
they carried off; and they went and returned unto their inheritance, and
built the cities, and dwelt in them. <span
id="an_jdg:21:24">24</span> And the children of Israel departed thence
at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family, and they went
out from thence every man to his inheritance. <span
id="an_jdg:21:25">25</span> In those days there was no king in Israel;
every man did that which was right in his own eyes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 1](sa1001)

</div>
