<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg007)  [Next](jdg009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 82

<span id="an_jdg:8:1">1</span> And the men of Ephraim said unto him:
\`Why hast thou served us thus, that thou didst not call us when thou
wentest to fight with Midian?' And they did chide with him sharply.
<span id="an_jdg:8:2">2</span> And he said unto them: \`What have I now
done in comparison with you? Is not the gleaning of Ephraim better than
the vintage of Abiezer? <span id="an_jdg:8:3">3</span> God hath
delivered into your hand the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and what
was I able to do in comparison with you?' Then their anger was abated
toward him, when he had said that.

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

<span id="an_jdg:8:4">4</span> And Gideon came to the Jordan, and passed
over, he, and the three hundred men that were with him, faint, yet
pursuing. <span id="an_jdg:8:5">5</span> And he said unto the men of
Succoth: \`Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the people that follow
me; for they are faint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, the
kings of Midian.' <span id="an_jdg:8:6">6</span> And the princes of
Succoth said: \`Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy power,
that we should give bread unto thine army?' <span
id="an_jdg:8:7">7</span> And Gideon said: \`Therefore when the LORD hath
delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into my hand, then I will tear your flesh
with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.' <span
id="an_jdg:8:8">8</span> And he went up thence to Penuel, and spoke unto
them in like manner; and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of
Succoth had answered. <span id="an_jdg:8:9">9</span> And he spoke also
unto the men of Penuel, saying: \`When I come back in peace, I will
break down this tower.'

<span id="an_jdg:8:10">10</span> Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor,
and their hosts with them, about fifteen thousand men, all that were
left of all the host of the children of the east; for there fell a
hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword. <span
id="an_jdg:8:11">11</span> And Gideon went up by the way of them that
dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host;
for the host was secure. <span id="an_jdg:8:12">12</span> And Zebah and
Zalmunna fled; and he pursued after them; and he took the two kings of
Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host. <span
id="an_jdg:8:13">13</span> And Gideon the son of Joash returned from the
battle from the ascent of Heres. <span id="an_jdg:8:14">14</span> And he
caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and inquired of him; and he
wrote down for him the princes of Succoth, and the elders thereof,
seventy and seven men. <span id="an_jdg:8:15">15</span> And he came unto
the men of Succoth, and said: \`Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, concerning
whom ye did taunt me, saying: Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in
thy power, that we should give bread unto thy men that are weary?' <span
id="an_jdg:8:16">16</span> And he took the elders of the city, and
thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of
Succoth. <span id="an_jdg:8:17">17</span> And he broke down the tower of
Penuel, and slew the men of the city. <span
id="an_jdg:8:18">18</span> Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna: \`Where
are the men whom ye slew at Tabor?' And they answered: \`As thou art, so
were they; of one form with the children of a king.' <span
id="an_jdg:8:19">19</span> And he said: \`They were my brethren, the
sons of my mother; as the LORD liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I
would not slay you.' <span id="an_jdg:8:20">20</span> And he said unto
Jether his first-born: \`Up, and slay them.' But the youth drew not his
sword; for he feared, because he was yet a youth. <span
id="an_jdg:8:21">21</span> Then Zebah and Zalmunna said: \`Rise thou,
and fall upon us; for as the man is, so is his strength.' And Gideon
arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, and took the crescents that were on
their camels' necks.

<span id="an_jdg:8:22">22</span> Then the men of Israel said unto
Gideon: \`Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son
also; for thou hast saved us out of the hand of Midian.' <span
id="an_jdg:8:23">23</span> And Gideon said unto them: \`I will not rule
over you, neither shall my son rule over you; the LORD shall rule over
you.' <span id="an_jdg:8:24">24</span> And Gideon said unto them: \`I
would make a request of you, that ye would give me every man the
ear-rings of his spoil.'—For they had golden ear-rings, because they
were Ishmaelites. <span id="an_jdg:8:25">25</span> And they answered:
\`We will willingly give them.' And they spread a garment, and did cast
therein every man the ear-rings of his spoil. <span
id="an_jdg:8:26">26</span> And

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

the weight of the golden ear-rings that he requested was a thousand and
seven hundred shekels of gold; beside the crescents, and the pendants,
and the purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and beside the
chains that were about their camels' necks. <span
id="an_jdg:8:27">27</span> And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it
in his city; even in Ophrah; and all Israel went astray after it there;
and it became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house. <span
id="an_jdg:8:28">28</span> So Midian was subdued before the children of
Israel, and they lifted up their heads no more. And the land had rest
forty years in the days of Gideon.

<span id="an_jdg:8:29">29</span> And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and
dwelt in his own house. <span id="an_jdg:8:30">30</span> And Gideon had
threescore and ten sons of his body begotten; for he had many wives.
<span id="an_jdg:8:31">31</span> And his concubine that was in Shechem,
she also bore him a son, and he called his name Abimelech. <span
id="an_jdg:8:32">32</span> And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good
old age, and was buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah
of the Abiezrites.

<span id="an_jdg:8:33">33</span> And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon
was dead, that the children of Israel again went astray after the
Baalim, and made Baal-berith their god. <span
id="an_jdg:8:34">34</span> And the children of Israel remembered not the
LORD their God, who had delivered them out of the hand of all their
enemies on every side; <span id="an_jdg:8:35">35</span> neither showed
they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, namely Gideon, according to all
the goodness which he had shown unto Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 9](jdg009)

</div>
