<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jos024)  [Next](jdg002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

‏שפתים‎

# JUDGES

### JUDGES CHAPTER 1

<span id="an_jdg:1:1">1</span> AND it came to pass after the death of
Joshua, that the children of Israel asked of the LORD, saying: \`Who
shall go up for us first against the Canaanites, to fight against them?'
<span id="an_jdg:1:2">2</span> And the LORD said: \`Judah shall go up;
behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.' <span
id="an_jdg:1:3">3</span> And Judah said unto Simeon his brother: \`Come
up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I
likewise will go with thee into thy lot.' So Simeon went with him. <span
id="an_jdg:1:4">4</span> And Judah went up; and the LORD delivered the
Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand; and they smote of them in
Bezek ten thousand men. <span id="an_jdg:1:5">5</span> And they found
Adoni-bezek in Bezek; and they fought against him, and they smote the
Canaanites and the Perizzites. <span id="an_jdg:1:6">6</span> But
Adoni-bezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut
off his thumbs and his great toes. <span id="an_jdg:1:7">7</span> And
Adoni-bezek said: \`Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and
their great toes cut off, gathered food under my table; as I have done,
so God hath requited me.' And they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died
there.

<span id="an_jdg:1:8">8</span> And the children of Judah fought against
Jerusalem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and set
the city on fire. <span id="an_jdg:1:9">9</span> And afterward the
children of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites that dwelt
in the hill-country, and in the South, and in the Lowland. <span
id="an_jdg:1:10">10</span> And Judah went against the Canaanites that
dwelt in Hebron—now the name of Hebron beforetime was Kiriath-arba—and
they smote Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai. <span
id="an_jdg:1:11">11</span> And from thence he went against the
inhabitants of Debir-now the name of Debir beforetime was
Kiriath-sepher. <span id="an_jdg:1:12">12</span> And Caleb said: \`He
that smiteth Kiriath-sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my
daughter to wife.' <span id="an_jdg:1:13">13</span> And Othniel the son
of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it; and he gave him Achsah his
daughter to wife. <span id="an_jdg:1:14">14</span> And it came to pass,
when she came unto him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field;
and she alighted from off her ass; and Caleb said unto her: \`What
wouldest thou?' <span id="an_jdg:1:15">15</span> And she said unto him:
\`Give me a blessing; for that thou hast set me in the Southland, give
me therefore springs of water.' And Caleb gave her the Upper Springs and
the Nether Springs.

<span id="an_jdg:1:16">16</span> And the children of the Kenite, Moses'
father-in-law, went up out of the city of palm-trees with the children
of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which is in the south of Arad;
and they went and dwelt with the people. <span
id="an_jdg:1:17">17</span> And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and
they smote the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed
it. And the name of the city was called Hormah. <span
id="an_jdg:1:18">18</span> Also Judah took Gaza with the border thereof,
and Ashkelon with the border thereof, and Ekron with the border thereof.
<span id="an_jdg:1:19">19</span> And the LORD was

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

with Judah; and he drove out the inhabitants of the hill-country; for he
could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had
chariots of iron. <span id="an_jdg:1:20">20</span> And they gave Hebron
unto Caleb, as Moses had spoken; and he drove out thence the three sons
of Anak. <span id="an_jdg:1:21">21</span> And the children of Benjamin
did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but the
Jebusites dwelt with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem, unto this
day.

<span id="an_jdg:1:22">22</span> And the house of Joseph, they also went
up against Beth-el; and the LORD was with them. <span
id="an_jdg:1:23">23</span> And the house of Joseph sent to spy out
Beth-el— now the name of the city before-time was Luz. <span
id="an_jdg:1:24">24</span> And the watchers saw a man come forth out of
the city, and they said unto him: \`Show us, we pray thee, the entrance
into the city, and we will deal kindly with thee.' <span
id="an_jdg:1:25">25</span> And he showed them the entrance into the
city, and they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let
the man go and all his family. <span id="an_jdg:1:26">26</span> And the
man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the
name thereof Luz, which is the name thereof unto this day.

<span id="an_jdg:1:27">27</span> And Manasseh did not drive out the
inhabitants of Beth-shean and its towns, nor of Taanach and its towns,
nor the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam
and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns; but the
Canaanites were resolved to dwell in that land. <span
id="an_jdg:1:28">28</span> And it came to pass, when Israel was waxen
strong, that they put the Canaanites to task work, but did in no wise
drive them out.

<span id="an_jdg:1:29">29</span> And Ephraim drove not out the
Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among
them.

<span id="an_jdg:1:30">30</span> Zebulun drove not out the inhabitants
of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt
among them, and became tributary.

<span id="an_jdg:1:31">31</span> Asher drove not out the inhabitants of
Acco, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of
Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob; <span id="an_jdg:1:32">32</span> but
the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land;
for they did not drive them out.

<span id="an_jdg:1:33">33</span> Naphtali drove not out the inhabitants
of Beth-shemesh, nor the inhabitants of Beth-anath; but he dwelt among
the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land; nevertheless the
inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and of Beth-anath became tributary unto
them.

<span id="an_jdg:1:34">34</span> And the Amorites forced the children of
Dan into the hill-country; for they would not suffer them to come down
to the valley. <span id="an_jdg:1:35">35</span> But the Amorites were
resolved to dwell in Har-heres, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim; yet the
hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributary.
<span id="an_jdg:1:36">36</span> And the border of the Amorites was from
the ascent of Akrabbim, from Sela, and upward.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 2](jdg002)

</div>
