<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg017)  [Next](jdg019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 18

<span id="an_jdg:18:1">1</span> In those days there was no king in
Israel; and in those days the tribe of the Danites sought them an
inheritance to dwell in; for unto that day there had nothing been
allotted unto them among the tribes of Israel for an inheritance. <span
id="an_jdg:18:2">2</span> And the children of Dan sent of their family
five men from their whole number, men of valour, from Zorah, and from
Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to search it; and they said unto them:
\`Go, search the land'; and they came to the hill-country of Ephraim,
unto the house of Micah, and lodged there. <span
id="an_jdg:18:3">3</span> When they were by the house of Micah, they
knew the voice of the young man the Levite; and they turned aside
thither, and said unto him: \`Who brought thee hither? and what doest
thou in this place? and what hast thou here?' <span
id="an_jdg:18:4">4</span> And he said unto them: \`Thus and thus hath
Micah dealt with me, and he hath hired me, and I am become his priest.'
<span id="an_jdg:18:5">5</span> And they said unto him: \`Ask counsel,
we pray thee, of God, that we may know whether our way which we are
going shall be prosperous.' <span id="an_jdg:18:6">6</span> And the
priest said unto them: \`Go in peace; before the LORD is your way
wherein ye go.'

<span id="an_jdg:18:7">7</span> Then the five men departed, and came to
Laish, and saw the people that were therein, how they dwelt in security,
after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; for there was none
in the land, possessing authority, that might put them to shame in any
thing, and they were far from the Zidonians, and had no dealings with
any man. <span id="an_jdg:18:8">8</span> And they came unto their
brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol; and their brethren said unto them: \`What
say ye?' <span id="an_jdg:18:9">9</span> And they said: \`Arise, and let
us go up against them; for we have seen the land, and, behold, it is
very good; and are ye still? be not slothful to go and to enter in to
possess the land. <span id="an_jdg:18:10">10</span> When ye go, ye shall
come unto a people secure, and the land is large; for God hath given it
into your hand; a place where there is no want; it hath every thing that
is in the earth.'

<span id="an_jdg:18:11">11</span> And there set forth from thence of the
family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men
girt with weapons of war. <span id="an_jdg:18:12">12</span> And they
went up, and encamped in Kiriath-jearim, in Judah; wherefore that place
was called Mahaneh-dan

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

unto this day; behold, it is behind Kiriath-jearim. <span
id="an_jdg:18:13">13</span> And they passed thence unto the hill-country
of Ephraim, and came unto the house of Micah. <span
id="an_jdg:18:14">14</span> Then answered the five men that went to spy
out the country of Laish, and said unto their brethren: \`Do ye know
that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven
image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do.'
<span id="an_jdg:18:15">15</span> And they turned aside thither, and
came to the house of the young man the Levite, even unto the house of
Micah, and asked him of his welfare. <span
id="an_jdg:18:16">16</span> And the six hundred men girt with their
weapons of war, who were of the children of Dan, stood by the entrance
of the gate. <span id="an_jdg:18:17">17</span> And the five men that I
went to spy out the land went up, and came in thither, and took the
graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image; and
the priest stood by the entrance of the gate with the six hundred men
girt with weapons of war. <span id="an_jdg:18:18">18</span> And when
these went into Micah's house, and fetched the graven image of the
ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image, the priest said unto
them: \`What do ye?' <span id="an_jdg:18:19">19</span> And they said
unto him: \`Hold thy peace, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and go with us,
and be to us a father and a priest; is it better for thee to be priest
unto the house of one man, or to be priest unto a tribe and a family in
Israel?' <span id="an_jdg:18:20">20</span> And the priest's heart was
glad, and he took the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and
went in the midst of the people. <span id="an_jdg:18:21">21</span> So
they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the cattle and the
goods before them. <span id="an_jdg:18:22">22</span> When they were a
good way from the house of Micah, the men that were in the houses near
to Micah's house were gathered together, and overtook the children of
Dan. <span id="an_jdg:18:23">23</span> And they cried unto the children
of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said unto Micah: \`What aileth
thee, that thou comest with such a company?' <span
id="an_jdg:18:24">24</span> And he said: \`Ye have taken away my god
which I made, and the priest, and are gone away, and what have I more?
and how then say ye unto me: What aileth thee?' <span
id="an_jdg:18:25">25</span> And the children of Dan said unto him: \`Let
not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry fellows fall upon you, and
thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household.' <span
id="an_jdg:18:26">26</span> And the children of Dan went their way; and
when Micah saw that they were too strong for him, he turned and went
back unto his house. <span id="an_jdg:18:27">27</span> And they took
that which Micah had made, and the priest whom he had, and came unto
Laish, unto a people quiet and secure, and smote them with the edge of
the sword; and they burnt the city with fire. <span
id="an_jdg:18:28">28</span> And there was no deliverer, because it was
far from Zidon, and they had no dealings with any man; and it was in the
valley that lieth by Beth-rehob. And they built the city, and dwelt
therein. <span id="an_jdg:18:29">29</span> And they called the name of
the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father, who was born unto
Israel; howbeit the name of the city was Laish at the first. <span
id="an_jdg:18:30">30</span> And the children of Dan set up for
themselves the graven image; and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son
of  <span id="fr_116"></span>[a](#fn_113.md) Manasseh, he and his sons were
priests to the tribe of the Danites until the day of the captivity of
the land. <span id="an_jdg:18:31">31</span> So they set them up Micah's
graven image which he made, all the time that the house of God was in
Shiloh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[318:a](jdg018.htm#fr_116.md) Heb. ‏מנשה‎ with ‏נ‎
suspended, indicating an earlier reading, *Moses*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 19](jdg019.md)

</div>
