<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg008)  [Next](jdg010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 9

<span id="an_jdg:9:1">1</span> And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went
to Shechem unto his mother's brethren, and spoke with them, and with all
the family of the house of his mother's father, saying: <span
id="an_jdg:9:2">2</span> \`Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men
of Shechem: Which is better for you, that all the sons of Jerubbaal, who
are threescore and ten persons, rule over you, or that one rule over
you? remember also that I am your bone and your flesh.' <span
id="an_jdg:9:3">3</span> And his mother's brethren spoke of him in the
ears of all the men of Shechem all these words; and their hearts
inclined to follow Abimelech; for they said: \`He is our brother.' <span
id="an_jdg:9:4">4</span> And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of
silver out of the house of Baal-berith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain
and light fellows, who followed him. <span id="an_jdg:9:5">5</span> And
he went unto his father's house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren the
sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon one stone; but
Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left; for he hid himself.

<span id="an_jdg:9:6">6</span> And all the men of Shechem assembled
themselves together, and all Beth-millo, and went and made Abimelech
king, by the terebinth of the pillar that was in Shechem. <span
id="an_jdg:9:7">7</span> And when they told it to Jotham, he went and
stood in the top of mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried,
and said unto them: \`Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may
hearken unto you. <span id="an_jdg:9:8">8</span> The trees went forth on
a time to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the olive-tree:
Reign thou over us. <span id="an_jdg:9:9">9</span> But the olive-tree
said unto them: Should I leave my fatness, seeing that by me they honour
God and man, and go to hold sway over the trees? <span
id="an_jdg:9:10">10</span> And the trees said to the fig-tree: Come
thou, and reign over us. <span id="an_jdg:9:11">11</span> But the
fig-tree said unto them: Should I leave my sweetness, and my good
fruitage, and go to hold sway over the trees? <span
id="an_jdg:9:12">12</span> And the trees said unto the vine: Come thou,
and reign over us. <span id="an_jdg:9:13">13</span> And the vine said
unto them: Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and go

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

to hold sway over the trees? <span id="an_jdg:9:14">14</span> Then said
all the trees unto the bramble: Come thou, and reign over us. <span
id="an_jdg:9:15">15</span> And the bramble said unto the trees: If in
truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and take refuge in my
shadow; and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the
cedars of Lebanon. <span id="an_jdg:9:16">16</span> Now therefore, if ye
have dealt truly and uprightly, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and
if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done unto
him according to the deserving of his hands— <span
id="an_jdg:9:17">17</span> for my father fought for you, and adventured
his life, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian; <span
id="an_jdg:9:18">18</span> and ye are risen up against my father's house
this day, and have slain his sons, threescore and ten persons, upon one
stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maid-servant, king over
the men of Shechem, because he is your brother— <span
id="an_jdg:9:19">19</span> if ye then have dealt truly and uprightly
with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in
Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you. <span
id="an_jdg:9:20">20</span> But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech,
and devour the men of Shechem, and Beth-millo; and let fire come out
from the men of Shechem, and from Beth-millo, and devour Abimelech.'
<span id="an_jdg:9:21">21</span> And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went
to Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother.

<span id="an_jdg:9:22">22</span> And Abimelech was prince over Israel
three years. <span id="an_jdg:9:23">23</span> And God sent an evil
spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the men of Shechem
dealt treacherously with Abimelech; <span
id="an_jdg:9:24">24</span> that the violence done to the threescore and
ten sons of Jerubbaal might come, and that their blood might be laid
upon Abimelech their brother, who slew them, and upon the men of
Shechem, who strengthened his hands to slay his brethren. <span
id="an_jdg:9:25">25</span> And the men of Shechem set liers-in-wait for
him on the tops of the mountains, and they robbed all that came along
that way by them; and it was told Abimelech.

<span id="an_jdg:9:26">26</span> And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his
brethren, and went on to Shechem; and the men of Shechem put their trust
in him. <span id="an_jdg:9:27">27</span> And they went out into the
field, and gathered their vineyards, and trod the grapes, and held
festival, and went into the house of their god, and did eat and drink,
and cursed Abimelech. <span id="an_jdg:9:28">28</span> And Gaal the son
of Ebed said: \`Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should
serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve
ye the men of Hamor the father of Shechem; but why should we serve him?
<span id="an_jdg:9:29">29</span> And would that this people were under
my hand! then would I remove Abimelech.' And he said to Abimelech:
\`Increase thine army, and come out.' <span
id="an_jdg:9:30">30</span> And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard
the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled. <span
id="an_jdg:9:31">31</span> And he sent messengers unto Abimelech in
Tormah, saying: \`Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren are come
to Shechem; and, behold, they will incite the city against thee. <span
id="an_jdg:9:32">32</span> Now therefore, up by night, thou and the
people that are with thee, and lie in wait in the field. <span
id="an_jdg:9:33">33</span> And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon
as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon the city; and,
behold, when he and the people that are with him come out against thee,
then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt be able.'

<span id="an_jdg:9:34">34</span> And Abimelech rose up, and all the
people that were with him, by night, and they lay in wait against

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shechem in four
companies. <span id="an_jdg:9:35">35</span> And Gaal the son of Ebed
went out, and stood in the entrance of the gate of the city; and
Abimelech rose up, and the people that were with him, from the
ambushment. <span id="an_jdg:9:36">36</span> And when Gaal saw the
people, he said to Zebul: \`Behold, there come people down from the tops
of the mountains.' And Zebul said unto him: \`Thou seest the shadow of
the mountains as if they were men.' <span id="an_jdg:9:37">37</span> And
Gaal spoke again and said: \`See, there come people down by the middle
of the land, and one company cometh by the way of Elonmeonenim.' <span
id="an_jdg:9:38">38</span> Then said Zebul unto him: \`Where is now thy
mouth, that thou saidst: Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is
not this the people that thou hast despised? go out now, I pray, and
fight with them.' <span id="an_jdg:9:39">39</span> And Gaal went out
before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech. <span
id="an_jdg:9:40">40</span> And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before
him, and there fell many wounded, even unto the entrance of the gate.
<span id="an_jdg:9:41">41</span> And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah; and
Zebul drove out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in
Shechem.

<span id="an_jdg:9:42">42</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
the people went out into the field; and it was told Abimelech. <span
id="an_jdg:9:43">43</span> And he took the people, and divided them into
three companies, and lay in wait in the field; and he looked, and,
behold, the people were coming forth out of the city; and he rose up
against them, and smote them. <span id="an_jdg:9:44">44</span> And
Abimelech, and the companies that were with him, rushed forward, and
stood in the entrance of the gate of the city; and the two companies
rushed upon all that were in the field, and smote them. <span
id="an_jdg:9:45">45</span> And Abimelech fought against the city all
that day; and he took the city, and slew the people that were therein;
and he beat down the city, and sowed it with salt.

<span id="an_jdg:9:46">46</span> And when all the men of the tower of
Shechem heard thereof, they entered into the hold of the house of
El-berith. <span id="an_jdg:9:47">47</span> And it was told Abimelech
that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together. <span
id="an_jdg:9:48">48</span> And Abimelech got him up to mount Zalmon, he
and all the people that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his
hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it up, and laid it
on his shoulder; and he said unto the people that were with him: \`What
ye have seen me do, make haste, and do as I have done.' <span
id="an_jdg:9:49">49</span> And all the people likewise cut down every
man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set
the hold on fire upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem
died also, about a thousand men and women.

<span id="an_jdg:9:50">50</span> Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and
encamped against Thebez, and took it. <span
id="an_jdg:9:51">51</span> But there was a strong tower within the city,
and thither fled all the men and women, even all they of the city, and
shut themselves in, and got them up to the roof of the tower. <span
id="an_jdg:9:52">52</span> And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought
against it, and went close unto the door of the tower to burn it with
fire. <span id="an_jdg:9:53">53</span> And a certain woman cast an upper
millstone upon Abimelech's head, and broke his skull. <span
id="an_jdg:9:54">54</span> Then he called hastily unto the young man his
armour-bearer, and said unto him: \`Draw thy sword, and kill me, that
men say not of me: A woman slew him.' And his young man thrust him
through, and he died. <span id="an_jdg:9:55">55</span> And when the men
of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto his
place. <span id="an_jdg:9:56">56</span> Thus God requited the wickedness
of Abimelech,

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

which he did unto his father, in slaying his seventy brethren; <span
id="an_jdg:9:57">57</span> and all the wickedness of the men of Shechem
did God requite upon their heads; and upon them came the curse of Jotham
the son of Jerubbaal.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 10](jdg010)

</div>
