<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg015)  [Next](jdg017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

### JUDGES CHAPTER 16

<span id="an_jdg:16:1">1</span> And Samson went to Gaza, and saw there a
harlot, and went in unto her. <span id="an_jdg:16:2">2</span> \[And it
was told\] the Gazites, saying: \`Samson is come hither.' And they
compassed him in, and lay in wait for him all night in the gate of the
city, and were quiet all the night, saying: \`Let be till morning light,
then we will kill him.' <span id="an_jdg:16:3">3</span> And Samson lay
till midnight, and arose at midnight, and laid hold of the doors of the
gate of the city, and the two posts, and plucked them up, bar and all,
and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of the
mountain that is before Hebron.

<span id="an_jdg:16:4">4</span> And it came to pass afterward, that he
loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah. <span
id="an_jdg:16:5">5</span> And the lords of the Philistines came up unto
her, and said unto her: \`Entice him, and see wherein his great strength
lieth, and by what means we may prevail against him, that we may bind
him to afflict him; and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred
pieces of silver.' <span id="an_jdg:16:6">6</span> And Delilah said to
Samson: \`Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great strength lieth, and
wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict thee.' <span
id="an_jdg:16:7">7</span> And Samson said unto her: \`If they bind me
with seven fresh bowstrings that were never dried, then shall I become
weak, and be as any other man.' <span id="an_jdg:16:8">8</span> Then the
lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven fresh bowstrings which
had not been dried, and she bound him with them. <span
id="an_jdg:16:9">9</span> Now she had liers-in-wait abiding in the inner
chamber. And she said unto him: \`The Philistines are upon thee,
Samson.' And he broke the bowstrings as a string of tow is broken when
it toucheth the fire. So his strength was not known. <span
id="an_jdg:16:10">10</span> And Delilah said unto Samson: \`Behold, thou
hast mocked me, and told me lies; now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith
thou mightest be bound.' <span id="an_jdg:16:11">11</span> And he said
unto her: \`If they only bind me with new ropes wherewith no work hath
been done, then shall I become weak, and be as any other man.' <span
id="an_jdg:16:12">12</span> So Delilah took new ropes, and bound him
therewith, and said unto him: \`The Philistines are upon thee, Samson.'
And the liers-in-wait were abiding in the inner chamber. And he broke
them from off his arms like a thread. <span
id="an_jdg:16:13">13</span> And Delilah said unto Samson: \`Hitherto
thou hast mocked me, and told me lies; tell me wherewith thou mightest
be bound.' And he said unto her: \`If thou weavest the seven locks of my
head with the web.' <span id="an_jdg:16:14">14</span> And she fastened
it with the pin, and said unto him: \`The Philistines are upon thee,
Samson.' And he awoke out of his sleep, and plucked away the pin of the
beam, and the web. <span id="an_jdg:16:15">15</span> And she said unto
him: \`How canst thou say: I love thee, when thy heart is not with me?
thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast not told me wherein thy
great strength lieth.' <span id="an_jdg:16:16">16</span> And it came to
pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, that his
soul was vexed unto death. <span id="an_jdg:16:17">17</span> And he told
her all his heart, and said unto her: \`There hath not come a razor upon
my head; for I have been a Nazirite unto God from my mother's womb; if I
be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak,
and be like any other man.' <span id="an_jdg:16:18">18</span> And when
Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called for
the lords of the Philistines, saying: \`Come up this once, for he hath
told me all his heart.' Then the lords of the Philistines came up unto
her, and brought the money

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

in their hand. <span id="an_jdg:16:19">19</span> And she made him sleep
upon her knees; and she called for a man, and had the seven locks of his
head shaven off; and she began to afflict him, and his strength went
from him. <span id="an_jdg:16:20">20</span> And she said: \`The
Philistines are upon thee, Samson.' And he awoke out of his sleep, and
said: \`I will go out as at other times, and shake myself.' But he knew
not that the LORD was departed from him. <span
id="an_jdg:16:21">21</span> And the Philistines laid hold on him, and
put out his eyes; and they brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with
fetters of brass; and he did grind in the prison-house. <span
id="an_jdg:16:22">22</span> Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow
again after he was shaven.

<span id="an_jdg:16:23">23</span> And the lords of the Philistines
gathered them together to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god,
and to rejoice; for they said: \`Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy
into our hand.' <span id="an_jdg:16:24">24</span> And when the people
saw him, they praised their god; for they said: \`Our god hath delivered
into our hand our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, who hath
slain many of us.' <span id="an_jdg:16:25">25</span> And it came to
pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said: \`Call for Samson,
that he may make us sport.' And they called for Samson out of the
prison-house; and he made sport before them; and they set him between
the pillars. <span id="an_jdg:16:26">26</span> And Samson said unto the
lad that held him by the hand: \`Suffer me that I may feel the pillars
whereupon the house resteth, that I may lean upon them.' <span
id="an_jdg:16:27">27</span> Now the house was full of men and women; and
all the lords of the Philistines were there; and there were upon the
roof about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made
sport. <span id="an_jdg:16:28">28</span> And Samson called unto the
LORD, and said: \`O Lord GOD, remember me, I pray Thee, and strengthen
me, I pray Thee, only this once, O God, that I may be this once avenged
of the Philistines for my two eyes.' <span
id="an_jdg:16:29">29</span> And Samson took fast hold of the two middle
pillars upon which the house rested, and leaned upon them, the one with
his right hand, and the other with his left. <span
id="an_jdg:16:30">30</span> And Samson said: \`Let me die with the
Philistines.' And he bent with all his might; and the house fell upon
the lords, and upon all the people that were therein. So the dead that
he slew at his death were more than they that he slew in his life. <span
id="an_jdg:16:31">31</span> Then his brethren and all the house of his
father came down, and took him, and brought him up, and buried him
between Zorah and Eshtaol in the burying-place of Manoah his father. And
he judged Israel twenty years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 17](jdg017.md)

</div>
