<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg010)  [Next](jdg012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 11

<span id="an_jdg:11:1">1</span> Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty
man of valour, and he was the son of a harlot; and Gilead begot
Jephthah. <span id="an_jdg:11:2">2</span> And Gilead's wife bore him
sons; and when his wife's sons grew up, they drove out Jephthah, and
said unto him: \`Thou shalt not inherit in our father's house; for thou
art the son of another woman.' <span id="an_jdg:11:3">3</span> Then
Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob; and there
were gathered vain

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

fellows to Jephthah, and they went out with him.

<span id="an_jdg:11:4">4</span> And it came to pass after a while, that
the children of Ammon made war against Israel. <span
id="an_jdg:11:5">5</span> And it was so, that when the children of Ammon
made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out
of the land of Tob. <span id="an_jdg:11:6">6</span> And they said unto
Jephthah: \`Come and be our chief, that we may fight with the children
of Ammon. <span id="an_jdg:11:7">7</span> And Jephthah said unto the
elders of Gilead: \`Did not ye hate me, and drive me out of my father's
house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?' <span
id="an_jdg:11:8">8</span> And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah:
\`Therefore are we returned to thee now, that thou mayest go with us,
and fight with the children of Ammon, and thou shalt be our head over
all the inhabitants of Gilead.' <span id="an_jdg:11:9">9</span> And
Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead: \`If ye bring me back home to
fight with the children of Ammon, and the LORD deliver them before me, I
will be your head.' <span id="an_jdg:11:10">10</span> And the elders of
Gilead said unto Jephthah: \`The LORD shall be witness between us;
surely according to thy word so will we do.' <span
id="an_jdg:11:11">11</span> Then Jephthah went with the elders of
Gilead, and the people made him head and chief over them; and Jephthah
spoke all his words before the LORD in Mizpah.

<span id="an_jdg:11:12">12</span> And Jephthah sent messengers unto the
king of the children of Ammon, saying: \`What hast thou to do with me,
that thou art come unto me to fight against my land?' <span
id="an_jdg:11:13">13</span> And the king of the children of Ammon
answered unto the messengers of Jephthah: \`Because Israel took away my
land, when he came up out of Egypt, from the Arnon even unto the Jabbok,
and unto the Jordan; now therefore restore those cities peaceably.'
<span id="an_jdg:11:14">14</span> And Jephthah sent messengers again
unto the king of the children of Ammon; <span
id="an_jdg:11:15">15</span> and he said unto him: \`Thus saith Jephthah:
Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of
Ammon. <span id="an_jdg:11:16">16</span> But when they came up from
Egypt, and Israel walked through the wilderness unto the Red Sea, and
came to Kadesh; <span id="an_jdg:11:17">17</span> then Israel sent
messengers unto the king of Edom, saying: Let me, I pray thee, pass
through thy land; but the king of Edom hearkened not. And in like manner
he sent unto the king of Moab; but he would not; and Israel abode in
Kadesh. <span id="an_jdg:11:18">18</span> Then he walked through the
wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and
came by the east side of the land of Moab, and they pitched on the other
side of the Arnon; but they came not within the border of Moab, for the
Arnon was the border of Moab. <span id="an_jdg:11:19">19</span> And
Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of
Heshbon; and Israel said unto him: Let us pass, we pray thee, through
thy land unto my place. <span id="an_jdg:11:20">20</span> But Sihon
trusted not Israel to pass through his border; but Sihon gathered all
his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel.
<span id="an_jdg:11:21">21</span> And the LORD, the God of Israel,
delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they
smote them; so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the
inhabitants of that country. <span id="an_jdg:11:22">22</span> And they
possessed ail the border of the Amorites, from the Arnon even unto the
Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto the Jordan. <span
id="an_jdg:11:23">23</span> So now the LORD, the God of Israel, hath
dispossessed the Amorites from before His people Israel, and shouldest
thou

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

possess them? <span id="an_jdg:11:24">24</span> Wilt not thou possess
that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever the
LORD our God hath dispossessed from before us, them will we possess.
<span id="an_jdg:11:25">25</span> And now art thou any thing better than
Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? did he ever strive against
Israel, or did he ever fight against them? <span
id="an_jdg:11:26">26</span> While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and its towns,
and in Aroer and its towns, and in all the cities that are along by the
side of the Arnon, three hundred years; wherefore did ye not recover
them within that time? <span id="an_jdg:11:27">27</span> I therefore
have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me;
the LORD, the Judge, be judge this day between the children of Israel
and the children of Ammon.' <span id="an_jdg:11:28">28</span> Howbeit
the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of
Jephthah which he sent him.

<span id="an_jdg:11:29">29</span> Then the spirit of the LORD came upon
Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh
of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of
Ammon. <span id="an_jdg:11:30">30</span> And Jephthah vowed a vow unto
the LORD, and said: \`If Thou wilt indeed deliver the children of Ammon
into my hand, <span id="an_jdg:11:31">31</span> then it shall be, that
whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I
return in peace from the children of Ammon, it shall be the LORD's, and
I will offer it up for a burnt-offering.' <span
id="an_jdg:11:32">32</span> So Jephthah passed over unto the children of
Ammon to fight against them; and the LORD delivered them into his hand.
<span id="an_jdg:11:33">33</span> And he smote them from Aroer until
thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto Abel-cheramim, with a
very great slaughter. So the children of Ammon were subdued before the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_jdg:11:34">34</span> And Jephthah came to Mizpah unto his
house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and
with dances; and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son
nor daughter. <span id="an_jdg:11:35">35</span> And it came to pass,
when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said: \`Alas, my
daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art become my
troubler; for I have opened my mouth unto the LORD, and I cannot go
back.' <span id="an_jdg:11:36">36</span> And she said unto him: \`My
father, thou hast opened thy mouth unto the LORD; do unto me according
to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the LORD
hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of
Ammon.' <span id="an_jdg:11:37">37</span> And she said unto her father:
\`Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may
depart and go down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my
companions.' <span id="an_jdg:11:38">38</span> And he said: \`Go.' And
he sent her away for two months; and she departed, she and her
companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains. <span
id="an_jdg:11:39">39</span> And it came to pass at the end of two
months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to
his vow which he had vowed; and she had not known man. And it was a
custom in Israel, <span id="an_jdg:11:40">40</span> that the daughters
of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite
four days in a year.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 12](jdg012.md)

</div>
