<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos005)  [Next](jos007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 6

<span id="an_jos:6:1">1</span> Now Jericho was straitly shut up because
of the children of Israel: none went out, and none came in.—<span
id="an_jos:6:2">2</span> And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'See, I have
given into thy hand Jericho, and the king thereof, even the mighty men
of valour. <span id="an_jos:6:3">3</span> And ye shall compass the city,
all the men of war, going about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six
days. <span id="an_jos:6:4">4</span> And seven priests shall bear seven
rams' horns before the ark; and the seventh day ye shall compass the
city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the horns. <span
id="an_jos:6:5">5</span> And it shall be, that when they make a long
blast with the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the horn, all
the people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city
shall fall down flat, and the people shall go up every man straight
before him.' <span id="an_jos:6:6">6</span> And Joshua the son of Nun
called the priests, and said unto them: 'Take up the ark of the
covenant, and let seven priests bear seven rams' horns before the ark of
the LORD.' <span id="an_jos:6:7">7</span> And he said unto the people:
'Pass on, and compass the city, and let the armed body pass on before
the ark of the LORD.' <span id="an_jos:6:8">8</span> And it was so, that
when Joshua had spoken unto the people, the seven priests bearing the
seven rams' horns before the LORD passed on, and blew with the horns;
and the ark of the covenant of the LORD followed them. <span
id="an_jos:6:9">9</span> And the armed men went before the priests that
blew the horns, and the rearward went after the ark, \[the priests\]
blowing with the horns continually. <span id="an_jos:6:10">10</span> And
Joshua commanded the people, saying: 'Ye shall not shout, nor let your
voice be heard, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouth, until
the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.' <span
id="an_jos:6:11">11</span> So he caused the ark of the LORD to compass
the city, going about it once; and they came into the camp, and lodged
in the camp.

<span id="an_jos:6:12">12</span> And Joshua rose early in the morning,
and the priests took up the ark of the LORD. <span
id="an_jos:6:13">13</span> And the seven priests bearing the seven rams'
horns before the ark of the LORD went on continually, and blew with the
horns; and the armed men went before them; and the rearward came after
the ark of the LORD, \[the priests\] blowing with the horns continually.
<span id="an_jos:6:14">14</span> And the second day they compassed the
city once, and returned into the camp; so they did six days. <span
id="an_jos:6:15">15</span> And it came to pass on the seventh day, that
they rose early at the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after
the same manner seven times; only on that day they compassed the city
seven times. <span id="an_jos:6:16">16</span> And it came to pass at the
seventh time, when the priests blew with the horns, that Joshua said
unto the people: 'Shout; for the LORD hath given you the city. <span
id="an_jos:6:17">17</span> And the city shall be devoted, even it and
all that is therein,

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

to the LORD; only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that are with
her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent. <span
id="an_jos:6:18">18</span> And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the
devoted thing, lest ye make yourselves accursed by taking of the devoted
thing, so should ye make the camp of Israel accursed, and trouble it.
<span id="an_jos:6:19">19</span> But all the silver, and gold, and
vessels of brass and iron, are holy unto the LORD; they shall come into
the treasury of the LORD.' <span id="an_jos:6:20">20</span> So the
people shouted, and \[the priests\] blew with the horns. And it came to
pass, when the people heard the sound of the horn, that the people
shouted with a great shout, and the wall fell down flat, so that the
people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they
took the city. <span id="an_jos:6:21">21</span> And they utterly
destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, both young and
old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword. <span
id="an_jos:6:22">22</span> And Joshua said unto the two men that had
spied out the land: 'Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence
the woman, and all that she hath, as ye swore unto her.' <span
id="an_jos:6:23">23</span> And the young men the spies went in, and
brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and
all that she had, all her kindred also they brought out; and they set
them without the camp of Israel. <span id="an_jos:6:24">24</span> And
they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein; only the
silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put
into the treasury of the house of the LORD. <span
id="an_jos:6:25">25</span> But Rahab the harlot, and her father's
household, and all that she had, did Joshua save alive; and she dwelt in
the midst of Israel, unto this day; because she hid the messengers, whom
Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.

<span id="an_jos:6:26">26</span> And Joshua charged the people with an
Oath at that time, saying: 'Cursed be the man before the LORD, that
riseth up and buildeth this city, even Jericho; with the loss of his
firstborn shall he lay the foundation thereof, and with the loss of his
youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.'

<span id="an_jos:6:27">27</span> So the LORD was with Joshua; and his
fame was in all the land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 7](jos007.md)

</div>
