<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jpspro)  [Next](jos002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

‏יהושע‎

# JOSHUA

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 1

<span id="an_jos:1:1">1</span> Now it came to pass after the death of
Moses the servant of the LORD, that the LORD spoke unto Joshua the son
of Nun, Moses' minister, saying: <span id="an_jos:1:2">2</span> 'Moses
My servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and
all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the
children of Israel. <span id="an_jos:1:3">3</span> Every place that the
sole of your foot shall tread upon, to you have I given it, as I spoke
unto Moses. <span id="an_jos:1:4">4</span> From the wilderness, and this
Lebanon, even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of
the Hittites, and unto the Great Sea toward the going down of the sun,
shall be your border. <span id="an_jos:1:5">5</span> There shall not any
man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I was with
Moses, so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
<span id="an_jos:1:6">6</span> Be strong and of good courage; for thou
shalt cause this people to inherit the land which I swore unto their
fathers to give them. <span id="an_jos:1:7">7</span> Only be strong and
very courageous, to observe to do according to all the law, which Moses
My servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand or to the
left, that thou mayest have good success whithersoever thou goest. <span
id="an_jos:1:8">8</span> This book of the law shall not depart out of
thy mouth, but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou
mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein; for then
thou shalt make thy ways prosperous, and then thou shalt have good
success. <span id="an_jos:1:9">9</span> Have not I commanded thee? Be
strong and of good courage; be not affrighted, neither be thou dismayed;
for the LORD thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.'

<span id="an_jos:1:10">10</span> Then Joshua commanded the officers of
the people, saying: <span id="an_jos:1:11">11</span> 'Pass through the
midst of the camp, and command the people, saying: Prepare you victuals;
for within three days ye are to pass over this Jordan, to go in to
possess the land, which the LORD your God giveth you to possess it.'

<span id="an_jos:1:12">12</span> And to the Reubenites, and to the
Gadites, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, spoke Joshua, saying: <span
id="an_jos:1:13">13</span> 'Remember the word which Moses the servant of
the LORD commanded you, saying: The LORD your God giveth you rest, and
will give you this land. <span id="an_jos:1:14">14</span> Your wives,
your little ones, and your cattle, shall abide in the land which Moses
gave you beyond the Jordan; but ye shall pass over before your brethren
armed, all the mighty men of valour, and shall help them; <span
id="an_jos:1:15">15</span> until the LORD have given your brethren rest,
as unto you, and they also have possessed the land which the LORD your
God giveth them; then ye shall return unto the land of your possession,
and possess it, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you beyond the
Jordan toward the sunrising.'

<span id="an_jos:1:16">16</span> And they answered Joshua, saying: 'All
that thou hast commanded us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest
us we will go. <span id="an_jos:1:17">17</span> According

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee;
only the LORD thy God be with thee, as He was with Moses. <span
id="an_jos:1:18">18</span> Whosoever he be that shall rebel against thy
commandment, and shall not hearken unto thy words in all that thou
commandest him, he shall be put to death; only be strong and of good
courage.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 2](jos002.md)

</div>
