<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos004)  [Next](jos006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 5

<span id="an_jos:5:1">1</span> And it came to pass, when all the kings
of the Amorites, that were beyond the Jordan westward, and all the kings
of the Canaanites, that were by the sea, heard how that the LORD had
dried up the waters of the Jordan from before the children of Israel,
until they were passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there
spirit in them any more, because of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_jos:5:2">2</span> At that time the LORD said unto Joshua:
'Make thee knives of flint, and circumcise again the children of Israel
the second time.' <span id="an_jos:5:3">3</span> And Joshua made him
knives of flint, and circumcised the children of Israel at  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[a](#fn_99) Gibeath-ha-araloth. <span
id="an_jos:5:4">4</span> And this is the cause why Joshua did
circumcise: all the people that came forth out of Egypt, that were
males, even all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way, after
they came forth out of Egypt. <span id="an_jos:5:5">5</span> For all the
people that came out were circumcised; but all the people that were born
in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, had not
been circumcised. <span id="an_jos:5:6">6</span> For the children of
Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till all the nation, even
the men of war that came forth out of Egypt, were consumed, because they
hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD; unto whom the LORD swore that
He would not let them see the land which the LORD swore unto their
fathers that He would give us, a land flowing with milk and honey. <span
id="an_jos:5:7">7</span> And He raised up their children in their stead;
them did Joshua circumcise; for they were uncircumcised, because they
had not been circumcised by the way. <span id="an_jos:5:8">8</span> And
it came to pass, when all the nation were circumcised, every one of
them, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were whole.

<span id="an_jos:5:9">9</span> And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'This day
have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you.' Wherefore the
name of that place was called  <span id="fr_103"></span>[b](#fn_100)
Gilgal, unto this day.

<span id="an_jos:5:10">10</span> And the children of Israel encamped in
Gilgal; and they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month at
even in the plains of Jericho. <span id="an_jos:5:11">11</span> And they
did eat of the produce of the land on the morrow after the passover,
unleavened cakes and parched corn, in the selfsame day. <span
id="an_jos:5:12">12</span> And the manna ceased on the morrow, after
they had eaten of the produce of the land; neither had the

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

children of Israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the
land of Canaan that year.

<span id="an_jos:5:13">13</span> And it came to pass, when Joshua was by
Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood
a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand; and Joshua went
unto him, and said unto him: 'Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?'
<span id="an_jos:5:14">14</span> And he said: 'Nay, but I am captain of
the host of the Lora); I am now come.' And Joshua fell on his face to
the earth, and bowed down, and said unto him: 'What saith my lord unto
his servant?' <span id="an_jos:5:15">15</span> And the captain of the
LORD'S host said unto Joshua: 'Put off thy shoe from off thy foot; for
the place whereon thou standest is holy.' And Joshua did so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[265:a](jos005.htm#fr_102) That is, *The hill of
the foreskins*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[265:b](jos005.htm#fr_103) That is, *Rolling*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 6](jos006)

</div>
