<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos009)  [Next](jos011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 10

<span id="an_jos:10:1">1</span> Now it came to pass, when Adoni-zedek
king of Jerusalem heard how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly
destroyed it; as he had done to Jericho and her king, so he had done to
Ai and her king; and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with
Israel, and were among them; <span id="an_jos:10:2">2</span> that they
feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the royal
cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and all the men thereof were
mighty. <span id="an_jos:10:3">3</span> Wherefore Adoni-zedek king of
Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of
Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon,
saying: <span id="an_jos:10:4">4</span> 'Come up unto me, and help me,
and let us smite Gibeon; for it hath made peace with Joshua and with the
children of Israel.' <span id="an_jos:10:5">5</span> Therefore the five
kings of the Amorites, the king of Jersualem, the king of Hebron, the
king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered
themselves together, and went up, they and all their hosts,and encamped
against Gibeon, and made war against it. <span
id="an_jos:10:6">6</span> And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the
camp to Gilgal, saying: 'Slack not thy hands from thy servants; come up
to us quickly, and save us, and help us; for all the kings of the
Amorites that dwell in the hill-country are gathered together against
us.' <span id="an_jos:10:7">7</span> So Joshua went up from Gilgal, he,
and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valour.

<span id="an_jos:10:8">8</span> And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'Fear
them not; for I have delivered them into thy hand; there shall not a man
of them stand against thee.' <span id="an_jos:10:9">9</span> Joshua
therefore came upon them suddenly; for he went up from Gilgal all the
night. <span id="an_jos:10:10">10</span> And the LORD discomfited them
before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon; and they
chased them by the way of the ascent of Beth-horon, and smote them to
Azekah, and unto Makkedah. <span id="an_jos:10:11">11</span> And it came
to pass, as they fled from before Israel, while they were at the descent
of Beth-horon, that the LORD cast down great stones from heaven upon
them unto Azekah, and they died; they were more who died with the
hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.

<span id="an_jos:10:12">12</span> Then spoke Joshua to the LORD in the
day when the LORD delivered up the Amorites before the children of
Israel; and he said in the sight of Israel:

'Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon;  
And thou, Moon, in the valley of Aijalon.'  
<span id="an_jos:10:13">13</span> And the sun stood still, and the moon
stayed,  
Until the nation had avenged themselves of their enemies.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Is not this
written in the book of Jashar? And the sun stayed in the

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day. <span
id="an_jos:10:14">14</span> And there was no day like that before it or
after it, that the LORD hearkened unto the voice of a man; for the LORD
fought for Israel.

<span id="an_jos:10:15">15</span> And Joshua returned, and all Israel
with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.

<span id="an_jos:10:16">16</span> And these five kings fled, and hid
themselves in the cave at Makkedah. <span
id="an_jos:10:17">17</span> And it was told Joshua, saying: 'The five
kings are found, hidden in the cave at Makkedah.' <span
id="an_jos:10:18">18</span> And Joshua said: 'Roll great stones unto the
mouth of the cave, and set men by it to keep them; <span
id="an_jos:10:19">19</span> but stay not ye; pursue after your enemies,
and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter into their
cities; for the LORD your God hath delivered them into your hand.' <span
id="an_jos:10:20">20</span> And it came to pass, when Joshua and the
children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very great
slaughter, till they were consumed, and the remnant which remained of
them had entered into the fortified cities, <span
id="an_jos:10:21">21</span> that all the people returned to the camp to
Joshua at Makkedah in peace; none whetted his tongue against any of the
children of Israel. <span id="an_jos:10:22">22</span> Then said Joshua:
'Open the mouth of the cave, and bring forth those five kings unto me
out of the cave.' <span id="an_jos:10:23">23</span> And they did so, and
brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of
Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish,
the king of Eglon. <span id="an_jos:10:24">24</span> And it came to
pass, when they brought forth those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua
called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the chiefs of the men of
war that went with him: 'Come near, put your feet upon the necks of
these kings.' And they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of
them. <span id="an_jos:10:25">25</span> And Joshua said unto them: 'Fear
not, nor be dismayed; be strong and of good courage; for thus shall the
LORD do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.' <span
id="an_jos:10:26">26</span> And afterward Joshua smote them, and put
them to death, and hanged them on five trees; and they were hanging upon
the trees until the evening. <span id="an_jos:10:27">27</span> And it
came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua
commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the
cave wherein they had hidden themselves, and laid great stones on the
mouth of the cave, unto this very day.

<span id="an_jos:10:28">28</span> And Joshua took Makkedah on that day,
and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof; he
utterly destroyed them and all the souls that were therein, he left none
remaining; and he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done unto the
king of Jericho.

<span id="an_jos:10:29">29</span> And Joshua passed from Makkedah, and
all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against Libnah. <span
id="an_jos:10:30">30</span> And the LORD delivered it also, and the king
thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it with the edge of the
sword, and all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining in
it; and he did unto the king thereof as he had done unto the king of
Jericho.

<span id="an_jos:10:31">31</span> And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all
Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought
against it. <span id="an_jos:10:32">32</span> And the LORD delivered
Lachish into the hand of Israel, and he took it on the second day, and
smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were
therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah.

<span id="an_jos:10:33">33</span> Then Horam king of Gezer came up to
help Lachish; and Joshua smote

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

<span id="an_jos:10:34">34</span> And Joshua passed from Lachish, and
all Israel with him, unto Eglon; and they encamped against it, and
fought against it. <span id="an_jos:10:35">35</span> And they took it on
that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that
he had done to Lachish.

<span id="an_jos:10:36">36</span> And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all
Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it. <span
id="an_jos:10:37">37</span> And they took it, and smote it with the edge
of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all
the souls that were therein; he left none remaining, according to all
that he had done to Eglon; but he utterly destroyed it, and all the
souls that were therein.

<span id="an_jos:10:38">38</span> And Joshua turned back, and all Israel
with him, to Debir; and fought against it. <span
id="an_jos:10:39">39</span> And he took it, and the king thereof, and
all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword,
and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining; as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king
thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to the king thereof.

<span id="an_jos:10:40">40</span> So Joshua smote all the land, the
hill-country, and the South, and the Lowland, and the slopes, and all
their kings; he left none remaining; but he utterly destroyed all that
breathed, as the LORD, the God of Israel, commanded. <span
id="an_jos:10:41">41</span> And Joshua smote them from Kadesh-barnea
even unto Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon. <span
id="an_jos:10:42">42</span> And all these kings and their land did
Joshua take at one time, because the LORD, the God of Israel, fought for
Israel. <span id="an_jos:10:43">43</span> And Joshua returned, and all
Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 11](jos011)

</div>
