<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos008)  [Next](jos010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 9

<span id="an_jos:9:1">1</span> And it came to pass, when all the kings
that were beyond the Jordan, in the hill-country, and in the Lowland,
and on all the shore of the Great Sea in front of Lebanon, the Hittite,
and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perizzite, the
Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof, <span
id="an_jos:9:2">2</span> that they gathered themselves together, to
fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one accord.

<span id="an_jos:9:3">3</span> But when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard
what Joshua had done unto Jericho and to Ai, <span
id="an_jos:9:4">4</span> they also did work wilily, and went and made as
if they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and
wineskins, worn and rent and patched up; <span
id="an_jos:9:5">5</span> and worn shoes and clouted upon their feet, and
worn garments upon them; and all the bread of their provision was dry
and was become crumbs. <span id="an_jos:9:6">6</span> And they went to
Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the men of
Israel: 'We are come from a far country; now therefore make ye a
covenant with us.' <span id="an_jos:9:7">7</span> And the men of Israel
said unto the Hivites: 'Peradventure ye dwell among us; and how shall we
make a covenant with you?' <span id="an_jos:9:8">8</span> And they said
unto Joshua: 'We are thy servants.' And Joshua said unto them: 'Who are
ye? and from whence come ye?' 'And they said unto him: 'From a very far
country thy servants are come because of the name of the LORD thy God;
for we have heard the fame of Him, and all that He did in Egypt, <span
id="an_jos:9:10">10</span> and all that He did to the two kings of the
Amorites, that were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to
Og king of Bashan, who was at Ashtaroth. <span
id="an_jos:9:11">11</span> And our elders and all the inhabitants of our
country spoke to us, saying: Take provision in your hand for the
journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them: We are your servants;
and now make ye a covenant with us. <span
id="an_jos:9:12">12</span> This our bread we took hot for our provision
out of our houses on the day we came forth to go unto you; but now,
behold, it is dry, and is become crumbs. <span
id="an_jos:9:13">13</span> And these wine-skins, which we filled, were
new; and, behold, they are rent. And these our garments and our shoes
are worn by reason of the very long journey.' <span
id="an_jos:9:14">14</span> And the men took of their provision, and
asked not counsel at the mouth of the LORD. <span
id="an_jos:9:15">15</span> And Joshua made peace with them, and made a
covenant with them, to let them live; and the princes of the
congregation swore unto them.

<span id="an_jos:9:16">16</span> And it came to pass at the end of three
days after they had made a covenant with them, that they heard that they
were their neighbours, and that they dwelt among them. <span
id="an_jos:9:17">17</span> And the children of Israel journeyed, and
came unto their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon,
and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kiriath-jearim. <span
id="an_jos:9:18">18</span> And the children of Israel smote them not,
because the princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the LORD,
the God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against the
princes. <span id="an_jos:9:19">19</span> But all the princes said unto
all the congregation: 'We have sworn unto them by the LORD, the God of
Israel; now therefore we may not touch them. <span
id="an_jos:9:20">20</span> This we will do to them, and let them live;
lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we swore unto them.'
<span id="an_jos:9:21">21</span> And the princes said concerning them:
'Let them live'; so they became hewers of wood and drawers of water unto
all the congregation, as the princes had spoken concerning them. <span
id="an_jos:9:22">22</span> And Joshua called for them, and he spoke unto
them, saying: 'Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying: We are very far
from you, when ye dwell among us? <span id="an_jos:9:23">23</span> Now
therefore ye are cursed, and there shall never fail to be of you
bondmen, both hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

my God.' <span id="an_jos:9:24">24</span> And they answered Joshua, and
said: 'Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that the LORD thy
God commanded His servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy
all the inhabitants of the land from before you; therefore we were sore
afraid for our lives because of you, and have done this thing. <span
id="an_jos:9:25">25</span> And now, behold, we are in thy hand: as it
seemeth good and right unto thee to do unto us, do.' <span
id="an_jos:9:26">26</span> And so did he unto them, and delivered them
out of the hand of the children of Israel, that they slew them not.
<span id="an_jos:9:27">27</span> And Joshua made them that day hewers of
wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the
LORD, unto this day, in the place which He should choose.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 10](jos010)

</div>
