<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos018)  [Next](jos020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 19

<span id="an_jos:19:1">1</span> And the second lot came out for Simeon,
even for the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their
families; and their inheritance was in the midst of the inheritance of
the children of Judah. <span id="an_jos:19:2">2</span> And they had for
their inheritance Beer-sheba with Sheba, and Moladah; <span
id="an_jos:19:3">3</span> and Hazarshual, and Balah, and Ezem; <span
id="an_jos:19:4">4</span> and Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah; <span
id="an_jos:19:5">5</span> and Ziklag, and Beth-marcaboth, and
Hazar-susah; <span id="an_jos:19:6">6</span> and Beth-lebaoth, and
Sharuhen; thirteen cities with their villages: <span
id="an_jos:19:7">7</span> Ain, Rimmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities
with their villages; <span id="an_jos:19:8">8</span> and all the
villages that were round about these cities to Baalathbeer, as far as
Ramah of the South. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Simeon according to their families. <span
id="an_jos:19:9">9</span> Out of the allotment of the children of Judah
was the inheritance of the children of Simeon, for the portion of the
children of Judah was too much for them; therefore the children of
Simeon had inheritance in the midst of their inheritance.

<span id="an_jos:19:10">10</span> And the third lot came up for the
children of Zebulun according to their families; and the border of their
inheritance was unto Sarid. <span id="an_jos:19:11">11</span> And their
border went up westward, even to Maralah, and reached to Dabbesheth; and
it reached to the brook that is before Jokneam. <span
id="an_jos:19:12">12</span> And it turned from Sarid eastward toward the
sunrising unto the border of Chisloth-tabor; and it went out to Dobrath,
and went up to Japhia. <span id="an_jos:19:13">13</span> And from thence
it passed along eastward to Gathhepher, to Eth-kazin; and it went out at
Rimmon-methoar unto Neah. <span id="an_jos:19:14">14</span> And the
border turned about it on the north to Hannathon; and the goings out
thereof were at the valley of Iphtahel; <span
id="an_jos:19:15">15</span> and Kattath, and Na-halal, and Shimron, and
Idalah, and Beth-lehem; twelve cities with their villages. <span
id="an_jos:19:16">16</span> This is the inheritance of the children of
Zebulun according to their

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

families, these cities with their villages.

<span id="an_jos:19:17">17</span> The fourth lot came out for Issachar,
even for the children of Issachar according to their families. <span
id="an_jos:19:18">18</span> And their border was Jezreel, and
Chesulloth, and Shunem; <span id="an_jos:19:19">19</span> and Hapharaim,
and Shion, and Anaharath; <span id="an_jos:19:20">20</span> and Rabbith,
and Kishion, and Ebez; <span id="an_jos:19:21">21</span> and Remeth, and
En-gannim, and En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez; <span
id="an_jos:19:22">22</span> and the border reached to Tabor, and
Shahazim, and Beth-shemesh; and the goings out of their border were at
the Jordan; sixteen cities with their villages. <span
id="an_jos:19:23">23</span> This is the inheritance of the tribe of the
children of Issachar according to their families, the cities with their
villages.

<span id="an_jos:19:24">24</span> And the fifth lot came out for the
tribe of the children of Asher according to their families. <span
id="an_jos:19:25">25</span> And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and
Beten, and Achshaph; <span id="an_jos:19:26">26</span> and Allammelech,
and Amad, and Mishal; and it reached to Carmel westward, and to
Shihorlibnath. <span id="an_jos:19:27">27</span> And it turned toward
the sunrising to Beth-dagon, and reached to Zebulun and to the valley of
Iphtahel northward at Beth-emek and Neiel; and it went out to Cabul on
the left hand, <span id="an_jos:19:28">28</span> and Ebron, and Rehob,
and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon. <span
id="an_jos:19:29">29</span> And the border turned to Ramah, and to the
fortified city of Tyre; and the border turned to Hosah; and the goings
out thereof were at the sea from Hebel to Achzib; <span
id="an_jos:19:30">30</span> Umrnah also, and Aphek, and Rehob; twenty
and two cities with their villages. <span
id="an_jos:19:31">31</span> This is the inheritance of the tribe of the
children of Asher according to their families, these cities with their
villages.

<span id="an_jos:19:32">32</span> The sixth lot came out for the
children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali according to
their families. <span id="an_jos:19:33">33</span> And their border was
from Heleph, from Elon-bezaanannim, and Adami-uekeb, and Jabneel, unto
Lakkum; and the goings out thereof were at the Jordan. <span
id="an_jos:19:34">34</span> And the border turned westward to
Aznoth-tabor, and went out from thence to Hukok; and it reached to
Zebulun on the south, and reached to Asher on the west, and to Judah at
the Jordan toward the sun-rising. <span id="an_jos:19:35">35</span> And
the fortified cities were Ziddim-zer, and Hammath, and Rakkath, and
Chinnereth; <span id="an_jos:19:36">36</span> and Adamah, and Ramah, and
Hazor; <span id="an_jos:19:37">37</span> and Kedesh, and Edrei, and
En-hazor; <span id="an_jos:19:38">38</span> and Iron, and Migdal-el, and
Horem, and Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their
villages. <span id="an_jos:19:39">39</span> This is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the
cities with their villages.

<span id="an_jos:19:40">40</span> The seventh lot came out for the.
tribe of the children of Dan according to their families. <span
id="an_jos:19:41">41</span> And the border of their inheritance was
Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir-shemesh; <span
id="an_jos:19:42">42</span> and Shaalabbin, and Aijalon, and Ithlah;
<span id="an_jos:19:43">43</span> and Elon, and Timnah, and Ekron; <span
id="an_jos:19:44">44</span> and Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath;
<span id="an_jos:19:45">45</span> and Jehud, and Bene-berak, and
Gath-rimmon; <span id="an_jos:19:46">46</span> and Me-jarkon, and
Rakkon, with the border over against Joppa. <span
id="an_jos:19:47">47</span> And the border of the children of Dan was
too strait for them; so the children of Dan went up and fought against
Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
possessed it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name
of Dan their father. <span id="an_jos:19:48">48</span> This is the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their
families, these cities with their villages.

<span id="an_jos:19:49">49</span> When they had made an end of
distributing the land for inheritance by the borders thereof, the
children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun in the
midst of them; <span id="an_jos:19:50">50</span> according to the
commandment of

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

the LORD they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath-serah in
the hill-country of Ephraim; and he built the city, and dwelt therein.

<span id="an_jos:19:51">51</span> These are the inheritances, which
Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the
fathers' houses of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for
inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the LORD, at the door of the tent of
meeting. So they made an end of dividing the land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 20](jos020)

</div>
