<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos006)  [Next](jos008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 7

<span id="an_jos:7:1">1</span> But the children of Israel committed a
trespass concerning the devoted thing; for Achan, the son of Carmi, the
son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the
devoted thing; and the anger of the LORD was kindled against the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_jos:7:2">2</span> And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai,
which is beside Beth-aven, on the east side of Beth-el, and spoke unto
them, saying: 'Go up and spy out the land.' And the men went up and
spied out Ai. <span id="an_jos:7:3">3</span> And they returned to
Joshua, and said unto him: 'Let not all the people go up; but let about
two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai; make not all the people to
toil thither; for they are but few.' <span id="an_jos:7:4">4</span> So
there went up thither of the people about three thousand men; and they
fled before the men of Ai. <span id="an_jos:7:5">5</span> And the men of
Ai smote of them about thirty and six men; and they chased them from
before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them at the descent; and
the hearts of the people melted, and became as water. <span
id="an_jos:7:6">6</span> And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the
earth upon his face before the ark of the LORD until the evening, he and
the elders of Israel; and they put dust upon their heads. <span
id="an_jos:7:7">7</span> And Joshua said: 'Alas, O Lord GOD, wherefore
hast Thou at all brought this people over the Jordan, to deliver us into
the hand of the Amorites, to

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

cause us to perish? would that we had been content and dwelt beyond the
Jordan! <span id="an_jos:7:8">8</span> Oh, Lord, what shall I say, after
that Israel hath turned their backs before their enemies! <span
id="an_jos:7:9">9</span> For when the Canaanites and all the inhabitants
of the land hear of it, they will compass us round, and cut off our name
from the earth; and what wilt Thou do for Thy great name?'

<span id="an_jos:7:10">10</span> And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'Get
thee up; wherefore, now, art thou fallen upon thy face? <span
id="an_jos:7:11">11</span> Israel hath sinned; yea, they have even
transgressed My covenant which I commanded them; yea, they have even
taken of the devoted thing; and have also stolen, and dissembled also,
and they have even put it among their own stuff. <span
id="an_jos:7:12">12</span> Therefore the children of Israel cannot stand
before their enemies, they turn their backs before their enemies,
because they are become accursed; I will not be with you any more,
except ye destroy the accursed from among you. <span
id="an_jos:7:13">13</span> Up, sanctify the people, and say: Sanctify
yourselves against to-morrow; for thus saith the LORD, the God of
Israel: There is a curse in the midst of thee, O Israel; thou canst not
stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from
among you. <span id="an_jos:7:14">14</span> In the morning therefore ye
shall draw near by your tribes; and it shall be, that the tribe which
the LORD taketh shall come near by families; and the family which the
LORD shall take shall come near by households; and the household which
the LORD shall take shall come near man by man. <span
id="an_jos:7:15">15</span> And it shall be that he that is taken with
the devoted thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath;
because he hath transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and because he
hath wrought a wanton deed in Israel.'

<span id="an_jos:7:16">16</span> So Joshua rose up early in the morning,
and brought Israel near by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was
taken. <span id="an_jos:7:17">17</span> And he brought near the family
of Judah; and he took the family of the Zerahites. And he brought near
the family of the Zerahites man by man; and Zabdi was taken. <span
id="an_jos:7:18">18</span> And he brought near his household man by man;
and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the
tribe of Judah, was taken. <span id="an_jos:7:19">19</span> And Joshua
said unto Achan: 'My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the LORD, the God
of Israel, and make confession unto Him; and tell me now what thou hast
done; hide nothing from me.' <span id="an_jos:7:20">20</span> And Achan
answered Joshua, and said: 'Of a truth I have sinned against the LORD,
the God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done. <span
id="an_jos:7:21">21</span> When I saw among the spoil a goodly  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[a](#fn_101.md) Shinar mantle, and two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted
them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst
of my tent, and the silver under it.' <span
id="an_jos:7:22">22</span> So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto
the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.
<span id="an_jos:7:23">23</span> And they took them from the midst of
the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto all the children of
Israel; and they laid them down before the LORD. <span
id="an_jos:7:24">24</span> And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took
Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the mantle, and the wedge of
gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and
his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had; and they brought them up
unto the valley of Achor. <span id="an_jos:7:25">25</span> And Joshua
said: 'Why hast thou troubled us? the LORD shall

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

trouble thee this day.' And all Israel stoned him with stones; and they
burned them with fire, and stoned them with stones. <span
id="an_jos:7:26">26</span> And they raised over him a great heap of
stones, unto this day; and the LORD turned from the fierceness of His
anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called The valley of  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[a](#fn_102.md) Achor, unto this day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[268:a](jos007.htm#fr_104.md) That is,
*Babylonish*.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[269:a](jos007.htm#fr_105.md) That is,
*Troubling*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 8](jos008.md)

</div>
