<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos010)  [Next](jos012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 11

<span id="an_jos:11:1">1</span> And it came to pass, when Jabin king of
Hazor heard thereof, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the
king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph, <span
id="an_jos:11:2">2</span> and to the kings that were on the north, in
the hill-country and in the Arabah south of Chinneroth, and in the
Lowland, and in the regions of Dor on the west, <span
id="an_jos:11:3">3</span> to the Canaanite on the east and on the west,
and the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in
the hill-country, and the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpah.
<span id="an_jos:11:4">4</span> And they went out, they and all their
hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the
sea-shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many. <span
id="an_jos:11:5">5</span> And all these kings met together; and they
came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to fight with Israel.

<span id="an_jos:11:6">6</span> And the LORD said unto Joshua,: 'Be not
afraid because of them; for to-morrow at this time will I deliver them
up all slain before Israel; thou shalt hough their horses, and burn
their chariots with fire.' <span id="an_jos:11:7">7</span> So Joshua
came, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of
Merom suddenly, and fell upon them. <span id="an_jos:11:8">8</span> And
the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, and they smote them,
and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephoth-maim, and unto the
valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them
none remaining. <span id="an_jos:11:9">9</span> And Joshua did unto them
as the LORD bade him; he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots
with fire.

<span id="an_jos:11:10">10</span> And Joshua turned back at that time,
and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword; for Hazor

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms. <span
id="an_jos:11:11">11</span> And they smote all the souls that were
therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them; there was
none left that breathed; and he burnt Hazor with fire. <span
id="an_jos:11:12">12</span> And all the cities of those kings, and all
the kings of them, did Joshua take, and he smote them with the edge of
the sword, and utterly destroyed them; as Moses the servant of the LORD
commanded. <span id="an_jos:11:13">13</span> But as for the cities that
stood on their mounds, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only—that
did Joshua burn. <span id="an_jos:11:14">14</span> And all the spoil of
these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel took for a prey
unto themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword,
until they had destroyed them, neither left they any that breathed.
<span id="an_jos:11:15">15</span> As the LORD commanded Moses His
servant, so did Moses command Joshua; and so did Joshua; he left nothing
undone of all that the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_jos:11:16">16</span> So Joshua took all that land, the
hill-country, and all the South, and all the land of Goshen, and the
Lowland, and the Arabah, and the hill-country of Israel, and the Lowland
of the same; <span id="an_jos:11:17">17</span> from the bare mountain,
that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon under
mount Hermon; and all their kings he took, and smote them; and put them
to death. <span id="an_jos:11:18">18</span> Joshua made war a long time
with all those kings. <span id="an_jos:11:19">19</span> There was not a
city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the
inhabitants of Gibeon; they took all in battle. <span
id="an_jos:11:20">20</span> For it was of the LORD to harden their
hearts, to come against Israel in battle, that they might be utterly
destroyed, that they might have no favour, but that they might be
destroyed, as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_jos:11:21">21</span> And Joshua came at that time, and cut
off the Anakim from the hill-country, from Hebron, from Debir, from
Anab, and from all the hill-country of Judah, and from all the
hill-country of Israel; Joshua utterly destroyed them with their cities.
<span id="an_jos:11:22">22</span> There was none of the Anakim left in
the land of the children of Israel; only in Gaza, in Gath, and in
Ashdod, did some remain. <span id="an_jos:11:23">23</span> So Joshua
took the whole land, according to all that the LORD spoke unto Moses;
and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel according to their
divisions by their tribes. And the land had rest from war.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 12](jos012.md)

</div>
