<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1021)  [Next](kg2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 22

<span id="an_kg1:22:1">1</span> And they continued three years without
war between Aram and Israel. <span id="an_kg1:22:2">2</span> And it came
to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down
to the king of Israel. <span id="an_kg1:22:3">3</span> And the king of
Israel said unto his servants: \`Know ye that Ramoth-gilead is ours, and
we are still, and take it not out of the hand of the king of Aram?'
<span id="an_kg1:22:4">4</span> And he said unto Jehoshaphat: \`Wilt
thou go with me to battle to Ramoth-gilead?' And Jehoshaphat said to the
king of Israel: \`I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses
as thy horses.'

<span id="an_kg1:22:5">5</span> And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of
Israel: \`Inquire, I pray thee, at the word of the LORD to-day.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:6">6</span> Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets
together, about four hundred men, and said unto them: \`Shall I go
against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?' And they said:
\`Go up; for the LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:7">7</span> But Jehoshaphat said: \`Is there not here
besides a prophet of the LORD, that we might inquire of him?' <span
id="an_kg1:22:8">8</span> And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat:
\`There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of the LORD, Micaiah the
son of Imlah; but I hate him; for he doth not prophesy good concerning
me, but evil.' And Jehoshaphat said: \`Let not the king say so.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:9">9</span> Then the king of Israel called an officer, and
said: \`Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imlah.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:10">10</span> Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the
king of Judah sat each on his throne, arrayed in their robes, in a
threshing-floor, at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the
prophets prophesied before them. <span id="an_kg1:22:11">11</span> And
Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron, and said: \`Thus
saith the LORD: With these shalt thou gore the Arameans, until they be
consumed.' <span id="an_kg1:22:12">12</span> And all the prophets
prophesied so, saying: \`Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper; for the
LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.'

<span id="an_kg1:22:13">13</span> And the messenger that went to call
Micaiah spoke unto him, saying: \`Behold now, the words of the prophets
declare good unto the king with one mouth, let thy word, I pray thee, be
like the word of one of them, and speak thou good.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:14">14</span> And Micaiah said: \`As the LORD liveth, what
the LORD saith unto me, that will I speak.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:15">15</span> And when he was come to the king, the king
said unto him: \`Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or
shall we forbear?' And he answered him: \`Go up, and prosper; and the
LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:16">16</span> And the king said unto him: \`How many times
shall I adjure thee that thou speak unto me nothing but the truth in the
name of the LORD?' <span id="an_kg1:22:17">17</span> And he said: \`I
saw all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no
shepherd; and the LORD said: These have no master; let them return every
man to his house in peace.' <span id="an_kg1:22:18">18</span> And the
king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat: \`Did I not tell thee that he would
not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?' <span
id="an_kg1:22:19">19</span> And he said: \`Therefore hear thou the word
of the LORD. I saw the LORD sitting on His throne, and all the host of
heaven standing by Him on His right hand and on His left. <span
id="an_kg1:22:20">20</span> And the LORD said: Who shall entice Ahab,
that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one said: On this
manner; and another said:

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On that manner.
<span id="an_kg1:22:21">21</span> And there came forth the spirit, and
stood before the LORD, and said: I will entice him. <span
id="an_kg1:22:22">22</span> And the LORD said unto him: Wherewith? And
he said: I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
his prophets. And He said: Thou shalt entice him, and shalt prevail
also; go forth, and do so. <span id="an_kg1:22:23">23</span> Now
therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all
these thy prophets; and the LORD hath spoken evil concerning thee.'

<span id="an_kg1:22:24">24</span> Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah
came near, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said: \`Which way went
the spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thee?' <span
id="an_kg1:22:25">25</span> And Micaiah said: \`Behold, thou shalt see
on that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.'
<span id="an_kg1:22:26">26</span> And the king of Israel said: \`Take
Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the city, and to
Joash the king's son; <span id="an_kg1:22:27">27</span> and say: Thus
saith the king: Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with scant
bread and with scant water, until I come in peace.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:28">28</span> And Micaiah said: \`If thou return at all in
peace, the LORD hath not spoken by me.' And he said: \`Hear, ye peoples,
all of you.'

<span id="an_kg1:22:29">29</span> So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead. <span
id="an_kg1:22:30">30</span> And the king of Israel said unto
Jehoshaphat: \`I will disguise myself, and go into the battle; but put
thou on thy robes.' And the king of Israel disguised himself, and went
into the battle. <span id="an_kg1:22:31">31</span> Now the king of Aram
had commanded the thirty and two captains of his chariots, saying:
\`Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the king of
Israel.' <span id="an_kg1:22:32">32</span> And it came to pass, when the
captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said: \`Surely it is
the king of Israel'; and they turned aside to fight against him; and
Jehoshaphat cried out. <span id="an_kg1:22:33">33</span> And it came to
pass, when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of
Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him. <span
id="an_kg1:22:34">34</span> And a certain man drew his bow at a venture,
and smote the king of Israel between the lower armour and the
breastplate; wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot: \`Turn
thy hand, and carry me out of the host; for I am sore wounded.' <span
id="an_kg1:22:35">35</span> And the battle increased that day; and the
king was stayed up in his chariot against the Arameans, and died at
even; and the blood ran out of the wound into the bottom of the chariot.
<span id="an_kg1:22:36">36</span> And there went a cry throughout the
host about the going down of the sun, saying: \`Every man to his city,
and every man to his country.'

<span id="an_kg1:22:37">37</span> So the king died, and was brought to
Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria. <span
id="an_kg1:22:38">38</span> And they washed the chariot by the pool of
Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood; the harlots also washed
themselves there; according unto the word of the LORD which He spoke.

<span id="an_kg1:22:39">39</span> Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and
all that he did, and the ivory house which he built, and all the cities
that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel? <span id="an_kg1:22:40">40</span> So Ahab slept with
his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg1:22:41">41</span> And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began
to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel. <span
id="an_kg1:22:42">42</span> Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old
when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in
Jerusalem. And his mother's name

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. <span id="an_kg1:22:43">43</span> And
he walked in all the way of Asa his father; he turned not aside from it,
doing that which was right in the eyes of the LORD; <span
id="an_kg1:22:44">44</span> howbeit the high places were not taken away;
the people still sacrificed and offered in the high places. <span
id="an_kg1:22:45">45</span> And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of
Israel.

<span id="an_kg1:22:46">46</span> Now the rest of the acts of
Jehoshaphat, and his might that he showed, and how he warred, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? <span
id="an_kg1:22:47">47</span> And the remnant of the sodomites that
remained in the days of his father Asa, he put away out of the land.
<span id="an_kg1:22:48">48</span> And there was no king in Edom: a
deputy was king. <span id="an_kg1:22:49">49</span> Jehoshaphat made
ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold; but they went not; for the
ships were broken at Ezion-geber. <span id="an_kg1:22:50">50</span> Then
said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat: \`Let my servants go with
thy servants in the ships.' But Jehoshaphat would not. <span
id="an_kg1:22:51">51</span> And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and
was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; and Jehoram
his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg1:22:52">52</span> Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign
over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of
Judah, and he reigned two years over Israel. <span
id="an_kg1:22:53">53</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight
of the LORD, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his
mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Ne-bat, wherein he made
Israel to sin. <span id="an_kg1:22:54">54</span> And he served Baal, and
worshipped him, and provoked the LORD, the God of Israel, according to
all that his father had done.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 1](kg2001)

</div>
