<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1007)  [Next](kg1009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 8

<span id="an_kg1:8:1">1</span> Then Solomon assembled the elders of
Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers'
houses of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, to
bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David,
which is Zion. <span id="an_kg1:8:2">2</span> And all the men of Israel
assembled themselves unto king Solomon at the feast, in the month
Ethanim, which is the seventh month. <span id="an_kg1:8:3">3</span> And
all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark. <span
id="an_kg1:8:4">4</span> And they brought up the ark of the LORD, and
the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the Tent;
even these did the priests and the Levites bring up. <span
id="an_kg1:8:5">5</span> And king Solomon and all the congregation of
Israel, that were assembled unto him, were with him before the ark,
sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for
multitude. <span id="an_kg1:8:6">6</span> And the priests brought in the
ark of the covenant of the LORD unto its place, into the Sanctuary of
the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.
<span id="an_kg1:8:7">7</span> For the cherubim spread forth their wings
over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and the
staves thereof above. <span id="an_kg1:8:8">8</span> And the staves were
so long that the ends of the staves were seen from the holy place, even
before the Sanctuary; but they could not be seen without; and there they
are unto this day. <span id="an_kg1:8:9">9</span> There was nothing in
the ark save the two tables of stone which Moses put there at Horeb,
when the LORD made a covenant with the children of Israel when they came
out of the land of Egypt. <span id="an_kg1:8:10">10</span> And it came
to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place, that the
cloud filled the house of the LORD, <span id="an_kg1:8:11">11</span> so
that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud; for
the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_kg1:8:12">12</span> Then spoke Solomon:  
The LORD hath said that He would dwell in the thick darkness.  
<span id="an_kg1:8:13">13</span> I have surely built Thee a house of
habitation,  
A place for Thee to dwell in for ever.

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_kg1:8:14">14</span> And the king turned his face about, and
blessed all the congregation of Israel; and all the congregation of
Israel stood. <span id="an_kg1:8:15">15</span> And he said: \`Blessed be
the LORD, the God of Israel, who spoke with His mouth unto David my
father, and hath with His hand fulfilled it, saying: <span
id="an_kg1:8:16">16</span> Since the day that I brought forth My people
Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to
build a house, that My name might be there; but I chose David to be over
My people Israel. <span id="an_kg1:8:17">17</span> Now it was in the
heart of David my father to build a house for the name of the LORD, the
God of Israel. <span id="an_kg1:8:18">18</span> But the LORD said unto
David my father: Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for My
name, thou didst well that it was in thy heart; <span
id="an_kg1:8:19">19</span> nevertheless thou shalt not build the house;
but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the
house for My name. <span id="an_kg1:8:20">20</span> And the LORD hath
established His word that He spoke; for I am risen up in the room of
David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised,
and have built the house for the name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
<span id="an_kg1:8:21">21</span> And there have I set a place for the
ark, wherein is the covenant of the LORD, which He made with our
fathers, when He brought them out of the land of Egypt.'

<span id="an_kg1:8:22">22</span> And Solomon stood before the altar of
the LORD in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread
forth his hands toward heaven; <span id="an_kg1:8:23">23</span> and he
said: \`O LORD, the God of Israel, there is no God like Thee, in heaven
above, or on earth beneath; who keepest covenant and mercy with Thy
servants, that walk before Thee with all their heart; <span
id="an_kg1:8:24">24</span> who hast kept with Thy servant David my
fatherthat which Thou didst promise him; yea, Thou spokest with Thy
mouth, and hast fulfilled it with Thy hand, as it is this day. <span
id="an_kg1:8:25">25</span> Now therefore, O LORD, the God of Israel,
keep with Thy servant David my father that which Thou hast promised him,
saying: There shall not fail thee a man in My sight to sit on the throne
of Israel, if only thy children take heed to their way, to walk before
Me as thou hast walked before Me. <span id="an_kg1:8:26">26</span> Now
therefore, O God of Israel, let Thy word, I pray Thee, be verified,
which Thou didst speak unto Thy servant David my father.

<span id="an_kg1:8:27">27</span> But will God in very truth dwell on the
earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain Thee; how
much less this house that I have builded! <span
id="an_kg1:8:28">28</span> Yet have Thou respect unto the prayer of Thy
servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry
and to the prayer which Thy servant prayeth before Thee this day; <span
id="an_kg1:8:29">29</span> that Thine eyes may be open toward this house
night and day, even toward the place whereof Thou hast said: My name
shall be there; to hearken unto the prayer which Thy servant shall pray
toward this place. <span id="an_kg1:8:30">30</span> And hearken Thou to
the supplication of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, when they
shall pray toward this place; yea, hear Thou in heaven Thy
dwelling-place; and when Thou hearest, forgive.

<span id="an_kg1:8:31">31</span> If a man sin against his neighbour, and
an oath be exacted of him to cause him to swear, and he come and swear
before Thine altar in this house; 32then hear Thou in heaven, and do,
and judge Thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his
own head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his
righteousness.

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

<span id="an_kg1:8:33">33</span> When Thy people Israel are smitten down
before the enemy, when they do sin against Thee, if they turn again to
Thee, and confess Thy name, and pray and make supplication unto Thee in
this house; <span id="an_kg1:8:34">34</span> then hear Thou in heaven,
and forgive the sin of Thy people Israel, and bring them back unto the
land which Thou gavest unto their fathers.

<span id="an_kg1:8:35">35</span> When heaven is shut up, and there is no
rain, when they do sin against Thee; if they pray toward this place, and
confess Thy name, and turn from their sin, when Thou dost afflict them;
<span id="an_kg1:8:36">36</span> then hear Thou in heaven, and forgive
the sin of Thy servants, and of Thy people Israel, when Thou teachest
them the good way wherein they should walk; and send rain upon Thy land,
which Thou hast given to Thy people for an inheritance.

<span id="an_kg1:8:37">37</span> If there be in the land famine, if
there be pestilence, if there be blasting or mildew, locust or
caterpillar; if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities;
whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there be; <span
id="an_kg1:8:38">38</span> what prayer and supplication soever be made
by any man of all Thy people Israel, who shall know every man the plague
of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house; <span
id="an_kg1:8:39">39</span> then hear Thou in heaven Thy dwelling-place,
and forgive, and do, and render unto every man according to all his
ways, whose heart Thou knowest—for Thou, even Thou only, knowest the
hearts of all the children of men—<span id="an_kg1:8:40">40</span> that
they may fear Thee all the days that they live in the land which Thou
gavest unto our fathers.

<span id="an_kg1:8:41">41</span> Moreover concerning the stranger that
is not of Thy people Israel, when he shall come out of a far country for
Thy name's sake—<span id="an_kg1:8:42">42</span> for they shall hear of
Thy great name, and of Thy mighty hand, and of Thine outstretched
arm—when he shall come and pray toward this house; <span
id="an_kg1:8:43">43</span> hear Thou in heaven Thy dwelling-place, and
do according to all that the stranger calleth to Thee for; that all the
peoples of the earth may know Thy name, to fear Thee, as doth Thy people
Israel, and that they may know that Thy name is called upon this house
which I have built.

<span id="an_kg1:8:44">44</span> If Thy people go out to battle against
their enemy, by whatsoever way Thou shalt send them, and they pray unto
the LORD toward the city which Thou hast chosen, and toward the house
which I have built for Thy name; <span id="an_kg1:8:45">45</span> then
hear Thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain
their cause. <span id="an_kg1:8:46">46</span> If they sin against
Thee—for there is no man that sinneth not—and Thou be angry with them,
and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captive unto
the land of the enemy, far off or near; <span
id="an_kg1:8:47">47</span> yet if they shall bethink themselves in the
land whither they are carried captive, and turn back, and make
supplication unto Thee in the land of them that carried them captive,
saying: We have sinned, and have done iniquitously, we have dealt
wickedly; <span id="an_kg1:8:48">48</span> if they return unto Thee with
all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their enemies,
who carried them captive, and pray unto Thee toward their land, which
Thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which Thou hast chosen, and the
house which I have built for Thy name; <span
id="an_kg1:8:49">49</span> then hear Thou their prayer and their
supplication in heaven Thy dwelling-place, and maintain their cause;
<span id="an_kg1:8:50">50</span> and forgive Thy people who have sinned
against Thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have
transgressed against

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thee; and give
them compassion before those who carried them captive, that they may
have compassion on them; <span id="an_kg1:8:51">51</span> for they are
Thy people, and Thine inheritance, which Thou broughtest forth out of
Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron; <span
id="an_kg1:8:52">52</span> that Thine eyes may be open unto the
supplication of Thy servant, and unto the supplication of Thy people
Israel, to hearken unto them whensoever they cry unto Thee. <span
id="an_kg1:8:53">53</span> For Thou didst set them apart from among all
the peoples of the earth, to be Thine inheritance, as Thou didst speak
by the hand of Moses Thy servant, when Thou broughtest our fathers out
of Egypt, O Lord GOD.'

<span id="an_kg1:8:54">54</span> And it was so, that when Solomon had
made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto the LORD,
he arose from before the altar of the LORD, from kneeling on his knees
with his hands spread forth toward heaven. <span
id="an_kg1:8:55">55</span> And he stood, and blessed all the
congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying: <span
id="an_kg1:8:56">56</span> \`Blessed be the LORD, that hath given rest
unto His people Israel, according to all that He promised; there hath
not failed one word of all His good promise, which He promised by the
hand of Moses His servant. <span id="an_kg1:8:57">57</span> The LORD our
God be. with us, as He was with our fathers; let Him not leave us, nor
forsake us; <span id="an_kg1:8:58">58</span> that He may incline our
hearts unto Him, to walk in all His ways, and to keep His commandments,
and His statutes, and His ordinances, which He commanded our fathers.
<span id="an_kg1:8:59">59</span> And let these my words, wherewith I
have made supplication before the LORD, be nigh unto the LORD our God
day and night, that He maintain the cause of His servant, and the cause
of His people Israel, as every day shall require; <span
id="an_kg1:8:60">60</span> that allthe peoples of the earth may know
that the LORD, He is God; there is none else. <span
id="an_kg1:8:61">61</span> Let your heart therefore be whole with the
LORD our God, to walk in His statutes, and to keep His commandments, as
at this day.'

<span id="an_kg1:8:62">62</span> And the king, and all Israel with him,
offered sacrifice before the LORD. <span id="an_kg1:8:63">63</span>  And
Solomon offered for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which He offered
unto the LORD, two and twenty thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty
thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel dedicated the
house of the LORD. <span id="an_kg1:8:64">64</span> The same day did the
king hallow the middle of the court that was before the house of the
LORD; for there he offered the burnt-offering, and the meal-offering,
and the fat of the peace-offerings; because the brazen altar that was
before the LORD was too little to receive the burnt-offering, and the
meal-offering, and the fat of the peace-offerings.

<span id="an_kg1:8:65">65</span> So Solomon held the feast at that time,
and all Israel with him, a great congregation, from the entrance of
Hamath unto the Brook of Egypt, before the LORD our God, seven days and
seven days, even fourteen days. <span id="an_kg1:8:66">66</span> On the
eighth day he sent the people away, and they blessed the king, and went
unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that the
LORD had shown unto David His servant, and to Israel His people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 9](kg1009)

</div>
