<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Kings Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1019)  [Next](kg1021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 20

<span id="an_kg1:20:1">1</span> And Ben-hadad the king of Aram gathered
all his host together; and there were thirty and two kings with him, and
horses and chariots; and he went up and besieged Samaria, and fought
against it. <span id="an_kg1:20:2">2</span> And he sent messengers to
Ahab king of Israel, into the city, <span id="an_kg1:20:3">3</span> and
said unto him: \`Thus saith Ben-hadad: Thy silver and thy gold is mine;
thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:4">4</span> And the king of Israel answered and said: \`It
is according to thy saying, my lord, O king: I am thine, and all that I
have.' <span id="an_kg1:20:5">5</span> And the messengers came again,
and said: \`Thus speaketh Ben-hadad, saying: I sent indeed unto thee,
saying: Thou shalt deliver me thy silver and thy gold, and thy wives,
and thy children; <span id="an_kg1:20:6">6</span> but I will send my
servants unto thee to-morrow about this time, and they shall search thy
house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall be, that whatsoever
is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in their hand, and take it
away.'

<span id="an_kg1:20:7">7</span> Then the king of Israel called all the
elders of the land, and said: \`Mark, I pray you, and see how this man
seeketh mischief; for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my children,
and for my silver, and for my gold; and I denied him not.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:8">8</span> And all the elders and all the people said
unto him: \`Hearken thou not, neither consent.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:9">9</span> Wherefore he said unto the messengers of
Ben-hadad: \`Tell my lord the king: All that thou didst send for to thy
servant at the first I will do; but this thing I may not do.' And the
messengers departed, and brought him back word. <span
id="an_kg1:20:10">10</span> And Ben-hadad sent unto him, and said: \`The
gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice
for handfuls for all the people that follow me.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:11">11</span> And the king of Israel answered and said:
\`Tell him: Let not him that girdeth on his armour boast himself as he
that putteth it off.' <span id="an_kg1:20:12">12</span> And it came to
pass, when \[Ben-hadad\] heard this message, as he was drinking, he and
the kings, in the booths, that he said unto his servants: \`Set
yourselves in array.' And they set themselves in array against the city.

<span id="an_kg1:20:13">13</span> And, behold, a prophet came near unto
Ahab king of Israel, and said: \`Thus saith the LORD: Hast thou seen all
this great multitude? behold, I will deliver it into thy hand this day;
and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:14">14</span> And Ahab said: \`By whom?' And he said:
\`Thus saith the LORD: By the young men of the princes of the
provinces.' Then he said: \`Who shall begin the battle?' And he
answered: \`Thou.' <span id="an_kg1:20:15">15</span> Then he numbered
the young men of the princes of the provinces, and they were

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

two hundred and thirty-two; and after them he numbered all the people,
even all the children of Israel, being seven thousand.

<span id="an_kg1:20:16">16</span> And they went out at noon. But
Ben-hadad was drinking himself drunk in the booths, he and the kings,
the thirty and two kings that helped him. <span
id="an_kg1:20:17">17</span> And the young men of the princes of the
provinces went out first; and Ben-hadad sent out, and they told him,
saying: \`There are men come out from Samaria.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:18">18</span> And he said: \`Whether they are come out for
peace, take them alive; or whether they are come out for war, take them
alive.' <span id="an_kg1:20:19">19</span> So these went out of the city,
the young men of the princes of the provinces, and the army which
followed them. <span id="an_kg1:20:20">20</span> And they slew every one
his man; and the Arameans fled, and Israel pursued them; and Benhadad
the king of Aram escaped on a horse with horsemen. <span
id="an_kg1:20:21">21</span> And the king of Israel went out, and smote
the horses and chariots, and slew the Arameans with a great slaughter.
<span id="an_kg1:20:22">22</span> And the prophet came near to the king
of Israel, and said unto him: \`Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and
see what thou doest; for at the return of the year the king of Aram will
come up against thee.'

<span id="an_kg1:20:23">23</span> And the servants of the king of Aram
said unto him: \`Their God is a God of the hills; therefore they were
stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely
we shall be stronger than they. <span id="an_kg1:20:24">24</span> And do
this thing: take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put
governors in their room: <span id="an_kg1:20:25">25</span> and number
thee an army, like the army that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and
chariot for chariot; and we will fight against them in the plain, and
surely we shall be stronger than they.' And he hearkened unto their
voice, and did so.

<span id="an_kg1:20:26">26</span> And it came to pass at the return of
the year, that Ben-hadad mustered the Arameans, and went up to Aphek, to
fight against Israel. <span id="an_kg1:20:27">27</span> And the children
of Israel were mustered, and were victualled, and went against them; and
the children of Israel encamped before them like two little flocks cf
kids; but the Arameans filled the country. <span
id="an_kg1:20:28">28</span> And a man of God came near and spoke unto
the king of Israel, and said: \`Thus saith the LORD: Because the
Arameans have said: The LORD is a God of the hills, but he is not a God
of the valleys; therefore will I deliver all this great multitude into
thy hand, and ye shall know that I am the LORD.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:29">29</span> And they encamped one over against the other
seven days. And so it was, that in the seventh day the battle was
joined; and the children of Israel slew of the Arameans a hundred
thousand footmen in one day. <span id="an_kg1:20:30">30</span> But the
rest fled to Aphek, into the city; and the wall fell upon twenty and
seven thousand men that were left. And Ben-hadad fled, and came into the
city, into an inner chamber.

<span id="an_kg1:20:31">31</span> And his servants said unto him:
\`Behold now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are
merciful kings; let us, we pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and
ropes upon our heads, and go out to the king of Israel; peradventure he
will save thy life.' <span id="an_kg1:20:32">32</span> So they girded
sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their heads, and came to the
king of Israel, and said: \`Thy servant Ben-hadad saith: I pray thee,
let me live.' And he said: \`Is he yet alive? he is my brother.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:33">33</span> Now the men took it for a sign, and hastened
to catch it from

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

him; and they said: \`Thy brother Ben-hadad.' Then he said: \`Go ye,
bring him.' Then Ben-hadad came forth to him; and he caused him to come
up into his chariot. <span id="an_kg1:20:34">34</span> And \[Ben-hadad\]
said unto him: \`The cities which my father took from thy father I will
restore; and thou shalt make streets for thee in Damascus, as my father
made in Samaria.' \`And I \[,said Ahab,\] will let thee go with this
covenant.' So he made a covenant with him, and let him go.

<span id="an_kg1:20:35">35</span> And a certain man of the sons of the
prophets said unto his fellow by the word of the LORD: \`Smite me, I
pray thee.' And the man refused to smite him. <span
id="an_kg1:20:36">36</span> Then said he unto him: \`Because thou hast
not hearkened to the voice of the LORD, behold, as soon as thou art
departed from me, a lion shall slay thee.' And as soon as he was
departed from him, a lion found him; and slew him. <span
id="an_kg1:20:37">37</span> Then he found another man, and said: \`Smite
me, I pray thee.' And the man smote him, smiting and wounding him. <span
id="an_kg1:20:38">38</span> So the prophet departed, and waited for the
king by the way, and disguised himself with his headband over his eyes.
<span id="an_kg1:20:39">39</span> And as the king passed by, he cried
unto the king; and he said: \`Thy servant went out into the midst of the
battle; and, behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and
said: Keep this man; if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life
be for his life, or else thou shalt pay a talent of silver. <span
id="an_kg1:20:40">40</span> And as thy servant was busy here and there,
he was gone.' And the king of Israel said unto him: \`So shall thy
judgment be; thyself hast decided it.' <span
id="an_kg1:20:41">41</span> And he hastened, and took the headband away'
from his eyes; and the king of Israel discerned him that he was of the
prophets. <span id="an_kg1:20:42">42</span> And he said unto him: \`Thus
saith the LORD: Because thou hast let go out of thy hand the man whom I
had devoted to destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life,
and thy people for his people.' <span id="an_kg1:20:43">43</span> And
the king of Israel went to his house sullen and displeased, and came to
Samaria.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 21](kg1021.md)

</div>
