<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1000)  [Next](kg1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 2

<span id="an_kg1:2:1">1</span> Now the days of David drew nigh that he
should die; and he charged Solomon his son, saying: <span
id="an_kg1:2:2">2</span> \`I go the way of all the earth; be thou strong
therefore, and show thyself a man; <span id="an_kg1:2:3">3</span> and
keep the charge of the LORD thy God, to walk in His ways, to keep His
statutes, and His commandments, and His ordinances, and His testimonies,
according to that which is written in the law of Moses, that thou mayest
prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest thyself;
<span id="an_kg1:2:4">4</span> that the LORD may establish His word
which He spoke concerning me, saying: If thy children take heed to their
way, to walk before Me in truth with all their heart and with all their
soul, there shall not fail thee, said He, a man on the throne of Israel.
<span id="an_kg1:2:5">5</span> Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the
son of Zeruiah did unto me, even what he did to the two captains of the
hosts of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner and unto Amasa the son of
Jether, whom he slew, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the
blood of war upon his girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes
that were on his feet. <span id="an_kg1:2:6">6</span> Do therefore
according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down to the grave
in peace. 'But show kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite,
and let them be of those that eat at thy table; for so they drew nigh
unto me when I

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

fled from Absalom thy brother. <span id="an_kg1:2:8">8</span> And,
behold, there is with thee Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite, of
Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to
Mahanaim; but he came down to meet nie at the Jordan, and I swore to him
by the LORD, saying: I will not put thee to death with the sword. <span
id="an_kg1:2:9">9</span> Now therefore hold him not guiltless, for thou
art a wise man; and thou wilt know what thou oughtest to do unto him,
and thou shalt bring his hoar head down to the grave with blood.'

<span id="an_kg1:2:10">10</span> And David slept with his fathers, and
was buried in the city of David. <span id="an_kg1:2:11">11</span> And
the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years: seven years
reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in
Jerusalem. <span id="an_kg1:2:12">12</span> And Solomon sat upon the
throne of David his father; and his kingdom was established firmly.

<span id="an_kg1:2:13">13</span> Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came
to Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon. And she said: Comest thou
peaceably?' And he said: 'Peaceably.' <span
id="an_kg1:2:14">14</span> He said moreover: \`I have somewhat to say
unto thee.' And she said: \`Say on.' <span
id="an_kg1:2:15">15</span> And he said: \`Thou knowest that the kingdom
was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should
reign; howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and is become my brother's;
for it was his from the LORD. <span id="an_kg1:2:16">16</span> And now I
ask one petition of thee, deny me not.' And she said unto him: \`Say
on.' <span id="an_kg1:2:17">17</span> And he said: \`Speak, I pray thee,
unto Solomon the king for he will not say thee nay—that he give me
Abishag the Shunammite to wife.' <span id="an_kg1:2:18">18</span> And
Bath-sheba said: \`Well; I will speak for thee unto the king.'

<span id="an_kg1:2:19">19</span> Bath-sheba therefore went unto king
Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonijah. And the king rose up tomeet
her, and bowed down unto her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a
throne to be set for the king's mother; and she sat on his right hand.
<span id="an_kg1:2:20">20</span> Then she said: \`I ask one small
petition of thee; deny me not.' And the king said unto her: \`Ask on, my
mother; for I will not deny thee.' <span id="an_kg1:2:21">21</span> And
she said: \`Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother
to wife.' <span id="an_kg1:2:22">22</span> And king Solomon answered and
said unto his mother: \`And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for
Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom also; for he is mine elder brother;
even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of
Zeruiah.' <span id="an_kg1:2:23">23</span> Then king Solomon swore by
the LORD, saying: \`God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah have not
spoken this word against his own life. <span
id="an_kg1:2:24">24</span> Now therefore as the LORD liveth, who hath
established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who
hath made me a house, as He promised, surely Adonijah shall be put to
death this day.' <span id="an_kg1:2:25">25</span> And king Solomon sent
by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he fell upon him, so
that he died.

<span id="an_kg1:2:26">26</span> And unto Abiathar the priest said the
king: \`Get thee to Anathoth, unto thine own fields; for thou art
deserving of death; but I will not at this time put thee to death,
because thou didst bear the ark of the Lord Gon before David my father,
and because thou vast afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.'
<span id="an_kg1:2:27">27</span> So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from
being priest unto the LORD; that the word of the LORD might be
fulfilled, which He spoke concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.

<span id="an_kg1:2:28">28</span> And the tidings came to Joab; for Joab
had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom.

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Joab fled unto
the Tent of the LORD, and caught hold on the horns of the altar. <span
id="an_kg1:2:29">29</span> And it was told king Solomon: 'Joab is fled
unto the Tent of the LORD, and, behold, he is by the altar.' Then
Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying: \`Go, fall upon him.'
<span id="an_kg1:2:30">30</span> And Benaiah came to the Tent of the
LORD, and said unto him: \`Thus saith the king: Come forth.' And he
said: \`Nay; but I will die here.' And Benaiah brought back word unto
the king, saying: \`Thus said Joab, and thus he answered me.' <span
id="an_kg1:2:31">31</span> And the king said unto him: 'Do as he hath
said, and fall upon him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the
blood, which Joab shed without cause, from me and from my father's
house. <span id="an_kg1:2:32">32</span> And the LORD will return his
blood upon his own head, because he fell upon two men more righteous and
better than he, and slew them with the sword, and my father David knew
it not: Abner the son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and Amasa
the son of Jether, captain of the host of Judah. <span
id="an_kg1:2:33">33</span> So shall their blood return upon the head of
Joab, and upon the head of his seed for ever; but unto David, and unto
his seed, and unto his house, and unto his throne, shall there be peace
for ever from the LORD.' <span id="an_kg1:2:34">34</span> Then Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and slew him; and he was
buried in his own house in the wilderness. <span
id="an_kg1:2:35">35</span> And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada
in his room over the host; and Zadok the priest did the king put in the
room of Abiathar.

<span id="an_kg1:2:36">36</span> And the king sent and called for
Shimei, and said unto him: \`Build thee a house in Jerusalem, and dwell
there, and go not forth thence any whither. <span
id="an_kg1:2:37">37</span> For on the day thou goest out, and passest
over the brook Kidron, know thou for certain that thou shalt surely die;
thy blood shall be upon thine own head.' <span
id="an_kg1:2:38">38</span> And Shimei said unto the king: \`The saying
is good; as my lord the king hath said, so will thy servant do.' And
Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days.

<span id="an_kg1:2:39">39</span> And it came to pass at the end of three
years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish, son of
Maacah, king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying: \`Behold, thy
servants are in Gath.' <span id="an_kg1:2:40">40</span> And Shimei
arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Gath to Achish, to seek his
servants; and Shimei went, and brought his servants from Gath. <span
id="an_kg1:2:41">41</span> And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone
from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come back. <span
id="an_kg1:2:42">42</span> And the king sent and called for Shimei, and
said unto him: \`Did I not make thee to swear by the LORD, and
forewarned thee, saying: Know for certain, that on the day thou goest
out, and walkest abroad any whither, thou shalt surely die? and thou
saidst unto me: The saying is good; I have heard it. <span
id="an_kg1:2:43">43</span> Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the
LORD, and the commandment that I have charged thee with?' <span
id="an_kg1:2:44">44</span> The king said moreover to Shimei: \`Thou
knowest all the wickedness which thy heart is privy to, that thou didst
to David my father; therefore the LORD shall return thy wickedness upon
thine own head. <span id="an_kg1:2:45">45</span> But king Solomon shall
be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the LORD
for ever.' <span id="an_kg1:2:46">46</span> So the king commanded
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he went out, and fell upon him, so that
he died.

And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 3](kg1003)

</div>
