<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1005)  [Next](kg1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 6

<span id="an_kg1:6:1">1</span> And it came to pass in the four hundred
and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the
land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the
month Ziv, which is the second month, that he began to build the house
of the LORD. <span id="an_kg1:6:2">2</span> And the house which king
Solomon built for the LORD, the length thereof was threescore cubits,and
the breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits.
<span id="an_kg1:6:3">3</span> And the porch before  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[b](#fn_134) the temple of the house, twenty cubits
was the length thereof, according to the breadth of the house; and ten
cubits was the breadth thereof before the house. <span
id="an_kg1:6:4">4</span> And for the house he made windows broad within,
and narrow without. <span id="an_kg1:6:5">5</span> And against the wall
of the house he built a side-structure round about, against the walls of
the house round about, both of the temple and of  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[c](#fn_135) the Sanctuary; and he made side-chambers
round about; <span id="an_kg1:6:6">6</span> the nethermost story of the
side-structure was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits
broad, and the third was seven cubits broad; for on the outside he made
rebatements in the wall of the house round about, that the beams should
not have hold in the walls of the house.—<span
id="an_kg1:6:7">7</span> For the house, when it was in building, was
built of stone made ready at the quarry; and there was neither hammer
nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in
building.—<span id="an_kg1:6:8">8</span> The door for the  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[d](#fn_136) lowest row of chambers was in the right
side of the house; and they went up by winding stairs into the middle
row, and out of the middle into the third. <span
id="an_kg1:6:9">9</span> So he built the house, and finished it; and he
covered in the house with planks of cedar over beams. <span
id="an_kg1:6:10">10</span> And he built the stories of the
side-structure against all the house, each five cubits high; and they
rested on the house with timber of cedar.

<span id="an_kg1:6:11">11</span> And the word of the LORD came to
Solomon, saying: <span id="an_kg1:6:12">12</span> As for this house
which thou art building, if thou wilt walk in My statutes, and execute
Mine ordinances, and keep all My commandments to walk in them; then will
I establish My word with thee, which I spoke unto David thy father;

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

<span id="an_kg1:6:13">13</span> in that I will dwell therein among the
children of Israel, and will not forsake My people Israel.'

<span id="an_kg1:6:14">14</span> So Solomon built the house, and
finished it. <span id="an_kg1:6:15">15</span> And he built the walls of
the house within with boards of cedar; from the floor of the house unto
the joists of the ceiling, he covered them on the inside with wood; and
he covered the floor of the house with boards of cypress. <span
id="an_kg1:6:16">16</span> And he built twenty cubits on the hinder part
of the house with boards of cedar from the floor unto the joists; he
even built them for himself within, for a Sanctuary, even for the most
holy place. <span id="an_kg1:6:17">17</span> And the house, that is, the
temple before \[the Sanctuary\], was forty cubits long. <span
id="an_kg1:6:18">18</span> And the cedar on the house within was carved
with knops and open flowers; all was cedar; there was no stone seen.
<span id="an_kg1:6:19">19</span> And he prepared the Sanctuary in the
midst of the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of the
LORD. <span id="an_kg1:6:20">20</span> And before the Sanctuary which
was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty
cubits in the height thereof, overlaid with pure gold, he set an altar,
which he covered with cedar. <span id="an_kg1:6:21">21</span> So Solomon
overlaid  <span id="fr_141"></span>[a](#fn_137) the house within with
pure gold; and he drew chains of gold across the wall before the
Sanctuary; and he overlaid it with gold. <span
id="an_kg1:6:22">22</span> And the whole house he overlaid with gold,
until all the house was finished; also the whole altar that belonged to
the Sanctuary he overlaid with gold.

<span id="an_kg1:6:23">23</span> And in the Sanctuary he made two
cherubim of olive-wood, each ten cubits high. <span
id="an_kg1:6:24">24</span> And five cubits was the one wing of the
cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub; from the uttermost
part of the one wing unto the uttermost part of the other were ten
cubits. <span id="an_kg1:6:25">25</span> And the othercherub was ten
cubits; both the cherubim were of one measure and one form. <span
id="an_kg1:6:26">26</span> The height of the one cherub was ten cubits,
and so was it of the other cherub. <span id="an_kg1:6:27">27</span> And
he set the cherubim within the inner house; and the wings of the
cherubim were stretched forth, so that the wing of the one touched the
one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall; and
their wings touched one another in the midst of the house. <span
id="an_kg1:6:28">28</span> And he overlaid the cherubim with gold.

<span id="an_kg1:6:29">29</span> And he carved all the walls of the
house round about with carved figures of cherubim and palm-trees and
open flowers, within and without. <span id="an_kg1:6:30">30</span> And
the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, within and without. <span
id="an_kg1:6:31">31</span> And for the entrance of the Sanctuary he made
doors of olive-wood, the doorposts within the frame having five angles.
<span id="an_kg1:6:32">32</span> And as for the two doors of olive-wood,
he carved upon them carvings of cherubim and palm-trees and open
flowers, and overlaid them with gold; and he spread the gold upon the
cherubim, and upon the palm-trees. <span id="an_kg1:6:33">33</span> So
also made he for the entrance of the temple door-posts of olive-wood,
within a frame foursquare; <span id="an_kg1:6:34">34</span> and two
doors of cypress-wood; the two leaves of the one door were folding, and
the two leaves of the other door were folding. <span
id="an_kg1:6:35">35</span> And he carved thereon cherubim and palm-trees
and open flowers; and he overlaid them with gold fitted upon the graven
work. <span id="an_kg1:6:36">36</span> And he built the inner court with
three rows of hewn stone, and a row of cedar beams.

<span id="an_kg1:6:37">37</span> In the fourth year was the foundation
of the house of the LORD laid, in the month Ziv. <span
id="an_kg1:6:38">38</span> And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul,
which is the eighth month, was the house

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

finished throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the
fashion of it. So was he seven years in building it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_134"></span>[409:b](kg1006.htm#fr_138) That is, the holy
place.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[409:c](kg1006.htm#fr_139) Heb. *debir*, that
is, the hindmost or innermost room, the most holy place.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[409:d](kg1006.htm#fr_140) Heb. *middle*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[410:a](kg1006.htm#fr_141) That is, the
Sanctuary.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 7](kg1007)

</div>
