<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Kings Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1013)  [Next](kg1015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 14

<span id="an_kg1:14:1">1</span> At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam
fell sick. <span id="an_kg1:14:2">2</span> And Jeroboam said to his
wife: \`Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known
to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get thee to Shiloh; behold, there is
Ahijah the prophet, who spoke concerning me that I should be king over
this people. <span id="an_kg1:14:3">3</span> And take with thee ten
loaves, and biscuits, and a cruse of honey, and go to him; he will tell
thee what shall become of the child.' <span
id="an_kg1:14:4">4</span> And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, and
went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not
see; for his eyes were set by reason of his age. <span
id="an_kg1:14:5">5</span> Now the LORD had said unto Ahijah: \`Behold,
the wife of Jeroboam cometh to inquire of thee concerning her son; for
he is sick; thus and thus shalt thou say unto her; for it will be, when
she cometh in, that she will feign herself to be another woman.'

<span id="an_kg1:14:6">6</span> And it was so, when Ahijah heard the
sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said: \`Come in,
thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am
sent to thee with heavy tidings. <span id="an_kg1:14:7">7</span> Go,
tell Jeroboam: Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Forasmuch as I
exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over My people
Israel, <span id="an_kg1:14:8">8</span> and rent the kingdom away from
the house of David, and gave it thee; and yet thou hast not been as My
servant David, who kept My commandments, and who followed Me with all
his heart, to do that only which was right in Mine eyes; <span
id="an_kg1:14:9">9</span> but hast done evil above all that were before
thee, and hast gone and made thee other gods, and molten images, to
provoke Me, and hast cast Me behind thy back; <span
id="an_kg1:14:10">10</span> therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon
the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam every man-child,
and him that is shut up and him that is left at large in Israel, and
will utterly sweep away the house of Jeroboam, as a man sweepeth away
dung, till it be all gone. <span id="an_kg1:14:11">11</span> Him that
dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth in
the field shall the fowls of the air eat; for the LORD hath spoken it.
<span id="an_kg1:14:12">12</span> Arise thou therefore, get thee to thy
house; and when thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die. <span
id="an_kg1:14:13">13</span> And all Israel shall make lamentation for
him, and bury him; for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave;
because in him there is found some good thing toward the LORD, the God
of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam. <span
id="an_kg1:14:14">14</span> Moreover the LORD will raise Him up a king
over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day. But what
is it even then? <span id="an_kg1:14:15">15</span> for the LORD will
smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water; and He will root up
Israel out of this good land, which He gave to their fathers, and will
scatter them beyond the River; because they have made their Asherim,
provoking the LORD. <span id="an_kg1:14:16">16</span> And He will give
Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, which he hath sinned, and
wherewith he hath made Israel to sin.'

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

<span id="an_kg1:14:17">17</span> And Jeroboam's wife arose, and
departed, and came to Tirzah; and as she came to the threshold of the
house, the child died. <span id="an_kg1:14:18">18</span> And all Israel
buried him, and made lamentation for him; according to the word of the
LORD, which He spoke by the hand of His servant Ahijah the prophet.

<span id="an_kg1:14:19">19</span> And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam,
how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. <span
id="an_kg1:14:20">20</span> And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two
and twenty years; and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg1:14:21">21</span> And Rehoboam the son of Solomon
reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty and one years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the
LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put His name there;
and his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess. <span
id="an_kg1:14:22">22</span> And Judah did that which was evil in the
sight of the LORD; and they moved Him to jealousy with their sins which
they committed, above all that their fathers had done. <span
id="an_kg1:14:23">23</span> For they also built them high places, and
pillars, and Asherim, on every high hill, and under every leafy tree;
<span id="an_kg1:14:24">24</span> and there were also sodomites in the
land; they did according to all the abominations of the nations which
the LORD drove out before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_kg1:14:25">25</span> And it came to pass in the fifth year
of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem;
<span id="an_kg1:14:26">26</span> and he took away the treasures of the
house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house; he even took
away all; and he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had
made. <span id="an_kg1:14:27">27</span> And king Rehoboammade in their
stead shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains
of the guard, who kept the door of the king's house. <span
id="an_kg1:14:28">28</span> And it was so, that as oft as the king went
into the house of the LORD, the guard bore them, and brought them back
into the guard-chamber.

<span id="an_kg1:14:29">29</span> Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam,
and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah? <span id="an_kg1:14:30">30</span> And there was
war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. <span
id="an_kg1:14:31">31</span> And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the city of David; and his mother's name was
Naamah the Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 15](kg1015.md)

</div>
