<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Kings Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1009)  [Next](kg1011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 10

<span id="an_kg1:10:1">1</span> And when the queen of Sheba heard of the
fame of Solomon because of the name of the LORD, she came to prove him
with hard questions. <span id="an_kg1:10:2">2</span> And she came to
Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bore spices and gold
very much, and precious stones; and when she was come to Solomon, she
spoke with him of all that was in her heart. <span
id="an_kg1:10:3">3</span> And Solomon told her all her questions; there
was not any thing hid from the king which he told her not. <span
id="an_kg1:10:4">4</span> And when the queen of Sheba had seen all the
wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built, <span
id="an_kg1:10:5">5</span> and the food of his table, and the sitting of
his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel,
and his cupbearers, and his burnt-offering which he offeredin the house
of the LORD, there was no more spirit in her. <span
id="an_kg1:10:6">6</span> And she said to the king: \`It was a true
report that I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom.
<span id="an_kg1:10:7">7</span> Howbeit I believed not the words, until
I came, and mine eyes had seen it; and, behold, the half was not told
me; thou hast wisdom and prosperity exceeding the fame which I heard.
<span id="an_kg1:10:8">8</span> Happy are thy men, happy are these thy
servants, that stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.
<span id="an_kg1:10:9">9</span> Blessed be the LORD thy God, who
delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel; because the LORD
loved Israel for ever, therefore made He thee king, to do justice and
righteousness.' <span id="an_kg1:10:10">10</span> And she gave the king
a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store,
and precious stones; there came no more such abundance of spices as
these which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon. <span
id="an_kg1:10:11">11</span> And the navy also of Hiram, that brought
gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of sandal-wood and
precious stones. <span id="an_kg1:10:12">12</span> And the king made of
the sandal-wood pillars for the house of the LORD, and for the king's
house, harps also and psalteries for the singers; there came no such
sandal-wood, nor was seen, unto this day. <span
id="an_kg1:10:13">13</span> And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba
all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which Solomon gave her
of his royal bounty. So she turned, and went to her own land, she and
her servants.

<span id="an_kg1:10:14">14</span> Now the weight of gold that came to
Solomon in one year was six hundred threescore and six talents of gold,
<span id="an_kg1:10:15">15</span> beside that which came of the
merchants, and of the traffic of the traders, and of all the kings of
the mingled people and of the governors of

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

the country. <span id="an_kg1:10:16">16</span> And king Solomon made two
hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of gold went to one
target. <span id="an_kg1:10:17">17</span> And he made three hundred
shields of beaten gold: three pounds of gold went to one shield; and the
king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.

<span id="an_kg1:10:18">18</span> Moreover the king made a great throne
of ivory, and overlaid it with the finest gold. <span
id="an_kg1:10:19">19</span> There were six steps to the throne, and the
top of the throne was round behind; and there were arms on either side
by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside the arms. <span
id="an_kg1:10:20">20</span> And twelve lions stood there on the one side
and on the other upon the six steps; there was not the like made in any
kingdom.

<span id="an_kg1:10:21">21</span> And all king Solomon's
drinking-vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the
forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of silver; it was nothing
accounted of in the days of Solomon. <span
id="an_kg1:10:22">22</span> For the king had at sea a navy of Tarshish
with the navy of Hiram; once every three years came the navy of
Tarshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

<span id="an_kg1:10:23">23</span> So king Solomon exceeded all the kings
of the earth in riches and in wisdom. <span
id="an_kg1:10:24">24</span> And all the earth sought the presence of
Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart. <span
id="an_kg1:10:25">25</span> And they brought every man his present,
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, and armour, and
spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.

<span id="an_kg1:10:26">26</span> And Solomon gathered together chariots
and horsemen; and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities, and
with the king at Jerusalem. <span id="an_kg1:10:27">27</span> And the
king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be
as the sycomore-trees that are in the Lowland, for abundance. <span
id="an_kg1:10:28">28</span> And the horses which Solomon had were
brought out of Egypt; also out of Keveh, the king's merchants buying
them of the men of Keveh at a price. <span
id="an_kg1:10:29">29</span> And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt
for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty;
and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Aram, did
they bring them out by their means.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 11](kg1011.md)

</div>
