<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1018)  [Next](kg1020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 19

<span id="an_kg1:19:1">1</span> And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah
had done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.
<span id="an_kg1:19:2">2</span> Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto
Elijah, saying: \`So let the gods do \[to me\], and more also, if I make
not thy life as the life of one of them by to-morrow about this time.'
<span id="an_kg1:19:3">3</span> And when he saw that, he arose, and went
for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left
his servant there. <span id="an_kg1:19:4">4</span> But he himself went a
day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a
broom-tree; and he requested for himself that he might die; and said:
\`It is enough; now, O LORD, take away my life; for I am not better than
my fathers.' <span id="an_kg1:19:5">5</span> And he lay down and slept
under a broom-tree; and, behold, an angel touched him, and said unto
him: \`Arise and eat.' <span id="an_kg1:19:6">6</span> And he looked,
and, behold, there was at his head a cake baked on the hot stones, and a
cruse of water. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again. <span
id="an_kg1:19:7">7</span> And the angel of the LORD came again the
second time, and touched him, and said: \`Arise and eat; because the
journey is too great for thee.' <span id="an_kg1:19:8">8</span> And he
arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meal
forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.

<span id="an_kg1:19:9">9</span> And he came thither unto a cave, and
lodged there; and, behold, the word of the LORD came to him, and He said
unto him: \`What doest thou here, Elijah?' <span
id="an_kg1:19:10">10</span> And he said: \`I have been very jealous for
the LORD, the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken Thy
covenant, thrown down Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.' <span id="an_kg1:19:11">11</span> And He said: \`Go forth, and
stand upon the mount before the LORD.' And, behold, the LORD passed by,
and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and broke in pieces the
rocks before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind; and after the
wind an earthquake; but the LORD was not in the earthquake; <span
id="an_kg1:19:12">12</span> and after the earthquake a fire; but the
LORD was not in the fire; and after the fire a still small voice. <span
id="an_kg1:19:13">13</span> And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he
wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entrance
of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said: \`What
doest thou here, Elijah?' <span id="an_kg1:19:14">14</span> And he said:
\`I have been very jealous for the LORD, the God of hosts; for the
children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant, thrown down Thine altars,
and slain Thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and
they seek my life, to take it away.'

<span id="an_kg1:19:15">15</span> And the LORD said unto him: \`Go,
return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus; and when thou comest,
thou shalt anoint Hazael to be king over Aram; <span
id="an_kg1:19:16">16</span> and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint
to be king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah
shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room. <span
id="an_kg1:19:17">17</span> And it shall come to pass, that him that
escapeth from the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay; and him that escapeth
from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay. <span
id="an_kg1:19:18">18</span> Yet will I leave seven thousand in Israel,
all the knees which

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.'

<span id="an_kg1:19:19">19</span> So he departed thence, and found
Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was plowing, with twelve yoke of oxen
before him, and he with the twelfth; and Elijah passed over unto him,
and cast his mantle upon him. <span id="an_kg1:19:20">20</span> And he
left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said: \`Let me, I pray thee,
kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee.' And he said
unto him: \`Go back; for what have I done to thee?' <span
id="an_kg1:19:21">21</span> And he returned from following him, and took
the yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled their flesh with the
instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the people, and they did eat.
Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 20](kg1020)

</div>
