<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Kings Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1006)  [Next](kg1008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 7

<span id="an_kg1:7:1">1</span> And Solomon was building his own house
thirteen years, and he finished all his house.

<span id="an_kg1:7:2">2</span> For he built the house of the forest of
Lebanon: the length thereof was a hundred cubits, and the breadth
thereof fifty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four
rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars. <span
id="an_kg1:7:3">3</span> And it was covered with cedar above upon the
side-chambers, that lay on forty and five pillars, fifteen in a row.
<span id="an_kg1:7:4">4</span> And there were beams in three rows; and
light was over against light in three ranks. <span
id="an_kg1:7:5">5</span> And all the doors with their posts were square
in the frame; and light was over against light in three ranks.

<span id="an_kg1:7:6">6</span> And he made the porch of pillars: the
length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits;
and a porch before them; and pillars and thick beams before them.

<span id="an_kg1:7:7">7</span> And he made the porch of the throne where
he might judge, even the porch of judgment; and it was covered with
cedar from floor to floor.

<span id="an_kg1:7:8">8</span> And his house where he might dwell, in
the other court, within the porch, was of the like work. He made also a
house for Pharaoh's daughter, whom Solomon had taken to wife, like unto
this porch.

<span id="an_kg1:7:9">9</span> All these were of costly stones,
according to the measures of hewn stones, sawed with saws, within and
without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside
unto the great court. <span id="an_kg1:7:10">10</span> And the
foundation was of costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten
cubits, and stones of eight cubits. <span id="an_kg1:7:11">11</span> And
above were costly stones, after the measure of hewn stones, and
cedar-wood. <span id="an_kg1:7:12">12</span> And the great court round
about had three rows of hewn stone, and a row of cedar beams, like as
the inner court of the house of the LORD, and the court of the porch of
the house.

<span id="an_kg1:7:13">13</span> And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram
out of Tyre. <span id="an_kg1:7:14">14</span> He was the son of a widow
of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in
brass; and he was filled with wisdom and understanding and skill, to
work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all
his work.

<span id="an_kg1:7:15">15</span> Thus he fashioned the two pillars of
brass, of eighteen cubits high each; and a line of twelve cubits did
compass it about; \[and so\] the other pillar. <span
id="an_kg1:7:16">16</span> And he made two capitals of molten brass, to
set upon the tops of the pillars; the height of the one capital was five
cubits, and the height of the other capital was five cubits. <span
id="an_kg1:7:17">17</span> He also made nets of checker-work, and
wreaths of chain-work, for the capitals which were upon the top of the
pillars: seven for the one capital, and seven for the other capital.
<span id="an_kg1:7:18">18</span> And he made the pillars; and there were
two rows round about upon the one network, to cover the capitals that
were upon the top of the pomegranates; and so did he for the other
capital. <span id="an_kg1:7:19">19</span> And the capitals that were
upon the top of the pillars in the porch were of lily-work, four cubits.
<span id="an_kg1:7:20">20</span> And there were capitals above also upon
the two pillars, close by the belly which was beside the network; and
the pomegranates were two hundred, in rows round about upon each
capital. <span id="an_kg1:7:21">21</span> And he set up the pillars at
the porch of the temple; and he set up the right pillar, and called the
name thereof Jachin; and he set up the left pillar, and called the name
thereof

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Boaz. <span
id="an_kg1:7:22">22</span>  And upon the top of the pillars was
lily-work; so was the work of the pillars finished.

<span id="an_kg1:7:23">23</span> And he made the molten sea of ten
cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and the height thereof was
five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.
<span id="an_kg1:7:24">24</span> And under the brim of it round about
there were knops which did compass it, for ten cubits, compassing the
sea round about; the knops were in two rows, cast when it was cast.
<span id="an_kg1:7:25">25</span> It stood upon twelve oxen, three
looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three
looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea
was set upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward. <span
id="an_kg1:7:26">26</span> And it was a handbreadth thick; and the brim
thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily;
it held two thousand baths.

<span id="an_kg1:7:27">27</span> And he made the ten bases of brass;
four cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth
thereof, and three cubits the height of it. <span
id="an_kg1:7:28">28</span> And the work of the bases was on this manner:
they had borders; and there were borders between the stays; <span
id="an_kg1:7:29">29</span> and on the borders that were between the
stays were lions, oxen, and cherubim; and upon the stays it was in like
manner above; and beneath the lions and oxen were wreaths of hanging
work. <span id="an_kg1:7:30">30</span> And every base had four brazen
wheels, and axles of brass; and the four feet thereof had undersetters;
beneath the laver were the undersetters molten, with wreaths at the side
of each. <span id="an_kg1:7:31">31</span> And the mouth of it within the
crown and above was a cubit high; and the mouth thereof was round after
the work of a pedestal, a cubit and a half; and also upon the mouth of
it were gravings; and theirborders were foursquare, not round. <span
id="an_kg1:7:32">32</span> And the four wheels were underneath the
borders; and the axletrees of the wheels were in the base; and the
height of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit. <span
id="an_kg1:7:33">33</span> And the work of the wheels was like the work
of a chariot wheel; their axletrees, and their felloes, and their
spokes, and their naves, were all molten. <span
id="an_kg1:7:34">34</span> And there were four under-setters at the four
corners of each base; the undersetters thereof were of one piece with
the base itself. <span id="an_kg1:7:35">35</span> And in the top of the
base was there a round compass of half a cubit high; and on the top of
the base the stays thereof and the borders thereof were of one piece
therewith. <span id="an_kg1:7:36">36</span> And on the plates of the
stays thereof, and on the borders thereof, he graved cherubim, lions,
and palm-trees, according to the space of each, with wreaths round
about. <span id="an_kg1:7:37">37</span> After this manner he made the
ten bases; all of them had one casting, one measure, and one form.

<span id="an_kg1:7:38">38</span> And he made ten lavers of brass: one
laver contained forty baths; and every laver was four cubits; and upon
every one of the ten bases one laver. <span
id="an_kg1:7:39">39</span> And he set the bases, five on the right side
of the house, and five on the left side of the house; and he set the sea
on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south.

40And  <span id="fr_142"></span>[a](#fn_138.md) Hiram made the pots, and
the shovels, and the basins.

So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he wrought for king
Solomon in the house of the LORD: <span id="an_kg1:6:41">41</span> the
two pillars, and the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of
the pillars; and the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals
that were on the top of the pillars; <span
id="an_kg1:6:42">42</span> and the four hundred pomegranates for the two
networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network, to

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

cover the two bowls of the capitals that were upon the top of the
pillars; <span id="an_kg1:7:43">43</span> and the ten bases, and the ten
lavers on the bases; <span id="an_kg1:7:44">44</span> and the one sea,
and the twelve oxen under the sea; <span id="an_kg1:7:45">45</span> and
the pots, and the shovels, and the basins; even all these vessels, which
Hiram made for king Solomon, in the house of the LORD, were of burnished
brass. <span id="an_kg1:7:46">46</span> In the plain of the Jordan did
the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarethan.
<span id="an_kg1:7:47">47</span> And Solomon left all the vessels
unweighed, because they were exceeding many; the weight of the brass
could not be found out. <span id="an_kg1:7:48">48</span> And Solomon
made all the vessels that were in the house of the LORD: the golden
altar, and the table whereupon the showbread was, of gold; <span
id="an_kg1:7:49">49</span> and the candlesticks, five on the right side,
and five on the left, before the Sanctuary, of pure gold; and the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold; <span
id="an_kg1:7:50">50</span> and the cups, and the snuffers, and the
basins, and the pans, and the fire-pans, of pure gold; and the hinges,
both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and for the
doors of the house, that is, of the temple, of gold.

<span id="an_kg1:7:51">51</span> Thus all the work that king Solomon
wrought in the house of the LORD was finished. And Solomon brought in
the things which David his father had dedicated, the silver, and the
gold, and the vessels, and put them in the treasuries of the house of
the LORD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_138"></span>[412:a](kg1007.htm#fr_142.md) Heb. *Hirom*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 8](kg1008.md)

</div>
