<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Kings Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2001)  [Next](kg2003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 2

<span id="an_kg2:2:1">1</span> And it came to pass, when the LORD would
take up Elijah by a whirlwind into heaven, that Elijah went with Elisha
from Gilgal. <span id="an_kg2:2:2">2</span> And Elijah said unto Elisha:
\`Tarry here, I pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me as far as Beth-el.'
And Elisha said: \`As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will
not leave thee.' So they went down to Beth-el.—<span
id="an_kg2:2:3">3</span> And the sons of the prophets that were at
Beth-el came forth to Elisha, and said unto him: \`Knowest thou that the
LORD will take away thy master from thy head to-day?' And he said:
\`Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace.'—<span
id="an_kg2:2:4">4</span> And Elijah said unto him: \`Elisha, tarry here,
I pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me to Jericho.' And he said: \`As
the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.' So they
came to Jericho.—<span id="an_kg2:2:5">5</span> And the sons of the
prophets that were at Jericho came near to Elisha, and said unto him:
\`Knowest thou that the LORD will take away thy master from thy head
to-day?' And he answered: \`Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace.'—<span
id="an_kg2:2:6">6</span> And Elijah said unto him: \`Tarry here, I pray
thee; for the LORD hath sent me to the Jordan.' And he said: \`As the
LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.' And they
two went on.

<span id="an_kg2:2:7">7</span> And fifty men of the sons of the prophets
went, and stood over against them afar off; and they two stood by the
Jordan. <span id="an_kg2:2:8">8</span> And Elijah took his mantle, and
wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither
and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground. <span
id="an_kg2:2:9">9</span> And it came to pass, when they were gone over,
that Elijah said unto Elisha: \`Ask what I shall do for thee, before I
am taken from thee.' And Elisha said: \`I pray thee, let a double
portion of thy spirit be upon me.' <span id="an_kg2:2:10">10</span> And
he said: \`Thou hast asked a hard thing; nevertheless, if thou see me
when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it
shall not be so.' <span id="an_kg2:2:11">11</span> And it came to pass,
as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a
chariot of fire, and horses of fire, which parted them both asunder; and
Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.

<span id="an_kg2:2:12">12</span> And Elisha saw it, and he cried: \`My
father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof!' And
he saw him no more; and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them
in two pieces. <span id="an_kg2:2:13">13</span> He took up also the
mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the
bank of the Jordan. <span id="an_kg2:2:14">14</span> And he took the
mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said:
\`Where is the LORD, the God of Elijah?' and when he also had smitten
the waters, they were divided hither and thither; and Elisha went over.

<span id="an_kg2:2:15">15</span> And when the sons of the prophets that
were at Jericho some way off

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

saw him, they said: \`The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha.' And
they came to meet him, and bowed down to the ground before him. <span
id="an_kg2:2:16">16</span> And they said unto him: \`Behold now, there
are with thy servants fifty strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and
seek thy master; lest peradventure the spirit of the LORD hath taken him
up, and cast him upon some mountain, or into some valley.' And he said:
\`Ye shall not send.' <span id="an_kg2:2:17">17</span> And when they
urged him till he was ashamed, he said: \`Send.' They sent therefore
fifty men; and they sought three days, but found him not. <span
id="an_kg2:2:18">18</span> And they came back to him, while he tarried
at Jericho; and he said unto them: \`Did I not say unto you: Go not?'

<span id="an_kg2:2:19">19</span> And the men of the city said unto
Elisha: \`Behold, we pray thee, the situation of this city is pleasant,
as my lord seeth; but the water is bad, and the land miscarrieth.' <span
id="an_kg2:2:20">20</span> And he said: \`Bring me a new cruse, and put
salt therein.' And they brought it to him. <span
id="an_kg2:2:21">21</span> And he went forth unto the spring of the
waters, and cast salt therein, and said: \`Thus saith the LORD: I have
healed these waters; there shall not be from thence any more death or
miscarrying.' <span id="an_kg2:2:22">22</span> So the waters were healed
unto this day, according to the word of Elisha which he spoke.

<span id="an_kg2:2:23">23</span> And he went up from thence unto
Beth-el; and as he was going up by the way, there came forth little
children out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him: \`Go up,
thou baldhead; go up, thou baldhead.' <span
id="an_kg2:2:24">24</span> And he looked behind him and saw them, and
cursed them in the name of the LORD. And there came forth two she-bears
out of the wood, and tore forty and two children of them. <span
id="an_kg2:2:25">25</span> And he went from thence to mount Carmel,and
from thence he returned to Samaria.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 3](kg2003.md)

</div>
