<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Kings Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2006)  [Next](kg2008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 7

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_kg2:7:1">1</span> And Elisha said: \`Hear ye the word of the
LORD; thus saith the LORD : To-morrow about this time shall a measure of
fine flour be sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a
shekel, in the gate of Samaria. <span id="an_kg2:7:2">2</span> Then the
captain on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God, and said:
\`Behold, if the LORD should make windows in heaven, might this thing
be?' And he said: \`Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt
not eat thereof.'

<span id="an_kg2:7:3">3</span> Now there were four leprous men at the
entrance of the gate; and they said one to another: \`Why sit we here
until we die? <span id="an_kg2:7:4">4</span> If we say: We will enter
into the city, then the famine is in the city, and we shall die there;
and if we sit still here, we die also. Now therefore come, and let us
fall unto the host of the Arameans; if they save us alive, we shall
live; and if they kill us, we shall but die.' <span
id="an_kg2:7:5">5</span> And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto
the camp of the Arameans; and when they were come to the outermost part
of the camp of the Arameans, behold, there was no man there. <span
id="an_kg2:7:6">6</span> For the Lord had made the host of the Arameans
to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a
great host; and they said one to another: \`Lo, the king of Israel hath
hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the
Egyptians, to come upon us.' <span id="an_kg2:7:7">7</span> Wherefore
they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their
horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their
life. <span id="an_kg2:7:8">8</span> And when these lepers came to the
outermost part of the camp, they went into one tent, and did eat and
drink, and carried thence silver, and gold, and raiment, and went and
hid it; and they came back, and entered into another tent, and carried
thence also, and went and hid it.

<span id="an_kg2:7:9">9</span> Then they said one to another: \`We do
not well; this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace; if
we tarry till the morning light, punishment will overtake us; now
therefore come, let us go and tell the king's household.' <span
id="an_kg2:7:10">10</span> So they came and called unto the porters of
the city; and they told them, saying: \`We came to the camp of the
Arameans, and, behold, there was no man there, neither voice of man, but
the horses tied, and the asses tied, and the tents as they were.' <span
id="an_kg2:7:11">11</span> And the porters called, and they told it to
the king's household within. <span id="an_kg2:7:12">12</span> And the
king arose in the night, and said unto his servants: \`I will now tell
you what the Arameans have done to us. They know that we are hungry;
therefore are they gone out of the camp to hide themselves in the field,
saying: When they come out of the city, we shall take them alive, and
get into the city.' <span id="an_kg2:7:13">13</span> And one of his
servants answered and said: \`Let some take, I pray thee, five of the
horses that remain, which are left in the city—behold, they are as all
the multitude of Israel that are left in it; behold, they are as all the
multitude of Israel that are consumed—and let us send and see.' <span
id="an_kg2:7:14">14</span> They took therefore two chariots with horses;
and the king sent after the host of the Arameans, saying: \`Go and see.'
<span id="an_kg2:7:15">15</span> And they went after them unto the
Jordan; and, lo, all the way was full of garments and vessels, which the
Arameans had cast away in their haste. And the messengers returned, and
told the king.

<span id="an_kg2:7:16">16</span> And the people went out, and spoiled
the camp of the Arameans. So a measure of fine flour was sold

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, according to the
word of the LORD. <span id="an_kg2:7:17">17</span> And the king
appointed the captain on whose hand he leaned to have the charge of the
gate; and the people trod upon him in the gate, and he died as the man
of God had said, who spoke when the king came down to him. <span
id="an_kg2:7:18">18</span> And it came to pass, as the man of God had
spoken to the king, saying: \`Two measures of barley for a shekel, and a
measure of fine flour for a shekel, shall be to-morrow about this time
in the gate of Samaria'; <span id="an_kg2:7:19">19</span> and that
captain answered the man of God, and said: \`Now, behold, if the LORD
should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be?' and he said:
\`Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof';
<span id="an_kg2:7:20">20</span> it came to pass even so unto him; for
the people trod upon him in the gate, and he died.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 8](kg2008)

</div>
