<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Kings Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2023)  [Next](kg2025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 24

<span id="an_kg2:24:1">1</span> In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant three years; then he
turned and rebelled against him. <span id="an_kg2:24:2">2</span> And the
LORD sent against him bands of the Chaldeans, and bands of the Arameans,
and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon, and sent
them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of the LORD,
which He spoke by the hand of His servants the prophets. <span
id="an_kg2:24:3">3</span> Surely at the commandment of the LORD came
this upon Judah, to remove them out of His sight, for the sins of
Manasseh, according to all that he did; <span
id="an_kg2:24:4">4</span> and also for the innocent blood that he shed;
for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; and the LORD would not
pardon.

<span id="an_kg2:24:5">5</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim,
and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah? <span id="an_kg2:24:6">6</span> So Jehoiakim
slept with his fathers; and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.
<span id="an_kg2:24:7">7</span> And the king of Egypt came not again any
more out of his land; for the king of Babylon had taken, from the Brook
of Egypt unto the river Euphrates, all that pertained to the king of
Egypt.

<span id="an_kg2:24:8">8</span> Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when
he began to reign; and he reigned in Jerusalem three months; and his
mother's name was Nehushta the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. <span
id="an_kg2:24:9">9</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight of
the LORD, according to all that his father had done. <span
id="an_kg2:24:10">10</span> At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon came up to Jerusalem, and the city was besieged. <span
id="an_kg2:24:11">11</span> And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came unto
the city, while his servants were besieging it. <span
id="an_kg2:24:12">12</span> And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to
the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his
princes, and his officers; and the king of Babylon took him in the
eighth year of his reign. <span id="an_kg2:24:13">13</span> And he
carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the
treasures of the king's house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold
which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the Lonn, as the
LORD had said. <span id="an_kg2:24:14">14</span> And he carried away all
Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, even
ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and the smiths; none
remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land. <span
id="an_kg2:24:15">15</span> And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon;
and the king's mother, and the king's wives, and his officers, and the
chief men of the land, carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to
Babylon. <span id="an_kg2:24:16">16</span> And all the men of might,
even seven thousand, and the craftsmen and the smiths a thousand, all of
them strong and apt for war, even them the king of Babylon brought
captive to Babylon. <span id="an_kg2:24:17">17</span> And the king of
Babylon made Mattaniah his father's brother king in his stead, and
changed his name to Zedekiah.

<span id="an_kg2:24:18">18</span> Zedekiah was twenty and one years old
when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and
his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. <span
id="an_kg2:24:19">19</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight
of the LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done. <span
id="an_kg2:24:20">20</span> For through the anger of the LORD did it

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

come to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until He had cast them out from His
presence.

And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 25](kg2025.md)

</div>
