<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Kings Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2013)  [Next](kg2015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 14

<span id="an_kg2:14:1">1</span> In the second year of Joash son of
Joahaz king of Israel began Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah to
reign. <span id="an_kg2:14:2">2</span> He was twenty and five years old
when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and nine years in
Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. <span
id="an_kg2:14:3">3</span> And he did that which was right in the eyes of
the LORD, yet not like David his father; he did according to all that
Joash his father had done. <span id="an_kg2:14:4">4</span> Howbeit the
high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and offered
in the high places. <span id="an_kg2:14:5">5</span> And it came to pass,
as soon as the kingdom was established in his hand, that he slew his
servants who had slain the king his father; <span
id="an_kg2:14:6">6</span> but the children of the murderers he put not
to death; according to that which is written in the book of the law of
Moses, as the LORD commanded, saying: \`The fathers shall not be put to
death for the children, nor the children be put to death for the
fathers; but every man shall be put to death for his own sin.' <span
id="an_kg2:14:7">7</span> He slew of Edom in the Valley of Salt ten
thousand, and took Sela by war, and called the name of it Joktheel, unto
this day.

<span id="an_kg2:14:8">8</span> Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash,
the son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying: \`Come, let us
look one another in the face.' <span id="an_kg2:14:9">9</span> And
Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying: \`The
thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon,
saying: Give thy daughter to my son to wife; and there passed by the
wild beasts that were in Lebanon, and trod down the thistle. <span
id="an_kg2:14:10">10</span> Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and will thy
heart lift thee up? glory therein, and remain at home; for why shouldest
thou meddle with evil, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah
with thee?' <span id="an_kg2:14:11">11</span> But Amaziah would not
hear. So Jehoash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of
Judah looked one another in the face at Bethshemesh, which belongeth to
Judah. <span id="an_kg2:14:12">12</span> And Judah was put to the worse
before Israel; and they fled every man to his tent. <span
id="an_kg2:14:13">13</span> And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king
of Judah, the son of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh, and
came to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of
Ephraim unto the corner gate, four hundred cubits. <span
id="an_kg2:14:14">14</span> And he took all the gold and silver, and all
the vessels that were found in the house of the LORD, and in the
treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to
Samaria.

<span id="an_kg2:14:15">15</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash
which he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of
Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel? <span id="an_kg2:14:16">16</span> And Jehoash slept with his
fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; and
Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg2:14:17">17</span> And Amaziah the son of Joash

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

king of Judah lived after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of
Israel fifteen years. <span id="an_kg2:14:18">18</span> Now the rest of
the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah? <span id="an_kg2:14:19">19</span> And they made a
conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish; but they
sent after him to Lachish, and slew him there. <span
id="an_kg2:14:20">20</span> And they brought him upon horses; and he was
buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David. <span
id="an_kg2:14:21">21</span> And all the people of Judah took Azariah,
who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father
Amaziah. <span id="an_kg2:14:22">22</span> He built Elath, and restored
it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.

<span id="an_kg2:14:23">23</span> In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the
son of Joash king of Judah Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel
began to reign in Samaria, and reigned forty and one years. <span
id="an_kg2:14:24">24</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight
of the LORD; he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin. <span
id="an_kg2:14:25">25</span> He restored the border of Israel from the
entrance of Hamath unto the sea of the Arabah, according to the word of
the LORD, the God of Israel, which He spoke by the hand of His servant
Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet, who was of Gath-hepher. <span
id="an_kg2:14:26">26</span> For the LORD saw the affliction of Israel,
that it was very bitter; for there was none shut up nor left at large,
neither was there any helper for Israel. <span
id="an_kg2:14:27">27</span> And the LORD said not that He would blot out
the name of Israel from under heaven; but He saved them by the hand of
Jeroboam the son of Joash.

<span id="an_kg2:14:28">28</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam,
and all that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how he recovered
Damascus, and Hamath,for Judah in Israel, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? <span
id="an_kg2:14:29">29</span> And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even
with the kings of Israel; and Zechariah his son reigned in his stead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 15](kg2015)

</div>
