<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Kings Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2015)  [Next](kg2017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 16

<span id="an_kg2:16:1">1</span> In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son
of Remaliah Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign. <span
id="an_kg2:16:2">2</span> Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to
reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; and he did not that
which was right in the eyes of the LORD his God, like David his father.
<span id="an_kg2:16:3">3</span> But he walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, yea, and made his son to pass through the fire, according to the
abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD cast out from before the
children of Israel. <span id="an_kg2:16:4">4</span> And he sacrificed
and offered in the high places, and on the hills, and under every leafy
tree.

<span id="an_kg2:16:5">5</span> Then Rezin king of Aram and Pekah son of
Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to war; and they besieged
Ahaz, but could not overcome him. <span id="an_kg2:16:6">6</span> At
that time Rezin king of Aram recovered Elath to Aram, and drove the Jews
from  <span id="fr_146"></span>[a](#fn_142.md) Elath; and the Edomites came
to Elath, and dwelt there, unto this day.

<span id="an_kg2:16:7">7</span> So Ahaz sent messengers to
Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying: \`I am thy servant and thy son;
come up, and save me out of the hand of the king of Aram, and out of the
hand of the king of Israel, who rise up against me.' <span
id="an_kg2:16:8">8</span> And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was
found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the king's
house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria. <span
id="an_kg2:16:9">9</span> And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him;
and the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and
carried the people of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.

<span id="an_kg2:16:10">10</span> And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet
Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and saw the altar that was at Damascus;
and king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest the fashion of the altar, and
the pattern of it, according to all the workmanship thereof. <span
id="an_kg2:16:11">11</span> And Urijah the priest built an altar;
according to all that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus, so did Urijah
the priest make it against the coming of king Ahaz from Damascus. <span
id="an_kg2:16:12">12</span> And when the king was come from Damascus,
the king saw the altar; and the king drew near unto the altar, and
offered thereon. <span id="an_kg2:16:13">13</span> And he offered his
burnt-offering and his meal-offering, and poured his drink-offering, and
dashed the blood of his peace-offerings against the altar. <span
id="an_kg2:16:14">14</span> And the brazen altar, which was before the
LORD, he brought from the forefront of the house, from between his altar
and the house of the LORD, and put it on the north side of his altar.
<span id="an_kg2:16:15">15</span> And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the
priest, saying: \`Upon the

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

great altar offer the morning burnt-offering, and the evening
meal-offering, and the king's burnt-offering, and his meal-offering,
with the burnt-offering of all the people of the land, and their
meal-offering, and their drink-offerings; and dash against it all the
blood of the burnt-offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice; but the
brazen altar shall be for me to look to.' <span
id="an_kg2:16:16">16</span> Thus did Urijah the priest, according to all
that king Ahaz commanded.

<span id="an_kg2:16:17">17</span> And king Ahaz cut off the borders of
the bases, and removed the laver from off them; and took down the sea
from off the brazen oxen that were under it, and put it upon a pavement
of stone. <span id="an_kg2:16:18">18</span> And the covered place for
the sabbath that they had built in the house, and the king's entry
without, turned he unto the house of the LORD, because of the king of
Assyria. <span id="an_kg2:16:19">19</span> Now the rest of the acts of
Ahaz which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah? <span id="an_kg2:16:20">20</span> And Ahaz slept
with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David;
and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_142"></span>[463:a](kg2016.htm#fr_146.md) Heb. *Eloth*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 17](kg2017.md)

</div>
