<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Kings Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2009)  [Next](kg2011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 10

<span id="an_kg2:10:1">1</span> Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria.
And Jehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jezreel,
even the elders, and unto them that brought up \[the sons of\] Ahab,
saying: <span id="an_kg2:10:2">2</span> 'And now as soon as this letter
cometh to you, seeing your master's sons are with you, and there are
with you chariots and horses, fortified cities also, and armour; <span
id="an_kg2:10:3">3</span> look ye out the best and meetest of your
master's sons, and set him on his father's throne, and fight for your
master's house.' <span id="an_kg2:10:4">4</span> But they were
exceedingly afraid, and said: 'Behold, the two kings stood not before
him; how then shall we stand?' <span id="an_kg2:10:5">5</span> And he
that was over the household, and he that was over the city, the elders
also, and they that brought up the children, sent to Jehu, saying: \`We
are thy servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not
make any man king; do thou that which is good in thine eyes.' <span
id="an_kg2:10:6">6</span> Then he wrote a letter the second time to
them, saying: \`If ye be on my side, and if ye

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

will hearken unto my voice, take ye the heads of the men your master's
sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to-morrow this time.' Now the king's
sons, being seventy persons, were with the great men of the city, who
brought them up. <span id="an_kg2:10:7">7</span> And it came to pass,
when the letter came to them, that they took the king's sons, and slew
them, even seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets, and sent
them unto him to Jezreel. <span id="an_kg2:10:8">8</span> And there came
a messenger, and told him, saying: 'They have brought the heads of the
king's sons.' And he said: 'Lay ye them in two heaps at the entrance of
the gate until the morning.' <span id="an_kg2:10:9">9</span> And it came
to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood, and said to all the
people: 'Ye are righteous; behold, I conspired against my master, and
slew him; but who smote all these? <span
id="an_kg2:10:10">10</span> Know now that there shall fall unto the
earth nothing of the word of the LORD, which the LORD spoke concerning
the house of Ahab; for the LORD hath done that which He spoke by His
servant Elijah.' <span id="an_kg2:10:11">11</span> So Jehu smote all
that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men,
and his familiar friends, and his priests, until there was left him none
remaining.

<span id="an_kg2:10:12">12</span> And he arose and departed, and went to
Samaria. And as he was at the shearing-house of the shepherds in the
way, <span id="an_kg2:10:13">13</span> Jehu met with the brethren of
Ahaziah king of Judah, and said: 'Who are ye?' And they answered: 'We
are the brethren of Ahaziah; and we go down to salute the children of
the king and the children of the queen.' <span
id="an_kg2:10:14">14</span> And he said: 'Take them alive.' And they
took them alive, and slew them at the pit of the shearing-house, even
two and forty men; neither left he any of them.

<span id="an_kg2:10:15">15</span> And when he was departed thence, he
lighted on Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him; and he
saluted him, and said to him: 'Is thy heart right, as my heart is with
thy heart?' And Jehonadab answered: 'It is.' 'If it be, \[said Jehu,\]
give me thy hand.' And he gave him his hand; and he took him up to him
into the chariot. <span id="an_kg2:10:16">16</span> And he said: 'Come
with me, and see my zeal for the LORD.' So they made him ride in his
chariot. <span id="an_kg2:10:17">17</span> And when he came to Samaria,
he smote all that remained unto Ahab in Samaria, till he had destroyed
him, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke to Elijah.

<span id="an_kg2:10:18">18</span> And Jehu gathered all the people
together, and said unto them: 'Ahab served Baal a little; but Jehu will
serve him much. <span id="an_kg2:10:19">19</span> Now therefore call
unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his worshippers, and all his
priests; let none be wanting; for I have a great sacrifice to do to
Baal; whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not live.' But Jehu did it in
subtlety, to the intent that he might destroy the worshippers of Baal.
<span id="an_kg2:10:20">20</span> And Jehu said: 'Sanctify a solemn
assembly for Baal.' And they proclaimed it. <span
id="an_kg2:10:21">21</span> And Jehu sent through all Israel; and all
the worshippers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left that came
not. And they came into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was
filled from one end to another. <span id="an_kg2:10:22">22</span> And he
said unto him that was over the vestry: 'Bring forth vestments for all
the worshippers of Baal.' And he brought them forth vestments. <span
id="an_kg2:10:23">23</span> And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of
Rechab, into the house of Baal; and he said unto the worshippers of
Baal: 'Search, and look that there be here with you none of the servants
of

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

the LORD, but the worshippers of Baal only.' <span
id="an_kg2:10:24">24</span> And they went in to offer sacrifices and
burnt-offerings. Now Jehu had appointed him fourscore men without, and
said: \`If any of the men whom I bring into your hands escape, his life
shall be for the life of him.'

<span id="an_kg2:10:25">25</span> And it came to pass, as soon as he had
made an end of offering the burnt-offering, that Jehu said to the guard
and to the captains: \`Go in, and slay them; let none come forth.' And
they smote them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the
captains cast them out, and went to the city of the house of Baal. <span
id="an_kg2:10:26">26</span> And they brought forth the pillars that were
in the house of Baal, and burned them. <span
id="an_kg2:10:27">27</span> And they broke down the pillar of Baal, and
broke down the house of Baal, and made it a draught-house, unto this
day.

<span id="an_kg2:10:28">28</span> Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of
Israel. <span id="an_kg2:10:29">29</span> Howbeit from the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin, Jehu
departed not from after them, the golden calves that were in Beth-el,
and that were in Dan. <span id="an_kg2:10:30">30</span> And the LORD
said unto Jehu: \`Because thou hast done well in executing that which is
right in Mine eyes, and hast done unto the house of Ahab according to
all that was in My heart, thy sons of the fourth generation shall sit on
the throne of Israel.' <span id="an_kg2:10:31">31</span> But Jehu took
no heed to walk in the law of the LORD, the God of Israel, with all his
heart; he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, wherewith he made
Israel to sin.

<span id="an_kg2:10:32">32</span> In those days the LORD began to cut
Israel short; and Hazael smote them in all the borders of Israel: <span
id="an_kg2:10:33">33</span> from the Jordan eastward, all the land of
Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer,
which is by the valley of Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan. <span
id="an_kg2:10:34">34</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all
that he did, and all his might, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel? <span id="an_kg2:10:35">35</span> And
Jehu slept with his fathers; and they buried him in Samaria. And
Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead. <span
id="an_kg2:10:36">36</span> And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel
in Samaria was twenty and eight years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 11](kg2011.md)

</div>
