<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Kings Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2012)  [Next](kg2014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 13

<span id="an_kg2:13:1">1</span> In the three and twentieth year of Joash
the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to
reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned seventeen years. <span
id="an_kg2:13:2">2</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight of
the LORD, and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

wherewith he made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom. <span
id="an_kg2:13:3">3</span> And the anger of the LORD was kindled against
Israel, and He delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Aram, and
into the hand of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael, continually. <span
id="an_kg2:13:4">4</span> And Jehoahaz besought the LORD, and the LORD
hearkened unto him; for He saw the oppression of Israel, how that the
king of Aram oppressed them.—<span id="an_kg2:13:5">5</span> And the
LORD gave Israel a deliverer, so that they went out from under the hand
of the Arameans; and the children of Israel dwelt in their tents, as
beforetime. <span id="an_kg2:13:6">6</span> Nevertheless they departed
not from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, wherewith he made Israel to
sin, but walked therein; and there remained the Asherah also in
Samaria.—<span id="an_kg2:13:7">7</span> For there was not left to
Jehoahaz of the people save fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten
thousand footmen; for the king of Aram destroyed them, and made them
like the dust in threshing. <span id="an_kg2:13:8">8</span> Now the rest
of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? <span
id="an_kg2:13:9">9</span> And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers; and they
buried him in Samaria; and Joash his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg2:13:10">10</span> In the thirty and seventh year of
Joash king of Judah began Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over
Israel in Samaria, and reigned sixteen years. <span
id="an_kg2:13:11">11</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight
of the LORD; he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin; but he walked therein. <span
id="an_kg2:13:12">12</span> Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all
that he did, and his might wherewith he fought against Amaziah king of
Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel? <span id="an_kg2:13:13">13</span> And Joash slept with his
fathers; and Jeroboam sat upon his throne; and Joash was buried in
Samaria with the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_kg2:13:14">14</span> Now Elisha was fallen sick of his
sickness whereof he was to die; and Joash the king of Israel came down
unto him, and wept over him, and said: \`My father, my father, the
chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof!' <span
id="an_kg2:13:15">15</span> And Elisha said unto him: \`Take bow and
arrows'; and he took unto him bow and arrows. <span
id="an_kg2:13:16">16</span> And he said to the king of Israel: \`Put thy
hand upon the bow'; and he put his hand upon it. And Elisha laid his
hands upon the king's hands. <span id="an_kg2:13:17">17</span> And he
said: \`Open the window eastward'; and he opened it. Then Elisha said:
\`Shoot'; and he shot. And he said: The LORD'S arrow of victory, even
the arrow of victory against Aram; for thou shalt smite the Arameans in
Aphek, till thou have consumed them.' <span
id="an_kg2:13:18">18</span> And he said: \`Take the arrows'; and he took
them. And he said unto the king of Israel: \`Smite upon the ground'; and
he smote thrice, and stayed. <span id="an_kg2:13:19">19</span> And the
man of God was wroth with him, and said: \`Thou shouldest have smitten
five or six times; then hadst thou smitten Aram till thou hadst consumed
it; whereas now thou shalt smite Aram but thrice.'

<span id="an_kg2:13:20">20</span> And Elisha died, and they buried him.
Now the bands of the Moabites used to invade the land at the coming in
of the year. <span id="an_kg2:13:21">21</span> And it came to pass, as
they were burying a man, that, behold, they spied a band; and they cast
the man into the sepulchre of Elisha; and as soon as the man touched the
bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.

<span id="an_kg2:13:22">22</span> And Hazael king of Aram oppressed

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel all the
days of Jehoahaz. <span id="an_kg2:13:23">23</span> But the LORD was
gracious unto them, and had compassion on them, and had respect unto
them, because of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would
not destroy them, neither hath He cast them from His presence until now.
<span id="an_kg2:13:24">24</span> And Hazael king of Aram died; and
Ben-hadad his son reigned in his stead. <span
id="an_kg2:13:25">25</span> And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again
out of the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities which he had
taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times did
Joash smite him, and recovered the cities of Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 14](kg2014.md)

</div>
