<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Kings Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2020)  [Next](kg2022.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 21

<span id="an_kg2:21:1">1</span> Manasseh was twelve years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned five and fifty years in Jerusalem; and
his mother's name was Hephzi-bah. <span id="an_kg2:21:2">2</span> And he
did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, after the abominations
of the nations, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel.
<span id="an_kg2:21:3">3</span> For he built again the high places which
Hezekiah his father had destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and
made an Asherah, as did Ahab king of Israel, and worshipped all the host
of heaven, and served them. <span id="an_kg2:21:4">4</span> And he built
altars in the house of the LORD, whereof the LORD said: \`In Jerusalem
will I put My name.' <span id="an_kg2:21:5">5</span> And he built altars
for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD.
<span id="an_kg2:21:6">6</span> And he made his son to pass through the
fire, and practised soothsaying, and used enchantments, and appointed
them that divined by a ghost or a familiar spirit: he wrought much evil
in the sight of the LORD, to provoke Him. <span
id="an_kg2:21:7">7</span> And he set the graven image of Asherah, that
he had made, in the house of which the LORD said to David and to Solomon
his son: \`In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of
all the tribes of Israel, will I put My name for ever; <span
id="an_kg2:21:8">8</span> neither will I cause the feet of Israel to
wander any more out of the land which I gave their fathers; if only they
will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and
according to all the law that My servant Moses commanded them.' <span
id="an_kg2:21:9">9</span> But they hearkened not; and Manasseh seduced
them to do that which is evil more than did the nations, whom the LORD
destroyed before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_kg2:21:10">10</span> And the LORD spoke by His servants the
prophets, saying: <span id="an_kg2:21:11">11</span> Because Manasseh
king of Judah hath done these abominations, and hath done wickedly above
all that the Amorites did, that were before him, and hath made Judah
also to sin with his idols; <span id="an_kg2:21:12">12</span> therefore
thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Behold, I bring such evil upon
Jerusalem and

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Judah, that
whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall tingle. <span
id="an_kg2:21:13">13</span> And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line
of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab; and I will wipe
Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down.
<span id="an_kg2:21:14">14</span> And I will cast off the remnant of
Mine inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies; and
they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies; <span
id="an_kg2:21:15">15</span> because they have done that which is evil in
My sight, and have provoked Me, since the day their fathers came forth
out of Egypt, even unto this day.'

<span id="an_kg2:21:16">16</span> Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood
very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; beside
his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in
the sight of the LORD. <span id="an_kg2:21:17">17</span> Now the rest of
the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned,
are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah? <span id="an_kg2:21:18">18</span> And Manasseh slept with his
fathers, and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of
Uzza; and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg2:21:19">19</span> Amon was twenty and two years old when
he began to reign; and he reigned two years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Meshullemeth the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah. <span
id="an_kg2:21:20">20</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight
of the LORD, as did Manasseh his father. <span
id="an_kg2:21:21">21</span> And he walked in all the way that his father
walked in, and served the idols that his father served, and worshipped
them. <span id="an_kg2:21:22">22</span> And he forsook the LORD, the God
of his fathers, and walked not in the way of the LORD. <span
id="an_kg2:21:23">23</span> And the servants of Amon conspired against
him, and put the king to death in his own house. <span
id="an_kg2:21:24">24</span> But the people of the land slew all them
that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made
Josiah his son king in his stead. <span id="an_kg2:21:25">25</span> Now
the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? <span
id="an_kg2:21:26">26</span> And he was buried in his sepulchre in the
garden of Uzza; and Josiah his son reigned in his stead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 22](kg2022.md)

</div>
