<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Kings Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2004)  [Next](kg2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 5

<span id="an_kg2:5:1">1</span> Now Naaman, captain of the host of the
king of Aram, was a great man with his master, and held in esteem,
because by him the LORD had given victory unto Aram; he was also a
mighty man of valour, but he was a leper. <span
id="an_kg2:5:2">2</span> And the Arameans had gone out in bands, and had

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and she
waited on Naaman's wife. <span id="an_kg2:5:3">3</span> And she said
unto her mistress: \`Would that my lord were with the prophet that is in
Samaria! then would he recover him of his leprosy.' <span
id="an_kg2:5:4">4</span> And he went in, and told his lord, saying:
\`Thus and thus said the maid that is of the land of Israel.' <span
id="an_kg2:5:5">5</span> And the king of Aram said: \`Go now, and I will
send a letter unto the king of Israel.' And he departed, and took with
him ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten
changes of raiment. <span id="an_kg2:5:6">6</span> And he brought the
letter to the king of Israel, saying: \`And now when this letter is come
unto thee, behold, I have sent Naaman my servant to thee, that thou
mayest recover him of his leprosy.' <span id="an_kg2:5:7">7</span> And
it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter, that he
rent his clothes, and said: \`Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that
this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy? but
consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh an occasion against me.'

<span id="an_kg2:5:8">8</span> And it was so, when Elisha the man of God
heard that the king of Israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the
king, saying: \`Wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now
to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.' <span
id="an_kg2:5:9">9</span> So Naaman came with his horses and with his
chariots, and stood at the door of the house of Elisha. <span
id="an_kg2:5:10">10</span> And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying:
\`Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come back
to thee, and thou shalt be clean.' <span id="an_kg2:5:11">11</span> But
Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said: \`Behold, I thought: He will
surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the LORD his
God, and wave his hand over the place, and recover the leper. <span
id="an_kg2:5:12">12</span> Are not Amanah and Pharpar, the rivers of
Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them,
and be clean?' So he turned, and went away in a rage. <span
id="an_kg2:5:13">13</span> And his servants came near, and spoke unto
him, and said: \`My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great
thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he
saith to thee: Wash, and be clean?' <span
id="an_kg2:5:14">14</span> Then went he down, and dipped himself seven
times in the Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God; and his
flesh came back like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.

<span id="an_kg2:5:15">15</span> And he returned to the man of God, he
and all his company, and came, and stood before him; and he said:
\`Behold now, I know that there is no God in all the earth, but in
Israel; now therefore, I pray thee, take a present of thy servant.'
<span id="an_kg2:5:16">16</span> But he said: \`As the LORD liveth,
before whom I stand, I will receive none.' And he urged him to take it;
but he refused. <span id="an_kg2:5:17">17</span> And Naaman said: \`If
not, yet I pray thee let there be given to thy servant two mules' burden
of earth; for thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt-offering
nor sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the LORD. <span
id="an_kg2:5:18">18</span> In this thing the LORD pardon thy servant:
when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he
leaneth on my hand, and I prostrate myself in the house of Rimmon, when
I prostrate myself in the house of Rimmon, the LORD pardon thy servant
in this thing.' <span id="an_kg2:5:19">19</span> And he said unto him:
\`Go in peace.' So he departed from him some way.

<span id="an_kg2:5:20">20</span> But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

the man of God, said: \`Behold, my master hath spared this Naaman the
Aramean, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought; as the
LORD liveth, I will surely run after him, and take somewhat of him.'
<span id="an_kg2:5:21">21</span> So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And
when Naaman saw one running after him, he alighted from the chariot to
meet him, and said: \`Is all well?' <span id="an_kg2:5:22">22</span> And
he said: \`All is well. My master hath sent me, saying: Behold, even now
there are come to me from the hill-country of Ephraim two young men of
the sons of the prophets; give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver,
and two changes of raiment.' <span id="an_kg2:5:23">23</span> And Naaman
said: \`Be content, take two talents.' And he urged him, and bound two
talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of raiment, and laid
them upon two of his servants; and they bore them before him. <span
id="an_kg2:5:24">24</span> And when he came to the hill, he took them
from their hand, and deposited them in the house; and he let the men go,
and they departed. <span id="an_kg2:5:25">25</span> But he went in, and
stood before his master. And Elisha said unto him: \`Whence comest thou,
Gehazi?' And he said: \`Thy servant went no whither.' <span
id="an_kg2:5:26">26</span> And he said unto him: \`Went not my heart
\[with thee\], when the man turned back from his chariot to meet thee?
Is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments, and olive-yards
and vineyards, and sheep and oxen, and men-servants and maidservants?
<span id="an_kg2:5:27">27</span> The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall
cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever.' And he went out from his
presence a leper as white as snow.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 6](kg2006)

</div>
