<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Kings Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2003)  [Next](kg2005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 4

<span id="an_kg2:4:1">1</span> Now there cried a certain woman of the
wives of the sons of the prophets unto Elisha, saying: \`Thy servant my
husband is dead; and thou knowest that thy servant did fear the LORD;
and the creditor is come to take unto him my two children to be
bondmen.' <span id="an_kg2:4:2">2</span> And Elisha said unto her:
\`What shall I do for thee? tell me; what hast thou in the house?' And
she said: \`Thy handmaid hath not any thing in the house, save a pot of
oil.' <span id="an_kg2:4:3">3</span> Then he said: \`Go, borrow

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbours, even empty vessels; borrow
not a few. <span id="an_kg2:4:4">4</span> And thou shalt go in, and shut
the door upon thee and upon thy sons, and pour out into all those
vessels; and thou shalt set aside that which is full.' <span
id="an_kg2:4:5">5</span> So she went from him, and shut the door upon
her and upon her sons; they brought the vessels to her, and she poured
out. <span id="an_kg2:4:6">6</span> And it came to pass, when the
vessels were full, that she said unto her son: \`Bring me yet a vessel.'
And he said unto her: \`There is not a vessel more.' And the oil stayed.
<span id="an_kg2:4:7">7</span> Then she came and told the man of God.
And he said: \`Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy
sons of the rest.'

<span id="an_kg2:4:8">8</span> and it fell on a day, that Elisha passed
to Shunem, where was a great woman; and she constrained him to eat
bread. And so it was, that as oft as he passed by, he turned in thither
to eat bread. <span id="an_kg2:4:9">9</span> And she said unto her
husband: \`Behold now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God, that
passeth by us continually. <span id="an_kg2:4:10">10</span> Let us make,
I pray thee, a little chamber on the roof; and let us set for him there
a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick; and it shall be,
when he cometh to us, that he shall turn in thither.' <span
id="an_kg2:4:11">11</span> And it fell on a day, that he came thither,
and he turned into the upper chamber and lay there. <span
id="an_kg2:4:12">12</span> And he said to Gehazi his servant: \`Call
this Shunammite.' And when he had called her, she stood before him.
<span id="an_kg2:4:13">13</span> And he said unto him: \`Say now unto
her: Behold, thou hast been careful for us with all this care; what is
to be done for thee? wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the
captain of the host?' And she answered: \`I dwell among mine own
people.' <span id="an_kg2:4:14">14</span> And he said: \`What then is to
be done for her?' And Gehazi answered: \`Verily she hath no son, and her
husband is old.' <span id="an_kg2:4:15">15</span> And he said: \`Call
her.' And when he had called her, she stood in the door. <span
id="an_kg2:4:16">16</span> And he said: \`At this season, when the time
cometh round, thou shalt embrace a son.' And she said: \`Nay, my lord,
thou man of God, do not lie unto thy handmaid.' <span
id="an_kg2:4:17">17</span> And the woman conceived, and bore a son at
that season, when the time came round, as Elisha had said unto her.

<span id="an_kg2:4:18">18</span> And when the child was grown, it fell
on a day, that he went out to his father to the reapers. <span
id="an_kg2:4:19">19</span> And he said unto his father: \`My head, my
head.' And he said to his servant: \`Carry him to his mother.' <span
id="an_kg2:4:20">20</span> And when he had taken him, and brought him to
his mother, he sat on her knees till noon, and then died. <span
id="an_kg2:4:21">21</span> And she went up, and laid him on the bed of
the man of God, and shut the door upon him, and went out. <span
id="an_kg2:4:22">22</span> And she called unto her husband, and said:
\`Send me, I pray thee, one of the servants, and one of the asses, that
I may run to the man of God, and come back.' <span
id="an_kg2:4:23">23</span> And he said: \`Wherefore wilt thou go to him
to-day? it is neither new moon nor sabbath.' And she said: \`It shall be
well.' <span id="an_kg2:4:24">24</span> Then she saddled an ass, and
said to her servant: \`Drive, and go forward; slacken me not the riding,
except I bid thee.' <span id="an_kg2:4:25">25</span> So she went, and
came unto the man of God to mount Carmel.

And it came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said
to Gehazi his servant: \`Behold, yonder is that Shunammite. <span
id="an_kg2:4:26">26</span> Run, I pray thee, now to meet her, and say
unto her: Is it well with thee? is it well with thy husband? is it well
with the child?' And she answered: \`It is well.' <span
id="an_kg2:4:27">27</span> And when she

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

came to the man of God to the hill, she caught hold of his feet. And
Gehazi came near to thrust her away; but the man of God said: \`Let her
alone; for her soul is bitter within her; and the LORD hath hid it from
me, and hath not told me.' <span id="an_kg2:4:28">28</span> Then she
said: \`Did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say: Do not deceive
me?' <span id="an_kg2:4:29">29</span> Then he said to Gehazi: \`Gird up
thy loins, and take my staff in thy hand, and go thy way; if thou meet
any man, salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him not; and lay
my staff upon the face of the child.' <span
id="an_kg2:4:30">30</span> And the mother of the child said: \`As the
LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.' And he
arose, and followed her. <span id="an_kg2:4:31">31</span> And Gehazi
passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the face of the child;
but there was neither voice, nor hearing. Wherefore he returned to meet
him, and told him, saying: \`The child is not awaked.'

<span id="an_kg2:4:32">32</span> And when Elisha was come into the
house, behold, the child was dead, and laid upon his bed. <span
id="an_kg2:4:33">33</span> He went in therefore, and shut the door upon
them twain, and prayed unto the LORD. <span
id="an_kg2:4:34">34</span> And he went up, and lay upon the child, and
put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands
upon his hands; and he stretched himself upon him; and the flesh of the
child waxed warm. <span id="an_kg2:4:35">35</span> Then he returned, and
walked in the house once to and fro; and went up, and stretched himself
upon him; and the child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his
eyes. <span id="an_kg2:4:36">36</span> And he called Gehazi, and said:
\`Call this Shunammite.' So he called her. And when she was come in unto
him, he said: Take up thy son.' <span id="an_kg2:4:37">37</span> Then
she went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed down to theground; and she
took up her son, and went out.

<span id="an_kg2:4:38">38</span> And Elisha came again to Gilgal; and
there was a dearth in the land; and the sons of the prophets were
sitting before him; and he said unto his servant: \`Set on the great
pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets. <span
id="an_kg2:4:39">39</span> And one went out into the field to gather
herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap
full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage; for they knew
them not. <span id="an_kg2:4:40">40</span> So they poured out for the
men to eat. And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage,
that they cried out, and said: \`O man of God, there is death in the
pot.' And they could not eat thereof. <span
id="an_kg2:4:41">41</span> But he said: \`Then bring meal.' And he cast
it into the pot; and he said: \`Pour out for the people, that they may
eat.' And there was no harm in the pot.

<span id="an_kg2:4:42">42</span> And there came a man from
Baalshalishah, and brought the man of God bread of the first-fruits,
twenty loaves of barley, and fresh ears of corn in his sack. And he
said: \`Give unto the people, that they may eat.' <span
id="an_kg2:4:43">43</span> And his servant said: \`How should I set this
before a hundred men?' But he said: \`Give the people, that they may
eat; for thus saith the LORD: They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.'
<span id="an_kg2:4:44">44</span> So he set it before them, and they did
eat, and left thereof, according to the word of the LORD.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 5](kg2005.md)

</div>
