<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Kings Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2014)  [Next](kg2016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 15

<span id="an_kg2:15:1">1</span> In the twenty and seventh year of
Jeroboam king of Israel began  <span id="fr_145"></span>[a](#fn_141.md)
Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign. <span
id="an_kg2:15:2">2</span> Sixteen years old was he when he began to
reign; and he reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem; and his mother's
name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. <span id="an_kg2:15:3">3</span> And he
did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that
his father Amaziah had done. <span id="an_kg2:15:4">4</span> Howbeit the
high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and offered
in the high places. <span id="an_kg2:15:5">5</span> And the LORD smote
the king, so that he was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in
a house set apart. And Jotham the king's son was over the household,
judging the people of the land. <span id="an_kg2:15:6">6</span> Now the
rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are they not written
in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? <span
id="an_kg2:15:7">7</span> And Azariah slept with his fathers; and they
buried him with his fathers in the city of David; and Jotham his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg2:15:8">8</span> In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah
king of Judah did Zechariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in
Samaria six months. <span id="an_kg2:15:9">9</span> And he did that
which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as his fathers had done; he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he
made Israel to sin. <span id="an_kg2:15:10">10</span> And Shallum the
son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote him before the people,
and slew him, and reigned in his stead. <span
id="an_kg2:15:11">11</span> Now the rest of the acts of Zechariah,
behold, they are written

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. <span
id="an_kg2:15:12">12</span> This was the word of the LORD which He spoke
unto Jehu, saying: \`Thy sons to the fourth generation shall sit upon
the throne of Israel.' And so it came to pass.

<span id="an_kg2:15:13">13</span> Shallum the son of Jabesh began to
reign in the nine and thirtieth year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he
reigned the space of a month in Samaria. <span
id="an_kg2:15:14">14</span> And Menahem the son of Gadi went up from
Tirzah, and came to Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in
Samaria, and slew him, and reigned in his stead. <span
id="an_kg2:15:15">15</span> Now the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his
conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel. <span
id="an_kg2:15:16">16</span> Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all that
were therein, and the borders thereof, from Tirzah; because they opened
not to him, therefore he smote it; and all the women therein that were
with child he ripped up.

<span id="an_kg2:15:17">17</span> In the nine and thirtieth year of
Azariah king of Judah began Mena-hem the son of Gadi to reign over
Israel, and reigned ten years in Samaria. <span
id="an_kg2:15:18">18</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight
of the LORD; he departed not all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin. <span
id="an_kg2:15:19">19</span> There came against the land Pul the king of
Assyria; and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his
hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand. <span
id="an_kg2:15:20">20</span> And Men-ahem exacted the money of Israel,
even of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of
silver, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned
back, and stayed not there in the land. <span
id="an_kg2:15:21">21</span> Now the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all
that he did, are they not writtenin the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel? <span id="an_kg2:15:22">22</span> And Menahem slept
with his fathers; and Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg2:15:23">23</span> In the fiftieth year of Azariah king
of Judah Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in
Samaria, and reigned two years. <span id="an_kg2:15:24">24</span> And he
did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he departed not from
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin.
<span id="an_kg2:15:25">25</span> And Pekah the son of Remaliah, his
captain, conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the castle
of the king's house, by Argob and by Arieh; and with him were fifty men
of the Gileadites; and he slew him, and reigned in his stead. <span
id="an_kg2:15:26">26</span> Now the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and
all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_kg2:15:27">27</span> In the two and fiftieth year of
Azariah king of Judah Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over
Israel in Samaria, and reigned twenty years. <span
id="an_kg2:15:28">28</span> And he did that which was evil in the sight
of the LORD; he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
wherewith he made Israel to sin. <span id="an_kg2:15:29">29</span> In
the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria,
and took Ijon, and Abel-beth-maacah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor,
and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali; and he carried them
captive to Assyria. <span id="an_kg2:15:30">30</span> And Hoshea the son
of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote
him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead, in the twentieth year of
Jotham the son of Uzziah. <span id="an_kg2:15:31">31</span> Now the rest
of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in
the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

<span id="an_kg2:15:32">32</span> In the second year of Pekah the son of
Remaliah king of Israel began Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah to
reign. <span id="an_kg2:15:33">33</span> Five and twenty years old was
he when he began to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem;
and his mother's name was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok. <span
id="an_kg2:15:34">34</span> And he did that which was right in the eyes
of the LORD; he did according to all that his father Uzziah had done.
<span id="an_kg2:15:35">35</span> Howbeit the high places were not taken
away; the people still sacrificed and offered in the high places. He
built the upper gate of the house of the LORD. <span
id="an_kg2:15:36">36</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all
that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Judah? <span id="an_kg2:15:37">37</span> In those days the LORD
began to send against Judah Rezin the king of Aram, and Pekah the son of
Remaliah. <span id="an_kg2:15:38">38</span> And Jotham slept with his
fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his
father; and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[461:a](kg2015.htm#fr_145.md) In verses 13, 30,
&c., *Uzziah*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 16](kg2016.md)

</div>
