<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Kings Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2007)  [Next](kg2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 8

<span id="an_kg2:8:1">1</span> Now Elisha had spoken unto the woman,
whose son he had restored to life, saying: \`Arise, and go thou and thy
household, and sojourn wheresoever thou canst sojourn; for the LORD hath
called for a famine; and it shall also come upon the land seven years.'
<span id="an_kg2:8:2">2</span> And the woman arose, and did according to
the word of the man of God; and she went with her household, and
sojourned in the land of the Philistines seven years. <span
id="an_kg2:8:3">3</span> And it came to pass at the seven years' end,
that the woman returned out of the land of the Philistines; and she went
forth to cry unto the king for her house and for her land. <span
id="an_kg2:8:4">4</span> Now the king was talking with Gehazi the
servant of the man of God, saying: \`Tell me, I pray thee, all the great
things that Elisha hath done.' <span id="an_kg2:8:5">5</span> And it
came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had restored to life him
that was dead, that, behold, the woman, whose son he had restored to
life, cried to the king for her house and for her land. And Gehazi said:
\`My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom Elisha
restored to life.' <span id="an_kg2:8:6">6</span> And when the king
asked the woman, she told him. So the king appointed unto her a certain
officer, saying: \`Restore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the
field since the day that she left the land, even until now.'

<span id="an_kg2:8:7">7</span> And Elisha came to Damascus; and
Ben-hadad the king of Aram was sick; and it was told him, saying: \`The
man of God is come hither.' <span id="an_kg2:8:8">8</span> And the king
said unto Hazael: \`Take a present in thy hand, and go meet the man of
God, and inquire of the LORD by him, saying; Shall I recover of this
sickness?' <span id="an_kg2:8:9">9</span> So Hazael went to meet him,
and took a present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty
camels' burden, and came and stood before him, and said: \`Thy son
Ben-hadad king of Aram hath sent me to thee, saying: Shall I recover of
this sickness?' <span id="an_kg2:8:10">10</span> And Elisha said unto
him: \`Go, say unto him: Thou shalt surely recover; howbeit the LORD
hath shown me that he shall surely die.' <span
id="an_kg2:8:11">11</span> And he settled his countenance stedfastly
upon him, until he was ashamed; and the man of God wept. <span
id="an_kg2:8:12">12</span> And Hazael said: \`Why weepeth my lord?' And
he answered: \`Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the
children of Israel: their strongholds wilt thou set on fire, and their
young men wilt thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash in pieces their
little ones, and rip up their women with child.' <span
id="an_kg2:8:13">13</span> And Hazael said: \`But what is thy servant,
who is but a dog, that he should do this great thing?' And

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Elisha answered:
\`The LORD hath shown me that thou shalt be king over Aram.' <span
id="an_kg2:8:14">14</span> Then he departed from Elisha, and came to his
master, who said to him: \`What said Elisha to thee?' And he answered:
\`He told me that thou wouldest surely recover.' <span
id="an_kg2:8:15">15</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that he
took the coverlet, and dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, so
that he died; and Hazael reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg2:8:16">16</span> And in the fifth year of Joram the son
of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram
the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah began to reign. <span
id="an_kg2:8:17">17</span> Thirty and two years old was he when he began
to reign; and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. <span
id="an_kg2:8:18">18</span> And he walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, as did the house of Ahab; for he had the daughter of Ahab to
wife; and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD. <span
id="an_kg2:8:19">19</span> Howbeit the LORD would not destroy Judah, for
David His servant's sake, as He promised him to give unto him a lamp and
to his children alway.

<span id="an_kg2:8:20">20</span> In his days Edom revolted from under
the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves. <span
id="an_kg2:8:21">21</span> Then Joram passed over to Zair, and all his
chariots with him; and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites that
compassed him about, and the captains of the chariots; and the people
fled to their tents. <span id="an_kg2:8:22">22</span> Yet Edom revolted
from under the hand of Judah, unto this day. Then did Libnah revolt at
the same time. <span id="an_kg2:8:23">23</span> And the rest of the acts
of Joram, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Judah? <span id="an_kg2:8:24">24</span> And
Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the
city of David; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead. <span
id="an_kg2:8:25">25</span> In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab
king of Israel did Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to
reign. <span id="an_kg2:8:26">26</span> Two and twenty years old was
Ahaziah when he began to reign; and he reigned one year in Jerusalem.
And his mother's name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri king of Israel.
<span id="an_kg2:8:27">27</span> And he walked in the way of the house
of Ahab, and did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did
the house of Ahab; for he was the son-in-law of the house of Ahab. <span
id="an_kg2:8:28">28</span> And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to war
against Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-gilead; and the Arameans wounded
Joram. <span id="an_kg2:8:29">29</span> And king Joram returned to be
healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Arameans had given him at
Ramah, when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. And Ahaziah the son
of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in
Jezreel, because he was sick.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 9](kg2009)

</div>
