<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Kings Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2022)  [Next](kg2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 23

<span id="an_kg2:23:1">1</span> And the king sent, and they gathered
unto him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem. <span
id="an_kg2:23:2">2</span> And the king went up to the house of the LORD,
and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him,
and the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, both small and
great; and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the
covenant which was found in the house of the LORD. <span
id="an_kg2:23:3">3</span> And the king stood on the platform, and made a
covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep His
commandments, and His testimonies, and His statutes, with all his heart,
and all his soul, to confirm the words of this covenant that were
written in this book; and all the people stood to the covenant.

<span id="an_kg2:23:4">4</span> And the king commanded Hilkiah the high
priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the
door, to bring forth out of the temple of the LORD all the vessels that
were

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

made for Baal, and for the Asherah, and for all the host of heaven; and
he burned them without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and carried
the ashes of them unto Beth-el. <span id="an_kg2:23:5">5</span> And he
put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to
offer in the high places in the cities of Judah, and in the places round
about Jerusalem; them also that offered unto Baal, to the sun, and to
the moon, and to the constellations, and to all the host of heaven.
<span id="an_kg2:23:6">6</span> And he brought out the Asherah from the
house of the LORD, without Jerusalem, unto the brook Kidron, and burned
it at the brook Kidron, and stamped it small to powder, and cast the
powder thereof upon the graves of the common people. <span
id="an_kg2:23:7">7</span> And he broke down the houses of the sodomites,
that were in the house of the LORD, where the women wove coverings for
the Asherah. <span id="an_kg2:23:8">8</span> And he brought all the
priests out of the cities of Judah, and defiled the high places where
the priests had made offerings, from Geba to Beer-sheba; and he broke
down the high places of the gates that were at the entrance of the gate
of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on a man's left hand as
he entered the gate of the city. <span
id="an_kg2:23:9">9</span> Nevertheless the priests of the high places
came not up to the altar of the LORD in Jerusalem, but they did eat
unleavened bread among their brethren. <span
id="an_kg2:23:10">10</span> And he defiled Topheth, which is in the
valley of the son of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his
daughter to pass through the fire to Molech. <span
id="an_kg2:23:11">11</span> And he took away the horses that the kings
of Judah had given to the sun, at the entrance of the house of the LORD,
by the chamber of Nethan-melech the officer, which was in the precincts;
and he burned the chariots of the sun with fire. <span
id="an_kg2:23:12">12</span> And the altars that were on the roof of the
upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars
which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the LORD, did
the king break down, and beat them down from thence, and cast the dust
of them into the brook Kidron. <span id="an_kg2:23:13">13</span> And the
high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of
the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had builded
for Ashtoreth the detestation of the Zidonians, and for Chemosh the
detestation of Moab, and for Milcom the abomination of the children of
Ammon, did the king defile. <span id="an_kg2:23:14">14</span> And he
broke in pieces the pillars, and cut down the Asherim, and filled their
places with the bones of men.

<span id="an_kg2:23:15">15</span> Moreover the altar that was at
Beth-el, and the high place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin, had made, even that altar and the high place he broke
down; and he burned the high place and stamped it small to powder, and
burned the Asherah. <span id="an_kg2:23:16">16</span> And as Josiah
turned himself, he spied the sepulchres that were there in the mount;
and he sent, and took the bones out of the sepulchres, and burned them
upon the altar, and defiled it, according to the word of the LORD which
the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these things. <span
id="an_kg2:23:17">17</span> Then he said: \`What monument is that which
I see?' And the men of the city told him: \`It is the sepulchre of the
man of God, who came from Judah, and proclaimed these things that thou
hast done against the altar of Beth-el.' <span
id="an_kg2:23:18">18</span> And he said: \`Let him be; let no man move
his bones.' So they let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

that came out of Samaria. <span id="an_kg2:23:19">19</span> And all the
houses also of the high places that were in the cities of Samaria, which
the kings of Israel had made to provoke \[the LORD\], Josiah took away,
and did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Beth-el.
<span id="an_kg2:23:20">20</span> And he slew all the priests of the
high places that were there, upon the altars, and burned men's bones
upon them; and he returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_kg2:23:21">21</span> And the king commanded all the people,
saying: \`Keep the passover unto the LORD your God, as it is written in
this book of the covenant.' <span id="an_kg2:23:22">22</span> For there
was not kept such a passover from the days of the judges that judged
Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of
Judah; <span id="an_kg2:23:23">23</span> but in the eighteenth year of
king Josiah was this passover kept to the LORD in Jerusalem. <span
id="an_kg2:23:24">24</span> Moreover them that divined by a ghost or a
familiar spirit, and the teraphim, and the idols, and all the detestable
things that were spied in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, did Josiah
put away, that he might confirm the words of the law which were written
in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the house of the LORD.
<span id="an_kg2:23:25">25</span> And like unto him was there no king
before him, that turned to the LORD with all his heart, and with all his
soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither
after him arose there any like him.

<span id="an_kg2:23:26">26</span> Notwithstanding the LORD turned not
from the fierceness of His great wrath, wherewith His anger was kindled
against Judah, because of all the provocations wherewith Manasseh had
provoked Him. <span id="an_kg2:23:27">27</span> And the LORD said: \`I
will remove Judah also out of My sight, as I have removed Israel, and I
will cast off this city which I have chosen, even Jerusalem, and the
house of which I said: My name shall be there.'

<span id="an_kg2:23:28">28</span> Now the rest of the acts of Josiah,
and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah? <span id="an_kg2:23:29">29</span> In his days
Pharaoh-necoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the
river Euphrates; and king Josiah went against him; and he slew him at
Megiddo, when he had seen him. <span id="an_kg2:23:30">30</span> And his
servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, and brought him to
Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulchre. And the people of the
land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him
king in his father's stead.

<span id="an_kg2:23:31">31</span> Jehoahaz was twenty and three years
old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem;
and his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
<span id="an_kg2:23:32">32</span> And he did that which was evil in the
sight of the LORD, according to all that his fathers had done. <span
id="an_kg2:23:33">33</span> And Pharaoh-necoh put him in bands at Riblah
in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem; and put the
land to a fine of a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.
<span id="an_kg2:23:34">34</span> And Pharaoh-necoh made Eliakim the son
of Josiah king in the room of Josiah his father, and changed his name to
Jehoiakim; but he took Jehoahaz away; and he came to Egypt, and died
there. <span id="an_kg2:23:35">35</span> And Jehoiakim gave the silver
and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land to give the money
according to the commandment of Pharaoh; he exacted the silver and the
gold of the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation,
to give it unto Pharaoh-necoh.

<span id="an_kg2:23:36">36</span> Jehoiakim was twenty and five years
old when he began to reign; and

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Zebudah
the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. <span id="an_kg2:23:37">37</span> And
he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all
that his fathers had done.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 24](kg2024)

</div>
