<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Kings Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2021)  [Next](kg2023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 22

<span id="an_kg2:22:1">1</span> Josiah was eight years old when he began
to reign; and he reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Jedidah the daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath. <span
id="an_kg2:22:2">2</span> And he did that which was right in the eyes of
the LORD, and walked in all the way of David his father, and turned not
aside to the right hand or to the left.

<span id="an_kg2:22:3">3</span> And it came to pass in the eighteenth
year of king Josiah, that the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the
son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of the LORD, saying: <span
id="an_kg2:22:4">4</span> \`Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he
may sum the money which is brought into the house of the LORD, which the
keepers of the door have gathered of the people; <span
id="an_kg2:22:5">5</span> and let them deliver it into the hand of the
workmen that have the oversight of the house of the LORD; and let them
give it to the workmen that are in the house of the LORD, to repair the
breaches of the house; <span id="an_kg2:22:6">6</span> unto the
carpenters, and to the builders, and to the masons; and for buying
timber and hewn stone to repair the house.'—<span
id="an_kg2:22:7">7</span> Howbeit there was no reckoning made with them
of the money that was delivered into their hand; for they dealt
faithfully.

<span id="an_kg2:22:8">8</span> And Hilkiah the high priest said unto
Shaphan the scribe: \`I have found the book of the Law in the house of
the LORD.' And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan, and he read it.

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_kg2:22:9">9</span> And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and
brought back word unto the king, and said: \`Thy servants have poured
out the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into
the hand of the workmen that have the oversight of the house of the
LORD.' <span id="an_kg2:22:10">10</span>  And Shaphan the scribe told
the king, saying: \`Hilkiah the priest hath delivered me a book.' And
Shaphan read it before the king. <span id="an_kg2:22:11">11</span> And
it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the
Law, that he rent his clothes. <span id="an_kg2:22:12">12</span> And the
king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and
Achbor the son of Micaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king's
servant, saying: <span id="an_kg2:22:13">13</span> \`Go ye, inquire of
the LORD for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the
words of this book that is found; for great is the wrath of the LORD
that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened unto
the words of this book, to do according unto all that which is written
concerning us.'

<span id="an_kg2:22:14">14</span> So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and
Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asaiah, went unto Huldah the prophetess, the
wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the
wardrobe—now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second quarter—and they spoke
with her. <span id="an_kg2:22:15">15</span> And she said unto them:
\`Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Tell ye the man that sent you
unto me: <span id="an_kg2:22:16">16</span> Thus saith the LORD: Behold,
I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof,
even all the words of the book which the king of Judah hath read; <span
id="an_kg2:22:17">17</span> because they have forsaken Me, and have
offered unto other gods, that they might provoke Me with all the work of
their hands; therefore My wrath shall be kindled against this place, and
it shall not be quenched. <span id="an_kg2:22:18">18</span> But unto the
king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of the LORD, thus shall ye say to
him: Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: As touching the words which
thou hast heard, <span id="an_kg2:22:19">19</span> because thy heart was
tender, and thou didst humble thyself before the LORD, when thou
heardest what I spoke against this place, and against the inhabitants
thereof, that they should become an astonishment and a curse, and hast
rent thy clothes, and wept before Me, I also have heard thee, saith the
LORD. <span id="an_kg2:22:20">20</span> Therefore, behold, I will gather
thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace,
neither shall thine eyes see all the evil which I will bring upon this
place.' And they brought back word unto the king.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 23](kg2023)

</div>
