<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Kings Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 25

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_kg2:25:1">1</span> And it came to pass in the ninth year of his
reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against
Jerusalem, and encamped against it; and they built forts against it
round about. <span id="an_kg2:25:2">2</span> So the city was besieged
unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah. <span
id="an_kg2:25:3">3</span> On the ninth day of the \[fourth\] month the
famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people
of the land. <span id="an_kg2:25:4">4</span> Then a breach was made in
the city, and all the men of war \[fled\] by night by the way of the
gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden—now the
Chaldeans were against the city round about—and the king went by the
wary of the Arabah. <span id="an_kg2:25:5">5</span> But the army of the
Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook him in the plains of
Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him. <span
id="an_kg2:25:6">6</span> Then they took the king, and carried him up
unto the king of Babylon to Riblah; and they gave judgment upon him.
<span id="an_kg2:25:7">7</span> And they slew the sons of Zedekiah
before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in
fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

<span id="an_kg2:25:8">8</span> Now in the fifth month, on the seventh
day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar,
king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, a servant of
the king of Babylon, unto Jerusalem. <span id="an_kg2:25:9">9</span> And
he burnt the house of the LORD, and the king's house; and all the houses
of Jerusalem, even every great man's house, burnt he with fire. <span
id="an_kg2:25:10">10</span> And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were
with the captain of the guard, broke down the walls of Jerusalem round
about. <span id="an_kg2:25:11">11</span> And the residue of the people
that were left in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the
king of Babylon, and the residue of the multitude, did Nebuzaradan the
captain of the guard carry away captive. <span
id="an_kg2:25:12">12</span> But the captain of the guard left of the
poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.

<span id="an_kg2:25:13">13</span> And the pillars of brass that were in
the house of the LORD, and the bases and the brazen sea that were in the
house of the LORD, did the Chaldeans break in pieces, and carried the
brass of them to Babylon. <span id="an_kg2:25:14">14</span> And the
pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the pans, and all the
vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away. <span
id="an_kg2:25:15">15</span> And the fire-pans, and the basins, that
which was of gold, in gold, and that which was of silver, in silver, the
captain of the guard took away. <span id="an_kg2:25:16">16</span> The
two pillars, the one sea, and the bases, which Solomon had made for the
house of the LORD; the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
<span id="an_kg2:25:17">17</span> The height of the one pillar was
eighteen cubits, and a capital of brass was upon it; and the height of
the capital was three cubits; with network and pomegranates upon the
capital round about, all of brass; and like unto these had the second
pillar with network.

<span id="an_kg2:25:18">18</span> And the captain of the guard took
Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three
keepers of the door; <span id="an_kg2:25:19">19</span> and out of the
city he took an officer that was set over the men of war; and five men
of them that saw the king's face, who were found in the city; and the
scribe of the captain of the host, who mustered the people of the land;
and threescore men of the people of the land,

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

that were found in the city. <span id="an_kg2:25:20">20</span> And
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the
king of Babylon to Riblah. <span id="an_kg2:25:21">21</span> And the
king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death at Riblah in the land
of Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land. <span
id="an_kg2:25:22">22</span> And as for the people that were left in the
land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, even over
them he made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, governor.

<span id="an_kg2:25:23">23</span> Now when all the captains of the
forces, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made
Gedaliah governor, they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of
Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite,
they and their men. <span id="an_kg2:25:24">24</span> And Gedaliah swore
to them and to their men, and said unto them: \`Fear not because of the
servants of the Chaldeans; dwell in the land, and serve the king of
Babylon, and it shall be well with you.' <span
id="an_kg2:25:25">25</span> But itcame to pass in the seventh month,
that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed
royal, came, and ten men with him, and smote Gedaliah, that he died, and
the Jews and the Chaldeans that were with him at Mizpah. <span
id="an_kg2:25:26">26</span> And all the people, both small and great,
and the captains of the forces, arose, and came to Egypt; for they were
afraid of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_kg2:25:27">27</span> And it came to pass in the seven and
thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the
twelfth month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, that
Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, did
lift up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison. <span
id="an_kg2:25:28">28</span> And he spoke kindly to him, and set his
throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon.
<span id="an_kg2:25:29">29</span> And he changed his prison garments,
and did eat bread before him continually all the days of his life. <span
id="an_kg2:25:30">30</span> And for his allowance, there was a continual
allowance given him of the king, every day a portion, all the days of
his life.

 
