<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev025)  [Next](lev027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 26

<span id="an_lev:26:1">1</span> Ye shall make you no idols, neither
shall ye rear you up a graven image, or a pillar, neither shall ye place
any figured stone in your land, to bow down unto it; for I am the LORD
your God. <span id="an_lev:26:2">2</span> Ye shall keep My sabbaths, and
reverence My sanctuary: I am the LORD. <span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

‏בחקתי‎

<span id="an_lev:26:3">3</span> If ye walk in My statutes, and keep My
commandments, and do them; <span id="an_lev:26:4">4</span> then I will
give your rains in their season, and the land shall yield her produce,
and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. <span
id="an_lev:26:5">5</span> And your threshing shall reach unto the
vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time; and ye shall
eat your bread until ye have enough, and dwell in your land safely.
<span id="an_lev:26:6">6</span> And I will give peace in the land, and
ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid; and I will cause evil
beasts to cease out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your
land. <span id="an_lev:26:7">7</span> And ye shall chase your enemies,
and they shall fall before you by the sword. <span
id="an_lev:26:8">8</span> And five of you shall chase a hundred, and a
hundred of you shall chase ten thousand; and your enemies shall fall
before you by the sword. <span id="an_lev:26:9">9</span> And I will have
respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you; and will
establish My covenant with you. <span id="an_lev:26:10">10</span> And ye
shall eat old store long kept, and ye shall bring forth the old from
before the new. <span id="an_lev:26:11">11</span> And I will set My
tabernacle among you, and My soul shall not abhor you. <span
id="an_lev:26:12">12</span> And I will walk among you, and will be your
God, and ye shall be My people. <span id="an_lev:26:13">13</span> I am
the LORD your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that
ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bars of your yoke,
and made you go upright.

<span id="an_lev:26:14">14</span> But if ye will not hearken unto Me,
and will not do all these commandments; <span
id="an_lev:26:15">15</span> and if ye shall reject My statutes, and if
your soul abhor Mine ordinances, so that ye will not do all My
commandments, but break My covenant; <span id="an_lev:26:16">16</span> I
also will do this unto you: I will appoint terror over you, even
consumption and fever, that shall make the eyes to fail, and the soul to
languish; and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat
it. <span id="an_lev:26:17">17</span> And I will set My face against
you, and ye shall be smitten before your enemies; they that hate you
shall rule over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth you. <span
id="an_lev:26:18">18</span> And if ye will not yet for these things
hearken unto Me, then I will chastise you seven times more for your
sins. <span id="an_lev:26:19">19</span> And I will break the pride of
your power; and I will make, your heaven as iron, and your earth as
brass. <span id="an_lev:26:20">20</span> And your strength shall be
spent in vain; for your land shall not yield her produce, neither shall
the trees of the land yield their fruit. <span
id="an_lev:26:21">21</span> And if ye walk contrary unto Me, and will
not hearken unto Me; I will bring seven times more plagues upon you
according to your sins. <span id="an_lev:26:22">22</span> And I will
send the beast of the field among you, which shall rob you of your
children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number; and your
ways shall become desolate. <span id="an_lev:26:23">23</span> And if in
spite of these things ye will not be corrected unto Me, but will walk
contrary unto Me; <span id="an_lev:26:24">24</span> then will I also
walk contrary unto you; and I will smite you, even I, seven times for
your sins. <span id="an_lev:26:25">25</span> And I will bring a sword
upon you, that shall execute the vengeance of the covenant; and ye shall
be gathered together within your cities; and I will send the pestilence
among you; and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy. <span
id="an_lev:26:26">26</span> When I break your staff of bread, ten women
shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver your bread
again by weight; and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.

<span id="an_lev:26:27">27</span> And if ye will not for all this <span
id="page_154">p. 154</span> hearken unto Me, but walk contrary unto Me;
<span id="an_lev:26:28">28</span> then I will walk contrary unto you in
fury; and I also will chastise you seven times for your sins. <span
id="an_lev:26:29">29</span> And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and
the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat. <span
id="an_lev:26:30">30</span> And I will destroy your high places, and cut
down your sun-pillars, and cast your carcasses upon the carcasses of
your idols; and My soul shall abhor you. <span
id="an_lev:26:31">31</span> And I will make your cities a waste, and
will bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the
savour of your sweet odours. <span id="an_lev:26:32">32</span> And I
will bring the land into desolation; and your enemies that dwell therein
shall be astonished at it. <span id="an_lev:26:33">33</span> And you
will I scatter among the nations, and I will draw out the sword after
you; and your land shall be a desolation, and your cities shall be a
waste. <span id="an_lev:26:34">34</span> Then shall the land be paid her
sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye are in your enemies’
land; even then shall the land rest, and repay her sabbaths. <span
id="an_lev:26:35">35</span> As long as it fifth desolate it shall have
rest; even the rest which it had not in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt
upon it. <span id="an_lev:26:36">36</span> And as for them that are left
of you, I will send a faintness into their heart in the lands of their
enemies; and the sound of a driven leaf shall chase them; and they shall
flee, as one fleeth from the sword; and they shall fall when none
pursueth. <span id="an_lev:26:37">37</span> And they shall stumble one
upon another, as it were before the sword, when none pursueth; and ye
shall have no power to stand before your enemies. <span
id="an_lev:26:38">38</span> And ye shall perish among the nations, and
the land of your enemies shall eat you up. <span
id="an_lev:26:39">39</span> And they that are left of you shall pine
away in their iniquity in your enemies’ lands; and also in the
iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them. <span
id="an_lev:26:40">40</span> And they shall confess their iniquity, and
the iniquity of their fathers, in their treachery which they committed
against Me, and also that they have walked contrary unto Me. <span
id="an_lev:26:41">41</span> I also will walk contrary unto them, and
bring them into the land of their enemies; if then perchance their
uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they then be paid the punishment of
their iniquity; <span id="an_lev:26:42">42</span> then will I remember
My covenant with Jacob, and also My covenant with Isaac, and also My
covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land.
<span id="an_lev:26:43">43</span> For the land shall lie forsaken
without them, and shall be paid her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate
without them; and they shall be paid the punishment of their iniquity;
because, even because they rejected Mine ordinances, and their soul
abhorred My statutes. <span id="an_lev:26:44">44</span> And yet for all
that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject
them, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break
My covenant with them; for I am the LORD their God. <span
id="an_lev:26:45">45</span> But I will for their sakes remember the
covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of
Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God: I am the
LORD.

<span id="an_lev:26:46">46</span> These are the statutes and ordinances
and laws, which the LORD made between Him and the children of Israel in
mount Sinai by the hand of Moses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 27](lev027)

</div>
