<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev003)  [Next](lev005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 4

<span id="an_lev:4:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:4:2">2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel,
saying:

If . any one shall sin through error, in any of the things which the
LORD hath commanded not to be done, and shall do any one of them: <span
id="an_lev:4:3">3</span> if the anointed priest shall sin so as to bring
guilt on the people, then let him offer for his sin, which he hath
sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto the LORD for a
sin-offering. <span id="an_lev:4:4">4</span> And he shall bring the
bullock unto the door of the tent of meeting before the LORD; and he
shall lay his hand upon the head of the bullock, and kill the bullock
before the LORD. <span id="an_lev:4:5">5</span> And the anointed priest
shall take of the blood of the bullock, and bring it to the tent of
meeting. <span id="an_lev:4:6">6</span> And the priest shall dip his
finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before the
LORD, in front of the veil of the sanctuary. <span
id="an_lev:4:7">7</span> And the priest shall put of the blood upon the
horns of the altar of sweet incense before the LORD, which is in the
tent of meeting; and all the remaining blood of the bullock shall he
pour out at the base of the altar of burnt-offering, which is at the
door of the tent of meeting. <span id="an_lev:4:8">8</span> And all the
fat of the bullock of the sin-offering he shall take off from it: the
fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
<span id="an_lev:4:9">9</span> and the two kidneys, and the fat that is
upon them, which is by the loins, and the lobe above the liver, which he
shall take away by the kidneys, <span id="an_lev:4:10">10</span> as it
is taken off from the ox of the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the
priest shall make them smoke upon the altar of burnt-offering. <span
id="an_lev:4:11">11</span> But the skin of the bullock, and all its
flesh, with its head, and with its legs, and its inwards, and its dung,
<span id="an_lev:4:12">12</span> even the whole bullock shall he carry
forth without the camp unto a clean place, where the ashes are poured
out, and burn it on wood with fire; where <span id="page_121">p.
121</span> the ashes are poured out shall it be burnt.

<span id="an_lev:4:13">13</span> And if the whole congregation of Israel
shall err, the thing being hid from the eyes of the assembly, and do any
of the things which the LORD hath commanded not to be done, and are
guilty: <span id="an_lev:4:14">14</span> when the sin wherein they have
sinned is known, then the assembly shall offer a young bullock for a
sin-offering, and bring it before the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_lev:4:15">15</span> And the elders of the congregation shall lay
their hands upon the head of the bullock before the LORD; and the
bullock shall be killed before the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:4:16">16</span> And the anointed priest shall bring of the
blood of the bullock to the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_lev:4:17">17</span> And the priest shall dip his finger in the
blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD, in front of the
veil. <span id="an_lev:4:18">18</span> And he shall put of the blood
upon the horns of the altar which is before the LORD, that is in the
tent of meeting, and all the remaining blood shall he pour out at the
base of the altar of burnt-offering, which is at the door of the tent of
meeting. <span id="an_lev:4:19">19</span> And all the fat thereof shall
he take off from it, and make it smoke upon the altar. <span
id="an_lev:4:20">20</span> Thus shall he do with the bullock; as he did
with the bullock of the sin-offering, so shall he do with this; and the
priest shall make atonement for them, and they shall be forgiven. <span
id="an_lev:4:21">21</span> And he shall carry forth the bullock without
the camp, and burn it as he burned the first bullock; it is the
sin-offering for the assembly.

<span id="an_lev:4:22">22</span> When a ruler sinneth, and doeth through
error any one of all the things which the LORD his God hath commanded
not to be done, and is guilty: <span id="an_lev:4:23">23</span> if his
sin, wherein he hath sinned, be known to him, he shall bring for his
offering a goat, a male without blemish. <span
id="an_lev:4:24">24</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of
the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt-offering
before the LORD; it is a sin-offering. <span
id="an_lev:4:25">25</span> And the priest shall take of the blood of the
sin-offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of
burnt-offering, and the remaining blood thereof shall he pour out at the
base of the altar of burnt-offering. <span
id="an_lev:4:26">26</span> And all the fat thereof shall he make smoke
upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the
priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin, and he shall
be forgiven.

<span id="an_lev:4:27">27</span> And if any one of the common people sin
through error, in doing any of the things which the LORD hath commanded
not to be done, and be guilty: <span id="an_lev:4:28">28</span> if his
sin, which he hath sinned, be known to him, then he shall bring for his
offering a goat, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath
sinned. <span id="an_lev:4:29">29</span> And he shall lay his hand upon
the head of the sin-offering, and kill the sin-offering in the place of
burnt-offering. <span id="an_lev:4:30">30</span> And the priest shall
take of the blood thereof with his finger, and put it upon the horns of
the altar of burnt-offering, and all the remaining blood thereof shall
he pour out at the base of the altar. <span
id="an_lev:4:31">31</span> And all the fat thereof shall he take away,
as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and
the priest shall make it smoke upon the altar for a sweet savour unto
the LORD; and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be
forgiven.

<span id="an_lev:4:32">32</span> And if he bring a lamb as his offering
for a sin-offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish. <span
id="an_lev:4:33">33</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of
the sin-offering, and kill it for a sin-offering in the place where they
kill the burnt-offering. <span id="an_lev:4:34">34</span> And <span
id="page_122">p. 122</span> the priest shall take of the blood of the
sin-offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of
burnt-offering, and all the remaining blood thereof shall he pour out at
the base of the altar. <span id="an_lev:4:35">35</span> And all the fat
thereof shall he take away, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from
the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the priest shall make them smoke
on the altar, upon the offerings of the LORD made by fire; and the
priest shall make atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath
sinned, and he shall be forgiven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 5](lev005.md)

</div>
