<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev018)  [Next](lev020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ‏קרשים‎

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 19

<span id="an_lev:19:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:19:2">2</span> Speak unto all the congregation of the
children of Israel, and say unto them:

Ye shall be holy; for I the LORD your God am holy. <span
id="an_lev:19:3">3</span> Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his
father, and ye shall keep My sabbaths: I am the LORD your God. <span
id="an_lev:19:4">4</span> Turn ye not unto the idols, nor make to
yourselves molten gods: I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_lev:19:5">5</span> And when ye offer a sacrifice of
peace-offerings unto the LORD, ye shall - offer it that ye may be
accepted. <span id="an_lev:19:6">6</span> It shall be eaten the same day
ye offer it, and on the morrow; and if aught remain until the third day,
it shall be burnt with fire. <span id="an_lev:19:7">7</span> And if it
be eaten at all on the third day, it is a vile thing; it shall not be
accepted. <span id="an_lev:19:8">8</span> But every one that eateth it
shall bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the holy thing of the
LORD; and that soul shall be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_lev:19:9">9</span> And when ye reap the harvest of your
land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corner of thy field, neither shalt
thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest. <span
id="an_lev:19:10">10</span> And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard,
neither shalt thou gather the fallen fruit of thy vineyard; thou shalt
leave them for the poor and for the stranger: I am the LORD your God.
<span id="an_lev:19:11">11</span> Ye shall not steal; neither shall ye
deal falsely, nor lie one to another. <span
id="an_lev:19:12">12</span> And ye shall not swear by My name. falsely,
so that thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:19:13">13</span> Thou shalt not oppress thy neighbour, nor
rob him; the wages of a hired servant <span id="page_143">p. 143</span>
shall not abide with thee all night until the morning. <span
id="an_lev:19:14">14</span> Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a
stumbling-block before the blind, but thou shalt fear thy God: I am the
LORD. <span id="an_lev:19:15">15</span> Ye shall do no unrighteousness
in judgment; thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor favour
the person of the mighty; but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy
neighbour. <span id="an_lev:19:16">16</span> Thou shalt not go up and
down as a talebearer among thy people; neither shalt thou stand idly by
the blood of thy neighbour: I am the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:19:17">17</span> Thou shalt not hate thy brother. in thy
heart; thou shalt surely rebuke thy neighbour, and not bear sin because
of him. <span id="an_lev:19:18">18</span> Thou shalt not take vengeance,
nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:19:19">19</span> Ye shall keep My statutes. Thou shalt not
let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind; thou shalt not sow thy field
with two kinds of seed; neither shall there come upon thee a garment of
two kinds of stuff mingled together. <span
id="an_lev:19:20">20</span> And whosoever Beth carnally with a woman,
that is a bondmaid, designated for a man, and not at all redeemed, nor
was freedom given her; there shall be inquisition; they shall not be put
to death, because she was not free. <span
id="an_lev:19:21">21</span> And he shall bring his forfeit unto the
LORD, unto the door of the tent of meeting, even a ram for a
guilt-offering. <span id="an_lev:19:22">22</span> And the priest shall
make atonement for him with the rain of the guilt-offering before the
LORD for his sin which he hath sinned; and he shall be forgiven for his
sin which he hath sinned.

<span id="an_lev:19:23">23</span> And when ye shall come into the land,
and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count
the fruit thereof as forbidden; three years shall it be as forbidden
unto you; it shall not be eaten. <span id="an_lev:19:24">24</span> And
in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy, for giving
praise unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:19:25">25</span> But in the fifth
year may ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you more
richly the increase thereof: I am the LORD your God. <span
id="an_lev:19:26">26</span> Ye shall not eat with the blood; neither
shall ye practise divination nor soothsaying. <span
id="an_lev:19:27">27</span> Ye shall not round the corners of your
heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard. <span
id="an_lev:19:28">28</span> Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh
for the dead, nor imprint any marks upon you: I am the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:19:29">29</span> Profane not thy daughter, to make her a
harlot, lest the land fall into harlotry, and the land become full of
lewdness. <span id="an_lev:19:30">30</span> Ye shall keep My sabbaths,
and reverence My sanctuary: I am the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:19:31">31</span> Turn ye not unto the ghosts, nor unto
familiar spirits; seek them not out, to be defiled by them: I am the
LORD your God. <span id="an_lev:19:32">32</span> Thou shalt rise up
before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and thou
shalt fear thy God: I am the LORD. <span id="an_lev:19:33">33</span> And
if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not do him wrong.
<span id="an_lev:19:34">34</span> The stranger that sojourneth with you
shall be unto you as the home-born among you, and thou shalt love him as
thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your
God. <span id="an_lev:19:35">35</span> Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure. <span
id="an_lev:19:36">36</span> Just balances, just weights, a just ephah,
and a just hin, shall ye have: I am the LORD your God, who brought you
out of the land of Egypt. <span id="an_lev:19:37">37</span> And ye shall
observe all My statutes, and all Mine ordinances, and do them: I am the
LORD.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 20](lev020.md)

</div>
