<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev005)  [Next](lev007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‏צו‎

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 6

<span id="an_lev:6:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:6:2">2</span> Command Aaron and his sons, saying:

This is the law of the burnt-offering: it is that which goeth up on its
firewood upon the altar all night unto the morning; and the fire of the
altar shall be kept burning thereby. <span id="an_lev:6:3">3</span> And
the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen breeches shall
he put upon his flesh; and he shall take up the ashes whereto the fire
hath consumed the burnt-offering on the altar, and he shall put them
beside the altar. <span id="an_lev:6:4">4</span> And he shall put off
his garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes
without the camp unto a clean place. <span id="an_lev:6:5">5</span> And
the fire upon the altar shall be kept burning thereby, it shall not go
out; and the priest shall kindle wood on it every morning; and he shall
lay the burnt-offering in order upon it, and shall make smoke thereon
the fat of the peace-offerings. <span id="an_lev:6:6">6</span> Fire
shall be kept burning upon the altar continually; it shall not go out.

<span id="an_lev:6:7">7</span> And this is the law of the meal-offering:
the sons of Aaron shall offer it before the LORD, in front of the altar.
<span id="an_lev:6:8">8</span> And he shall take up therefrom his
handful, of the fine flour of the meal-offering, and of the oil thereof,
and all the frankincense which is upon the meal-offering, and shall make
the memorial-part thereof smoke upon the altar for a sweet savour unto
the LORD. <span id="an_lev:6:9">9</span> And that which is left thereof
shall Aaron and his sons eat; it shall be eaten without leaven in a holy
place; in the court of the tent of meeting they shall eat it. <span
id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="an_lev:6:10">10</span> It shall
not be baked with leaven. I have given it as their portion of My
offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as the sin-offering, and as the
guilt-offering. <span id="an_lev:6:11">11</span> Every male among the
children of Aaron may eat of it, as a due for ever throughout your
generations, from the offerings of the LORD made by fire; whatsoever
toucheth them shall be holy.

<span id="an_lev:6:12">12</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:6:13">13</span> This is the offering of Aaron and of
his sons, which they shall offer unto the LORD in the day when he is
anointed: the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal-offering
perpetually, half of it in the morning, and half thereof in the evening.
<span id="an_lev:6:14">14</span> On a griddle it shall be made with oil;
when it is soaked, thou shalt bring it in; in broken pieces shalt thou
offer the meal-offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:6:15">15</span> And the anointed priest that shall be in his
stead from among his sons shall offer it, it is a due for ever; it shall
be wholly made to smoke unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:6:16">16</span> And every meal-offering of the priest shall
be wholly made to smoke; it shall not be eaten.

<span id="an_lev:6:17">17</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:6:18">18</span> Speak unto Aaron and to his sons,
saying:

This is the law of the sin-offering: in the place where the
burnt-offering is killed shall the sin-offering be killed before the
LORD; it is most holy. <span id="an_lev:6:19">19</span> The priest that
offereth it for sin shall eat it; in a holy place shall it be eaten, in
the court of the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_lev:6:20">20</span> Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof
shall be holy; and when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any
garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in a holy place.
<span id="an_lev:6:21">21</span> But the earthen vessel wherein it is
sodden I shall be broken; and if it be sodden in a brazen vessel, it
shall be scoured, and rinsed in water. <span
id="an_lev:6:22">22</span> Every male among the priests may eat thereof;
it is most holy. <span id="an_lev:6:23">23</span> And no sin-offering,
whereof any of the blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make
atonement in the holy place, shall be eaten; it shall be burnt with
fire.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 7](lev007.md)

</div>
