<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev001)  [Next](lev003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 2

<span id="an_lev:2:1">1</span> And when any one bringeth a meal-offering
unto the LORD, his offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour
oil upon it, and put frankincense <span id="page_119">p. 119</span>
thereon. <span id="an_lev:2:2">2</span> And he shall bring it to Aaron's
sons the priests; and he shall take thereout his handful of the fine
flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, together with all the
frankincense thereof; and the priest shall make the memorial-part
thereof smoke upon the altar, an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:2:3">3</span> But that which is
left of the meal-offering shall be Aaron's and his sons’; it is a thing
most holy of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.

<span id="an_lev:2:4">4</span> And when thou bringest a meal-offering
baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled
with oil, or unleavened wafers spread with oil.

<span id="an_lev:2:5">5</span> And if thy offering be a meal-offering
baked on a griddle, it shall be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with
oil. <span id="an_lev:2:6">6</span> Thou shalt break it in pieces, and
pour oil thereon; it is a meal-offering.

<span id="an_lev:2:7">7</span> And if thy offering be a meal-offering of
the stewing-pan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil. <span
id="an_lev:2:8">8</span> And thou shalt bring the meal-offering that is
made of these things unto the LORD; and it shall be presented unto the
priest, and he shall bring it unto the altar. <span
id="an_lev:2:9">9</span> And the priest shall take off from the
meal-offering the memorial-part thereof, and shall make it smoke upon
the altar—an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
<span id="an_lev:2:10">10</span> But that which is left of the
meal-offering shall be Aaron's and his sons’; it is a thing most holy of
the offerings of the LORD made by fire. <span
id="an_lev:2:11">11</span> No meal-offering, which ye shall bring unto
the LORD, shall be made with leaven; for ye shall make no leaven, nor
any honey, smoke as an offering made by fire unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:2:12">12</span> As an offering of first-fruits ye may bring
them unto the LORD; but they shall not come up for a sweet savour on the
altar. <span id="an_lev:2:13">13</span> And every meal-offering of thine
shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the
covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meal-offering; with all thine
offerings thou shalt offer salt.

<span id="an_lev:2:14">14</span> And if thou bring a meal-offering of
first-fruits unto the LORD, thou shalt bring for the meal-offering of
thy first-fruits corn in the ear parched with fire, even groats of the
fresh ear. <span id="an_lev:2:15">15</span> And thou shalt put oil upon
it, and lay frankincense thereon; it is a meal-offering. <span
id="an_lev:2:16">16</span> And the priest shall make the memorial-part
of it smoke, even of the groats thereof, and of the oil thereof, with
all the frankincense thereof; it is an offering made by fire unto the
LORD.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 3](lev003.md)

</div>
