<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](exo040)  [Next](lev002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

### ‏ויקרא‎

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 1

<span id="an_lev:1:1">1</span> AND the LORD called unto Moses, and spoke
unto him out of the tent of meeting, saying: <span
id="an_lev:1:2">2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto
them:

When any man of you bringeth an offering unto the LORD, ye shall bring
your offering of the cattle, even of the herd or of the flock.

<span id="an_lev:1:3">3</span> If his offering be a burnt-offering of
the herd, he shall offer it a male without blemish; he shall bring it to
the door of the tent of meeting, that he may be accepted before the
LORD. <span id="an_lev:1:4">4</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the
head of the burnt-offering; and it shall be accepted for him to make
atonement for him. <span id="an_lev:1:5">5</span> And he shall kill the
bullock before the LORD; and Aaron's sons, the priests, shall present
the blood, and dash the blood round about against the altar that is at
the door of the tent of meeting. <span id="an_lev:1:6">6</span> And he
shall flay the burnt-offering, and cut it into its pieces. <span
id="an_lev:1:7">7</span> And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire
upon the altar, and lay wood in order upon the fire. <span
id="an_lev:1:8">8</span> And Aaron's sons, the priests, shall lay the
pieces, and the head, and the suet, in order upon the wood that is on
the fire which is upon the altar; <span id="an_lev:1:9">9</span> but its
inwards and its legs shall he wash with water; and the priest shall make
the whole smoke on the altar, for a burnt-offering, an offering made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

<span id="an_lev:1:10">10</span> And if his offering be of the flock,
whether of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt-offering, he shall
offer it a male without blemish. <span id="an_lev:1:11">11</span> And he
shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the LORD; and
Aaron's sons, the priests, shall dash its blood against the altar round
about. <span id="an_lev:1:12">12</span> And he shall cut it into its
pieces; and the priest shall lay them, with its head and its suet, in
order on the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar. <span
id="an_lev:1:13">13</span> But the inwards and the legs shall he wash
with water; and the priest shall offer the whole, and make it smoke upon
the altar; it is a burnt-offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the LORD.

<span id="an_lev:1:14">14</span> And if his offering to the LORD be a
burnt-offering of fowls, then he shall bring his offering of
turtle-doves, or of young pigeons. <span id="an_lev:1:15">15</span> And
the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and pinch off its head, and
make it smoke on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be drained out
on the side of the altar. <span id="an_lev:1:16">16</span> And he shall
take away its crop with the feathers thereof, and cast it beside the
altar on the east part, in the place of the ashes. <span
id="an_lev:1:17">17</span> And he shall rend it by the wings thereof,
but shall not divide it asunder; and the priest shall make it smoke upon
the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire; it is a burnt-offering,
an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 2](lev002.md)

</div>
