<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev009)  [Next](lev011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 10

<span id="an_lev:10:1">1</span> And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron,
took each of them his censer, and put fire therein, and laid incense
thereon, and offered strange fire before the LORD, which He had not
commanded them. <span id="an_lev:10:2">2</span> And there came forth
fire from before the LORD, and devoured them, and they died before the
LORD. <span id="an_lev:10:3">3</span> Then Moses said unto Aaron: 'This
is it that the LORD spoke, saying: Through them that are nigh unto Me I
will be sanctified, and before all the people I will be glorified.' And
Aaron held his peace. <span id="an_lev:10:4">4</span> And Moses called
Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the <span id="page_129">p.
129</span> uncle of Aaron, and said unto them: 'Draw near, carry your
brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp.' <span
id="an_lev:10:5">5</span> So they drew near, and carried them in their
tunics out of the camp, as Moses had said. <span
id="an_lev:10:6">6</span> And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar
and unto Ithamar, his sons: 'Let not the hair of your heads go loose,
neither rend your clothes, that ye die not, and that He be not wroth
with all the congregation; but let your brethren, the whole house of
Israel, bewail the burning which the LORD hath kindled. <span
id="an_lev:10:7">7</span> And ye shall not go out from the door of the
tent of meeting, lest ye die; for the anointing oil of the LORD is upon
you.' And they did according to the word of Moses.

<span id="an_lev:10:8">8</span> And the LORD spoke unto Aaron, saying:
<span id="an_lev:10:9">9</span> 'Drink no wine nor strong drink, thou,
nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tent of meeting, that ye die
not; it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations. <span
id="an_lev:10:10">10</span> And that ye may put difference between the
holy and the common, and between the unclean and the clean; <span
id="an_lev:10:11">11</span> and that ye may teach the children of Israel
all the statutes which the LORD hath spoken unto them by the hand of
Moses.'

<span id="an_lev:10:12">12</span> And Moses spoke unto Aaron, and unto
Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons that were left: 'Take the meal
offering that remaineth of the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and
eat it without leaven beside the altar; for it is most holy. <span
id="an_lev:10:13">13</span> And ye shall eat it in a holy place, because
it is thy due, and thy sons’ due, of the offerings of the LORD made by
fire; for so I am commanded. <span id="an_lev:10:14">14</span> And the
breast of waving and the thigh of heaving shall ye eat in a clean place;
thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee; for they are given as
thy due, and thy sons due, out of the sacrifices of the peace-offerings
of the children of Israel. <span id="an_lev:10:15">15</span> The thigh
of heaving and the breast of waving shall they bring with the offerings
of the fat made by fire, to wave it for a wave-offering before the LORD;
and it shall be thine, and thy sons’ with thee, as a due for ever; as
the LORD hath commanded.'

<span id="an_lev:10:16">16</span> And Moses diligently inquired for the
goat of the sin-offering, and, behold, it was burnt; and he was angry
with Eleazar and with Ithamar, the sons of Aaron that were left, saying:
<span id="an_lev:10:17">17</span> 'Wherefore have ye not eaten the
sin-offering in the place of the sanctuary, seeing it is most holy, and
He hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make
atonement for them before the LORD? <span
id="an_lev:10:18">18</span> Behold, the blood of it was not brought into
the sanctuary within; ye should certainly have eaten it in the
sanctuary, as I commanded.' <span id="an_lev:10:19">19</span> And Aaron
spoke unto Moses: 'Behold, this day have they offered their sin-offering
and their burnt-offering before the LORD, and there have befallen me
such things as these; and if I had eaten the sin-offering to-day, would
it have been well-pleasing in the sight of the LORD?' <span
id="an_lev:10:20">20</span> And when Moses heard that, it was
well-pleasing in his sight.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 11](lev011)

</div>
