<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev022)  [Next](lev024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 23

<span id="an_lev:23:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:23:2">2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them:

The appointed seasons of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy
convocations, even these are My appointed seasons. <span
id="an_lev:23:3">3</span> Six days shall work be done; but on the
seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, a holy convocation; ye shall do
no manner of work; it is a sabbath unto the LORD in all your dwellings.

<span id="an_lev:23:4">4</span> These are the appointed seasons of the
LORD, even holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their appointed
season. <span id="an_lev:23:5">5</span> In the first month, on the
fourteenth day of the month at dusk, is the LORD'S passover. <span
id="an_lev:23:6">6</span> And on the fifteenth day of the same month is
the feast of unleavened bread unto the LORD; seven days ye shall eat
unleavened bread. <span id="an_lev:23:7">7</span> In the first day ye
shall have a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work.
<span id="an_lev:23:8">8</span> And ye shall bring an offering made by
fire unto the LORD seven days; in the seventh day is a holy convocation;
ye shall do no manner of servile work.

<span id="an_lev:23:9">9</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:23:10">10</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them:

When ye are come into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap the
harvest thereof, then ye shall bring the sheaf of the first-fruits of
your harvest unto the priest. <span id="an_lev:23:11">11</span> And he
shall wave <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> the sheaf before the LORD,
to be accepted for you; on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall
wave it. <span id="an_lev:23:12">12</span> And in the day when ye wave
the sheaf, ye shall offer a he-lamb without blemish of the first year
for a burnt-offering unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:23:13">13</span> And the meal-offering thereof shall be two
tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering made
by fire unto the LORD for a sweet savour; and the drink-offering thereof
shall be of wine, the fourth part of a hin. <span
id="an_lev:23:14">14</span> And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched
corn, nor fresh ears, until this selfsame day, until ye have brought the
offering of your God; it is a statute for ever throughout your
generations in all your dwellings.

<span id="an_lev:23:15">15</span> And ye shall count unto you from
morrow after the  <span id="fr_93"></span>[a](#fn_90) day of rest, from
the day that ye brought the sheaf of the waving; seven weeks shall there
be complete; <span id="an_lev:23:16">16</span> even unto the morrow
after the seventh week shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall present
a new meal-offering unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:23:17">17</span> Ye
shall bring out of your dwellings two wave-loaves of two tenth parts of
an ephah; they shall be of fine flour, they shall be baked with leaven,
for first-fruits unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:23:18">18</span> And ye
shall present with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the first
year, and one young bullock, and two rams; they shall be a
burnt-offering unto the LORD, with their meal-offering, and their
drink-offerings, even an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto
the LORD. <span id="an_lev:23:19">19</span> And ye shall offer one
he-goat for a sin-offering, and two he-lambs of the first year for a
sacrifice of peace-offerings. <span id="an_lev:23:20">20</span> And the
priest shall wave them with the bread of the first-fruits for a
wave-offering before the LORD, with the two lambs; they shall be holy to
the LORD for the priest. <span id="an_lev:23:21">21</span> And ye shall
make proclamation on the selfsame day; there shall be a holy convocation
unto you; ye shall do no manner of servile work; it is a statute for
ever in all your dwellings throughout your generations.

<span id="an_lev:23:22">22</span> And when ye reap the harvest of your
land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corner of thy field, neither shalt
thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest; thou shalt leave them for the
poor, and for the stranger: I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_lev:23:23">23</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:23:24">24</span> Speak unto the children of Israel,
saying:

In the seventh month, in the first day of the month, shall be a solemn
rest unto you, a memorial proclaimed with the blast of horns, a holy
convocation. <span id="an_lev:23:25">25</span> Ye shall do no manner of
servile work; and ye shall bring an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="an_lev:23:26">26</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:

<span id="an_lev:23:27">27</span> Howbeit on the tenth day of this
seventh month is the day of atonement; there shall be a holy convocation
unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls; and ye shall bring an
offering made by fire unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:23:28">28</span> And ye shall do no manner of work in that
same day; for it is a day of atonement, to make atonement for you before
the LORD your God. <span id="an_lev:23:29">29</span> For whatsoever soul
it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off
from his people. <span id="an_lev:23:30">30</span> And whatsoever soul
it be that doeth any manner of work in that same day, that soul will I
destroy from among his people. <span id="an_lev:23:31">31</span> Ye
shall do no manner of work; it is a statute for ever throughout your
generations in all <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> your dwellings.
<span id="an_lev:23:32">32</span> It shall be unto you a sabbath of
solemn rest, and ye shall afflict your souls; in the ninth day of the
month at even, from even unto even, shall ye keep your sabbath.

<span id="an_lev:23:33">33</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:23:34">34</span> Speak unto the children of Israel,
saying:

On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the feast of tabernacles
for seven days unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:23:35">35</span> On the
first day shall be a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile
work. <span id="an_lev:23:36">36</span> Seven days ye shall bring an
offering made by fire unto the LORD; on the eighth day shall be a holy
convocation unto you; and ye shall bring an offering made by fire unto
the LORD; it is a day of solemn assembly; ye shall do no manner of
servile work.

<span id="an_lev:23:37">37</span> These are the appointed seasons of the
LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to bring an
offering made by fire unto the LORD, a burnt-offering, and a
meal-offering, a sacrifice, and drink-offerings, each on its own day;
<span id="an_lev:23:38">38</span> beside the Sabbaths of the LORD, and
beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your
freewill-offerings, which ye give unto the LORD.

<span id="an_lev:23:39">39</span> Howbeit on the fifteenth day of the
seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruits of the land, ye shall
keep the feast of the LORD seven days; on the first day shall be a
solemn rest, and on the eighth day shall be, a solemn rest. <span
id="an_lev:23:40">40</span> And ye shall take you on the first day the
fruit of goodly trees, branches of palm-trees, and boughs of thick
trees, and willows of the brook, and ye shall rejoice before the LORD
your God seven days. <span id="an_lev:23:41">41</span> And ye shall keep
it a feast unto the LORD seven days in thé year; it is a statute for
ever in your generations; ye shall keep it in the seventh month. <span
id="an_lev:23:42">42</span> Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all
that are home-born in Israel shall dwell in booths; <span
id="an_lev:23:43">43</span> that your generations may know that I made
the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of
the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_lev:23:44">44</span> And Moses declared unto the children
of Israel the appointed seasons of the LORD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[148:a](lev023.htm#fr_93) Heb. *sabbath*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 24](lev024)

</div>
