<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev016)  [Next](lev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 17

<span id="an_lev:17:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:17:2">2</span> Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and
unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them: This is the thing
which the LORD hath commanded, saying:

<span id="an_lev:17:3">3</span> What man soever there be of the house of
Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that
killeth it without the camp, <span id="an_lev:17:4">4</span> and hath
not brought it unto the door of the tent of meeting, to present it as an
offering unto the LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD, blood shall be
imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man shall be cut off
from among his people. <span id="an_lev:17:5">5</span> To the end that
the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they sacrifice
in the open field, even that they may bring them unto the LORD, unto the
door of the tent of meeting, unto the priest, and sacrifice them for
sacrifices of peace-offerings unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:17:6">6</span> And the priest shall dash the blood against
the altar of the LORD at the door of the tent of meeting, and make the
fat smoke for a sweet savour unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:17:7">7</span> And they shall no more sacrifice their
sacrifices unto the satyrs, after whom they go astray. This shall be a
statute for ever unto them throughout their generations.

<span id="an_lev:17:8">8</span> And thou shalt say unto them: Whatsoever
man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn
among them, that offereth a burnt-offering or sacrifice, <span
id="an_lev:17:9">9</span> and bringeth it not unto the door of the tent
of meeting, to sacrifice it unto the LORD, even that man shall be cut
off from his people. <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span id="an_lev:17:10">10</span> And whatsoever man there be of the
house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, that
eateth any manner of blood, I will set My face against that soul that
eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people. <span
id="an_lev:17:11">11</span> For the life of the flesh is in the blood;
and I have given it to you upon the altar to make atonement for your
souls; for it is the blood that maketh atonement by reason of the life.
<span id="an_lev:17:12">12</span> Therefore I said unto the children of
Israel: No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that
sojourneth among you eat blood.

<span id="an_lev:17:13">13</span> And whatsoever man there be of the
children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, that
taketh in hunting any beast or fowl that may be eaten, he shall pour out
the blood thereof, and cover it with dust. <span
id="an_lev:17:14">14</span> For as to the life of all flesh, the blood
thereof is all one with the life thereof; therefore I said unto the
children of Israel: Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh; for
the life of all flesh is the blood thereof; whosoever eateth it shall be
cut off. <span id="an_lev:17:15">15</span> And every soul that eateth
that which dieth of itself, or that which is torn of beasts, whether he
be home-born or a stranger, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself
in water, and be unclean until the even; then shall he be clean. <span
id="an_lev:17:16">16</span> But if he wash them not, nor bathe his
flesh, then he shall bear his iniquity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 18](lev018)

</div>
