<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev026)  [Next](num001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 27

<span id="an_lev:27:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:27:2">2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them:

When a man shall clearly utter a vow of persons unto the LORD, according
to thy valuation, <span id="an_lev:27:3">3</span> then thy valuation
shall be for the male <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> from twenty
years old even unto sixty years old, even thy valuation shall be fifty
shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary. <span
id="an_lev:27:4">4</span> And if it be a female, then thy valuation
shall be thirty shekels. <span id="an_lev:27:5">5</span> And if it be
from five years old even unto twenty years old, then thy valuation shall
be for the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels. <span
id="an_lev:27:6">6</span> And if it be from a month old even unto five
years old, then thy valuation shall be for the male five shekels of
silver, and for the female thy valuation shall be three shekels of
silver. <span id="an_lev:27:7">7</span> And if it be from sixty years
old and upward: if it be a male, then thy valuation shall be fifteen
shekels, and for the female ten shekels. <span
id="an_lev:27:8">8</span> But if he be too poor for thy valuation, then
he shall be set before the priest, and the priest shall value him;
according to the means of him that vowed shall the priest value him.

<span id="an_lev:27:9">9</span> And if it be a beast, whereof men bring
an offering unto the LORD, all that any man giveth of such unto the LORD
shall be holy. <span id="an_lev:27:10">10</span> He shall not alter it,
nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good; and if he shall at
all change beast for beast, then both it and that for which it is
changed shall be holy. <span id="an_lev:27:11">11</span> And if it be
any unclean beast, of which they may not bring an offering unto the
LORD, then he shall set the beast before the priest. <span
id="an_lev:27:12">12</span> And the priest shall value it, whether it be
good or bad; as thou the priest valuest it, so shall it be. <span
id="an_lev:27:13">13</span> But if he will indeed redeem it, then he
shall add the fifth part thereof unto thy valuation.

<span id="an_lev:27:14">14</span> And when a man shall sanctify his
house to be holy unto the LORD, then the priest shall value it, whether
it be good or bad; as the priest shall value it, so shall it stand.
<span id="an_lev:27:15">15</span> And if he that sanctified it will
redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy
valuation unto it, and it shall be his.

<span id="an_lev:27:16">16</span> And if a man shall sanctify unto the
LORD part of the field of his possession, then thy valuation shall be
according to the sowing thereof; the sowing of a homer of barley shall
be valued at fifty shekels of silver. <span
id="an_lev:27:17">17</span> If he sanctify his field from the year of
jubilee, according to thy valuation it shall stand. <span
id="an_lev:27:18">18</span> But if he sanctify . his field after the
jubilee, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money according to
the years that remain unto the year of jubilee, and an abatement shall
be made from thy valuation. <span id="an_lev:27:19">19</span> And if he
that sanctified the field will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the
fifth part of the money of thy valuation unto it, and it shall be
assured to him. <span id="an_lev:27:20">20</span> And if he will not
redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall
not be redeemed any more. <span id="an_lev:27:21">21</span> But the
field, when it goeth out in the jubilee, shall be holy unto the LORD, as
a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the priest's. <span
id="an_lev:27:22">22</span> And if he sanctify unto the LORD a field
which he hath bought, which is not of the field of his possession; <span
id="an_lev:27:23">23</span> then the priest shall reckon unto him the
worth of thy valuation unto the year of jubilee; and he shall give thy
valuation in that day, as a holy thing unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:27:24">24</span> In the year of jubilee the field shall
return unto him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the
possession of the land belongeth. <span id="an_lev:27:25">25</span> And
all thy valuations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary;
twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.

<span id="an_lev:27:26">26</span> Howbeit the firstling among beasts,
which is born as a firstling to the LORD, no man shall sanctify it;
<span id="page_156">p. 156</span> whether it be ox or sheep, it is the
LORD'S. <span id="an_lev:27:27">27</span> And if it be of an unclean
beast, then he shall ransom it according to thy valuation, and shall add
unto it the fifth part thereof; or if it be not redeemed, then it shall
be sold according to thy valuation.

<span id="an_lev:27:28">28</span> Notwithstanding, no devoted thing,
that a man may devote unto the LORD of all that he hath, whether of man
or beast, or of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed;
every devoted thing is most holy unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:27:29">29</span> None devoted, that may be devoted of men,
shall be ransomed; he shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_lev:27:30">30</span> And all the tithe of the land, whether
of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the LORD'S; it
is holy unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:27:31">31</span> And if a man
will redeem aught of his tithe, he shall add unto it the fifth part
thereof. <span id="an_lev:27:32">32</span> And all the tithe of the herd
or the flock, whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy
unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:27:33">33</span> He shall not inquire
whether it be good or had, neither shall he change it; and if he change
it at all, then both it and that for which it is changed shall be holy;
it shall not be redeemed.

<span id="an_lev:27:34">34</span> These are the commandments, which the
LORD commanded Moses for the children of Israel in mount Sinai.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 1](num001)

</div>
