<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev010)  [Next](lev012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 11

<span id="an_lev:11:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and to
Aaron, saying unto them: <span id="an_lev:11:2">2</span> Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying:

These are the living things which ye may eat among all the beasts that
are on the earth. <span id="an_lev:11:3">3</span> Whatsoever parteth the
hoof, and is wholly cloven-footed, and cheweth the cud, among the
beasts, that may ye eat. <span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span
id="an_lev:11:4">4</span> Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them
that only chew the cud, or of them that only part the hoof: the camel,
because he cheweth the cud but parteth not the hoof, he is unclean unto
you. <span id="an_lev:11:5">5</span> And the rock-badger, because he
cheweth the cud but parteth not the hoof, he is unclean unto you. <span
id="an_lev:11:6">6</span> And the hare, because she cheweth the cud but
parteth not the hoof, she is unclean unto you. <span
id="an_lev:11:7">7</span> And the swine, because he parteth the hoof,
and is cloven-footed, but cheweth not the cud, he is unclean unto you.
<span id="an_lev:11:8">8</span> Of their flesh ye shall not eat, and
their carcasses ye shall not touch; they are unclean unto you.

<span id="an_lev:11:9">9</span> These may ye eat of all that are in the
waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and
in the rivers, them may ye eat. <span id="an_lev:11:10">10</span> And
all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers, of all
that swarm in the waters, and of all the living creatures . that are in
the waters, they are a detestable thing unto you, <span
id="an_lev:11:11">11</span> and they shall be a detestable thing unto
you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, and their carcasses ye shall have
in detestation. <span id="an_lev:11:12">12</span> Whatsoever hath no
fins nor scales in the waters, that is a detestable thing unto you.

<span id="an_lev:11:13">13</span> And these ye shall have in detestation
among the fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are a detestable thing:
the great vulture, and the bearded vulture, and the osprey; <span
id="an_lev:11:14">14</span> and the kite, and the falcon after its
kinds; <span id="an_lev:11:15">15</span> every raven after its kinds;
<span id="an_lev:11:16">16</span> and the ostrich, and the night-hawk,
and the sea-mew, and the hawk after its kinds; <span
id="an_lev:11:17">17</span> and the little owl, and the cormorant, and
the great owl; <span id="an_lev:11:18">18</span> and the horned owl, and
the pelican, and the carrion-vulture; <span
id="an_lev:11:19">19</span> and the stork, and the heron after its
kinds, and the hoopoe, and the bat.

<span id="an_lev:11:20">20</span> All winged swarming things that go
upon all fours are a detestable thing unto you. <span
id="an_lev:11:21">21</span> Yet these may ye eat of all winged swarming
things that go upon all fours, which have jointed legs above their feet,
wherewith to leap upon the earth; <span id="an_lev:11:22">22</span> even
these of them ye may eat: the locust after its kinds, and the bald
locust after its kinds, and the cricket after its kinds, and the
grasshopper after its kinds. <span id="an_lev:11:23">23</span> But all
winged swarming things, which have four feet, are a detestable thing
unto you.

<span id="an_lev:11:24">24</span> And by these ye shall become unclean;
whosoever toucheth the carcass of them shall be unclean until the even.
<span id="an_lev:11:25">25</span> And whosoever beareth aught of the
carcass of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.
<span id="an_lev:11:26">26</span> Every beast which parteth the hoof,
but is not cloven-footed, nor cheweth the cud, is unclean unto you;
every one that toucheth them shall be unclean. <span
id="an_lev:11:27">27</span> And whatsoever goeth upon its paws, among
all beasts that go on all fours, they are unclean unto you; whoso
toucheth their carcass shall be unclean until the even. <span
id="an_lev:11:28">28</span> And he that beareth the carcass of them
shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; they are unclean
unto you.

<span id="an_lev:11:29">29</span> And these are they which are unclean
unto you among the swarming things that swarm upon the earth: the
weasel, and the mouse, and the great lizard after its kinds, <span
id="an_lev:11:30">30</span> and the gecko, and the land-crocodile, and
the lizard, and the sand-lizard, and the chameleon. <span
id="an_lev:11:31">31</span> These are they which are unclean to you
among all that swarm; whosoever doth touch them, when they are dead,
shall be unclean until the even. <span id="an_lev:11:32">32</span> And
upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall, it shall be
unclean; <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> whether it be any vessel of
wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be, wherewith
any work is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean
until the even; then shall it be clean. <span
id="an_lev:11:33">33</span> And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of
them falleth, whatsoever is in it shall be unclean, and it ye shall
break. <span id="an_lev:11:34">34</span> All food therein which may be
eaten, that on which water cometh, shall be unclean; and all drink in
every such vessel that may be drunk shall be unclean. <span
id="an_lev:11:35">35</span> And every thing whereupon any part of their
carcass falleth shall be unclean; whether oven, or range for pots, it
shall be broken in pieces; they are unclean, and shall be unclean unto
you. <span id="an_lev:11:36">36</span> Nevertheless a fountain or a
cistern wherein is a gathering of water shall be clean; but he who
toucheth their carcass shall be unclean. <span
id="an_lev:11:37">37</span> And if aught of their carcass fall upon any
sowing seed which is to be sown, it is clean. <span
id="an_lev:11:38">38</span> But if water he put upon the seed, and aught
of their carcass fall thereon, it is unclean unto you.

<span id="an_lev:11:39">39</span> And if any beast, of which ye may eat,
die, he that toucheth the carcass thereof shall be unclean until the
even. <span id="an_lev:11:40">40</span> And he that eateth of the
carcass of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; he
also that beareth the carcass of it shall wash his clothes, and be
unclean until the even.

<span id="an_lev:11:41">41</span> And every swarming thing that swarmeth
upon the earth is a detestable thing; it shall not be eaten. <span
id="an_lev:11:42">42</span> Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and
whatsoever goeth upon all fours, or whatsoever hath many feet, even all
swarming things that swarm upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for
they are a detestable thing. <span id="an_lev:11:43">43</span> Ye shall
not make yourselves detestable with any swarming thing that swarmeth,
neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be
defiled thereby. <span id="an_lev:11:44">44</span> For I am the LORD
your God; sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy; for I am holy;
neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of swarming thing
that moveth upon the earth. <span id="an_lev:11:45">45</span> For I am
the LORD that brought you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God;
ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.

<span id="an_lev:11:46">46</span> This is the law of the beast, and of
the fowl, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and of
every creature that swarmeth upon the earth; <span
id="an_lev:11:47">47</span> to make a difference between the unclean and
the clean, and between the living thing that may be eaten and the living
thing that may not be eaten.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 12](lev012)

</div>
