<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev008)  [Next](lev010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ‏שמיני‎

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 9

<span id="an_lev:9:1">1</span> And it came to pass on the eighth day,
that Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel; <span
id="an_lev:9:2">2</span> and he said unto Aaron: 'Take thee a bull-calf
for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering, without blemish, and
offer them before the LORD. <span id="an_lev:9:3">3</span> And unto the
children of Israel thou shalt speak, saying: Take ye a he-goat for a
sin-offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of the first year, without
blemish, for a burnt-offering; <span id="an_lev:9:4">4</span> and an ox
and a ram for peace-offerings, to sacrifice before the LORD; and a
meal-offering mingled with oil; for to-day the LORD appeareth <span
id="page_128">p. 128</span> unto you.' <span
id="an_lev:9:5">5</span> And they brought that which Moses commanded
before the tent of meeting; and all the congregation drew near and stood
before the LORD. <span id="an_lev:9:6">6</span> And Moses said: 'This is
the thing which the LORD commanded that ye should do; that the glory of
the LORD may appear unto you.' <span id="an_lev:9:7">7</span> And Moses
said unto Aaron: 'Draw near unto the altar, and offer thy sin-offering,
and thy burnt-offering, and make atonement for thyself, and for the
people; and present the offering of the people, and make atonement for
them; as the LORD commanded.' <span id="an_lev:9:8">8</span> So Aaron
drew near unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin-offering, which
was for himself. <span id="an_lev:9:9">9</span> And the sons of Aaron
presented the blood unto him; and he dipped his finger in the blood, and
put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the base
of the altar. <span id="an_lev:9:10">10</span> But the fat, and the
kidneys, and the lobe of the liver of the sin-offering, he made smoke
upon the altar; as the LORD commanded Moses. <span
id="an_lev:9:11">11</span> And the flesh and the skin were burnt with
fire without the camp. <span id="an_lev:9:12">12</span> And he slew the
burnt-offering; and Aaron's sons delivered unto him the blood, and he
dashed it against the altar round about. <span
id="an_lev:9:13">13</span> And they delivered the burnt-offering unto
him, piece by piece, and the head; and he made them smoke upon the
altar. <span id="an_lev:9:14">14</span> And he washed the inwards and
the legs, and made them smoke upon the burnt-offering on the altar.
<span id="an_lev:9:15">15</span> And the people's offering was
presented; and he took the goat of the sin-offering which was for the
people, and slew it, and offered it for sin, as the first. <span
id="an_lev:9:16">16</span> And the burnt-offering was presented; and he
offered it according to the ordinance. <span
id="an_lev:9:17">17</span> And the meal-offering was presented; and he
filled his hand therefrom, and made it smoke upon the altar, besides the
burnt-offering of the morning. <span id="an_lev:9:18">18</span> He slew
also the ox and the ram, the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which was for
the people; and Aaron's sons delivered unto him the blood, and he dashed
it against the altar round about, <span id="an_lev:9:19">19</span> and
the fat of the ox, and of the ram, the fat tail, and that which covereth
the inwards, and the kidneys, and the lobe of the liver. <span
id="an_lev:9:20">20</span> And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he
made the fat smoke upon the altar. <span id="an_lev:9:21">21</span> And
the breasts and the right thigh Aaron waved for a wave-offering before
the LORD; as Moses commanded. <span id="an_lev:9:22">22</span> And Aaron
lifted up his hands toward the people, and blessed them; and he came
down from offering the sin-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the
peace-offerings. <span id="an_lev:9:23">23</span> And Moses and Aaron
went into the tent of meeting, and came out, and blessed the people; and
the glory of the LORD appeared unto all the people. <span
id="an_lev:9:24">24</span> And there came forth fire from before the
LORD, and consumed upon the altar the burnt-offering and the fat; and
when all the people saw it, they shouted, and fell on their faces.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 10](lev010.md)

</div>
