<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev012)  [Next](lev014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 13

<span id="an_lev:13:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying:

<span id="an_lev:13:2">2</span> When a man shall have in the skin of his
flesh a rising, or a scab, or a bright spot, and it become in the skin
of his flesh the plague of leprosy, then he shall be brought unto Aaron
the priest, or unto one of his sons the priests. <span
id="an_lev:13:3">3</span> And the priest shall look on the plague in the
skin of the flesh; and if the hair in the plague be turned white, and
the appearance of the plague be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is
the plague of leprosy; and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce
him unclean. <span id="an_lev:13:4">4</span> And if the bright spot be
white in the skin of his flesh, and the appearance thereof be not deeper
than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned white, then the priest
shall shut up him that hath the plague seven days. <span
id="an_lev:13:5">5</span> And the priest shall look on him the seventh
day; and, behold, if the plague stay in its appearance, and the plague
be not spread in the skin, then the priest shall shut him up seven days
more. <span id="an_lev:13:6">6</span> And the priest shall look on him
again the seventh day; and, behold, if the plague be dim, and the plague
be not spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean: it
is a scab; and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean. <span
id="an_lev:13:7">7</span> But if the scab spread abroad in the skin,
after that he hath shown himself to the priest for his cleansing, he
shall show himself to the priest again. <span
id="an_lev:13:8">8</span> And the priest shall look, and, behold, if the
scab be spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean:
it is leprosy.

<span id="an_lev:13:9">9</span> When the plague of leprosy is in a man,
then he shall be brought unto the priest. <span
id="an_lev:13:10">10</span> And the priest shall look, and, behold, if
there be a white rising in the skin, and it have turned the hair white,
and there be quick raw flesh in the rising, <span
id="an_lev:13:11">11</span> it is an old leprosy in the skin of his
flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean; he shall not shut him
up; for he is unclean. <span id="an_lev:13:12">12</span> And if the
leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover all the skin
of him that hath the plague from his head even to his feet, as far as
appeareth to the priest; <span id="an_lev:13:13">13</span> then the
priest shall look; and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his
flesh, he shall pronounce him clean that bath the plague; it is all
turned white: he is clean. <span id="an_lev:13:14">14</span> But
whensoever raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean. <span
id="an_lev:13:15">15</span> And the priest shall look on the raw flesh,
and pronounce him unclean; the raw flesh is unclean: it is leprosy.
<span id="an_lev:13:16">16</span> But if the raw flesh again be turned
into white, then he shall come unto the priest; <span
id="an_lev:13:17">17</span> and the priest shall look on him; and,
behold, if the plague be turned into white, then the priest shall
pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean.

<span id="an_lev:13:18">18</span> And when the flesh hath in the skin
thereof a boil, and it is healed, <span id="an_lev:13:19">19</span> and
in the place of the boil there is a white rising, or a bright spot,
reddish-white, then it shall be shown to the priest. <span
id="an_lev:13:20">20</span> And the priest shall look; and, behold, if
the appearance thereof be lower than the skin, and <span
id="page_133">p. 133</span> the hair thereof be turned white, then I the
priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy, it hath
broken out in the boil. <span id="an_lev:13:21">21</span> But if the
priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hairs therein, and it
be not lower than the skin, but be dim, then the priest shall shut him
up seven days. <span id="an_lev:13:22">22</span> And if it spread abroad
in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a
plague. <span id="an_lev:13:23">23</span> But if the bright spot stay in
its place, and be not spread, it is the scar of the boil; and the priest
shall pronounce him clean.

<span id="an_lev:13:24">24</span> Or when the flesh hath in the skin
thereof d burning by fire, and the quick flesh of the burning become a
bright spot, reddish-white, or white; <span
id="an_lev:13:25">25</span> then the priest shall look upon it; and,
behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and the
appearance thereof be deeper than the skin, it is leprosy, it hath
broken out in the burning; and the priest shall pronounce him unclean:
it is the plague of leprosy. <span id="an_lev:13:26">26</span> But if
the priest look on it, and, behold, they be no white hair in the bright
spot, and it be no lower than the skin, but be dim; then the priest
shall shut him up seven days. <span id="an_lev:13:27">27</span> And the
priest shall look upon him the seventh day; if it spread abroad in the
skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of
leprosy. <span id="an_lev:13:28">28</span> And if the bright spot stay
in its place, and be not spread in the skin, but be dim, it is the
rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean; for it
is the scar of the burning.

<span id="an_lev:13:29">29</span> And when a man or woman hath a plague
upon the head or upon the heard, <span id="an_lev:13:30">30</span> then
the priest shall look on the plague; and, behold, if the appearance
thereof be deeper than the skin, and there be in it yellow thin hair,
then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a scall, it is
leprosy of the head or of the beard. <span
id="an_lev:13:31">31</span> And if the priest look on the plague of the
scall, and, behold, the appearance thereof be not deeper than the skin,
and there be no black hair in it, then the priest shall shut up him that
hath the plague of the scall seven days. <span
id="an_lev:13:32">32</span> And in the seventh day the priest shall look
on the plague; and, behold, if the scall be not spread, and there be in
it no yellow hair, and the appearance of the scall be not deeper than
the skin, <span id="an_lev:13:33">33</span> then he shall be shaven, but
the scall shall he not shave; and the priest shall shut up him that hath
the scall seven days more. <span id="an_lev:13:34">34</span> And in the
seventh day the priest shall look on the scall; and, behold, if the
scall be not spread in the skin, and the appearance thereof be not
deeper than the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean; and he
shall wash his clothes, and be clean. <span
id="an_lev:13:35">35</span> But if the scall spread abroad in the skin
after his cleansing, <span id="an_lev:13:36">36</span> then the priest
shall look on him; and, beheld, if the scall be spread in the skin, the
priest shall not seek for the yellow hair: he is unclean. <span
id="an_lev:13:37">37</span> But if the scall stay in its appearance, and
black hair be grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean; and
the priest shall pronounce him clean.

<span id="an_lev:13:38">38</span> And if a man or a woman have in the
skin of their flesh bright spots, even white bright spots; <span
id="an_lev:13:39">39</span> then the priest shall look; and, behold, if
the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be of a dull white, it is a
tetter, it hath broken out in the skin: he is clean.

<span id="an_lev:13:40">40</span> And if a man's hair be fallen off his
head, he is bald; yet is he clean. <span id="an_lev:13:41">41</span> And
if his hair be fallen off from the front part of his head, he is
forehead-bald; <span id="page_134">p. 134</span> yet is he clean. <span
id="an_lev:13:42">42</span> But if there be in the bald head, or the
bald forehead, a reddish-white plague, it is leprosy breaking out in his
bald head, or his bald forehead. <span id="an_lev:13:43">43</span> Then
the priest shall look upon him; and, behold, if the rising of the plague
be reddish-white in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the
appearance of leprosy in the skin of the flesh, <span
id="an_lev:13:44">44</span> he is a leprous man, he is unclean; the
priest shall surely pronounce him unclean: his plague is in his head.

<span id="an_lev:13:45">45</span> And the leper in whom the plague is,
his clothes shall be rent, and the hair of his head shall go loose, and
he shall cover his upper lip, and shall cry: 'Unclean, unclean.' <span
id="an_lev:13:46">46</span> All the days wherein the plague is in him he
shall be unclean; he is unclean; he shall dwell alone; without the camp
shall his dwelling be.

<span id="an_lev:13:47">47</span> And when the plague of leprosy is in a
garment, whether it be a woollen garment, or a linen garment; <span
id="an_lev:13:48">48</span> or in the warp, or in the woof, whether they
be of linen, or of wool; or in a skin, or in any thing made of skin:
<span id="an_lev:13:49">49</span> if the plague be greenish or reddish
in the garment, or in the skin, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in
any thing of skin, it is the plague of leprosy, and shall be shown unto
the priest. <span id="an_lev:13:50">50</span> And the priest shall look
upon the plague, and shut up that which hath the plague seven days.
<span id="an_lev:13:51">51</span> And he shall look on the plague on the
seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment, or in the warp, or
in the woof, or in the skin, whatever service skin is used for, the
plague is a malignant leprosy: it is unclean. <span
id="an_lev:13:52">52</span> And he shall burn the garment, or the warp,
or the woof, whether it be of wool or of linen, or any thing of skin,
wherein the plague is; for it is a malignant leprosy; it shall be burnt
in the fire. <span id="an_lev:13:53">53</span> And if the priest shall
look, and, behold, the plague be not spread in the garment, or in the
warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; <span
id="an_lev:13:54">54</span> then the priest shall command that they wash
the thing wherein the plague is, and he shall shut it up seven days
more. <span id="an_lev:13:55">55</span> And the priest shall look, after
that the plague is washed; and, behold, if the plague have not changed
its colour, and the plague be not spread, it is unclean; thou shalt burn
it in the fire; it is a fret, whether the bareness be within or without.
<span id="an_lev:13:56">56</span> And if the priest look, and, behold,
the plague be dim after the washing thereof, then he shall rend it out
of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the
woof. <span id="an_lev:13:57">57</span> And if it appear still in the
garment, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin, it is
breaking out, thou shalt burn that wherein the plague is with fire.
<span id="an_lev:13:58">58</span> And the garment, or the warp, or the
woof, or whatsoever thing of skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the
plague be departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time,
and shall be clean. <span id="an_lev:13:59">59</span> This is the law of
the plague of leprosy in a garment of wool or linen, or in the warp, or
in the woof, or in any thing of skin, to pronounce it clean, or to
pronounce it unclean.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 14](lev014)

</div>
