<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev017)  [Next](lev019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 18

<span id="an_lev:18:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:18:2">2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them:

I am the LORD your God. <span id="an_lev:18:3">3</span> After the doings
of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do; and after the
doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do;
neither shall ye walk in their statutes. <span
id="an_lev:18:4">4</span> Mine ordinances shall ye do, and My statutes
shall ye keep, to walk therein: I am the LORD your God. <span
id="an_lev:18:5">5</span> Ye shall therefore keep My statutes, and Mine
ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live by them: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_lev:18:6">6</span> None of you shall approach to any that
is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_lev:18:7">7</span> The nakedness of thy father, and the
nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: she is thy mother; thou
shalt not uncover her nakedness.

<span id="an_lev:18:8">8</span> The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt
thou not uncover: it is thy father's nakedness.

<span id="an_lev:18:9">9</span> The nakedness of thy sister, the
daughter of thy father, or the daughter of thy mother, whether born at
home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.

<span id="an_lev:18:10">10</span> The nakedness of thy son's daughter,
or of thy daughter's daughter, even their nakedness thou shalt not
uncover; for theirs is thine own nakedness.

<span id="an_lev:18:11">11</span> The nakedness of thy father's wife's
daughter, begotten of thy father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not
uncover her nakedness.

<span id="an_lev:18:12">12</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness
of thy father's sister: she is thy father's near kinswoman.

<span id="an_lev:18:13">13</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness
of thy mother's sister; for she is thy mother's near kinswoman.

<span id="an_lev:18:14">14</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness
of thy father's brother, thou shalt not approach to his wife: she is
thine aunt.

<span id="an_lev:18:15">15</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness
of thy daughter-in-law: she is thy son's wife; thou shalt not uncover
her nakedness.

<span id="an_lev:18:16">16</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness
of thy brother's wife: it is thy brother's nakedness. <span
id="an_lev:18:17">17</span> Thou shalt not <span id="page_142">p.
142</span> uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter; thou shalt
not take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her
nakedness: they are near kinswomen; it is lewdness. <span
id="an_lev:18:18">18</span> And thou shalt not take a woman to her
sister, to be a rival to her, to uncover her nakedness, beside the other
in her life-time. <span id="an_lev:18:19">19</span> And thou shalt not
approach unto a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is impure
by her uncleanness. <span id="an_lev:18:20">20</span> And thou shalt not
lie carnally with thy neighhour's wife, to defile thyself with her.
<span id="an_lev:18:21">21</span> And thou shalt not give any of thy
seed to set them apart to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of
thy God: I am the LORD. <span id="an_lev:18:22">22</span> Thou shalt not
lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is abomination. <span
id="an_lev:18:23">23</span> And thou shalt not lie with any beast to
defile thyself therewith; neither shall any woman stand before a beast,
to lie down thereto; it is perversion.

<span id="an_lev:18:24">24</span> Defile not ye yourselves in any of
these things; for in all these the nations are defiled, which I cast out
from before you. <span id="an_lev:18:25">25</span> And the land was
defiled, therefore I did visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the
land vomited out her inhabitants. <span id="an_lev:18:26">26</span> Ye
therefore shall keep My statutes and Mine ordinances, and shall not do
any of these abominations; neither the home-born, nor the stranger that
sojourneth among you—<span id="an_lev:18:27">27</span> for all these
abominations have the men of the land done, that were before you, and
the land is defiled—<span id="an_lev:18:28">28</span> that the land
vomit not you out also, when ye defile it, as it vomited out the nation
that was before you. <span id="an_lev:18:29">29</span> For whosoever
shall do any of these abominations, even the souls that do them shall be
cut off from among their people. <span
id="an_lev:18:30">30</span> Therefore shall ye keep My charge, that ye
do not any of these abominable customs, which were done before you, and
that ye defile not yourselves therein: I am the LORD your God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 19](lev019.md)

</div>
