<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev014)  [Next](lev016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 15

<span id="an_lev:15:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and to
Aaron, saying: <span id="an_lev:15:2">2</span> Speak unto the children
of Israel, and say unto them:

When any man hath an issue out of his flesh, his issue is unclean. <span
id="an_lev:15:3">3</span> And this shall be his uncleanness in his
issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped
from his issue, it is his uncleanness. <span
id="an_lev:15:4">4</span> Every bed whereon he that hath the issue lieth
shall be unclean; and every thing whereon he sitteth shall be unclean.
<span id="an_lev:15:5">5</span> And whosoever toucheth his bed shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even. <span id="an_lev:15:6">6</span> And he that sitteth on any thing
whereon he that hath the issue sat shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even. <span
id="an_lev:15:7">7</span> And he that toucheth the flesh of him that
hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and
be unclean until the even. <span id="an_lev:15:8">8</span> And if he
that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean, then he shall wash his
clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
<span id="an_lev:15:9">9</span> And what saddle soever he that hath the
issue rideth upon shall be unclean. <span
id="an_lev:15:10">10</span> And whosoever toucheth any thing that was
under him shall be unclean until the even; and he that beareth those
things shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
unclean until the even. <span id="an_lev:15:11">11</span> And whomsoever
he that hath the issue toucheth, without having rinsed his hands in
water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
unclean until the even. <span id="an_lev:15:12">12</span> And the
earthen vessel, which he that hath the issue toucheth, shall be broken;
and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water. <span
id="an_lev:15:13">13</span> And when he that hath an issue is cleansed
of his issue, then he shall number to himself seven days for his
cleansing, and wash his clothes; and he shall bathe his flesh in running
water, and shall be clean. <span id="an_lev:15:14">14</span> And on the
eighth day he shall take to him two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons,
and come before the LORD unto the door of the tent of meeting, and give
them unto the priest. <span id="an_lev:15:15">15</span> And the priest
shall offer them, the one for a sin-offering, and the other for a
burnt-offering; and the priest shall make atonement for him before the
LORD for his issue.

<span id="an_lev:15:16">16</span> And if the flow of seed go out from
<span id="page_138">p. 138</span> a man, then he shall bathe all his
flesh in water, and be unclean until the even. <span
id="an_lev:15:17">17</span> And every garment, and every skin, whereon
is the flow of seed, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until
the even. <span id="an_lev:15:18">18</span> The woman also with whom a
man shall lie carnally, they shall both bathe themselves in water, and
be unclean until the even.

<span id="an_lev:15:19">19</span> And if a woman have an issue, and her
issue in her flesh be blood, she shall be in her impurity seven days;
and whosoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the even. <span
id="an_lev:15:20">20</span> And every thing that she lieth upon in her
impurity shall be unclean; every thing also that she sitteth upon shall
be unclean. <span id="an_lev:15:21">21</span> And whosoever toucheth her
bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean
until the even. <span id="an_lev:15:22">22</span> And whosoever toucheth
any thing that she sitteth upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even. <span
id="an_lev:15:23">23</span> And if he be on the bed, or on any thing
whereon she sitteth, when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the
even. <span id="an_lev:15:24">24</span> And if any man lie with her, and
her impurity be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days; and every bed
whereon he lieth shall be unclean.

<span id="an_lev:15:25">25</span> And if a woman have an issue of her
blood many days not in the time of her impurity, or if she have an issue
beyond the time of her impurity; all the days of the issue of her
uncleanness she shall be as in the days of her impurity: she is unclean.
<span id="an_lev:15:26">26</span> Every bed whereon she lieth all the
days of her issue shall be unto her as the bed of her impurity; and
every thing whereon she sitteth shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of
her impurity. <span id="an_lev:15:27">27</span> And whosoever toucheth
those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water and be unclean until the even. <span
id="an_lev:15:28">28</span> But if she be cleansed of her issue, then
she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she shall be
clean, <span id="an_lev:15:29">29</span> And on the eighth day she shall
take unto her two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and bring them
unto the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_lev:15:30">30</span> And the priest shall offer the one for a
sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering; and the priest shall
make atonement for her before the LORD for the issue of her uncleanness.

<span id="an_lev:15:31">31</span> Thus shall ye separate the children of
Israel from their uncleanness, that they die not in their uncleanness;
when they defile My tabernacle that is in the midst of them.

<span id="an_lev:15:32">32</span> This is the law of him that hath an
issue, and of him from whom the flow of seed goeth out, so that he is
unclean thereby; <span id="an_lev:15:33">33</span> and of her that is
sick with her impurity, and of them that have an issue, whether it be a
man, or a woman; and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 16](lev016)

</div>
