<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev021)  [Next](lev023.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 22

<span id="an_lev:22:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:22:2">2</span> Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that
they separate themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel,
which they hallow unto Me, and that they profane not My holy name: I am
the LORD. <span id="an_lev:22:3">3</span> Say unto them:

Whosoever he be of all your seed throughout your generations, that
approacheth unto the holy things, which the children of Israel hallow
unto the LORD, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut
off from before Me: I am the LORD. <span id="an_lev:22:4">4</span> What
man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or hath an issue, he shall
not eat of the holy things, until he be clean. And whoso toucheth any
one that is unclean by the dead; or from whomsoever the flow of seed
goeth out; <span id="an_lev:22:5">5</span> or whosoever toucheth any
swarming thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may
take uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath; <span
id="an_lev:22:6">6</span> the soul that toucheth any such shall be
unclean until the even, and shall not eat of the holy things, unless he
bathe his flesh in water. <span id="an_lev:22:7">7</span> And when the
sun is down, he shall be clean; and afterward he may eat of the holy
things, because it is his bread. <span id="an_lev:22:8">8</span> That
which dieth of itself, or is torn of beasts, he shall not eat to defile
himself therewith: I am the LORD. <span id="an_lev:22:9">9</span> They
shall therefore keep My charge, lest they bear sin for it, and die
therein, if they profane it: I am the LORD who sanctify them. <span
id="an_lev:22:10">10</span> There shall no  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[a](#fn_89.md) common man eat of the holy thing; a tenant
of a priest, or a hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing. <span
id="an_lev:22:11">11</span> But if a priest buy any soul, the purchase
of his money, he may eat of it; and such as are born in his house, they
may eat of his bread. <span id="an_lev:22:12">12</span> And if a
priest's daughter be married unto a common man, she shall not eat of
that which is set apart from the holy things. <span
id="an_lev:22:13">13</span> But if a priest's daughter be a widow, or
divorced, and have no child, and is returned unto her father's house, as
in her youth, she may eat of her father's bread; but there shall no
common man eat thereof. <span id="an_lev:22:14">14</span> And if a man
eat of the holy thing through error, then he shall put the fifth part
thereof unto it, and shall give unto the priest the holy thing. <span
id="an_lev:22:15">15</span> And they shall not profane the holy things
of the children of Israel, which they set apart unto the LORD; <span
id="an_lev:22:16">16</span> and so cause them to bear the iniquity that
bringeth guilt, when they eat their holy things; for I am the LORD who
sanctify them.

<span id="an_lev:22:17">17</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:22:18">18</span> Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and
unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them:

Whosoever he be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel,
that bringeth his offering, whether it <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>
be any of their vows, or any of their freewill-offerings, which are
brought unto the LORD for a burnt-offering; <span
id="an_lev:22:19">19</span> that ye may be accepted, ye shall offer a
male without blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.
<span id="an_lev:22:20">20</span> But whatsoever hath a blemish, that
shall ye not bring; for it shall not be acceptable for you. <span
id="an_lev:22:21">21</span> And whosoever bringeth a sacrifice of
peace-offerings unto the LORD in fulfilment of a vow clearly uttered, or
for a freewill-offering, of the herd or of the flock, it shall be
perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein. <span
id="an_lev:22:22">22</span> Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a
wen, or scabbed, or scurvy, ye shall not offer these unto the LORD, nor
make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:22:23">23</span> Either a bullock or a lamb that hath any
thing too long or too short, that mayest thou offer for a
freewill-offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted. <span
id="an_lev:22:24">24</span> That which hath its stones bruised, or
crushed, or torn, or cut, ye shall not offer unto the LORD; neither
shall ye do thus in your land. <span id="an_lev:22:25">25</span> Neither
from the hand of a foreigner shall ye offer the bread of your God of any
of these, because their corruption is in them, there is a blemish in
them; they shall not be accepted for you.

<span id="an_lev:22:26">26</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:

<span id="an_lev:22:27">27</span> When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat,
is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam; but from
the eighth day and thenceforth it may be accepted for an offering made
by fire unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:22:28">28</span> And whether it
be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and its young both in one day. <span
id="an_lev:22:29">29</span> And When ye sacrifice a sacrifice of
thanksgiving unto the LORD, ye shall sacrifice it that ye may be
accepted. <span id="an_lev:22:30">30</span> On the same day it shall be
eaten; ye shall leave none of it until the morning: I am the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:22:31">31</span> And ye shall keep My commandments, and do
them: I am the LORD. <span id="an_lev:22:32">32</span> And ye shall not
profane My holy name; but I will be hallowed among the children of
Israel: I am the LORD who hallow you, <span
id="an_lev:22:33">33</span> that brought you out of the land of Egypt,
to be your God: I am the LORD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_89"></span>[146:a](lev022.htm#fr_92.md) That is, one who is
not a priest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 23](lev023.md)

</div>
