<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev015)  [Next](lev017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ‏אחרי מות‎

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 16

<span id="an_lev:16:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, after the
death of the two sons of Aaron, when they drew near before the LORD, and
died; <span id="an_lev:16:2">2</span> and the LORD said unto Moses:
'Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the
holy place within the veil, before the ark-cover which is upon the ark;
that he die not; for I appear in the cloud upon the ark-cover. <span
id="an_lev:16:3">3</span> Herewith shall Aaron come into the holy place:
with a young bullock for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-
offering. <span id="an_lev:16:4">4</span> He shall put on the holy linen
tunic, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be
girded with the linen girdle, and <span id="page_139">p. 139</span> with
the linen mitre shall he be attired; they are the holy garments; and he
shall bathe his flesh in water, and put them on. <span
id="an_lev:16:5">5</span> And he shall take of the congregation of the
children of Israel two he-goats for a sin-offering, and one ram for a
burnt-offering. <span id="an_lev:16:6">6</span> And Aaron shall present
the bullock of the sin-offering, which is for himself, and make
atonement for himself, and for his house. <span
id="an_lev:16:7">7</span> And he shall take the two goats, and set them
before the LORD at the door of the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_lev:16:8">8</span> And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats:
one lot for the LORD, and the other lot for Azazel. <span
id="an_lev:16:9">9</span> And Aaron shall present the goat upon which
the lot fell for the LORD, and offer him for a sin-offering. <span
id="an_lev:16:10">10</span> But the goat, on which the lot fell for
Azazel, shall be set alive before the LORD, to make atonement over him,
to send him away for Azazel into the wilderness. <span
id="an_lev:16:11">11</span> And Aaron shall present the bullock of the
sin-offering, which is for himself, and shall make atonement for
himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the
sin-offering which is for himself. <span id="an_lev:16:12">12</span> And
he shall take a censer. full of coals of fire from off the altar before
the LORD, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it
within the veil. <span id="an_lev:16:13">13</span> And he shall put the
incense upon the fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the incense may
cover the ark-cover that is upon the testimony, that he die not. <span
id="an_lev:16:14">14</span> And he shall take of the blood of the
bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the ark-cover on the east;
and before the ark-cover shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger
seven times. <span id="an_lev:16:15">15</span> Then shall he kill the
goat of the sin-offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood
within the veil, and do With his blood as he did with the blood of the
bullock, and sprinkle it upon the ark-cover, and before the ark-cover.
<span id="an_lev:16:16">16</span> And he shall make atonement for the
holy place, because of the uncleannesses of the children of Israel, and
because of their transgressions, even all their sins; and so shall he do
for the tent of meeting, that dwelleth with them in the midst of their
uncleannesses. <span id="an_lev:16:17">17</span> And there shall be no
man in the tent of meeting when he goeth in to make atonement in the
holy place, until he come out, and have made atonement for himself, and
for his household, and for all the assembly of Israel. <span
id="an_lev:16:18">18</span> And he shall go out unto the altar that is
before the LORD, and make atonement for it; and shall take of the blood
of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns
of the altar round about. <span id="an_lev:16:19">19</span> And he shall
sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse
it, and hallow it from the uncleannesses of the children of Israel.
<span id="an_lev:16:20">20</span> And when he hath made an end of
atoning for the holy place, and the tent of meeting, and the altar, he
shall present the live goat. <span id="an_lev:16:21">21</span> And Aaron
shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess
over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions, even all their sins; and he shall put them upon the head
of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of an appointed man
into the wilderness. <span id="an_lev:16:22">22</span> And the goat
shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land which is cut off;
and he shall let go the goat in the wilderness. <span
id="an_lev:16:23">23</span> And Aaron shall come into the tent of
meeting, and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he
went into the holy place, and shall leave them there. <span
id="an_lev:16:24">24</span> And he shall bathe his flesh in water in a
holy place, <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> and put on his other
vestments, and come forth, and offer his burnt-offering and the
burnt-offering of the people, and make atonement for himself and for the
people. <span id="an_lev:16:25">25</span> And the fat of the
sin-offering shall he make smoke upon the altar. <span
id="an_lev:16:26">26</span> And he that letteth go the goat for Azazel
shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he
may come into the camp. <span id="an_lev:16:27">27</span> And the
bullock of the sin-offering, and the goat of the sin-offering, whose
blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shall be
carried forth without the camp; and they shall burn in the fire their
skins, and their flesh, and their dung. <span
id="an_lev:16:28">28</span> And he that burneth them shall wash his
clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he may come into
the camp.

<span id="an_lev:16:29">29</span> And it shall be a statute for ever
unto you: in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall
afflict your souls, and shall do no manner of work, the home-born, or
the stranger that sojourneth among you. <span
id="an_lev:16:30">30</span> For on this day shall atonement be made for
you, to cleanse you; from all your sins shall ye be clean before the
LORD. <span id="an_lev:16:31">31</span> It is a sabbath of solemn rest
unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls; it is a statute for ever.
<span id="an_lev:16:32">32</span> And the priest, who shall be anointed
and who shall be consecrated to be priest in his father's stead, shall
make the atonement, and shall put on the linen garments, even the holy
garments. <span id="an_lev:16:33">33</span> And he shall make atonement
for the most holy place, and he shall make atonement for the tent of
meeting and for the altar; and he shall make atonement for the priests
and for all the people of the assembly. <span
id="an_lev:16:34">34</span> And this shall be an everlasting statute
unto you, to make atonement for the children of Israel because of all
their sins once in the year.' And he did as the LORD commanded Moses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 17](lev017)

</div>
