<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num018)  [Next](num020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 19

‏חק.ט‎

<span id="an_num:19:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying:

<span id="an_num:19:2">2</span> This is the statute of the law which the
LORD hath commanded, saying: Speak unto the children of Israel, that
they bring thee a red heifer, faultless, wherein is no blemish, and upon
which never came yoke. <span id="an_num:19:3">3</span> And ye shall give
her unto Eleazar the priest, and she shall be brought forth without the
camp, and she shall be slain before his face. <span
id="an_num:19:4">4</span> And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood
with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood toward the front of the tent
of meeting seven times. <span id="an_num:19:5">5</span> And the heifer
shall be burnt in his sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood,
with her dung, shall be burnt. <span id="an_num:19:6">6</span> And the
priest shall take cedar-wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into
the midst of the burning of the heifer. <span
id="an_num:19:7">7</span> Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he
shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he may come into the camp,
and the priest shall be unclean until the even. <span
id="an_num:19:8">8</span> And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes
in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the
even. <span id="an_num:19:9">9</span> And a man that is clean shall
gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay them up without the camp in a
clean place, and it shall be kept for the congregation of the children
of Israel for a water of sprinkling; it is a purification from sin.
<span id="an_num:19:10">10</span> And he that gathereth the ashes of the
heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; and it
shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that
sojourneth among them, for a statute for ever. <span
id="an_num:19:11">11</span> He that toucheth the dead, even any man's
dead body, shall be unclean seven days; <span
id="an_num:19:12">12</span> the same shall purify himself therewith on
the third day and on the seventh day, and he shall be clean; but if he
purify not himself the third day and the seventh day, he shall not be
clean. <span id="an_num:19:13">13</span> Whosoever toucheth the dead,
even the body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not himself—he hath
defiled the tabernacle of the LORD—that soul shall be cut off from
Israel; because the water of sprinkling was not dashed against him, he
shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet upon him. <span
id="an_num:19:14">14</span> This is the law: when a man dieth in a tent,
every one that cometh into the tent, and every thing that is in the
tent, shall be unclean seven

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

days. <span id="an_num:19:15">15</span> And every open vessel, which
hath no covering close-bound upon it, is unclean. <span
id="an_num:19:16">16</span> And whosoever in the open field toucheth one
that is slain with a sword, or one that dieth of himself, or a bone of a
man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days. <span
id="an_num:19:17">17</span> And for the unclean they shall take of the
ashes of the burning of the purification from sin, and running water
shall be put thereto in a vessel. <span id="an_num:19:18">18</span> And
a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle
it upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, and upon the persons that
were there, and upon him that touched the bone, or the slain, or the
dead, or the grave. <span id="an_num:19:19">19</span> And the clean
person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the
seventh day; and on the seventh day he shall purify him; and he shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at
even. <span id="an_num:19:20">20</span> But the man that shall be
unclean, and shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from
the midst of the assembly, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the
LORD; the water of sprinkling hath not been dashed against him: he is
unclean. <span id="an_num:19:21">21</span> And it shall be a perpetual
statute unto them; and he that sprinkleth the water of sprinkling shall
wash his clothes; and he that toucheth the water of sprinkling shall be
unclean until even. <span id="an_num:19:22">22</span> And whatsoever the
unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and the soul that toucheth him
shall be unclean until even.

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 20](num020)

</div>
