<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num026)  [Next](num028.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 27

<span id="an_num:27:1">1</span> Then drew near the daughters of
Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the
son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph; and
these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and
Milcah, and Tirzah. <span id="an_num:27:2">2</span> And they stood
before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and
all the congregation, at the door of the tent of meeting, saying: <span
id="an_num:27:3">3</span> \`Our father died in the wilderness, and he
was not among the company of them that gathered themselves together
against the LORD in the company of Korah, but he died in his own sin;
and he had no sons. <span id="an_num:27:4">4</span> Why should the name
of our father be done away from among his family, because he had no son?
Give unto us a possession among the brethren of our father.' <span
id="an_num:27:5">5</span> And Moses brought their cause before the LORD.
<span id="an_num:27:6">6</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:27:7">7</span> \`The daughters of Zelophehad speak
right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among
their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their
father to pass unto them. <span id="an_num:27:8">8</span> And thou shalt
speak unto the children of Israel, saying: If a man die, and have no
son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto

his daughter. <span id="an_num:27:9">9</span> And if he have no
daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren. <span
id="an_num:27:10">10</span> And if he have no brethren, then ye shall
give his inheritance unto his father's brethren. <span
id="an_num:27:11">11</span> And if his father have no brethren, then ye
shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his
family, and he shall possess it. And it shall be unto the children of
Israel a statute of judgment, as the LORD commanded Moses.'

<span id="an_num:27:12">12</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: \`Get
thee up into this mountain of Abarim, and behold the land which I have
given unto the children of Israel. <span id="an_num:27:13">13</span> And
when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as
Aaron thy brother was gathered; <span
id="an_num:27:14">14</span> because ye rebelled against My commandment
in the wilderness of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify
Me at the waters before their eyes.'—These are the waters of
Meribath-kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.— <span
id="an_num:27:15">15</span> And Moses spoke unto the LORD, saying: <span
id="an_num:27:16">16</span> \`Let the LORD, the God of the spirits of
all flesh, set a man over the congregation, <span
id="an_num:27:17">17</span> who may go out before them, and who may come
in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them in;
that the congregation of the LORD be not as sheep which have no
shepherd.' <span id="an_num:27:18">18</span> And the LORD said unto
Moses: \`Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is spirit, and
lay thy hand upon him; <span id="an_num:27:19">19</span> and set him
before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and give him
a charge in their sight. <span id="an_num:27:20">20</span> And thou
shalt put of thy honour upon him, that all the congregation of the
children of Israel may hearken. <span id="an_num:27:21">21</span> And he
shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire for him by the
judgment of the Urim before

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

the LORD; at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come
in, both he, and all the children of Israel with him, even all the
congregation.' <span id="an_num:27:22">22</span> And Moses did as the
LORD commanded him; and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the
priest, and before all the congregation. <span
id="an_num:27:23">23</span> And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him
a charge, as the LORD spoke by the hand of Moses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 28](num028.md)

</div>
