<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num016)  [Next](num018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 17

<span id="an_num:17:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:17:2">2</span> \`Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron
the priest, that he take up the fire-pans out of the burning, and
scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are become holy; <span
id="an_num:17:3">3</span> even the fire-pans of these men who have
sinned at the cost of their lives, and let them be made beaten plates
for a covering of the altar—for they are become holy, because they were
offered before the LORD—that they may be a sign unto the children of
Israel.' <span id="an_num:17:4">4</span> And Eleazar the priest took the
brazen fire-pans, which they that were burnt had offered; and they beat
them out for a covering of the altar, <span id="an_num:17:5">5</span> to
be a memorial unto the children of Israel, to the end that no common
man, that is not of the seed of Aaron, draw near to burn incense before
the LORD; that he fare not as Korah, and as his company; as the LORD
spoke unto him by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_num:17:6">6</span> But on the morrow all the congregation
of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron,
saying: \`Ye have killed the people of the LORD.' <span
id="an_num:17:7">7</span> And it came to pass, when the congregation was
assembled against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the
tent of meeting; and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the
LORD appeared. <span id="an_num:17:8">8</span> And Moses and Aaron came
to the front of the tent of meeting. <span id="an_num:17:9">9</span> And
the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying: <span
id="an_num:17:10">10</span> \`Get you up from among this congregation,
that I may consume them in a moment.' And they fell upon their faces.
<span id="an_num:17:11">11</span> And Moses said unto Aaron: \`Take thy
fire-pan, and put fire therein from off the altar, and lay incense
thereon, and carry it quickly unto the congregation, and make atonement
for them; for there is wrath gone out from the LORD: the plague is
begun.' <span id="an_num:17:12">12</span> And Aaron took as Moses spoke,
and ran into the midst of the assembly; and, behold, the plague was
begun among the people; and he put on the incense, and made atonement
for the people. <span id="an_num:17:13">13</span> And he stood between
the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span id="an_num:17:14">14</span> Now they that died by the plague were
fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides them that died about the
matter of Korah. <span id="an_num:17:15">15</span> And Aaron returned
unto Moses unto the door of the tent of meeting, and the plague was
stayed.

<span id="an_num:17:16">16</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:17:17">17</span> \`Speak unto the children of Israel,
and take of them rods, one for each fathers' house, of all their princes
according to their fathers' houses, twelve rods; thou shalt write every
man's name upon his rod. <span id="an_num:17:18">18</span> And thou
shalt write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi, for there shall be one
rod for the head of their fathers' houses. <span
id="an_num:17:19">19</span> And thou shalt lay them up in the tent of
meeting before the testimony, where I meet with you. <span
id="an_num:17:20">20</span> And it shall come to pass, that the man whom
I shall choose, his rod shall bud; and I will make to cease from Me the
murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur against you.'
<span id="an_num:17:21">21</span> And Moses spoke unto the children of
Israel; and all their princes gave him rods, for each prince one,
according to their fathers' houses, even twelve rods; and the rod of
Aaron was among their rods. <span id="an_num:17:22">22</span> And Moses
laid up the rods before the LORD in the tent of the testimony. <span
id="an_num:17:23">23</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
Moses went into the tent of the testimony; and, behold, the rod of Aaron
for the house of Levi was budded, and put forth buds, and bloomed
blossoms, and bore ripe almonds. <span id="an_num:17:24">24</span> And
Moses brought out all the rods from before the LORD unto all the
children of Israel; and they looked, and took every man his rod.

<span id="an_num:17:25">25</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: \`Put
back the rod of Aaron before the testimony, to be kept there, for a
token against the rebellious children; that there may be made an end of
their murmurings against Me, that they die not.' <span
id="an_num:17:26">26</span> Thus did Moses; as the LORD commanded him,
so did he.

<span id="an_num:17:27">27</span> And the children of Israel spoke unto
Moses, saying: \`Behold, we perish, we are undone, we are all undone.
<span id="an_num:17:28">28</span> Every one that cometh near, that
cometh near unto the tabernacle of the LORD, is to die; shall we wholly
perish?'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 18](num018)

</div>
