<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num014)  [Next](num016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 15

<span id="an_num:15:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:15:2">2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them:

When ye are come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto
you, <span id="an_num:15:3">3</span> and will make an offering by fire
unto the LORD, a burnt-offering, or a sacrifice, in fulfilment of a vow
clearly uttered, or as a freewill-offering, or in your appointed
seasons, to make a sweet savour unto the LORD, of the herd, or of the
flock; <span id="an_num:15:4">4</span> then shall he that bringeth his
offering present unto the LORD a meal-offering of a tenth part of an
ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of oil; <span
id="an_num:15:5">5</span> and wine for the drink-offering, the fourth
part of a hin, shalt thou prepare with the burnt-offering or for the
sacrifice, for each lamb. <span id="an_num:15:6">6</span> Or for a ram,
thou shalt prepare for a meal-offering two tenth parts of an ephah of
fine flour mingled with the third part of a hin of oil; <span
id="an_num:15:7">7</span> and for the drink-offering thou shalt present
the third part of a hin of wine, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. <span
id="an_num:15:8">8</span> And when thou preparest a bullock for a
burnt-offering, or for a sacrifice, in fulfilment of a vow clearly
uttered, or for peace-offerings unto the LORD; <span
id="an_num:15:9">9</span> then shall there be presented with the bullock
a meal-offering of three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled
with half a hin of oil. <span id="an_num:15:10">10</span> And thou shalt
present for the drink-offering half a hin of wine, for an offering made
by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. <span
id="an_num:15:11">11</span> Thus shall it be done for each bullock, or
for each ram, or for each of the he-lambs, or of the kids. <span
id="an_num:15:12">12</span> According to the number that ye may prepare,
so shall ye do for every one according to their number. <span
id="an_num:15:13">13</span> All that are home-born shall do these things
after this manner, in presenting an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the LORD. <span id="an_num:15:14">14</span> And if a
stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever may be among you, throughout
your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the LORD; as ye do, so he shall do. <span
id="an_num:15:15">15</span> As for the congregation, there shall be one
statute both for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you, a
statute for ever throughout your generations; as ye are, so shall the
stranger be before the LORD. <span id="an_num:15:16">16</span> One law
and one ordinance shall be both for you, and for the stranger that
sojourneth with you.

 

<span id="an_num:15:17">17</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:15:18">18</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them:

When ye come into the land whither I bring you, <span
id="an_num:15:19">19</span> then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the
bread of the land, ye shall set apart a portion for a gift unto the
LORD. <span id="an_num:15:20">20</span> Of the first of your dough ye
shall set apart a cake for a gift; as that which is set apart of the
threshing-floor, so shall ye set it apart. <span
id="an_num:15:21">21</span> Of the first of your dough ye shall give
unto the LORD a portion for a gift throughout your generations.

 

<span id="an_num:15:22">22</span> And when ye shall err, and not observe
all these commandments, which the LORD hath spoken unto Moses, <span
id="an_num:15:23">23</span> even all that the LORD hath commanded you by
the hand of Moses, from the day that the LORD

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

gave commandment, and onward throughout your generations; <span
id="an_num:15:24">24</span> then it shall be, if it be done in error by
the congregation, it being hid from their eyes, that all the
congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt-offering, for a
sweet savour unto the LORD—with the meal-offering thereof, and the
drink-offering thereof, according to the ordinance—and one he-goat for a
sin-offering. <span id="an_num:15:25">25</span> And the priest shall
make atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel, and
they shall be forgiven; for it was an error, and they have brought their
offering, an offering made by fire unto the LORD, and their sin-offering
before the LORD, for their error. <span id="an_num:15:26">26</span> And
all the congregation of the children of Israel shall be forgiven, and
the stranger that sojourneth among them; for in respect of all the
people it was done in error.

<span id="an_num:15:27">27</span> And if one person sin through error,
then he shall offer a she-goat of the first year for a sin-offering.
<span id="an_num:15:28">28</span> And the priest shall make atonement
for the soul that erreth, when he sinneth through error, before the
LORD, to make atonement for him; and he shall be forgiven, <span
id="an_num:15:29">29</span> both he that is home-born among the children
of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them: ye shall have
one law for him that doeth aught in error. <span
id="an_num:15:30">30</span> But the soul that doeth aught with a high
hand, whether he be home-born or a stranger, the same blasphemeth the
LORD; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people. <span
id="an_num:15:31">31</span> Because he hath despised the word of the
LORD, and hath broken His commandment; that soul shall utterly be cut
off, his iniquity shall be upon him.

 

<span id="an_num:15:32">32</span> And while the children of Israel were
in the wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks upon the sabbath
day. <span id="an_num:15:33">33</span> And they that found him gathering
sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the congregation.
<span id="an_num:15:34">34</span> And they put him in ward, because it
had not been declared what should be done to him. <span
id="an_num:15:35">35</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: \`The man
shall surely be put to death; all the congregation shall stone him with
stones without the camp.' <span id="an_num:15:36">36</span> And all the
congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him with stones,
and he died, as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_num:15:37">37</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:15:38">38</span> \`Speak unto the children of Israel,
and bid them that they make them throughout their generations fringes in
the corners of their garments, and that they put with the fringe of each
corner a thread of blue. <span id="an_num:15:39">39</span> And it shall
be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the
commandments of the LORD, and do them; and that ye go not about after
your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go astray; <span
id="an_num:15:40">40</span> that ye may remember and do all My
commandments, and be holy unto your God. <span
id="an_num:15:41">41</span> I am the LORD your God, who brought you out
of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD your God.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 16](num016.md)

</div>
