<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num010)  [Next](num012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 11

<span id="an_num:11:1">1</span> And the people were as murmurers,
speaking evil in the ears of the LORD; and when the LORD heard it, His
anger was kindled; and the fire of the LORD burnt among them, and
devoured in the uttermost part of the camp. <span
id="an_num:11:2">2</span> And the people cried unto Moses; and Moses
prayed unto the LORD, and the fire abated. <span
id="an_num:11:3">3</span> And the name of that place was called  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[a](#fn_92) Taberah, because the fire of the LORD
burnt among them.

<span id="an_num:11:4">4</span> And the mixed multitude that was among
them fell a lusting; and the children of Israel also wept on their part,
and said: \`Would that we were given flesh to eat! <span
id="an_num:11:5">5</span> We remember the fish, which we were wont to
eat in Egypt for nought; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks,
and the onions, and the garlic; <span id="an_num:11:6">6</span> but now
our soul is dried away; there is nothing at all; we have nought save
this manna to look to.'— <span id="an_num:11:7">7</span> Now the manna
was like coriander seed, and the appearance thereof as the appearance of
bdellium. <span id="an_num:11:8">8</span> The people went about, and
gathered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in mortars, and seethed
it in pots, and made cakes of it; and the taste of it was as the taste
of a

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

cake baked with oil. <span id="an_num:11:9">9</span> And when the dew
fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it.— <span
id="an_num:11:10">10</span> And Moses heard the people weeping, family
by family, every man at the door of his tent; and the anger of the LORD
was kindled greatly; and Moses was displeased. <span
id="an_num:11:11">11</span> And Moses said unto the LORD: \`Wherefore
hast Thou dealt ill with Thy servant? and wherefore have I not found
favour in Thy sight, that Thou layest the burden of all this people upon
me? <span id="an_num:11:12">12</span> Have I conceived all this people?
have I brought them forth, that Thou shouldest say unto me: Carry them
in thy bosom, as a nursing-father carrieth the sucking child, unto the
land which Thou didst swear unto their fathers? <span
id="an_num:11:13">13</span> Whence should I have flesh to give unto all
this people? for they trouble me with their weeping, saying: Give us
flesh, that we may eat. <span id="an_num:11:14">14</span> I am not able
to bear all this people myself alone, because it is too heavy for me.
<span id="an_num:11:15">15</span> And if Thou deal thus with me, kill
me, I pray Thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in Thy sight; and
let me not look upon my wretchedness.'

<span id="an_num:11:16">16</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: \`Gather
unto Me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the
elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the
tent of meeting, that they may stand there with thee. <span
id="an_num:11:17">17</span> And I will come down and speak with thee
there; and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it
upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that
thou bear it not thyself alone. <span id="an_num:11:18">18</span> And
say thou unto the people: Sanctify yourselves against to-morrow, and ye
shall eat flesh; for ye have wept in the ears of the LORD, saying: Would
that we were given flesh to eat! for it was well with us in Egypt;
therefore the LORD will give you flesh, and ye shall eat. <span
id="an_num:11:19">19</span> Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor
five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days; <span
id="an_num:11:20">20</span> but a whole month, until it come out at your
nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you; because that ye have rejected
the LORD who is among you, and have troubled Him with weeping, saying:
Why, now, came we forth out of Egypt?' <span
id="an_num:11:21">21</span> And Moses said: \`The people, among whom I
am, are six hundred thousand men on foot; and yet Thou hast said: I will
give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month! <span
id="an_num:11:22">22</span> If flocks and herds be slain for them, will
they suffice them? or if all the fish of the sea be gathered together
for them, will they suffice them?' <span id="an_num:11:23">23</span> And
the LORD said unto Moses: \`Is the LORD's hand waxed short? now shalt
thou see whether My word shall come to pass unto thee or not.'

<span id="an_num:11:24">24</span> And Moses went out, and told the
people the words of the LORD; and he gathered seventy men of the elders
of the people, and set them round about the Tent. <span
id="an_num:11:25">25</span> And the LORD came down in the cloud, and
spoke unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and put it
upon the seventy elders; and it came to pass, that, when the spirit
rested upon them, they prophesied, but they did so no more. <span
id="an_num:11:26">26</span> But there remained two men in the camp, the
name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad; and the
spirit rested upon them; and they were of them that were recorded, but
had not gone out unto the Tent; and they prophesied in the camp. <span
id="an_num:11:27">27</span> And there ran a young man, and told Moses,
and said: \`Eldad and Medad are

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

prophesying in the camp.' <span id="an_num:11:28">28</span> And Joshua
the son of Nun, the minister of Moses from his youth up, answered and
said: \`My lord Moses, shut them in.' <span
id="an_num:11:29">29</span> And Moses said unto him: \`Art thou jealous
for my sake? would that all the LORD's people were prophets, that the
LORD would put His spirit upon them!' <span
id="an_num:11:30">30</span> And Moses withdrew into the camp, he and the
elders of Israel.

<span id="an_num:11:31">31</span> And there went forth a wind from the
LORD, and brought across quails from the sea, and let them fall by the
camp, about a day's journey on this side, and a day's journey on the
other side, round about the camp, and about two cubits above the face of
the earth. <span id="an_num:11:32">32</span> And the people rose up all
that day, and all the night, and all the next day, and gathered the
quails; he that gathered least gathered ten heaps; and they spread them
all abroad for themselves round about the camp. <span
id="an_num:11:33">33</span> While the flesh was yet between their teeth,
ere it was chewed, the anger of the LORD was kindled against the people,
and the LORD smote the people with a very great plague. <span
id="an_num:11:34">34</span> And the name of that place was called  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[a](#fn_93) Kibroth-hattaavah, because there they
buried the people that lusted. <span id="an_num:11:35">35</span> From
Kibroth-hattaavah the people journeyed unto Hazeroth; and they abode at
Hazeroth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[174:a](num011.htm#fr_95) That is, *Burning*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[176:a](num011.htm#fr_96) That is, *The graves
of lust*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 12](num012)

</div>
