<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num015)  [Next](num017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 16

‏קרח‎

<span id="an_num:16:1">1</span> Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of
Kohath, the son of Levi, with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and
On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men; <span
id="an_num:16:2">2</span> and they rose up in face of Moses, with
certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty men; they were
princes of the congregation, the elect men of the assembly, men of
renown; <span id="an_num:16:3">3</span> and they assembled themselves
together against Moses and against

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

Aaron, and said unto them: \`Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
congregation are holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them;
wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the assembly of the LORD?'
<span id="an_num:16:4">4</span> And when Moses heard it, he fell upon
his face. <span id="an_num:16:5">5</span> And he spoke unto Korah and
unto all his company, saying: \`In the morning the LORD will show who
are His, and who is holy, and will cause him to come near unto Him; even
him whom He may choose will He cause to come near unto Him. <span
id="an_num:16:6">6</span> This do: take you censers, Korah, and all his
company; <span id="an_num:16:7">7</span> and put fire therein, and put
incense upon them before the LORD tomorrow; and it shall be that the man
whom the LORD doth choose, he shall be holy; ye take too much upon you,
ye sons of Levi.' <span id="an_num:16:8">8</span> And Moses said unto
Korah: \`Hear now, ye sons of Levi: <span id="an_num:16:9">9</span> is
it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you
from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to Himself, to do the
service of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to stand before the
congregation to minister unto them; <span
id="an_num:16:10">10</span> and that He hath brought thee near, and all
thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee? and will ye seek the priesthood
also? <span id="an_num:16:11">11</span> Therefore thou and all thy
company that are gathered together against the LORD—; and as to Aaron,
what is he that ye murmur against him?' <span
id="an_num:16:12">12</span> And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram,
the sons of Eliab; and they said: \`We will not come up; <span
id="an_num:16:13">13</span> is it a small thing that thou hast brought
us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in the
wilderness, but thou must needs make thyself also a prince over us?
<span id="an_num:16:14">14</span> Moreover thou hast not brought us into
a land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us inheritance of fields
and vineyards; wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we will not come
up.' <span id="an_num:16:15">15</span> And Moses was very wroth, and
said unto the LORD: \`Respect not Thou their offering; I have not taken
one ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them.' <span
id="an_num:16:16">16</span> And Moses said unto Korah: \`Be thou and all
thy congregation before the LORD, thou, and they, and Aaron, to-morrow;
<span id="an_num:16:17">17</span> and take ye every man his fire-pan,
and put incense upon them, and bring ye before the LORD every man his
fire-pan, two hundred and fifty fire-pans; thou also, and Aaron, each
his fire-pan.' <span id="an_num:16:18">18</span> And they took every man
his fire-pan, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and stood
at the door of the tent of meeting with Moses and Aaron. <span
id="an_num:16:19">19</span> And Korah assembled all the congregation
against them unto the door of the tent of meeting; and the glory of the
LORD appeared unto all the congregation.

<span id="an_num:16:20">20</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying: <span id="an_num:16:21">21</span> \`Separate yourselves
from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.'
<span id="an_num:16:22">22</span> And they fell upon their faces, and
said: \`O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin,
and wilt Thou be wroth with all the congregation?'

<span id="an_num:16:23">23</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:16:24">24</span> \`Speak unto the congregation, saying:
Get you up from about the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.' <span
id="an_num:16:25">25</span> And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and
Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed him. <span
id="an_num:16:26">26</span> And he spoke unto the congregation, saying:
\`Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch
nothing of theirs, lest ye be swept away in all their sins.' <span
id="an_num:16:27">27</span> So

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

they got them up from the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on
every side; and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood at the door of
their tents, with their wives, and their sons, and their little ones.
<span id="an_num:16:28">28</span> And Moses said: \`Hereby ye shall know
that the LORD hath sent me to do all these works, and that I have not
done them of mine own mind. <span id="an_num:16:29">29</span> If these
men die the common death of all men, and be visited after the visitation
of all men, then the LORD hath not sent me. <span
id="an_num:16:30">30</span> But if the LORD make a new thing, and the
ground open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto
them, and they go down alive into the pit, then ye shall understand that
these men have despised the LORD.' <span id="an_num:16:31">31</span> And
it came to pass, as he made an end of speaking all these words, that the
ground did cleave asunder that was under them. <span
id="an_num:16:32">32</span> And the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their households, and all the men that
appertained unto Korah, and all their goods. <span
id="an_num:16:33">33</span> So they, and all that appertained to them,
went down alive into the pit; and the earth closed upon them, and they
perished from among the assembly. <span id="an_num:16:34">34</span> And
all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them; for they
said: \`Lest the earth swallow us up.' <span
id="an_num:16:35">35</span> And fire came forth from the LORD, and
devoured the two hundred and fifty men that offered the incense.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 17](num017.md)

</div>
