<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num013)  [Next](num015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 14

<span id="an_num:14:1">1</span> And all the congregation lifted up their
voice, and cried; and the people wept that night. <span
id="an_num:14:2">2</span> And all the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and against Aaron; and the whole congregation said unto
them: \`Would that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would we had
died in this wilderness! <span id="an_num:14:3">3</span> And wherefore
doth the LORD bring us unto this land, to fall by the sword? Our wives
and our little ones will be a prey; were it not better for us to return
into Egypt?' <span id="an_num:14:4">4</span> And they said one to
another: \`Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt.' <span
id="an_num:14:5">5</span> Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces
before all the assembly of the congregation of the children of Israel.
<span id="an_num:14:6">6</span> And Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the
son of Jephunneh, who were of them that spied out the land, rent their
clothes. <span id="an_num:14:7">7</span> And they spoke unto all the
congregation of the children of Israel, saying: \`The land, which we
passed through to spy it out, is an exceeding good land. <span
id="an_num:14:8">8</span> If the LORD delight in us, then He will bring
us into this land, and give it unto usa land which floweth with milk and
honey. <span id="an_num:14:9">9</span> Only rebel not against the LORD,
neither fear ye the people of the land; for they are bread for us; their
defence is removed from over them, and the LORD is with us; fear them
not.' <span id="an_num:14:10">10</span> But all the congregation bade
stone them with stones, when the glory of the LORD appeared in the tent
of meeting unto all the children of Israel.

<span id="an_num:14:11">11</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: \`How
long will this people despise Me? and how long will they not believe in
Me, for all the signs which I have wrought among them? <span
id="an_num:14:12">12</span> I will smite them with the pestilence, and
destroy them, and will make of thee a nation greater and mightier than
they.' <span id="an_num:14:13">13</span> And Moses said unto the LORD:
\`When the Egyptians shall hear—for Thou broughtest up this people in
Thy might from among them— <span id="an_num:14:14">14</span> they will
say to the inhabitants of this land, who have heard that Thou LORD art
in the midst of this people; inasmuch as Thou LORD art seen face to
face, and Thy cloud standeth over them, and Thou goest before them, in a
pillar of cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night; <span
id="an_num:14:15">15</span> now if Thou shalt kill this people as one
man, then the nations which have heard the fame of Thee will speak,
saying: <span id="an_num:14:16">16</span> Because the LORD was not able
to bring this people into the land which He swore unto them, therefore
He hath slain them in the wilderness. <span
id="an_num:14:17">17</span> And now, I pray Thee, let the power of the
Lord be great, according as Thou hast spoken, saying: <span
id="an_num:14:18">18</span> The LORD is slow to anger, and plenteous in
lovingkindness, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and that will by
no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, upon the third and upon the fourth generation. <span
id="an_num:14:19">19</span> Pardon, I pray Thee, the iniquity of this
people according unto the

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

greatness of Thy lovingkindness, and according as Thou hast forgiven
this people, from Egypt even until now.' <span
id="an_num:14:20">20</span> And the LORD said: \`I have pardoned
according to thy word. <span id="an_num:14:21">21</span> But in very
deed, as I live—and all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the
LORD— <span id="an_num:14:22">22</span> surely all those men that have
seen My glory, and My signs, which I wrought in Egypt and in the
wilderness, yet have put Me to proof these ten times, and have not
hearkened to My voice; <span id="an_num:14:23">23</span> surely they
shall not see the land which I swore unto their fathers, neither shall
any of them that despised Me see it. <span
id="an_num:14:24">24</span> But My servant Caleb, because he had another
spirit with him, and hath followed Me fully, him will I bring into the
land whereinto he went; and his seed shall possess it. <span
id="an_num:14:25">25</span> Now the Amalekite and the Canaanite dwell in
the Vale; to-morrow turn ye, and get you into the wilderness by the way
to the Red Sea.'

<span id="an_num:14:26">26</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying: <span id="an_num:14:27">27</span> \`How long shall I bear
with this evil congregation, that keep murmuring against Me? I have
heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they keep
murmuring against Me. <span id="an_num:14:28">28</span> Say unto them:
As I live, saith the LORD, surely as ye have spoken in Mine ears, so
will I do to you: <span id="an_num:14:29">29</span> your carcasses shall
fall in this wilderness, and all that were numbered of you, according to
your whole number, from twenty years old and upward, ye that have
murmured against Me; <span id="an_num:14:30">30</span> surely ye shall
not come into the land, concerning which I lifted up My hand that I
would make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and
Joshua the son of Nun. <span id="an_num:14:31">31</span> But your little
ones, that ye said would be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall
know the land which ye have rejected. <span
id="an_num:14:32">32</span> But as for you, your carcasses shall fall in
this wilderness. <span id="an_num:14:33">33</span> And your children
shall be wanderers in the wilderness forty years, and shall bear your
strayings, until your carcasses be consumed in the wilderness. <span
id="an_num:14:34">34</span> After the number of the days in which ye
spied out the land, even forty days, for every day a year, shall ye bear
your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shall know My displeasure.
<span id="an_num:14:35">35</span> I the LORD have spoken, surely this
will I do unto all this evil congregation, that are gathered together
against Me; in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they
shall die.' <span id="an_num:14:36">36</span> And the men, whom Moses
sent to spy out the land, and who, when they returned, made all the
congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up an evil report
against the land, <span id="an_num:14:37">37</span> even those men that
did bring up an evil report of the land, died by the plague before the
LORD. <span id="an_num:14:38">38</span> But Joshua the son of Nun, and
Caleb the son of Jephunneh, remained alive of those men that went to spy
out the land. <span id="an_num:14:39">39</span> And Moses told these
words unto all the children of Israel; and the people mourned greatly.
<span id="an_num:14:40">40</span> And they rose up early in the morning,
and got them up to the top of the mountain, saying: \`Lo, we are here,
and will go up unto the place which the LORD hath promised; for we have
sinned.' <span id="an_num:14:41">41</span> And Moses said: \`Wherefore
now do ye transgress the commandment of the LORD, seeing it shall not
prosper? <span id="an_num:14:42">42</span> Go not up, for the LORD is
not among you; that ye be not smitten down before your enemies. <span
id="an_num:14:43">43</span> For there the Amalekite and the Canaanite
are before you, and ye shall fall by the sword; forasmuch as ye are
turned back from following the LORD, and

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

the LORD will not be with you.' <span id="an_num:14:44">44</span> But
they presumed to go up to the top of the mountain; nevertheless the ark
of the covenant of the LORD, and Moses, departed not out of the camp.
<span id="an_num:14:45">45</span> Then the Amalekite and the Canaanite,
who dwelt in that hill-country, came down, and smote them and beat them
down, even unto Hormah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 15](num015.md)

</div>
