<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num028)  [Next](num030.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 29

<span id="an_num:29:1">1</span> And in the seventh month, on the first
day of the month, ye shall have a holy convocation: ye shall do no
manner of servile work; it is a day of blowing the horn unto you. <span
id="an_num:29:2">2</span> And ye shall prepare a burnt-offering for a
sweet savour unto the LORD: one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs
of the first year without blemish; <span id="an_num:29:3">3</span> and
their meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for
the bullock, two tenth parts for the ram, <span
id="an_num:29:4">4</span> and one tenth part for every lamb of the seven
lambs; <span id="an_num:29:5">5</span> and one he-goat for a
sin-offering, to make atonement for you; <span
id="an_num:29:6">6</span> beside the burnt-offering of the new moon, and
the meal-offering thereof, and the continual burnt-offering and the
meal-offering thereof, and their drink-offerings, according unto their
ordinance, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="an_num:29:7">7</span> And on the tenth day of this seventh
month ye shall have a holy convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls;
ye shall do no manner of work; <span id="an_num:29:8">8</span> but ye
shall present a burnt-offering unto the LORD for a sweet savour: one
young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year; they shall be
unto you without blemish; <span id="an_num:29:9">9</span> and their
meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for the
bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram, <span
id="an_num:29:10">10</span> a several tenth part for every lamb of the
seven lambs; <span id="an_num:29:11">11</span> one he-goat for a
sin-offering; beside the sin-offering of atonement, and the continual
burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and their
drink-offerings.

<span id="an_num:29:12">12</span> And on the fifteenth day of the
seventh month ye shall have a holy convocation: ye shall do no manner of
servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the LORD seven days; <span
id="an_num:29:13">13</span> and ye shall present a burnt-offering, an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: thirteen young
bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year; they shall be
without blemish; <span id="an_num:29:14">14</span> and their
meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for every
bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth parts for each ram of the
two rams, <span id="an_num:29:15">15</span> and a several tenth part for
every lamb of the fourteen lambs <span id="an_num:29:16">16</span> and
one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the continual

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering
thereof.

<span id="an_num:29:17">17</span> And on the second day ye shall present
twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year
without blemish; <span id="an_num:29:18">18</span> and their
meal-offering and their drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams,
and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance; <span
id="an_num:29:19">19</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside
the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and their
drink-offerings.

<span id="an_num:29:20">20</span> And on the third day eleven bullocks,
two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish; <span
id="an_num:29:21">21</span> and their meal-offering and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
according to their number, after the ordinance; <span
id="an_num:29:22">22</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside
the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and the
drink-offering thereof.

<span id="an_num:29:23">23</span> And on the fourth day ten bullocks,
two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish; <span
id="an_num:29:24">24</span> their meal-offering and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
according to their number, after the ordinance; <span
id="an_num:29:25">25</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside
the continual burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the
drink-offering thereof.

<span id="an_num:29:26">26</span> And on the fifth day nine bullocks,
two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish; <span
id="an_num:29:27">27</span> and their meal-offering and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
according to their number, after the ordinance; <span
id="an_num:29:28">28</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside
the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and the
drink-offering thereof.

<span id="an_num:29:29">29</span> And on the sixth day eight bullocks,
two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish; <span
id="an_num:29:30">30</span> and their meal-offering and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
according to their number, after the ordinance; <span
id="an_num:29:31">31</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside
the continual burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the
drink-offerings thereof.

<span id="an_num:29:32">32</span> And on the seventh day seven bullocks,
two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish; <span
id="an_num:29:33">33</span> and their meal-offering and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
according to their number, after the ordinance; <span
id="an_num:29:34">34</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside
the continual burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the
drink-offering thereof.

<span id="an_num:29:35">35</span> On the eighth day ye shall have a
solemn assembly: ye shall do no manner of servile work; <span
id="an_num:29:36">36</span> but ye shall present a burnt-offering, an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: one bullock, one
ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish; <span
id="an_num:29:37">37</span> their meal-offering and their
drink-offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, shall
be according to their number, after the ordinance; <span
id="an_num:29:38">38</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside
the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and the
drink-offering thereof.

<span id="an_num:29:39">39</span> These ye shall offer unto the LORD in
your appointed seasons, beside your vows, and your freewill-offerings,
whether they be your burnt-offerings, or your meal-offerings, or your
drink-offerings, or your peace-offerings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 30](num030.md)

</div>
