<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num019)  [Next](num021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 20

<span id="an_num:20:1">1</span> And the children of Israel, even the
whole congregation, came into the wilderness of Zin in the first month;
and the people abode in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried
there. <span id="an_num:20:2">2</span> And there was no water for the
congregation; and they assembled themselves together against Moses and
against Aaron. <span id="an_num:20:3">3</span> And the people strove
with Moses, and spoke, saying: \`Would that we had perished when our
brethren perished before the LORD! <span id="an_num:20:4">4</span> And
why have ye brought the assembly of the LORD into this wilderness, to
die there, we and our cattle? <span id="an_num:20:5">5</span> And
wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto
this evil place? it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of
pomegranates; neither is there any water to drink.' <span
id="an_num:20:6">6</span> And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of
the assembly unto the door of the tent of meeting, and fell upon their
faces; and the glory of the LORD appeared unto them. <span
id="an_num:20:7">7</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying: <span
id="an_num:20:8">8</span> \`Take the rod, and assemble the congregation,
thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their
eyes, that it give forth its water; and thou shalt bring forth to them
water out of the rock; so thou shalt give the congregation and their
cattle drink.' <span id="an_num:20:9">9</span> And Moses took the rod
from before the LORD, as He commanded him. <span
id="an_num:20:10">10</span> And Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly
together before the rock, and he said unto them: \`Hear now, ye rebels;
are we to bring you forth water out of this rock?' <span
id="an_num:20:11">11</span> And Moses lifted up his hand, and smote the
rock with his rod twice; and water came forth abundantly, and the
congregation drank, and their cattle. <span
id="an_num:20:12">12</span> And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron:
\`Because ye believed not in Me, to sanctify Me in the eyes of the
children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this assembly into the
land which I have given them.' <span id="an_num:20:13">13</span> These
are the waters of  <span id="fr_98"></span>[a](#fn_95.md) Meribah, where
the children of

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel strove with
the LORD, and He was sanctified in them.

<span id="an_num:20:14">14</span> And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh
unto the king of Edom: \`Thus saith thy brother Israel: Thou knowest all
the travail that hath befallen us; <span id="an_num:20:15">15</span> how
our fathers went down into Egypt, and we dwelt in Egypt a long time; and
the Egyptians dealt ill with us, and our fathers; <span
id="an_num:20:16">16</span> and when we cried unto the LORD, He heard
our voice, and sent an angel, and brought us forth out of Egypt; and,
behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border. <span
id="an_num:20:17">17</span> Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy land;
we will not pass through field or through vineyard, neither will we
drink of the water of the wells; we will go along the king's highway, we
will not turn aside to the right hand nor to the left, until we have
passed thy border.' <span id="an_num:20:18">18</span> And Edom said unto
him: \`Thou shalt not pass through me, lest I come out with the sword
against thee.' <span id="an_num:20:19">19</span> And the children of
Israel said unto him: \`We will go up by the highway; and if we drink of
thy water, I and my cattle, then will I give the price thereof; let me
only pass through on my feet; there is no hurt.' <span
id="an_num:20:20">20</span> And he said: \`Thou shalt not pass through.'
And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand.
<span id="an_num:20:21">21</span> Thus Edom refused to give Israel
passage through his border; wherefore Israel turned away from him.

<span id="an_num:20:22">22</span> And they journeyed from Kadesh; and
the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, came unto mount
Hor. <span id="an_num:20:23">23</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and
Aaron in mount Hor, by the border of the land of Edom, saying: <span
id="an_num:20:24">24</span> \`Aaron shall be gathered unto his people;
for he shall not enter into the land which I have given unto the
children of Israel, because ye rebelled against My word at the waters of
Meribah. <span id="an_num:20:25">25</span> Take Aaron and Eleazar his
son, and bring them up unto mount Hor. <span
id="an_num:20:26">26</span> And strip Aaron of his garments, and put
them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people,
and shall die there.' <span id="an_num:20:27">27</span> And Moses did as
the LORD commanded; and they went up into mount Hor in the sight of all
the congregation. <span id="an_num:20:28">28</span> And Moses stripped
Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron died
there in the top of the mount; and Moses and Eleazar came down from the
mount. <span id="an_num:20:29">29</span> And when all the congregation
saw that Aaron was dead, they wept for Aaron thirty days, even all the
house of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_95"></span>[187:a](num020.htm#fr_98.md) That is, *Strife*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 21](num021.md)

</div>
