<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num030)  [Next](num032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 31

<span id="an_num:31:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:31:2">2</span> \`Avenge the children of Israel of the
Midianites; afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people.' <span
id="an_num:31:3">3</span> And Moses spoke unto the people, saying: \`Arm
ye men from among you for the war, that they may go against Midian, to
execute the LORD's vengeance on Midian. <span
id="an_num:31:4">4</span> Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the
tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war.' <span
id="an_num:31:5">5</span> So there were delivered, out of the thousands
of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.
<span id="an_num:31:6">6</span> And Moses sent them, a thousand of every
tribe, to the war, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to
the war, with the holy vessels and the trumpets for the alarm in his
hand. <span id="an_num:31:7">7</span> And they warred against Midian, as
the LORD commanded Moses; and they slew every male.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span id="an_num:31:8">8</span> And they slew the kings of Midian with
the rest of their slain: Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the
five kings of Midian; Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the
sword. <span id="an_num:31:9">9</span> And the children of Israel took
captive the women of Midian and their little ones; and all their cattle,
and all their flocks, and all their goods, they took for a prey. <span
id="an_num:31:10">10</span> And all their cities in the places wherein
they dwelt, and all their encampments, they burnt with fire. <span
id="an_num:31:11">11</span> And they took all the spoil, and all the
prey, both of man and of beast. <span id="an_num:31:12">12</span> And
they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, and
unto Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the children of
Israel, unto the camp, unto the plains of Moab, which are by the Jordan
at Jericho.

<span id="an_num:31:13">13</span> And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and
all the princes of the congregation, went forth to meet them without the
camp. <span id="an_num:31:14">14</span> And Moses was wroth with the
officers of the host, the captains of thousands and the captains of
hundreds, who came from the service of the war. <span
id="an_num:31:15">15</span> And Moses said unto them: \`Have ye saved
all the women alive? <span id="an_num:31:16">16</span> Behold, these
caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to revolt
so as to break faith with the LORD in the matter of Peor, and so the
plague was among the congregation of the LORD. <span
id="an_num:31:17">17</span> Now therefore kill every male among the
little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him.
<span id="an_num:31:18">18</span> But all the women children, that have
not known man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves. <span
id="an_num:31:19">19</span> And encamp ye without the camp seven days;
whosoever hath killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain,
purify yourselves on the third day and on the seventh day, ye and your
captives. <span id="an_num:31:20">20</span> And as to every garment, and
all that is made of skin, and all work of goats' hair, and all things
made of wood, ye shall purify.'

<span id="an_num:31:21">21</span> And Eleazar the priest said unto the
men of war that went to the battle: \`This is the statute of the law
which the LORD hath commanded Moses: <span
id="an_num:31:22">22</span> Howbeit the gold, and the silver, the brass,
the iron, the tin, and the lead, <span id="an_num:31:23">23</span> every
thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make to go through the fire, and
it shall be clean; nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of
sprinkling; and all that abideth not the fire ye shall make to go
through the water. <span id="an_num:31:24">24</span> And ye shall wash
your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, and afterward ye
may come into the camp.'

<span id="an_num:31:25">25</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:31:26">26</span> \`Take the sum of the prey that was
taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the
heads of the fathers' houses of the congregation; <span
id="an_num:31:27">27</span> and divide the prey into two parts: between
the men skilled in war, that went out to battle, and all the
congregation; <span id="an_num:31:28">28</span> and levy a tribute unto
the LORD of the men of war that went out to battle: one soul of five
hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, and
of the flocks; <span id="an_num:31:29">29</span> take it of their half,
and give it unto Eleazar the priest, as a portion set apart for the
LORD. <span id="an_num:31:30">30</span> And of the children of Israel's
half, thou shalt take one drawn out of every fifty, of the persons, of
the beeves, of the asses, and of the flocks, even of all the cattle, and
give them unto the Levites, that keep the charge of the tabernacle of
the LORD.' <span id="an_num:31:31">31</span> And Moses and Eleazar the
priest did as the LORD commanded

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moses. <span
id="an_num:31:32">32</span> Now the prey, over and above the booty which
the men of war took, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and
five thousand sheep, <span id="an_num:31:33">33</span> and threescore
and twelve thousand beeves, <span id="an_num:31:34">34</span> and
threescore and one thousand asses, <span id="an_num:31:35">35</span> and
thirty and two thousand persons in all, of the women that had not known
man by lying with him. <span id="an_num:31:36">36</span> And the half,
which was the portion of them that went out to war, was in number three
hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and five hundred
sheep. <span id="an_num:31:37">37</span> And the LORD's tribute of the
sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen. <span
id="an_num:31:38">38</span> And the beeves were thirty and six thousand,
of which the LORD's tribute was threescore and twelve. <span
id="an_num:31:39">39</span> And the asses were thirty thousand and five
hundred, of which the LORD's tribute was threescore and one. <span
id="an_num:31:40">40</span> And the persons were sixteen thousand, of
whom the LORD's tribute was thirty and two persons. <span
id="an_num:31:41">41</span> And Moses gave the tribute, which was set
apart for the LORD, unto Eleazar the priest, as the LORD commanded
Moses. <span id="an_num:31:42">42</span> And of the children of Israel's
half, which Moses divided off from the men that warred— <span
id="an_num:31:43">43</span> now the congregation's half was three
hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and five hundred
sheep, <span id="an_num:31:44">44</span> and thirty and six thousand
beeves, <span id="an_num:31:45">45</span> and thirty thousand and five
hundred asses, <span id="an_num:31:46">46</span> and sixteen thousand
persons— <span id="an_num:31:47">47</span> even of the children of
Israel's half, Moses took one drawn out of every fifty, both of man and
of beast, and gave them unto the Levites, that kept the charge of the
tabernacle of the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_num:31:48">48</span> And the officers that were over the
thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and the captains of
hundreds, came near unto Moses; <span id="an_num:31:49">49</span> and
they said unto Moses: \`Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of
war that are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us.
<span id="an_num:31:50">50</span> And we have brought the LORD's
offering, what every man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, armlets, and
bracelets, signet-rings, ear-rings, and girdles, to make atonement for
our souls before the LORD.' <span id="an_num:31:51">51</span> And Moses
and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them; even all wrought jewels.
<span id="an_num:31:52">52</span> And all the gold of the gift that they
set apart for the LORD, of the captains of thousands, and of the
captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty
shekels.— <span id="an_num:31:53">53</span> For the men of war had taken
booty, every man for himself.— <span id="an_num:31:54">54</span> And
Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, and brought it into the tent of meeting, for a memorial
for the children of Israel before the LORD.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 32](num032)

</div>
