<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](lev027)  [Next](num002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 1

<span id="an_num:1:1">1</span> AND the LORD spoke unto Moses in the
wilderness of Sinai, in the tent of meeting, on the first day of the
second month, in the second year after they were come out of the land of
Egypt, saying: <span id="an_num:1:2">2</span> 'Take ye the sum of all
the congregation of the children of Israel, by their families, by their
fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, every male, by their
polls; <span id="an_num:1:3">3</span> from twenty years old and upward,
all that are able to go forth to war in Israel: ye shall number them by
their hosts, even thou and Aaron. <span id="an_num:1:4">4</span> And
with you there shall be a man of every tribe, every one head of his
fathers’ house. <span id="an_num:1:5">5</span> And these, are the names
of the men that shall stand with you: of Reuben, Elizur the son of
Shedeur. <span id="an_num:1:6">6</span> Of Simeon, Shelumiel the son of
Zurishaddai. <span id="an_num:1:7">7</span> Of Judah, Nahshon the son of
Amminadab. <span id="an_num:1:8">8</span> Of Issachar, Nethanel the son
of Zuar. <span id="an_num:1:9">9</span> Of Zebulun, Eliab the son of
Helon. <span id="an_num:1:10">10</span> Of the children of Joseph: of
Ephraim, Elishama the son of Ammihud; of Manasseh, Gamaliel the son of
Pedahzur. <span id="an_num:1:11">11</span> Of Benjamin, Abidan the son
of Gideoni. <span id="an_num:1:12">12</span> Of Dan, Ahiezer the son of
Ammishaddai. <span id="an_num:1:13">13</span> Of Asher, Pagiel the son
of Ochran. <span id="an_num:1:14">14</span> Of Gad, Eliasaph the son of
Deuel. <span id="an_num:1:15">15</span> Of Naphtali, Ahira the son of
Enan.' <span id="an_num:1:16">16</span> These were the elect of the
congregation, the princes of the tribes of their fathers; they were the
heads of the thousands of Israel. <span id="an_num:1:17">17</span> And
Moses and Aaron took these men that are pointed out by name. <span
id="an_num:1:18">18</span> And they assembled all the congregation
together on the first day of the second month, and they declared their
pedigrees after their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.
<span id="an_num:1:19">19</span> As the LORD commanded Moses, so did he
number them in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_num:1:20">20</span> And the children of Reuben, Israel's
first-born, their generations, by their families, by their fathers’
houses, according to the number of names, by their polls, every male
from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span id="an_num:1:21">21</span> those that were numbered of them, of
the tribe of Reuben, were forty and six thousand and five hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:22">22</span> Of the children of Simeon, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, those that
were numbered thereof, according to the number of names, by their polls,
every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:23">23</span> those that were numbered
of them, of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty and nine thousand and three
hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:24">24</span> Of the children of Gad, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:25">25</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Gad, were forty and five thousand
six hundred and fifty. <span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span id="an_num:1:26">26</span> Of the children of Judah, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:27">27</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Judah, were threescore and
fourteen thousand and six hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:28">28</span> Of the children of Issachar, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:29">29</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Issachar, were fifty and four
thousand and four hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:30">30</span> Of the children of Zebulun, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:31">31</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty and seven
thousand and four hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:32">32</span> Of the children of Joseph, namely, of
the children of Ephraim, their generations, by their families, by their
fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war; <span
id="an_num:1:33">33</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand and five hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:34">34</span> Of the children of Manasseh, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:35">35</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Manasseh, were thirty and two
thousand and two hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:36">36</span> Of the children of Benjamin, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:37">37</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty and five
thousand and four hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:380">380</span> f the children of Dan, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:39">39</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Dan, were threescore and two
thousand and seven hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:40">40</span> Of the children of Asher, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:41">41</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Asher, were forty and one
thousand and five hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:42">42</span> Of the children of Naphtali, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, according to
the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war; <span id="an_num:1:43">43</span> those that
were numbered of them, of the tribe of Naphtali, were fifty and three
thousand and four hundred.

<span id="an_num:1:44">44</span> These are those that were numbered,
which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve
men; they were each one for his fathers’ house. <span
id="an_num:1:45">45</span> And all those that were numbered of the
children of Israel by their fathers’ houses, from twenty years old and
upward, all that were able to go forth to war in Israel; <span
id="an_num:1:46">46</span> even all those that were numbered were six
hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty. <span
id="an_num:1:47">47</span> But the Levites after the <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> tribe of their fathers were not numbered
among them.

<span id="an_num:1:48">48</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:1:49">49</span> 'Howbeit the tribe of Levi thou shalt
not number, neither shalt thou take the sum of them among the children
of Israel; <span id="an_num:1:50">50</span> but appoint thou the Levites
over the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all the furniture
thereof, and over all that belongeth to it; they shall bear the
tabernacle, and all the furniture thereof; and they shall minister unto
it, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle. <span
id="an_num:1:51">51</span> And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the
Levites shall take it down; and when the tabernacle is to be pitched,
the Levites shall set it up; and the common man that draweth nigh shall
be put to death. <span id="an_num:1:52">52</span> And the children of
Israel shall pitch their tents, every man with his own camp, and every
man with his own standard, according to their hosts. <span
id="an_num:1:53">53</span> But the Levites shall pitch round about the
tabernacle of the testimony, that there be no wrath upon the
congregation of the children of Israel; and the Levites shall keep the
charge of the tabernacle of the testimony.' <span
id="an_num:1:54">54</span> Thus did the children of Israel; according to
all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 2](num002)

</div>
