<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num004)  [Next](num006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 5

<span id="an_num:5:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:5:2">2</span> 'Command the children of Israel, that
they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that hath an issue,
and whosoever is unclean by the dead; <span
id="an_num:5:3">3</span> both male and female shall ye put out, without
the camp shall ye put them; that they defile not their camp, in the
midst whereof I dwell.' <span id="an_num:5:4">4</span> And the children
of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp; as the LORD spoke
unto Moses, so did the children of Israel.

<span id="an_num:5:5">5</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:5:6">6</span> Speak unto the children of Israel:

When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, to commit a
trespass against the LORD, and that soul be guilty; <span
id="an_num:5:7">7</span> then they shall confess their sin which they
have done; and he shall make restitution for his guilt in full, and add
unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him in respect of whom
he hath been guilty. <span id="an_num:5:8">8</span> But if the man have
no kinsman to whom restitution may be made for the guilt, the
restitution for guilt which is made shall be the LORD'S, even the
priest's; besides the ram of the atonement, whereby atonement shall be
made for him. <span id="an_num:5:9">9</span> And every heave-offering of
all the holy things of the children of Israel, which they present unto
the priest, shall be his. <span id="an_num:5:10">10</span> And every
man's hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man giveth the
priest, it shall be his.

<span id="an_num:5:11">11</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:5:12">12</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them:

If any man's wife go aside, and act unfaithfully against him, <span
id="an_num:5:13">13</span> and a man lie with her carnally, and it be
hid from the eyes of her husband, she being defiled secretly, and there
be no witness against her, neither she be taken in the act; <span
id="an_num:5:14">14</span> and the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and
he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled; or if the spirit of
jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not
defiled; <span id="an_num:5:15">15</span> then shall the man bring his
wife unto the priest, and shall bring her offering for her, the tenth
part of an ephah of barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put
frankincense thereon; for it is a meal-offering of jealousy, a
meal-offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance. <span
id="an_num:5:16">16</span> And the priest shall bring her near, and set
her before the LORD. <span id="an_num:5:17">17</span> And the priest
shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is on
the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take, and put it into the
water. <span id="an_num:5:18">18</span> And the priest shall set the
woman before the LORD, and let the hair of the woman's head go loose,
and put the meal-offering of memorial in her hands, which is the
meal-offering of jealousy; and the priest shall have in his hand the
water of bitterness that causeth the curse. <span
id="an_num:5:19">19</span> And the priest shall cause her to swear, and
shall say unto the woman: 'If no man have lain with thee, and if thou
hast not gone aside to uncleanness, being under thy husband, be thou
free from this water of bitterness that causeth the curse; <span
id="an_num:5:20">20</span> but if thou hast gone aside, being under thy
<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> husband, and if thou be defiled, and
some man have lain with thee besides thy husband—<span
id="an_num:5:21">21</span> then the priest shall cause the woman to
swear with the oath of cursing, and the priest shall say unto the
woman—the LORD make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when the
LORD doth make thy thigh to fall away, and thy belly to swell; <span
id="an_num:5:22">22</span> and this water that causeth the curse shall
go into thy bowels, and make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to fall
away'; and the woman shall say: 'Amen, Amen.' <span
id="an_num:5:23">23</span> And the priest shall write these curses in a
scroll, and he shall blot them out into the water of bitterness. <span
id="an_num:5:24">24</span> And he shall make the woman drink the water
of bitterness that causeth the curse; and the water that causeth the
curse shall enter into her and become bitter. <span
id="an_num:5:25">25</span> And the priest shall take the meal-offering
of jealousy out of the woman's hand, and shall wave the meal-offering
before the LORD, and bring it unto the altar. <span
id="an_num:5:26">26</span> And the priest shall take a handful of the
meal-offering, as the memorial-part thereof, and make it smoke upon the
altar, and afterward shall make the woman drink the water. <span
id="an_num:5:27">27</span> And when he hath made her drink the water,
then it shall come to pass, if she be defiled, and have acted
unfaithfully against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse
shall enter into her and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and
her thigh shall fall away; and the woman shall be a curse among her
people. <span id="an_num:5:28">28</span> And if the woman be not
defiled, but be clean; then she shall be cleared, and shall conceive
seed. <span id="an_num:5:29">29</span> This is the law of jealousy, when
a wife, being under her husband, goeth aside, and is defiled; <span
id="an_num:5:30">30</span> or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon a
man, and he be jealous over his wife; then shall he set the woman before
the LORD, and the priest shall execute upon her all this law. <span
id="an_num:5:31">31</span> And the man shall be clear from iniquity, and
that woman shall bear her iniquity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 6](num006.md)

</div>
