<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num009)  [Next](num011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 10

 

<span id="an_num:10:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:10:2">2</span> \`Make thee two trumpets of silver; of
beaten work shalt thou make them; and they shall be unto thee for the
calling of the congregation, and for causing the camps to set forward.
<span id="an_num:10:3">3</span> And when they shall blow with them, all
the congregation shall gather themselves unto thee at the door of the
tent of meeting. <span id="an_num:10:4">4</span> And if they blow but
with one, then the princes, the heads of the thousands of Israel, shall
gather themselves unto thee. <span id="an_num:10:5">5</span> And when ye
blow an alarm, the camps that lie on the east side shall take their
journey. <span id="an_num:10:6">6</span> And when ye blow an alarm the
second time, the camps that lie on the south side shall set forward;
they shall blow an alarm for their journeys. <span
id="an_num:10:7">7</span> But when the assembly is to be gathered
together, ye shall blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm. <span
id="an_num:10:8">8</span> And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow
with the trumpets; and they shall be to you for a statute for ever
throughout your generations. <span id="an_num:10:9">9</span> And when ye
go to war in your land against the adversary that oppresseth you, then
ye shall sound an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be remembered
before the LORD your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies. <span
id="an_num:10:10">10</span> Also in the day of your gladness, and in
your appointed seasons, and in your new moons, ye shall blow with the
trumpets over your burnt-offerings, and over the sacrifices of your
peace-offerings; and they shall be to you for a memorial before your
God: I am the LORD your God.'

 

<span id="an_num:10:11">11</span> And it came to pass in the second
year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the month, that the
cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle of the testimony. <span
id="an_num:10:12">12</span> And the children of Israel set forward by
their stages out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud abode in the
wilderness of Paran.— <span id="an_num:10:13">13</span> And they took
their first journey, according to the commandment of the LORD by the
hand of Moses. <span id="an_num:10:14">14</span> And in the first place
the standard of the camp of the children of Judah set forward according
to their hosts; and over his host was Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
<span id="an_num:10:15">15</span> And over the host of the tribe of the
children of Issachar was Nethanel the son of Zuar. <span
id="an_num:10:16">16</span> And over the host of the tribe of the
children of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon. <span
id="an_num:10:17">17</span> And the tabernacle was taken down; and the
sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari, who bore the tabernacle, set
forward. <span id="an_num:10:18">18</span> And the standard of the camp
of Reuben set forward according to their hosts; and over his host was
Elizur the son of Shedeur. <span id="an_num:10:19">19</span> And over
the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Zurishaddai. <span
id="an_num:10:20">20</span> And over the host of the tribe of the
children of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel. <span
id="an_num:10:21">21</span> And the Kohathites the bearers of the
sanctuary set forward, that the tabernacle might be set up against their
coming. <span id="an_num:10:22">22</span> And the standard of the camp
of the children of Ephraim set forward according to their hosts; and
over his host was Elishama the son of Ammihud. <span
id="an_num:10:23">23</span> And over the host of the tribe of the
children of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. <span
id="an_num:10:24">24</span> And over the host of the tribe of the
children of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni. <span
id="an_num:10:25">25</span> And the standard of the camp of the children
of Dan, which was the rearward of all the camps, set forward according
to their hosts; and over his host was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
<span id="an_num:10:26">26</span> And over the host of the tribe of the
children of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ochran. <span
id="an_num:10:27">27</span> And over the host of the tribe of the
children of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan. <span
id="an_num:10:28">28</span> Thus were the journeyings of the children of
Israel according to their hosts.—And they set forward.

<span id="an_num:10:29">29</span> And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of
Reuel the Midianite, Moses' father-in-law: \`We are journeying unto the
place of which the LORD said: I will give it you; come thou with us, and
we will do thee good; for the LORD hath spoken good concerning Israel.'
<span id="an_num:10:30">30</span> And he said unto him: \`I will not go;
but I will depart to mine own land, and to my kindred.' <span
id="an_num:10:31">31</span> And he said: \`Leave us not, I pray thee;
forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and
thou shalt be to us instead of eyes. <span
id="an_num:10:32">32</span> And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it
shall be, that what good so-ever the LORD shall do unto us, the same
will we do unto thee.'

<span id="an_num:10:33">33</span> And they set forward from the mount of
the LORD three days' journey; and the ark of the covenant of the LORD
went before them three days' journey, to seek out a resting-place for
them. <span id="an_num:10:34">34</span> And the cloud of the LORD was
over them by day, when they set forward from the camp.

<span id="an_num:10:35">35</span> And it came to pass, when the ark set
forward, that Moses said: \`Rise up, O LORD, and let Thine enemies be
scattered; and let them that hate Thee flee before Thee.' <span
id="an_num:10:36">36</span> And when it rested, he said: \`Return, O
LORD, unto the ten thousands of the families of Israel.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 11](num011)

</div>
