<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num031)  [Next](num033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 32

<span id="an_num:32:1">1</span> Now the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad had a very great multitude of cattle; and when they saw
the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a
place for cattle, <span id="an_num:32:2">2</span> the children of Gad
and the children of Reuben came and spoke unto Moses, and to Eleazar the
priest, and unto the princes of the congregation, saying: <span
id="an_num:32:3">3</span> \`Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah,
and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Sebam, and Nebo, and Beon, <span
id="an_num:32:4">4</span> the land which the LORD smote before the
congregation of Israel, is a land for cattle, and thy servants have
cattle.' <span id="an_num:32:5">5</span> And they said: \`If we have
found favour in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy servants for
a possession;

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

bring us not over the Jordan.' <span id="an_num:32:6">6</span> And Moses
said unto the children of Gad and to the children of Reuben: \`Shall
your brethren go to the war, and shall ye sit here? <span
id="an_num:32:7">7</span> And wherefore will ye turn away the heart of
the children of Israel from going over into the land which the LORD hath
given them? <span id="an_num:32:8">8</span> Thus did your fathers, when
I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land. <span
id="an_num:32:9">9</span> For when they went up unto the valley of
Eshcol, and saw the land, they turned away the heart of the children of
Israel, that they should not go into the land which the LORD had given
them. <span id="an_num:32:10">10</span> And the LORD's anger was kindled
in that day, and He swore, saying: <span
id="an_num:32:11">11</span> Surely none of the men that came up out of
Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I
swore unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not
wholly followed Me; <span id="an_num:32:12">12</span> save Caleb the son
of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, and Joshua the son of Nun; because they have
wholly followed the LORD. <span id="an_num:32:13">13</span> And the
LORD's anger was kindled against Israel, and He made them wander to and
fro in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation, that had
done evil in the sight of the LORD, was consumed. <span
id="an_num:32:14">14</span> And, behold, ye are risen up in your
fathers' stead, a brood of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger
of the LORD toward Israel. <span id="an_num:32:15">15</span> For if ye
turn away from after Him, He will yet again leave them in the
wilderness; and so ye will destroy all this people.'

<span id="an_num:32:16">16</span> And they came near unto him, and said:
\`We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our
little ones; <span id="an_num:32:17">17</span> but we ourselves will be
ready armed to go before the children of Israel, until we have brought
them unto their place; and our little ones shall dwell in the fortified
cities because of the inhabitants of the land. <span
id="an_num:32:18">18</span> We will not return unto our houses, until
the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance. <span
id="an_num:32:19">19</span> For we will not inherit with them on the
other side of the Jordan, and forward, because our inheritance is fallen
to us on this side of the Jordan eastward.'

<span id="an_num:32:20">20</span> And Moses said unto them: \`If ye will
do this thing: if ye will arm yourselves to go before the LORD to the
war, <span id="an_num:32:21">21</span> and every armed man of you will
pass over the Jordan before the LORD, until He hath driven out His
enemies from before Him, <span id="an_num:32:22">22</span> and the land
be subdued before the LORD, and ye return afterward; then ye shall be
clear before the LORD, and before Israel, and this land shall be unto
you for a possession before the LORD. <span
id="an_num:32:23">23</span> But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have
sinned against the LORD; and know ye your sin which will find you. <span
id="an_num:32:24">24</span> Build you cities for your little ones, and
folds for your sheep; and do that which hath proceeded out of your
mouth.'

<span id="an_num:32:25">25</span> And the children of Gad and the
children of Reuben spoke unto Moses, saying: \`Thy servants will do as
my lord commandeth. <span id="an_num:32:26">26</span> Our little ones,
our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle, shall be there in the cities
of Gilead; <span id="an_num:32:27">27</span> but thy servants will pass
over, every man that is armed for war, before the LORD to battle, as my
lord saith.'

<span id="an_num:32:28">28</span> So Moses gave charge concerning them
to Eleazar the priest, and to Joshua the son of Nun, and to the heads of
the fathers' houses of the tribes of the children of Israel. <span
id="an_num:32:29">29</span> And Moses said unto them: \`If the children
of Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over the Jordan,
every

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

man that is armed to battle, before the LORD, and the land shall be
subdued before you, then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a
possession; <span id="an_num:32:30">30</span> but if they will not pass
over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land
of Canaan.' <span id="an_num:32:31">31</span> And the children of Gad
and the children of Reuben answered, saying: \`As the LORD hath said
unto thy servants, so will we do. <span id="an_num:32:32">32</span> We
will pass over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan, and the
possession of our inheritance shall remain with us beyond the Jordan.'

<span id="an_num:32:33">33</span> And Moses gave unto them, even to the
children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and unto the half-tribe
of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the
Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, according to
the cities thereof with their borders, even the cities of the land round
ahout. <span id="an_num:32:34">34</span> And the children of Gad built
Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer; <span id="an_num:32:35">35</span> and
Atroth-shophan, and Jazer, and Jogbehah; <span
id="an_num:32:36">36</span> and Bethnimrah, and Beth-haran; fortified
cities, and folds for sheep. <span id="an_num:32:37">37</span> And the
children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kiriathaim; <span
id="an_num:32:38">38</span> and Nebo, and Baal-meon—their names being
changed—and Sibmah; and gave their names unto the cities which they
builded. <span id="an_num:32:39">39</span> And the children of Machir
the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the
Amorites that were therein. <span id="an_num:32:40">40</span> And Moses
gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein. <span
id="an_num:32:41">41</span> And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took
the villages thereof, and called them  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[a](#fn_98) Havvoth-jair. <span
id="an_num:32:42">42</span> And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the
villages thereof, and called it Nobah, after his own name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[206:a](num032.htm#fr_101) That is, *The
villages of Jair*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 33](num033)

</div>
