<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num003)  [Next](num005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 4

<span id="an_num:4:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying: <span id="an_num:4:2">2</span> 'Take the sum of the sons
of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, by their families, by their
fathers’ houses, <span id="an_num:4:3">3</span> from thirty years old
and upward even until fifty years; old, all that enter upon the service,
to do work in the tent of meeting. <span id="an_num:4:4">4</span> This
is the service of the sons of Kohath, in the tent of meeting, about the
most holy things: <span id="an_num:4:5">5</span> when the camp setteth
forward, Aaron shall go in, and his sons, and they shall take down the
veil of the screen, and cover the ark of the testimony with it; <span
id="an_num:4:6">6</span> and shall put thereon a covering of sealskin,
<span id="page_163">p. 163</span> and shall spread over it a cloth all
of blue, and shall set the staves thereof. <span
id="an_num:4:7">7</span> And upon the table of showbread they shall
spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the dishes, and the pans, and
the bowls, and the jars wherewith to pour out; and the continual bread
shall remain thereon. <span id="an_num:4:8">8</span> And they shall
spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering
of sealskin, and shall set the staves thereof. <span
id="an_num:4:9">9</span> And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover
the candlestick of the light, and its lamps, and its tongs, and its
snuffdishes, and all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister
unto it. <span id="an_num:4:10">10</span> And they shall put it and all
the vessels thereof within a covering of sealskin, and shall put it upon
a bar. <span id="an_num:4:11">11</span> And upon the golden altar they
shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of sealskin,
and shall set the staves thereof. <span id="an_num:4:12">12</span> And
they shall take all the vessels of ministry, wherewith they minister in
the sanctuary, and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a
covering of sealskin, and shall put them on a bar. <span
id="an_num:4:13">13</span> And they shall take away the ashes from the
altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon. <span
id="an_num:4:14">14</span> And they shall put upon it all the vessels
thereof, wherewith they minister about it, the fire-pans, the
flesh-hooks, and the shovels, and the basins, all the vessels of the
altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of sealskin, and set the
staves thereof. <span id="an_num:4:15">15</span> And when Aaron and his
sons have made an end of covering the holy furniture, and all the holy
vessels, as the camp is to set forward—after that, the sons of Kohath
shall come to bear them; but they shall not touch the holy things, lest
they die. These things are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tent
of meeting. <span id="an_num:4:16">16</span> And the charge of Eleazar
the son of Aaron the priest shall be the oil for the light, and the
sweet incense, and the continual meal-offering, and the anointing oil:
he shall have the charge of all the tabernacle, and of all that therein
is, whether it be the sanctuary, or the furniture thereof.'

<span id="an_num:4:17">17</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying: <span id="an_num:4:18">18</span> 'Cut ye not off the
tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites; <span
id="an_num:4:19">19</span> but thus do unto them, that they may live,
and not die, when they approach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his
sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his
burden; <span id="an_num:4:20">20</span> but they shall not go in to see
the holy things as they are being covered, lest they die.'

#### ‏נשא‎

<span id="an_num:4:21">21</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:4:22">22</span> 'Take the sum of the sons of Gershon
also, by their fathers’ houses, by their families; <span
id="an_num:4:23">23</span> from thirty years old and upward until fifty
years old shalt thou number them: all that enter in to wait upon the
service, to do service in the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_num:4:24">24</span> This is the service of the families of the
Gershonites, in serving and in bearing burdens: <span
id="an_num:4:25">25</span> they shall bear the curtains of the
tabernacle, and the tent of meeting, its covering, and the covering of
sealskin that is above upon it, and the screen for the door of the tent
of meeting; <span id="an_num:4:26">26</span> and the hangings of the
court, and the screen for the door of the gate of the court, which is by
the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all
the instruments of their service, and whatsoever there may be to do with
them, therein shall they serve. <span id="an_num:4:27">27</span> At the
commandment of Aaron and his <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> sons
shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their
burden, and in all their service; and ye shall appoint unto them in
charge all their burden. <span id="an_num:4:28">28</span> This is the
service of the families of the sons of the Gershonites in the tent of
meeting; and their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of
Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_num:4:29">29</span> As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt
number them by their families, by their fathers’ houses; <span
id="an_num:4:30">30</span> from thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one that entereth upon the
service, to do the work of the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_num:4:31">31</span> And this is the charge of their burden,
according to all their service in the tent of meeting: the boards of the
tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof and the
sockets thereof; <span id="an_num:4:32">32</span> and the pillars of the
court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords,
even all their appurtenance, and all that pertaineth to their service;
and by name ye shall appoint the instruments of the charge of their
burden. <span id="an_num:4:33">33</span> This is the service of the
families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the
tent of meeting, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.'

<span id="an_num:4:34">34</span> And Moses and Aaron and the princes of
the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites by their families,
and by their fathers’ houses, <span id="an_num:4:35">35</span> from
thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one, that
entered upon the service, for service in the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_num:4:36">36</span> And those that were numbered of them by their
families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty. <span
id="an_num:4:37">37</span> These are they that were numbered of the
families of the Kohathites, of all that did serve in the tent of
meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of
the LORD by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_num:4:38">38</span> And those that were numbered of the
sons of Gershon, by their families, and by their fathers’ houses, <span
id="an_num:4:39">39</span> from thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old, every one that entered upon the service, for service in
the tent of meeting, <span id="an_num:4:40">40</span> even those that
were numbered of them, by their families, by their fathers’ houses, were
two thousand and six hundred and thirty. <span
id="an_num:4:41">41</span> These are they that were numbered of the
families of the sons of Gershon, of all that did serve in the tent of
meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of
the LORD.

<span id="an_num:4:42">42</span> And those that were numbered of the
families of the sons of Merari, by their families, by their fathers’
houses, <span id="an_num:4:43">43</span> from thirty years old and
upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entered upon the
service, for service in the tent of meeting, <span
id="an_num:4:44">44</span> even those that were numbered of them by
their families, were three thousand and two hundred. <span
id="an_num:4:45">45</span> These are they that were numbered of the
families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according
to the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_num:4:46">46</span> All those that were numbered of the
Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the princes of Israel numbered, by
their families, and by their fathers’ houses, <span
id="an_num:4:47">47</span> from thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old, every one that entered in to do the, work of service.
and the work of bearing burdens in the tent of meeting, <span
id="an_num:4:48">48</span> even those that were numbered, of them, were
eight thousand and <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> five hundred and
fourscore. <span id="an_num:4:49">49</span> According to the commandment
of the LORD they were appointed by the hand of Moses, every one to his
service, and to his burden; they were also numbered, as the LORD
commanded Moses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 5](num005)

</div>
