<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num025)  [Next](num027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 26

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_num:26:1">1</span> that the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto
Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying: <span
id="an_num:26:2">2</span> \`Take the sum of all the congregation of the
children of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, by their fathers'
houses, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel.' <span
id="an_num:26:3">3</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with
them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying: <span
id="an_num:26:4">4</span> \`\[Take the sum of the people,\] from twenty
years old and upward, as the LORD commanded Moses and the children of
Israel, that came forth out of the land of Egypt.'

<span id="an_num:26:5">5</span> Reuben, the first-born of Israel: the
sons of Reuben: of Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the
family of the Palluites; <span id="an_num:26:6">6</span> of Hezron, the
family of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the family of the Carmites. <span
id="an_num:26:7">7</span> These are the families of the Reubenites; and
they that were numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven
hundred and thirty. <span id="an_num:26:8">8</span> And the sons of
Pallu: Eliab. <span id="an_num:26:9">9</span> And the sons of Eliab:
Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. These are that Dathan and Abiram, the
elect of the congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in
the company of Korah, when they strove against the LORD; <span
id="an_num:26:10">10</span> and the earth opened her

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah, when that company
died; what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men, and they
became a sign. <span id="an_num:26:11">11</span> Notwithstanding the
sons of Korah died not.

<span id="an_num:26:12">12</span> The sons of Simeon after their
families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family
of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites; <span
id="an_num:26:13">13</span> of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites; of
Shaul, the family of the Shaulites. <span
id="an_num:26:14">14</span> These are the families of the Simeonites,
twenty and two thousand and two hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:15">15</span> The sons of Gad after their families:
of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the family of the
Haggites; of Shuni, the family of the Shunites; <span
id="an_num:26:16">16</span> of Ozni, the family of the Oznites; of Eri,
the family of the Erites; <span id="an_num:26:17">17</span> of Arod, the
family of the Arodites; of Areli, the family of the Arelites. <span
id="an_num:26:18">18</span> These are the families of the sons of Gad
according to those that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five
hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:19">19</span> The sons of Judah: Er and Onan; and Er
and Onan died in the land of Canaan. <span
id="an_num:26:20">20</span> 4nd the sons of Judah after their families
were: of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; of Perez, the family of
the Perezites; of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites. <span
id="an_num:26:21">21</span> And the sons of Perez were: of Hezron, the
family of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites. <span
id="an_num:26:22">22</span> These are the families of Judah according to
those that were numbered of them; threescore and sixteen thousand and
five hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:23">23</span> The sons of Issachar after their
families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the family of
the Punites; <span id="an_num:26:24">24</span> of Jashub, the family of
the Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites. <span
id="an_num:26:25">25</span> These are the families of Issachar according
to those that were numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and
three hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:26">26</span> The sons of Zebulun after their
families: of Sered, the family of the Seredites; of Elon, the family of
the Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites. <span
id="an_num:26:27">27</span> These are the families of the Zebulunites
according to those that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and
five hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:28">28</span> The sons of Joseph after their
families: Manasseh and Ephraim. <span id="an_num:26:29">29</span> The
sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites—and Machir
begot Gilead; of Gilead, the family of the Gileadites. <span
id="an_num:26:30">30</span> These are the sons of Gilead: of Iezer, the
family of the Iezerites; of Helek, the family of the Helekites; <span
id="an_num:26:31">31</span> and of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites;
and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites; <span
id="an_num:26:32">32</span> and of Shemida, the family of the
Shemidaites; and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites. <span
id="an_num:26:33">33</span> And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no
sons, but daughters; and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were
Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. <span
id="an_num:26:34">34</span> These are the families of Manasseh; and they
that were numbered of them were fifty and two thousand and seven
hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:35">35</span> These are the sons of Ephraim after
their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites; of
Becher, the family of the Becherites; of Tahan, the family of the
Tahanites. <span id="an_num:26:36">36</span> And these are the sons of
Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites. <span
id="an_num:26:37">37</span> These are the families of the sons of
Ephraim according to those that were numbered of them, thirty and two
thousand and five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their
families.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<span id="an_num:26:38">38</span> The sons of Benjamin after their
families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of
the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites; <span
id="an_num:26:39">39</span> of Shephupham, the family of the
Shuphamites; of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites. <span
id="an_num:26:40">40</span> And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman;
\[of Ard,\] the family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the family of the
Naamites. <span id="an_num:26:41">41</span> These are the sons of
Benjamin after their families; and they that were numbered of them were
forty and five thousand and six hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:42">42</span> These are the sons of Dan after their
families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the
families of Dan after their families. <span
id="an_num:26:43">43</span> All the families of the Shuhamites,
according to those that were numbered of them, were threescore and four
thousand and four hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:44">44</span> The sons of Asher after their
families: of Imnah, the family of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the family of
the Ishvites; of Beriah, the family of the Beriites. <span
id="an_num:26:45">45</span> Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family
of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites. <span
id="an_num:26:46">46</span> And the name of the daughter of Asher was
Serah. <span id="an_num:26:47">47</span> These are the families of the
sons of Asher according to those that were numbered of them, fifty and
three thousand and four hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:48">48</span> The sons of Naphtali after their
families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family
of the Gunites; <span id="an_num:26:49">49</span> of Jezer, the family
of the Jezerites; of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites. <span
id="an_num:26:50">50</span> These are the families of Naphtali according
to their families; and they that were numbered of them were forty and
five thousand and four hundred.

<span id="an_num:26:51">51</span> These are they that were numbered of
the children of Israel, six hundred thousand and a thousand and seven
hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_num:26:52">52</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:26:53">53</span> \`Unto these the land shall be divided
for an inheritance according to the number of names. <span
id="an_num:26:54">54</span> To the more thou shalt give the more
inheritance, and to the fewer thou shalt give the less inheritance; to
each one according to those that were numbered of it shall its
inheritance be given. <span id="an_num:26:55">55</span> Notwithstanding
the land shall be divided by lot; according to the names of the tribes
of their fathers they shall inherit. <span
id="an_num:26:56">56</span> According to the lot shall their inheritance
be divided between the more and the fewer.'

<span id="an_num:26:57">57</span> And these are they that were numbered
of the Levites after their families: of Gershon, the family of the
Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; of Merari, the
family of the Merarites. <span id="an_num:26:58">58</span> These are the
families of Levi: the family of the Libnites, the family of the
Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the
family of the Korahites. And Kohath begot Amram. <span
id="an_num:26:59">59</span> And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed,
the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt; and she bore unto
Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister. <span
id="an_num:26:60">60</span> And unto Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu,
Eleazar and Ithamar. <span id="an_num:26:61">61</span> And Nadab and
Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before the LORD. <span
id="an_num:26:62">62</span> And they that were numbered of them were
twenty and three thousand, every male from a month old and upward; for
they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because there was
no inheritance given them among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_num:26:63">63</span> These are they that were numbered by
Moses and Eleazar the priest, who

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at
Jericho. <span id="an_num:26:64">64</span> But among these there was not
a man of them that were numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who
numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai. <span
id="an_num:26:65">65</span> For the LORD had said of them: \`They shall
surely die in the wilderness.' And there was not left a man of them,
save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 27](num027)

</div>
