<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1022)  [Next](sa1024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 23

<span id="an_sa1:23:1">1</span> And they told David, saying: \`Behold,
the Philistines are fighting against Keilah, and they rob the
threshing-floors.' <span id="an_sa1:23:2">2</span> Therefore David
inquired of the LORD, saying: \`Shall I go and smite these Philistines?'
And the LORD said unto David: \`Go, and smite the Philistines, and save
Keilah.' <span id="an_sa1:23:3">3</span> And David's men said unto him:
\`Behold, we are afraid here in Judah; how much more then if we go to
Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?' <span
id="an_sa1:23:4">4</span> Then David inquired of the LORD yet again. And
the LORD answered him and said: \`Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will
deliver the Philistines into thy hand.' <span
id="an_sa1:23:5">5</span> And David and his men went to Keilah, and
fought with the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and slew
them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.

<span id="an_sa1:23:6">6</span> And it came to pass, when Abiathar the
son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an
ephod in his hand. <span id="an_sa1:23:7">7</span> And it was told Saul
that David was come to Keilah. And Saul said: \`God hath delivered him
into my hand; for he is shut in, by entering into a town that hath gates
and bars.' <span id="an_sa1:23:8">8</span> And Saul summoned all the
people to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men. <span
id="an_sa1:23:9">9</span> And David knew that Saul devised mischief
against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest: \`Bring hither the
ephod.' <span id="an_sa1:23:10">10</span> Then said David: \`O

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> LORD, the God of
Israel, Thy servant hath surely heard that Saul seeketh to come to
Keilah, to destroy the city for my sake. <span
id="an_sa1:23:11">11</span> Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into
his hand? will Saul come down, as Thy servant hath heard? O LORD, the
God of Israel, I beseech Thee, tell Thy servant.' And the LORD said:
\`He will come down.' <span id="an_sa1:23:12">12</span> Then said David:
\`Will the men of Keilah deliver up me and my men into the hand of
Saul?' And the LORD said: \`They will deliver thee up.' <span
id="an_sa1:23:13">13</span> Then David and his men, who were about six
hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they
could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and
he forbore to go forth.

<span id="an_sa1:23:14">14</span> And David abode in the wilderness in
the strongholds, and remained in the hill-country in the wilderness of
Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his
hand. <span id="an_sa1:23:15">15</span> And David saw that Saul was come
out to seek his life; and David was in the wilderness of Ziph in the
wood. <span id="an_sa1:23:16">16</span> And Jonathan Saul's son arose,
and went to David into the wood, and strengthened his hand in God. <span
id="an_sa1:23:17">17</span> And he said unto him: \`Fear not; for the
hand of Saul my father shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over
Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father
knoweth.' <span id="an_sa1:23:18">18</span> And they two made a covenant
before the LORD; and David abode in the wood, and Jonathan went to his
house.

<span id="an_sa1:23:19">19</span> Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to
Gibeah, saying: \`Doth not David hide himself with us in the strongholds
in the wood, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon?
<span id="an_sa1:23:20">20</span> Now therefore, O king, come down,
according to all the desire of thy soul to come down; and our part shall
be to deliver him up into the king's hand.' <span
id="an_sa1:23:21">21</span> And Saul said: \`Blessed be ye of the LORD;
for ye have had compassion on me. <span id="an_sa1:23:22">22</span> Go,
I pray you, make yet more sure, and know and see his place where his
haunt is, and who hath seen him there; for it is told me that he dealeth
very subtly. <span id="an_sa1:23:23">23</span> See therefore, and take
knowledge of all the lurking-places where he hideth himself, and come ye
back to me with the certainty, and I will go with you; and it shall come
to pass, if he be in the land, that I will search him out among all the
thousands of Judah.' <span id="an_sa1:23:24">24</span> And they arose,
and went to Ziph before Saul; but David and his men were in the
wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah on the south of Jeshimon. <span
id="an_sa1:23:25">25</span> And Saul and his men went to seek him. And
they told David; wherefore he came down to the rock, and abode in the
wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in
the wilderness of Maon. <span id="an_sa1:23:26">26</span> And Saul went
on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the
mountain; and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul; for Saul
and his men compassed David and his men round about to take them. <span
id="an_sa1:23:27">27</span> But there came a messenger unto Saul,
saying: \`Haste thee, and come; for the Philistines have made a raid
upon the land.' <span id="an_sa1:23:28">28</span> So Saul returned from
pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines; therefore they
called that place  <span id="fr_125"></span>[a](#fn_122)
Sela-hammahlekoth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[355:a](sa1023.htm#fr_125) That is, *The rock
of divisions*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 24](sa1024)

</div>
