<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1021)  [Next](sa1023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 22

<span id="an_sa1:22:1">1</span> David therefore departed thence, and
escaped to the cave of Adullam; and when his brethren and all his
father's house heard it, they went down thither to him. <span
id="an_sa1:22:2">2</span> And every one that was in distress, and every
one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered
themselves unto him; and he became captain over them; and there were
with him about four hundred men.

<span id="an_sa1:22:3">3</span> And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab;
and he said unto the king of Moab: \`Let my father and my mother, I pray
thee, come forth, and be with you, till I know what God will do for me.'
<span id="an_sa1:22:4">4</span> And he brought them before the king of
Moab; and they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the
stronghold. <span id="an_sa1:22:5">5</span> And the prophet Gad said
unto David: \`Abide not in the stronghold; depart, and get thee into the
land of Judah.' Then David departed and came into the forest of Hereth.

<span id="an_sa1:22:6">6</span> And Saul heard that David was
discovered, and the men that were with him; now Saul was sitting in
Gibeah, under the tamarisk-tree in Ramah, with his spear in his hand,
and all his servants were standing about him. <span
id="an_sa1:22:7">7</span> And Saul said unto his servants that stood
about him: \`Hear now, ye Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every
one of you fields and vineyards, will he make you all captains of
thousands and captains of hundreds; <span id="an_sa1:22:8">8</span> that
all of you have conspired against me, and there was none that disclosed
it to me when my son made a league with the son of Jesse, and there is
none of you that is sorry for me, or discloseth unto me that my son hath
stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?' <span
id="an_sa1:22:9">9</span> Then answered Doeg the Edomite, who was set
over the servants of Saul, and said: \`I saw the son of Jesse coming to
Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub. <span
id="an_sa1:22:10">10</span> And he inquired of the LORD for him, and
gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.'

<span id="an_sa1:22:11">11</span> Then the king sent to call Ahimelech
the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests
that were in Nob; and they came all of them to the king. <span
id="an_sa1:22:12">12</span> And Saul

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

said: \`Hear now, thou son of Ahitub.' And he answered: \`Here I am, my
lord.' <span id="an_sa1:22:13">13</span> And Saul said unto him: \`Why
have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou
hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast inquired of God for him,
that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?' <span
id="an_sa1:22:14">14</span> Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said:
\`And who among all thy servants is so trusted as David, who is the
king's son-in-law, and giveth heed unto thy bidding, and is honourable
in thy house? <span id="an_sa1:22:15">15</span> Have I to-day begun to
inquire of God for him? be it far from me; let not the king impute any
thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of my father; for thy
servant knoweth nothing of all this, less or more.' <span
id="an_sa1:22:16">16</span> And the king said: \`Thou shalt surely die,
Ahimelech, thou, and all thy father's house.' <span
id="an_sa1:22:17">17</span> And the king said unto the guard that stood
about him: \`Turn, and slay the priests of the LORD; because their hand
also is with David, and because they knew that he fled, and did not
disclose it to me.' But the servants of the king would not put forth
their hand to fall upon the priests of the LORD. <span
id="an_sa1:22:18">18</span> And the king said to Doeg: \`Turn thou, and
fall upon the priests.' And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon
the priests, and he slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did
wear a linen ephod. <span id="an_sa1:22:19">19</span> And Nob, the city
of the priests, smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and women,
children and sucklings, and oxen and asses and sheep, with the edge of
the sword. <span id="an_sa1:22:20">20</span> And one of the sons of
Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after
David. <span id="an_sa1:22:21">21</span> And Abiathar told David that
Saul had slain the LORD's priests. <span id="an_sa1:22:22">22</span> And
David said unto Abiathar: \`I knew on that day, when Doeg the Edomite
was there, that he would surely tell Saul; I have brought about the
death of all the persons of thy father's house. <span
id="an_sa1:22:23">23</span> Abide thou with me, fear not; for he that
seeketh my life seeketh thy life; for with me thou shalt be in
safeguard.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 23](sa1023)

</div>
