<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1020)  [Next](sa1022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 21

 

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_sa1:21:1">1</span> And he arose and departed; and Jonathan went
into the city.

<span id="an_sa1:21:2">2</span> Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the
priest; and Ahimelech came to meet David trembling, and said unto him:
\`Why art thou alone, and no man with thee?' <span
id="an_sa1:21:3">3</span> And David said unto Ahimelech the priest:
\`The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me: Let no
man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I
have commanded thee; and the young men have I appointed to such and such
a place. <span id="an_sa1:21:4">4</span> Now therefore what is under thy
hand? five loaves of bread? give them in my hand, or whatsoever there is
present.' <span id="an_sa1:21:5">5</span> And the priest answered David,
and said: \`There is no common bread under my hand, but there is holy
bread; if only the young men have kept themselves from women.' <span
id="an_sa1:21:6">6</span> And David answered the priest, and said unto
him: \`Of a truth women have been kept from us about these three days;
when I came out, the vessels of the young men were holy, though it was
but a common journey; how much more then to-day, when there shall be
holy bread in their vessels?' <span id="an_sa1:21:7">7</span> So the
priest gave him holy bread; for there was no bread there but the
showbread, that was taken from before the LORD, to put hot bread in the
day when it was taken away.—<span id="an_sa1:21:8">8</span> Now a
certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before
the LORD; and his name was Doeg the Edomite, the chiefest of the
herd-men that belonged to Saul.—<span id="an_sa1:21:9">9</span> And
David said unto Ahimelech: \`And

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

is there peradventure here under thy hand spear or sword? for I have
neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king's
business required haste.' <span id="an_sa1:21:10">10</span> And the
priest said: \`The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in
the vale of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the
ephod; if thou wilt take that, take it; for there is no other save that
here.' And David said : \`There is none like that; give it me.'

<span id="an_sa1:21:11">11</span> And David arose, and fled that day for
fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath. <span
id="an_sa1:21:12">12</span> And the servants of Achish said unto him:
\`Is not this David the king of the land? Did they not sing one to
another of him in dances, saying:

Saul hath slain his thousands,

And David his ten thousands?'

<span id="an_sa1:21:13">13</span> And David laid up these words in his
heart, and was sore afraid of Achish the king of Gath. <span
id="an_sa1:21:14">14</span> And he changed his demeanour before them,
and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of
the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard. <span
id="an_sa1:21:15">15</span> Then said Achish unto his servants: \`Lo,
when ye see a man that is mad, wherefore do ye bring him to me? <span
id="an_sa1:21:16">16</span> Do I lack madmen, that ye have brought this
fellow to play the madman in my presence? shall this fellow come into my
house?'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 22](sa1022)

</div>
