<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1010)  [Next](sa1012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 11

<span id="an_sa1:11:1">1</span> Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and
encamped against Jabesh-gilead; and all the men of Jabesh said unto
Nahash: \`Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee.' <span
id="an_sa1:11:2">2</span> And Nahash the Ammonite said unto them: \`On
this condition will I make it with you, that all your right eyes be put
out; and I will lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.' <span
id="an_sa1:11:3">3</span> And the elders of Jabesh said unto him: \`Give
us seven days' respite, that we may send messengers unto all the borders
of Israel; and then, if there be none to deliver us, we

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

will come out to thee.' <span id="an_sa1:11:4">4</span> Then came the
messengers to Gibeath-shaul, and spoke these words in the ears of the
people; and all the people lifted up their voice, and wept. <span
id="an_sa1:11:5">5</span> And, behold, Saul came following the oxen out
of the field; and Saul said: \`What aileth the people that they weep?'
And they told him the words of the men of Jabesh. <span
id="an_sa1:11:6">6</span> And the spirit of God came mightily upon Saul
when he heard those words, and his anger was kindled greatly. <span
id="an_sa1:11:7">7</span> And he took a yoke of oxen, and cut them in
pieces, and sent them throughout all the borders of Israel by the hand
of messengers, saying: \`Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after
Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen.' And the dread of the LORD
fell on the people, and they came out as one man. <span
id="an_sa1:11:8">8</span> And he numbered them in Bezek; and the
children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah
thirty thousand. <span id="an_sa1:11:9">9</span> And they said unto the
messengers that came: \`Thus shall ye say unto the men of Jabesh-gilead:
To-morrow, by the time the sun is hot, ye shall have deliverance.' And
the messengers came and told the men of Jabesh; and they were glad.
<span id="an_sa1:11:10">10</span> And the men of Jabesh said:
\`To-morrow we will come out unto you, and ye shall do with us all that
seemeth good unto you.'

<span id="an_sa1:11:11">11</span> And it was so on the morrow, that Saul
put the people in three companies; and they came into the midst of the
camp in the morning watch, and smote the Ammonites until the heat of the
day; and it came to pass, that they that remained were scattered, so
that two of them were not left together. <span
id="an_sa1:11:12">12</span> And the people said unto Samuel: \`Who is he
that said: Shall Saul reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them
to death.' <span id="an_sa1:11:13">13</span> And Saul said: \`There
shall not a man be put to death this day; for to-day the LORD hath
wrought deliverance in Israel.'

<span id="an_sa1:11:14">14</span> Then said Samuel to the people: \`Come
and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.' <span
id="an_sa1:11:15">15</span> And all the people went to Gilgal; and there
they made Saul king before the LORD in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed
sacrifices of peace-offerings before the LORD; and there Saul and all
the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 12](sa1012.md)

</div>
