<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1007)  [Next](sa1011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 10

<span id="an_sa1:10:1">1</span> Then Samuel took the vial of oil, and
poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said: \`Is it not that the
LORD hath anointed thee to be prince over His inheritance? <span
id="an_sa1:10:2">2</span> When thou art departed from me to-day, then
thou shalt find two men by the tomb of Rachel, in the border of Benjamin
at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee: The asses which thou wentest to
seek are found; and, lo, thy father hath left off caring for the asses,
and is anxious concerning you, saying: What shall I do for my son? <span
id="an_sa1:10:3">3</span> Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and
thou shalt come to the terebinth of Tabor, and there shall meet thee
there three men going up to God to Beth-el, one carrying three kids, and
another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of
wine. <span id="an_sa1:10:4">4</span> And they will salute thee, and
give thee two cakes of bread; which thou shalt receive of their hand.
<span id="an_sa1:10:5">5</span> After that thou shalt come to the hill
of God, where is the garrison of the Philistines; and it shall come to
pass, when thou art come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a
band of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a
timbrel, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they will be
prophesying. <span id="an_sa1:10:6">6</span> And the spirit of the LORD
will come mightily upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and
shalt be turned into another man. <span id="an_sa1:10:7">7</span> And
let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do as thy hand
shall find; for God is with thee. <span id="an_sa1:10:8">8</span> And
thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will come down
unto thee, to offer burnt-offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of
peace-offerings; seven days shalt thou tarry, till I come unto thee, and
tell thee what thou shalt do.'

<span id="an_sa1:10:9">9</span> And it was so, that when he had turned
his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart; and all those
signs came to pass that day. <span id="an_sa1:10:10">10</span> And when
they came thither to

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

the hill, behold, a band of prophets met him; and the spirit of God came
mightily upon him, and he prophesied among them. <span
id="an_sa1:10:11">11</span> And it came to pass, when all that knew him
beforetime saw that, behold, he prophesied with the prophets, then the
people said one to another: \`What is this that is come unto the son of
Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?' <span
id="an_sa1:10:12">12</span> And one of the same place answered and said:
\`And who is their father?' Therefore it became a proverb: \`Is Saul
also among the prophets?' <span id="an_sa1:10:13">13</span> And when he
had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place.

<span id="an_sa1:10:14">14</span> And Saul's uncle said unto him and to
his servant: \`Whither went ye?' And he said: \`To seek the asses; and
when we saw that they were not found, we came to Samuel.' <span
id="an_sa1:10:15">15</span> And Saul's uncle said: \`Tell me, I pray
thee, what Samuel said unto you.' <span id="an_sa1:10:16">16</span> And
Saul said unto his uncle: \`He told us plainly that the asses were
found.' But concerning the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spoke,
he told him not.

<span id="an_sa1:10:17">17</span> And Samuel called the people together
unto the LORD to Mizpah. <span id="an_sa1:10:18">18</span> And he said
unto the children of Israel: \`Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: I
brought up Israel out of Egypt, and I delivered you out of the hand of
the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all the kingdoms that oppressed
you. <span id="an_sa1:10:19">19</span> But ye have this day rejected
your God, who Himself saveth you out of all your calamities and your
distresses; and ye have said unto Him: Nay, but set a king over us. Now
therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes, and by your
thousands.' <span id="an_sa1:10:20">20</span> So Samuel brought all the
tribes of Israel near, and the tribe of Benjamin was taken. <span
id="an_sa1:10:21">21</span> And he brought the tribe of Benjamin near by
their families, and the family of the Matrites was taken; and Saul the
son of Kish was taken; but when they sought him, he could not be found.
<span id="an_sa1:10:22">22</span> Therefore they asked of the LORD
further: \`Is there yet a man come hither?' And the LORD answered:
\`Behold, he hath hid himself among the baggage.' <span
id="an_sa1:10:23">23</span> And they ran and fetched him thence; and
when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people
from his shoulders and upward. <span id="an_sa1:10:24">24</span> And
Samuel said to all the people: \`See ye him whom the LORD hath chosen,
that there is none like him among all the people?' And all the people
shouted, and said: \`Long live the king.'

<span id="an_sa1:10:25">25</span> Then Samuel told the people the manner
of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the LORD.
And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house. <span
id="an_sa1:10:26">26</span> And Saul also went to his house to Gibeah;
and there went with him the men of valour, whose hearts God had touched.
<span id="an_sa1:10:27">27</span> But certain base fellows said: \`How
shall this man save us?' And they despised him, and brought him no
present. But he was as one that held his peace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 11](sa1011.md)

</div>
