<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1029)  [Next](sa1031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 30

<span id="an_sa1:30:1">1</span> And it came to pass, when David and his
men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had made a
raid upon the South, and upon Ziklag, and had smitten Ziklag, and burned
it with fire; <span id="an_sa1:30:2">2</span> and had taken captive the
women and all that were therein, both small and great; they slew not
any, but carried them off, and went their way. <span
id="an_sa1:30:3">3</span> And when David and his men came to the city,
behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and
their daughters, were taken captives. <span
id="an_sa1:30:4">4</span> Then David and the people that were with him
lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.
<span id="an_sa1:30:5">5</span> And David's two wives were taken
captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the
Carmelite. <span id="an_sa1:30:6">6</span> And David was greatly
distressed; for the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all
the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters;
but David strengthened himself in the LORD his God.

<span id="an_sa1:30:7">7</span> And David said to Abiathar the priest,
the son of Ahimelech: \`I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod.' And
Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David. <span
id="an_sa1:30:8">8</span> And David inquired of the LORD, saying:
\`Shall I pursue after this troop? shall I overtake them?' And He
answered him: \`Pursue; for thou shalt surely overtake them, and shalt
without fail recover all.' <span id="an_sa1:30:9">9</span> So David
went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and came to the
brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed. <span
id="an_sa1:30:10">10</span> But David pursued, he and four hundred men;
for two hundred stayed behind, who were so faint that they could not go
over the brook Besor.

<span id="an_sa1:30:11">11</span> And they found an Egyptian in the
field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and
they gave him water to drink; <span id="an_sa1:30:12">12</span> and they
gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins; and
when he had eaten, his spirit came back to him; for he had eaten no
bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights. <span
id="an_sa1:30:13">13</span> And David said unto him: \`To whom belongest

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

thou? and whence art thou?' And he said: \`I am a young Egyptian,
servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days ago I
fell sick. <span id="an_sa1:30:14">14</span> We made a raid upon the
South of the Cherethites, and upon that which belongeth to Judah, and
upon the South of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.' <span
id="an_sa1:30:15">15</span> And David said to him: \`Wilt thou bring me
down to this troop?' And he said: \`Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt
neither kill me, nor deliver me up into the hands of my master, and I
will bring thee down to this troop.'

<span id="an_sa1:30:16">16</span> And when he had brought him down,
behold, they were spread abroad over all the ground, eating and
drinking, and feasting, because of all the great spoil that they had
taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.
<span id="an_sa1:30:17">17</span> And David smote them from the twilight
even unto the evening of the next day; and there escaped not a man of
them, save four hundred young men, who rode upon camels and fled. <span
id="an_sa1:30:18">18</span> And David recovered all that the Amalekites
had taken; and David rescued his two wives. <span
id="an_sa1:30:19">19</span> And there was nothing lacking to them,
neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor
any thing that they had taken to them; David brought back all. <span
id="an_sa1:30:20">20</span> And David took all the flocks and the herds,
which they drove before those other cattle, and said: \`This is David's
spoil.'

<span id="an_sa1:30:21">21</span> And David came to the two hundred men,
who were so faint that they could not follow David, whom also they had
made to abide at the brook Besor; and they went forth to meet David, and
to meet the people that were with him; and when David came near to the
people, he saluted them. <span id="an_sa1:30:22">22</span> Then answered
all the wicked men and base fellows, of those that went with David, and
said: \`Because they went not with us, we will not give them aught of
the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his wife and his
children, that they may lead them away, and depart.' <span
id="an_sa1:30:23">23</span> Then said David: \`Ye shall not do so, my
brethren, with that which the LORD hath given unto us, who hath
preserved us, and delivered the troop that came against us into our
hand. <span id="an_sa1:30:24">24</span> And who will hearken unto you in
this matter? for as is the share of him that goeth down to the battle,
so shall be the share of him that tarrieth by the baggage; they shall
share alike.' <span id="an_sa1:30:25">25</span> And it was so from that
day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto
this day.

<span id="an_sa1:30:26">26</span> And when David came to Ziklag, he sent
of the spoil unto the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying:
\`Behold a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the LORD';
<span id="an_sa1:30:27">27</span> to them that were in Beth-el, and to
them that were in Ramoth of the South, and to them that were in Jattir;
<span id="an_sa1:30:28">28</span> and to them that were in Aroer, and to
them that were in Siphmoth, and to them that were in Eshtemoa; <span
id="an_sa1:30:29">29</span> and to them that were in Racal, and to them
that were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to them that were in
the cities of the Kenites; <span id="an_sa1:30:30">30</span> and to them
that were in Hormah, and to them that were in Bor-ashan, and to them
that were in Athach; <span id="an_sa1:30:31">31</span> and to them that
were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men
were wont to haunt.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 31](sa1031)

</div>
