<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1004)  [Next](sa1006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 5

<span id="an_sa1:5:1">1</span> Now the Philistines had taken the ark of
God, and they brought it from Eben-ezer unto Ashdod. <span
id="an_sa1:5:2">2</span> And the Philistines took the ark of God, and
brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon. <span
id="an_sa1:5:3">3</span> And when they of Ashdod arose early on the
morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the
ark of the LORD. And they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.
<span id="an_sa1:5:4">4</span> And when they arose early on the morrow
morning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the
ark of the LORD; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands
lay cut off upon the threshold; only the trunk of Dagon was left to him.
<span id="an_sa1:5:5">5</span> Therefore neither the priests of Dagon,
nor any that come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in
Ashdod unto this day.

<span id="an_sa1:5:6">6</span> But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon
them of Ashdod, and He destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even
Ashdod and the borders thereof. <span id="an_sa1:5:7">7</span> And when
the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said: \`The ark of the God of
Israel shall not abide with us; for His hand is sore upon us, and upon
Dagon our god.' <span id="an_sa1:5:8">8</span> They sent therefore and
gathered all the lords of the Philistines unto them, and said: \`What
shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel?' And they answered: \`Let
the ark of the God of Israel be carried about unto Gath.' And they
carried the ark of the God of Israel about thither. <span
id="an_sa1:5:9">9</span> And it was so, that, after they had carried it
about, the hand of the LORD was against the city with a very great
discomfiture; and He smote the men of the city, both small and great,
and emerods broke out upon them. <span id="an_sa1:5:10">10</span> So
they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark of
God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying: \`They have
brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us and our
people.' <span id="an_sa1:5:11">11</span> They sent therefore and
gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and they said:
\`Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go back to its own
place, that it slay us not, and our people'; for there was a deadly
discomfiture throughout all the city; the hand of God was very heavy
there.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span id="an_sa1:5:12">12</span> And the men that died not were smitten
with the emerods; and the cry of the city went up to heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 6](sa1006.md)

</div>
