<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1017)  [Next](sa1019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 18

<span id="an_sa1:18:1">1</span> And it came to pass, when he had made an
end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the
soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. <span
id="an_sa1:18:2">2</span> And Saul took him that day, and would let him
go no more home to his father's house. <span
id="an_sa1:18:3">3</span> Then Jonathan made a covenant with David,
because he loved him as his own soul. <span
id="an_sa1:18:4">4</span> And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that
was upon him, and gave it to David, and his apparel, even to his sword,
and to his bow, and to his girdle. <span id="an_sa1:18:5">5</span> And
David went out; whithersoever Saul sent him, he had good success; and
Saul set him over the men of war; and it was good in the sight of all
the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants.

<span id="an_sa1:18:6">6</span> And it came to pass as they came, when
David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came
out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul,
with timbrels, with joy, and with three-stringed instruments. <span
id="an_sa1:18:7">7</span> And the women sang one to another in their
play, and said:

Saul hath slain his thousands,

And David his ten thousands.

<span id="an_sa1:18:8">8</span> And Saul was very wroth, and this saying
displeased him; and he said: They have ascribed unto David ten
thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands; and all he
lacketh is the kingdom!' <span id="an_sa1:18:9">9</span> And Saul eyed
David from that day and forward.

<span id="an_sa1:18:10">10</span> And it came to pass on the morrow,
that an evil spirit from God came mightily upon Saul, and he raved in
the midst of the house; and David played with his hand, as he did day by
day; and Saul had his spear in his hand. <span
id="an_sa1:18:11">11</span> And Saul cast the spear; for he said: \`I
will smite David even to the wall.' And David stepped aside out of his
presence twice. <span id="an_sa1:18:12">12</span> And Saul was afraid of
David, because the LORD was with him, and was departed from Saul. <span
id="an_sa1:18:13">13</span> Therefore Saul removed him from him, and
made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in before
the people. <span id="an_sa1:18:14">14</span> And David had great
success in all his ways; and the LORD was with him. <span
id="an_sa1:18:15">15</span> And when Saul saw that he had great success,
he stood in awe of him. <span id="an_sa1:18:16">16</span> But all Israel
and Judah loved David; for he went out and came in before them.

<span id="an_sa1:18:17">17</span> And Saul said to David: \`Behold my
elder daughter Merab, her will I give thee to wife; only be thou valiant
for me, and fight the LORD's battles.' For Saul said: \`Let not my hand
be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.' <span
id="an_sa1:18:18">18</span> And David said unto Saul: \`Who am I, and
what is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be
son-in-law to the king?' <span id="an_sa1:18:19">19</span> But it came
to pass at the time when Merab Saul's daughter should have been given to
David, that she was given unto Adriel the Meholathite to wife. <span
id="an_sa1:18:20">20</span> And Michal Saul's daughter loved David; and
they told Saul, and the thing pleased him. <span
id="an_sa1:18:21">21</span> And Saul said: \`I will give him her, that
she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be
against him.' Wherefore Saul said to David: \`Thou shalt this day be my
son-in-law through the one of the twain.' <span
id="an_sa1:18:22">22</span> And

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

Saul commanded his servants: \`Speak with David secretly, and say:
Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his servants love thee;
now therefore be the king's son-in-law.' <span
id="an_sa1:18:23">23</span> And Saul's servants spoke those words in the
ears of David. And David said: \`Seemeth it to you a light thing to be
the king's son-in-law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly
esteemed?' <span id="an_sa1:18:24">24</span> And the servants of Saul
told him, saying: \`On this manner spoke David.' <span
id="an_sa1:18:25">25</span> And Saul said: \`Thus shall ye say to David:
The king desireth not any dowry, but a hundred foreskins of the
Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies.' For Saul thought to
make David fall by the hand of the Philistines. <span
id="an_sa1:18:26">26</span> And when his servants told David these
words, it pleased David well to be the king's son-in-law. And the days
were not expired; <span id="an_sa1:18:27">27</span> and David arose and
went, he and his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred men; and
David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full number to the
king, that he might be the king's son-in-law. And Saul gave him Michal
his daughter to wife. <span id="an_sa1:18:28">28</span> And Saul saw and
knew that the LORD was with David; and Michal Saul's daughter loved him.
<span id="an_sa1:18:29">29</span> And Saul was yet the more afraid of
David; and Saul was David's enemy continually.

<span id="an_sa1:18:30">30</span> Then the princes of the Philistines
went forth; and it came to pass, as often as they went forth, that David
prospered more than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much
set by.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 19](sa1019.md)

</div>
