<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1014)  [Next](sa1016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 15

<span id="an_sa1:15:1">1</span> And Samuel said unto Saul: \`The LORD
sent me to anoint thee to be king over His people, over Israel; now
therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the LORD. <span
id="an_sa1:15:2">2</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts: I remember that
which Amalek did to Israel, how he set himself against him in the way,
when he came up out of Egypt. <span id="an_sa1:15:3">3</span> Now go and
smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them
not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep,
camel and ass.'

<span id="an_sa1:15:4">4</span> And Saul summoned the people, and
numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand
men of Judah. <span id="an_sa1:15:5">5</span> And Saul came to the city
of Amalek, and lay in wait in the valley. <span
id="an_sa1:15:6">6</span> And Saul said unto the Kenites: \`Go, depart,
get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them;
for ye showed kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up
out of Egypt.' So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites. <span
id="an_sa1:15:7">7</span> And Saul smote the Amalekites, from Havilah as
thou goest to Shur, that is in front of Egypt. <span
id="an_sa1:15:8">8</span> And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites
alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.
<span id="an_sa1:15:9">9</span> But Saul and

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, even
the young of the second birth, and the lambs, and all that was good, and
would not utterly destroy them; but every thing that was of no account
and feeble, that they destroyed utterly.

<span id="an_sa1:15:10">10</span> Then came the word of the LORD unto
Samuel, saying: <span id="an_sa1:15:11">11</span> \`It repenteth Me that
I have set up Saul to be king; for he is turned back from following Me,
and hath not performed My commandments.' And it grieved Samuel; and he
cried unto the LORD all night. <span id="an_sa1:15:12">12</span> And
Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning; and it was told Samuel,
saying: \`Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he is setting him up a
monument, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.'
<span id="an_sa1:15:13">13</span> And Samuel came to Saul; and Saul said
unto him: \`Blessed be thou of the LORD; I have performed the
commandment of the LORD.' <span id="an_sa1:15:14">14</span> And Samuel
said: \`What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and
the lowing of the oxen which I hear?' <span
id="an_sa1:15:15">15</span> And Saul said: \`They have brought them from
the Amalekites; for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the
oxen, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God; and the rest we have utterly
destroyed.' <span id="an_sa1:15:16">16</span> Then Samuel said unto
Saul: \`Stay, and I will tell thee what the LORD hath said to me this
night.' And he said unto him: \`Say on.'

<span id="an_sa1:15:17">17</span> And Samuel said: \`Though thou be
little in thine own sight, art thou not head of the tribes of Israel?
And the LORD anointed thee king over Israel; <span
id="an_sa1:15:18">18</span> and the LORD sent thee on a journey, and
said: Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed. <span
id="an_sa1:15:19">19</span> Wherefore then didst thou not hearken to the
voice of the LORD, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst that which
was evil in the sight of the LORD?' <span
id="an_sa1:15:20">20</span> And Saul said unto Samuel: \`Yea, I have
hearkened to the voice of the LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD
sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly
destroyed the Amalekites. <span id="an_sa1:15:21">21</span> But the
people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the devoted
things, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God in Gilgal.' <span
id="an_sa1:15:22">22</span> And Samuel said:

\`Hath the LORD as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices,  
As in hearkening to the voice of the LORD?  
Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice,  
And to hearken than the fat of rams.  
<span id="an_sa1:15:23">23</span> For rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft,  
And stubbornness is as idolatry and teraphim.

Because thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, He hath also rejected
thee from being king.' <span id="an_sa1:15:24">24</span> And Saul said
unto Samuel: \`I have sinned; for I have transgressed the commandment of
the LORD, and thy words; because I feared the people, and hearkened to
their voice. <span id="an_sa1:15:25">25</span> Now therefore, I pray
thee, pardon my sin, and return with me, that I may worship the LORD.'
<span id="an_sa1:15:26">26</span> And Samuel said unto Saul: \`I will
not return with thee; for thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, and
the LORD hath rejected thee from being king over Israel.' <span
id="an_sa1:15:27">27</span> And as Samuel turned about to go away, he
laid hold upon the skirt of his robe, and it rent. <span
id="an_sa1:15:28">28</span> And Samuel said unto him: \`The LORD hath
rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a
neighbour of thine, that is better than thou. <span
id="an_sa1:15:29">29</span> And also the Glory of Israel will

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

not lie nor repent; for He is not a man, that He should repent.' <span
id="an_sa1:15:30">30</span> Then he said: \`I have sinned; yet honour me
now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and
return with me, that I may worship the LORD thy God.' <span
id="an_sa1:15:31">31</span> So Samuel returned after Saul; and Saul
worshipped the LORD.

<span id="an_sa1:15:32">32</span> Then said Samuel: \`Bring ye hither to
me Agag the king of the Amalekites.' And Agag came unto him in chains.
And Agag said: \`Surely the bitterness of death is at hand.' <span
id="an_sa1:15:33">33</span> And Samuel said:

As thy sword hath made women childless,  
So shall thy mother be childless among women.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Samuel hewed
Agag in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal.

<span id="an_sa1:15:34">34</span> Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul
went up to his house to Gibeath-shaul. <span
id="an_sa1:15:35">35</span> And Samuel never beheld Saul again until the
day of his death; for Samuel mourned for Saul; and the LORD repented
that He had made Saul king over Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[342:a](sa1014.htm#fr_124) Heb. *Abiner*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 16](sa1016)

</div>
