<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1023)  [Next](sa1025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 24

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_sa1:24:1">1</span> And David went up from thence, and dwelt in
the strongholds of En-gedi.

<span id="an_sa1:24:2">2</span> And it came to pass, when Saul was
returned from following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying:
\`Behold, David is in the wilderness

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

of En-gedi.' <span id="an_sa1:24:3">3</span> Then Saul took three
thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his
men upon the rocks of the wild goats. <span
id="an_sa1:24:4">4</span> And he came to the sheepcotes by the way,
where was a cave; and Saul went in to cover his feet. Now David and his
men were sitting in the innermost parts of the cave. <span
id="an_sa1:24:5">5</span> And the men of David said unto him: \`Behold
the day in which the LORD hath said unto thee: Behold, I will deliver
thine enemy into thy hand, and thou shalt do to him as it shall seem
good unto thee.' Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe
privily. <span id="an_sa1:24:6">6</span> And it came to pass afterward,
that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt. <span
id="an_sa1:24:7">7</span> And he said unto his men: \`The LORD forbid it
me, that I should do this thing unto my lord, the LORD'S anointed, to
put forth my hand against him, seeing he is the LORD'S anointed.' <span
id="an_sa1:24:8">8</span> So David checked his men with these words, and
suffered them not to rise against Saul. And Saul rose up out of the
cave, and went on his way.

<span id="an_sa1:24:9">9</span> David also arose afterward, and went out
of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying: \`My lord the king.' And when
Saul looked behind him, David bowed with his face to the earth, and
prostrated himself. <span id="an_sa1:24:10">10</span> And David said to
Saul: \`Wherefore hearkenest thou to men's words, saying: Behold, David
seeketh thy hurt? <span id="an_sa1:24:11">11</span> Behold, this day
thine eyes have seen how that the LORD had delivered thee to-day into my
hand in the cave; and some bade me kill thee; but mine eye spared thee;
and I said: I will not put forth my hand against my lord; for he is the
LORD'S anointed. <span id="an_sa1:24:12">12</span> Moreover, my father,
see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand; for in that I cut off
the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see that there
is neither evil nor transgression in my hand, and I have not sinned
against thee, though thou layest wait for my soul to take it. <span
id="an_sa1:24:13">13</span> The LORD judge between me and thee, and the
LORD avenge me of thee; but my hand shall not be upon thee. <span
id="an_sa1:24:14">14</span> As saith the proverb of the ancients: Out of
the wicked cometh forth wickedness; but my hand shall not be upon thee.
<span id="an_sa1:24:15">15</span> After whom is the king of Israel come
out? after whom dost thou pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea. <span
id="an_sa1:24:16">16</span> The LORD therefore be judge, and give
sentence between me and thee, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver
me out of thy hand.'

<span id="an_sa1:24:17">17</span> And it came to pass, when David had
made an end of speaking these words unto Saul, that Saul said: \`Is this
thy voice, my son David?' And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept. <span
id="an_sa1:24:18">18</span> And he said to David: \`Thou art more
righteous than I; for thou hast rendered unto me good, whereas I have
rendered unto thee evil. <span id="an_sa1:24:19">19</span> And thou hast
declared this day how that thou hast dealt well with me; forasmuch as
when the LORD had delivered me up into thy hand, thou didst not kill me.
<span id="an_sa1:24:20">20</span> For if a man find his enemy, will he
let him go well away? wherefore the LORD reward thee good for that which
thou hast done unto me this day. <span id="an_sa1:24:21">21</span> And
now, behold, I know that thou shalt surely be king, and that the kingdom
of Israel shall be established in thy hand. <span
id="an_sa1:24:22">22</span> Swear now therefore unto me by the LORD,
that thou wilt not cut off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not
destroy my name out of my father's house.' <span
id="an_sa1:24:23">23</span> And David swore unto Saul. And Saul went
home; but

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> David and his men
got them up unto the stronghold.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 25](sa1025.md)

</div>
