<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1006)  [Next](sa1010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 7

<span id="an_sa1:7:1">1</span> And the men of Kiriath-jearim came, and
fetched up the ark of the LORD, and brought it into the house of
Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of
the LORD.

<span id="an_sa1:7:2">2</span> And it came to pass, from the day that
the ark abode in Kiriath-jearim, that the time was long; for it was
twenty years; and all the house of Israel yearned after the LORD. <span
id="an_sa1:7:3">3</span> And Samuel spoke unto all the house of Israel,
saying: \`If ye do return unto the LORD with all your heart, then put
away the foreign gods and the Ashtaroth from among you, and direct your
hearts unto the LORD, and serve Him only; and He will deliver you out of
the hand of the Philistines.' <span id="an_sa1:7:4">4</span> Then the
children of Israel did put away the Baalim and the Ashtaroth, and served
the LORD only.

<span id="an_sa1:7:5">5</span> And Samuel said: \`Gather all Israel to
Mizpah, and I will pray for you unto the LORD.' <span
id="an_sa1:7:6">6</span> And they gathered together to Mizpah, and drew
water, and poured it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and
said there: \`We have sinned against the LORD.' And Samuel judged the
children of Israel in Mizpah.

<span id="an_sa1:7:7">7</span> And when the Philistines heard that the
children of Israel were gathered together to Mizpah, the lords of the
Philistines went up against Israel. And when the children of Israel
heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines. <span
id="an_sa1:7:8">8</span> And the children of Israel said to Samuel:
\`Cease not to cry unto the LORD our God for us, that He save us out of
the hand of the Philistines.' <span id="an_sa1:7:9">9</span> And Samuel
took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a whole burnt-offering unto the
LORD; and Samuel cried unto the LORD for Israel; and the LORD answered
him. <span id="an_sa1:7:10">10</span> And as Samuel was offering up the
burnt-offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel; but
the LORD thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the
Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten down before
Israel. <span id="an_sa1:7:11">11</span> And the men of Israel went out
of Mizpah, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until they came
under Beth-car. <span id="an_sa1:7:12">12</span> Then Samuel took a
stone, and set it between Mizpah and Shen, and called the name of it
 <span id="fr_120"></span>[b](#fn_117.md) Eben-ezer, saying: \`Hitherto
hath the LORD helped us.' <span id="an_sa1:7:13">13</span> So the
Philistines were subdued, and they came no more within the border of
Israel; and the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines all the
days of Samuel. <span id="an_sa1:7:14">14</span> And the cities which
the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from
Ekron even unto Gath; and the border thereof did Israel deliver out of
the hand of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the
Amorites. <span id="an_sa1:7:15">15</span> And Samuel judged Israel all
the days of his life. <span id="an_sa1:7:16">16</span> And he went from
year to year in circuit

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

to Beth-el, and Gilgal, and Mizpah; and he judged Israel in all those
places. <span id="an_sa1:7:17">17</span> And his return was to Ramah,
for there was his house; and there he judged Israel; and he built there
an altar unto the LORD.

<span id="an_sa1:8:1">1</span> And it came to pass, when Samuel was old,
that he made his sons judges over Israel. <span
id="an_sa1:8:2">2</span> Now the name of his first-born was Joel; and
the name of his second, Abijah; they were judges in Beer-sheba. <span
id="an_sa1:8:3">3</span> And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned
aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted justice.

<span id="an_sa1:8:4">4</span> Then all the elders of Israel gathered
themselves together, and came to Samuel unto Ramah. <span
id="an_sa1:8:5">5</span> And they said unto him: \`Behold, thou art old,
and thy sons walk not in thy ways; now make us a king to judge us like
all the nations.' <span id="an_sa1:8:6">6</span> But the thing
displeased Samuel, when they said: \`Give us a king to judge us.' And
Samuel prayed unto the LORD. <span id="an_sa1:8:7">7</span> And the LORD
said unto Samuel: \`Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that
they say unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected Me, that I should not be king over them. <span
id="an_sa1:8:8">8</span> According to all the works which they have done
since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, in
that they have forsaken Me, and served other gods, so do they also unto
thee. <span id="an_sa1:8:9">9</span> Now therefore hearken unto their
voice; howbeit thou shalt earnestly forewarn them, and shalt declare
unto them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.'

<span id="an_sa1:8:10">10</span> And Samuel told all the words of the
LORD unto the people that asked of him a king. <span
id="an_sa1:8:11">11</span> And he said: \`This will be the manner of the
king that shall reign over you: he will take your sons, and appoint them
unto him, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and they shall run
before his chariots. <span id="an_sa1:8:12">12</span> And he will
appoint them unto him for captains of thousands, and captains of
fifties; and to plow his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make
his instruments of war, and the instruments of his chariots. <span
id="an_sa1:8:13">13</span> And he will take your daughters to be
perfumers, and to be cooks, and to be bakers. <span
id="an_sa1:8:14">14</span> And he will take your fields, and your
vineyards, and your olive-yards, even the best of them, and give them to
his servants. <span id="an_sa1:8:15">15</span> And he will take the
tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and
to his servants. <span id="an_sa1:8:16">16</span> And he will take your
men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your goodliest young men, and
your asses, and put them to his work. <span
id="an_sa1:8:17">17</span> He will take the tenth of your flocks; and ye
shall be his servants. <span id="an_sa1:8:18">18</span> And ye shall cry
out in that day because of your king whom ye shall have chosen you; and
the LORD will not answer you in that day.' <span
id="an_sa1:8:19">19</span> But the people refused to hearken unto the
voice of Samuel; and they said: \`Nay; but there shall be a king over
us; <span id="an_sa1:8:20">20</span> that we also may be like all the
nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight
our battles.' <span id="an_sa1:8:21">21</span> And Samuel heard all the
words of the people, and he spoke them in the ears of the LORD. <span
id="an_sa1:8:22">22</span> And the LORD said to Samuel: \`Hearken unto
their voice, and make them a king.' And Samuel said unto the men of
Israel: \`Go ye every man unto his city.'

<span id="an_sa1:9:1">1</span> Now there was a man of Ben-jamin, whose
name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath,
the son of Aphiah, the son of a Benjamite, a mighty man of valour. <span
id="an_sa1:9:2">2</span> And he had a son, whose name was Saul, young
and goodly,

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than
he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the people.
<span id="an_sa1:9:3">3</span> Now the asses of Kish Saul's father were
lost. And Kish said to Saul his son: \`Take now one of the servants with
thee, and arise, go seek the asses.' <span id="an_sa1:9:4">4</span> And
he passed through the hill-country of Ephraim, and passed through the
land of Shalishah, but they found them not; then they passed through the
land of Shaalim, and there they were not; and he passed through the land
of the Benjamites, but they found them not. <span
id="an_sa1:9:5">5</span> When they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul
said to his servant that was with him: \`Come and let us return; lest my
father leave caring for the asses, and become anxious concerning us.'
<span id="an_sa1:9:6">6</span> And he said unto him: \`Behold now, there
is in this city a man of God, and he is a man that is held in honour;
all that he saith cometh surely to pass; now let us go thither;
peradventure he can tell us concerning our journey whereon we go.' <span
id="an_sa1:9:7">7</span> Then said Saul to his servant: \`But, behold,
if we go, what shall we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our
vessels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God; what
have we?' <span id="an_sa1:9:8">8</span> And the servant answered Saul
again, and said: 'Behold, I have in my hand the fourth part of a shekel
of silver, that will I give to the man of God, to tell us our
way.'—<span id="an_sa1:9:9">9</span> Beforetime in Israel, when a man
went to inquire of God, thus he said: \`Come and let us go to the seer';
for he that is now called a prophet was beforetime called a seer.—<span
id="an_sa1:9:10">10</span> Then said Saul to his servant: \`Well said;
come, let us go.' So they went unto the city where the man of God was.
<span id="an_sa1:9:11">11</span> As they went up the ascent to the city,
they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them:
\`Is the seer here?' <span id="an_sa1:9:12">12</span> And they answered
them, and said: \`He is; behold, he is before thee; make haste now, for
he is come to-day into the city; for the people have a sacrifice to-day
in the high place. <span id="an_sa1:9:13">13</span> As soon as ye are
come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up to
the high place to eat; for the people will not eat until he come,
because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that are
bidden. Now therefore get you up; for at this time ye shall find him.'
<span id="an_sa1:9:14">14</span> And they went up to the city; and as
they came within the city, behold, Samuel came out toward them, to go up
to the high place.

<span id="an_sa1:9:15">15</span> Now the LORD had revealed unto Samuel a
day before Saul came, saying: <span
id="an_sa1:9:16">16</span> 'To-morrow about this time I will send thee a
man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be prince
over My people Israel, and he shall save My people out of the hand of
the Philistines; for I have looked upon My people, because their cry is
come unto Me.' <span id="an_sa1:9:17">17</span> And when Samuel saw
Saul, the LORD spoke unto him: \`Behold the man of whom I said unto
thee: This same shall have authority over My people.' <span
id="an_sa1:9:18">18</span> Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate,
and said: \`Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is.' <span
id="an_sa1:9:19">19</span> And Samuel answered Saul, and said: \`I am
the seer; go up before me unto the high place, for ye shall eat with me
to-day; and in the morning I will let thee go, and will tell thee all
that is in thy heart. <span id="an_sa1:9:20">20</span> And as for thine
asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them; for they
are found. And on whom is all the desire of

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel? Is it not
on thee, and on all thy father's house?' <span
id="an_sa1:9:21">21</span> And Saul answered and said: \`Am not I a
Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the
least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then
speakest thou to me after this manner?'

<span id="an_sa1:9:22">22</span> And Samuel took Saul and his servant,
and brought them into the chamber, and made them sit in the chiefest
place among them that were bidden, who were about thirty persons. <span
id="an_sa1:9:23">23</span> And Samuel said unto the cook: \`Bring the
portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee: Set it by thee.'
<span id="an_sa1:9:24">24</span> And the cook took up the thigh, and
that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And \[Samuel\] said:
\`Behold that which hath been reserved! set it before thee and eat;
because unto the appointed time hath it been kept for thee, for I said:
I have invited the people.' So Saul did eat with Samuel that day. <span
id="an_sa1:9:25">25</span> And when they were come down from the high
place into the city, he spoke with Saul upon the housetop. <span
id="an_sa1:9:26">26</span> And they arose early; and it came to pass
about the break of day, that Samuel called to Saul on the housetop,
saying: \`Up, that I may send thee away.' And Saul arose, and they went
out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad. <span
id="an_sa1:9:27">27</span> As they were going down at the end of the
city, Samuel said to Saul: \`Bid the servant pass on before us—and he
passed on—but stand thou still at this time, that I may cause thee to
hear the word of God.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[332:b](sa1007.htm#fr_120.md) That is, *The stone
of help*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 10](sa1010.md)

</div>
