<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2009)  [Next](sa2011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 10

<span id="an_sa2:10:1">1</span>  And it came to pass after this, that
the king of the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his
stead. <span id="an_sa2:10:2">2</span>  And David said: \`I will show
kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father showed kindness
unto me.' So David sent by the hand of his servants to comfort him
concerning his father. And David's servants came into the land of the
children of Ammon. <span id="an_sa2:10:3">3</span>  But the princes of
the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their lord: \`Thinkest thou that
David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee?
hath not David sent his servants unto thee to search the city, and to
spy it out, and to overthrow it?' <span id="an_sa2:10:4">4</span>  So
Hanun took David's servants, and shaved off the one half of their
beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their
buttocks, and sent them away. <span id="an_sa2:10:5">5</span>  When they
told it unto David, he sent to meet them; for the men were greatly
ashamed. And the king said: \`Tarry at Jericho until your beards be
grown, and then return.'

<span id="an_sa2:10:6">6</span>  And when the children of Ammon saw that
they were become odious to David, the children of Ammon sent and hired
the Arameans of Bethrehob, and the Arameans of Zobah, twenty thousand
footmen, and the king of Maacah with a thousand men, and the men of Tob
twelve thousand men. <span id="an_sa2:10:7">7</span>  And when David
heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men. <span
id="an_sa2:10:8">8</span>  And the children of Ammon came out, and put
the battle in array at the entrance of the gate; and the Arameans of
Zobah, and of Rehob, and the men of Tob and Maacah, were by themselves
in the field.

<span id="an_sa2:10:9">9</span>  Now when Joab saw that the battle was
set against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of
Israel, and put them in array against the Arameans; <span
id="an_sa2:10:10">10</span>  and the rest

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

of the people he committed into the hand of  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[a](#fn_128) Abishai his brother, and he put them in
array against the children of Ammon. <span id="an_sa2:10:11">11</span> 
And he said: \`If the Arameans be too strong for me, then thou shalt
help me, but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I
will come and help thee. <span id="an_sa2:10:12">12</span>  Be of good
courage, and let us prove strong for our people, and for the cities of
our God; and the LORD do that which seemeth Him good.' <span
id="an_sa2:10:13">13</span>  So Joab and the people that were with him
drew nigh unto the battle against the Arameans; and they fled before
him. <span id="an_sa2:10:14">14</span>  And when the children of Ammon
saw that the Arameans were fled, they likewise fled before Abishai, and
entered into the city. Then Joab returned from the children of Ammon,
and came to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_sa2:10:15">15</span>  And when the Arameans saw that they
were put to the worse before Israel, they gathered themselves together.
<span id="an_sa2:10:16">16</span>  And Hadadezer sent, and brought out
the Arameans that were beyond the River; and they came to Helam, with
Shobach the captain of the host of Hadadezer at their head. <span
id="an_sa2:10:17">17</span>  And it was told David; and he gathered all
Israel together, and passed over the Jordan, and came to Helam. And the
Arameans set themselves in array against David, and fought with him.
<span id="an_sa2:10:18">18</span>  And the Arameans fled before Israel;
and David slew of the Arameans seven hundred drivers of chariots, and
forty thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their host, so
that he died there. <span id="an_sa2:10:19">19</span>  And when all the
kings that were servants to Hadadezer saw that they were put to the
worse before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served them. So
the Arameans feared to help the children of Ammon any more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[377:a](sa2010.htm#fr_131) Heb. *Abshai*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 11](sa2011)

</div>
