<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2011)  [Next](sa2013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 12

<span id="an_sa2:12:1">1</span>  And the LORD sent Nathan unto David.
And he came unto him, and said unto him: \`There were two men in one
city: the one rich, and the other poor. <span id="an_sa2:12:2">2</span> 
The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds; <span
id="an_sa2:12:3">3</span>  but the poor man had nothing, save one little
ewe lamb, which he had bought and reared; and it grew up together with
him, and with his children; it did eat of his own morsel, and drank of
his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter. <span
id="an_sa2:12:4">4</span>  And there came a traveller unto the rich man,
and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for
the wayfaring man that was come unto him, but took the poor man's lamb,
and dressed it for the man that was come to him.' <span
id="an_sa2:12:5">5</span>  And

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> David's anger was
greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan: \`As the LORD
liveth, the man that hath done this deserveth to die; <span
id="an_sa2:12:6">6</span>  and he shall restore the lamb fourfold,
because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.'

<span id="an_sa2:12:7">7</span>  And Nathan said to David: Thou art the
man. Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: I anointed thee king over
Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul; <span
id="an_sa2:12:8">8</span>  and I gave thee thy master's house, and thy
master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of
Judah; and if that were too little, then would I add unto thee so much
more. <span id="an_sa2:12:9">9</span>  Wherefore hast thou despised the
word of the LORD, to do that which is evil in My sight? Uriah the
Hittite thou hast smitten with the sword, and his wife thou hast taken
to be thy wife, and him thou hast slain with the sword of the children
of Ammon. <span id="an_sa2:12:10">10</span>  Now therefore, the sword
shall never depart from thy house; because thou hast despised Me, and
hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife. <span
id="an_sa2:12:11">11</span>  Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will raise
up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives
before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie
with thy wives in the sight of this sun. <span
id="an_sa2:12:12">12</span>  For thou didst it secretly; but I will do
this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.' <span
id="an_sa2:12:13">13</span>  And David said unto Nathan: \`I have sinned
against the LORD.' And Nathan said unto David: \`The LORD also hath put
away thy sin; thou shalt not die. <span id="an_sa2:12:14">14</span> 
Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast greatly blasphemed the enemies
of the LORD, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die.'
<span id="an_sa2:12:15">15</span>  And Nathan departed unto his house.

And the LORD struck the child that Uriah's wife bore unto David, and it
was very sick. <span id="an_sa2:12:16">16</span>  David therefore
besought God for the child; and David fasted, and as often as he went
in, he lay all night upon the earth. <span id="an_sa2:12:17">17</span> 
And the elders of his house arose, and stood beside him, to raise him up
from the earth; but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.
<span id="an_sa2:12:18">18</span>  And it came to pass on the seventh
day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him
that the child was dead; for they said: \`Behold, while the child was
yet alive, we spoke unto him, and he hearkened not unto our voice; how
then shall we tell him that the child is dead, so that he do himself
some harm?' <span id="an_sa2:12:19">19</span>  But when David saw that
his servants whispered together, David perceived that the child was
dead; and David said unto his servants: \`Is the child dead?' And they
said: \`He is dead.' <span id="an_sa2:12:20">20</span>  Then David arose
from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his
apparel; and he came into the house of the LORD, and worshipped; then he
came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him,
and he did eat. <span id="an_sa2:12:21">21</span>  Then said his
servants unto him: \`What thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst
fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was
dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.' <span id="an_sa2:12:22">22</span> 
And he said: \`While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I
said: Who knoweth whether the LORD will not be gracious to me, that the
child may live? <span id="an_sa2:12:23">23</span>  But now he is dead,
wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him,
but he will not return to me.'

<span id="an_sa2:12:24">24</span>  And David comforted Bath-sheba his
wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her; and she bore a son, and

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

called his name Solomon. And the LORD loved him; <span
id="an_sa2:12:25">25</span>  and He sent by the hand of Nathan the
prophet, and he called his name  <span id="fr_132"></span>[a](#fn_129.md)
Jedidiah, for the LORD's sake.

<span id="an_sa2:12:26">26</span>  Now Joab fought against Rab-bah of
the children of Ammon, and took the royal city. <span
id="an_sa2:12:27">27</span>  And Joab sent messengers to David, and
said: \`I have fought against Rabbah, yea, I have taken the city of
waters. <span id="an_sa2:12:28">28</span>  Now therefore gather the rest
of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it; lest I
take the city, and it be called after my name.' <span
id="an_sa2:12:29">29</span>  And David gathered all the people together,
and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it. <span
id="an_sa2:12:30">30</span>  And he took the crown of Malcam from off
his head; and the weight thereof was a talent of gold, and in it were
precious stones; and it was set on David's head. And he brought forth
the spoil of the city, exceeding much. <span
id="an_sa2:12:31">31</span>  And he brought forth the people that were
therein, and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under
axes of iron, and made them pass through the brickkiln; and thus did he
unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the
people returned unto Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[380:a](sa2012.htm#fr_132.md) That is, *Beloved of
the LORD*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 13](sa2013.md)

</div>
