<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2002)  [Next](sa2004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 3

<span id="an_sa2:3:1">1</span>  Now there was long war between the house
of Saul and the house of David; and David waxed stronger

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

and stronger, but the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker.

<span id="an_sa2:3:2">2</span>  And unto David were sons born in Hebron;
and his first-born was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; <span
id="an_sa2:3:3">3</span>  and his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife
of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third Absalom the son of Maacah the
daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; <span id="an_sa2:3:4">4</span>  and
the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the
son of Abital; <span id="an_sa2:3:5">5</span>  and the sixth, Ithream,
of Eglah David's wife. These were born to David in Hebron.

<span id="an_sa2:3:6">6</span>  And it came to pass, while there was war
between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner showed
himself strong in the house of Saul. <span id="an_sa2:3:7">7</span>  Now
Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah; and
\[Ish-bosheth\] said to Abner: \`Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my
father's concubine?' <span id="an_sa2:3:8">8</span>  Then was Abner very
wroth for the words of Ish-bosheth, and said: \`Am I a dog's head that
belongeth to Judah? This day do I show kindness unto the house of Saul
thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered
thee into the hand of David, and yet thou chargest me this day with a
fault concerning this woman. <span id="an_sa2:3:9">9</span>  God do so
to Abner, and more also, if, as the LORD hath sworn to David, I do not
even so to him; <span id="an_sa2:3:10">10</span>  to transfer the
kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over
Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beer-sheba.' <span
id="an_sa2:3:11">11</span>  And he could not answer Abner another word,
because he feared him.

<span id="an_sa2:3:12">12</span>  And Abner sent messengers to David
straightway, saying: \`Whose is the land?' saying also: \`Make thy
league with me, and, behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring over
all Israel unto thee.' <span id="an_sa2:3:13">13</span>  And he said: 
\`Well; I will make a league with thee; but one thing I require of thee,
that is, thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring Michal
Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.' <span
id="an_sa2:3:14">14</span>  And David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth
Saul's son, saying: \`Deliver me my wife Michal, whom I betrothed to me
for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.' <span
id="an_sa2:3:15">15</span>  And Ish-bosheth sent, and took her from her
husband, even from Paltiel the son of Laish. <span
id="an_sa2:3:16">16</span>  And her husband went with her, weeping as he
went, and followed her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him: \`Go,
return'; and he returned.

<span id="an_sa2:3:17">17</span>  And Abner had communication with the
elders of Israel, saying: \`In times past ye sought for David to be king
over you; <span id="an_sa2:3:18">18</span>  now then do it; for the LORD
hath spoken of David, saying: By the hand of My servant David I will
save My people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the
hand of all their enemies.' <span id="an_sa2:3:19">19</span>  And Abner
also spoke in the ears of Benjamin; and Abner went also to speak in the
ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and to the whole
house of Benjamin. <span id="an_sa2:3:20">20</span>  So Abner came to
David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the
men that were with him a feast. <span id="an_sa2:3:21">21</span>  And
Abner said unto David: \`I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel
unto my lord the king, that they may make a covenant with thee, and that
thou mayest reign over all that thy soul desireth.' And David sent Abner
away; and he went in peace.

<span id="an_sa2:3:22">22</span>  And, behold, the servants of David and
Joab came from a foray, and brought in a great spoil with them; but
Abner was not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away,

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

and he was gone in peace. <span id="an_sa2:3:23">23</span>  When Joab
and all the host that was with him were come, they told Joab, saying:
\`Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, and
he is gone in peace.' <span id="an_sa2:3:24">24</span>  Then Joab came
to the king, and said: \`What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto
thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone?
<span id="an_sa2:3:25">25</span>  Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner,
that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming
in, and to know all that thou doest.' <span id="an_sa2:3:26">26</span> 
And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after Abner,
and they brought him back from Bor-sirah; but David knew it not.

<span id="an_sa2:3:27">27</span>  And when Abner was returned to Hebron,
Joab took him aside into the midst of the gate to speak with him
quietly, and smote him there in the groin, that he died, for the blood
of Asahel his brother. <span id="an_sa2:3:28">28</span>  And afterward
when David heard it, he said: \`I and my kingdom are guiltless before
the LORD for ever from the blood of Abner the son of Ner; <span
id="an_sa2:3:29">29</span>  let it fall upon the head of Joab, and upon
all his father's house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab
one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff,
or that falleth by the sword, or that lacketh bread.' <span
id="an_sa2:3:30">30</span>  So Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner,
because he had killed their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.

<span id="an_sa2:3:31">31</span>  And David said to Joab, and to all the
people that were with him: \`Rend your clothes, and gird you with
sackcloth, and wail before Abner.' And king David followed the bier.
<span id="an_sa2:3:32">32</span>  And they buried Abner in Hebron; and
the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all
the people wept. <span id="an_sa2:3:33">33</span>  And the king lamented
for Abner, and said:

Should Abner die as a churl dieth?  
<span id="an_sa2:3:34">34</span>  Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet
put into fetters;  
As a man falleth before the children of iniquity, so didst thou fall.

And all the people wept again over him. <span
id="an_sa2:3:35">35</span>  And all the people came to cause David to
eat bread while it was yet day; but David swore, saying: \`God do so to
me, and more also, if I taste bread, or aught else, till the sun be
down.' <span id="an_sa2:3:36">36</span>  And all the people took notice
of it, and it pleased them; whatsoever the king did, pleased all the
people. <span id="an_sa2:3:37">37</span>  So all the people and all
Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the
son of Ner. <span id="an_sa2:3:38">38</span>  And the king said unto his
servants: \`Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen
this day in Israel? <span id="an_sa2:3:39">39</span>  And I am this day
weak, and just anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah are too
hard for me; the LORD reward the evil-doer according to his wickedness.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 4](sa2004.md)

</div>
