<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2012)  [Next](sa2014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 13

<span id="an_sa2:13:1">1</span>  And it came to pass after this, that
Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and
Amnon the son of David loved her. <span id="an_sa2:13:2">2</span>  And
Amnon was so distressed that he fell sick because of his sister Tamar;
for she was a virgin; and it seemed hard to Amnon to do any thing unto
her. <span id="an_sa2:13:3">3</span>  But Amnon had a friend, whose name
was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother; and Jonadab was a very
subtle man. <span id="an_sa2:13:4">4</span>  And he said unto him:
\`Why, O son of the king, art thou thus becoming leaner from day to day?
wilt thou not tell me?' And Amnon said unto him: \`I love Tamar, my
brother Absalom's sister.' <span id="an_sa2:13:5">5</span>  And Jonadab
said unto him: \`Lay thee down on thy bed, and feign thyself sick; and
when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him: Let my sister Tamar
come, I pray thee, and give me bread to eat, and dress the food in my
sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.' <span
id="an_sa2:13:6">6</span>  So Amnon lay down, and feigned himself sick;
and when the king was come to see him, Amnon said unto the king: \`Let
my sister Tamar come, I pray thee, and make me a couple of cakes in my
sight, that I may eat at her hand.'

<span id="an_sa2:13:7">7</span>  Then David sent home to Tamar, saying:
\`Go now to thy brother Amnon's house, and dress him food.' <span
id="an_sa2:13:8">8</span>  So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house;
and he was lying down. And she took dough, and kneaded it, and made
cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes. <span
id="an_sa2:13:9">9</span>  And she took the pan, and poured them out
before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said: \`Have out all men
from me.' And they went out every man from him. <span
id="an_sa2:13:10">10</span>  And Amnon said unto Tamar: \`Bring the food
into the chamber, that I may eat of thy hand.' And Tamar took the cakes
which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her
brother. <span id="an_sa2:13:11">11</span>  And when she had brought
them near unto him to eat, he took hold of her, and said unto her:
\`Come lie with me, my sister.' <span id="an_sa2:13:12">12</span>  And
she answered him: \`Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing
ought to be done in Israel; do not thou this wanton deed. <span
id="an_sa2:13:13">13</span>  And I, whither shall I carry my shame? and
as for thee, thou wilt be as one of the base men in Israel. Now
therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me
from thee.'

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
id="an_sa2:13:14">14</span>  Howbeit he would not hearken unto her
voice; but being stronger than she, he forced her, and lay with her.

<span id="an_sa2:13:15">15</span>  Then Amnon hated her with exceeding
great hatred; for the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the
love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her: \`Arise, be
gone.' <span id="an_sa2:13:16">16</span>  And she said unto him: \`Not
so, because this great wrong in putting me forth is worse than the other
that thou didst unto me.' But he would not hearken unto her. <span
id="an_sa2:13:17">17</span>  Then he called his servant that ministered
unto him, and said: \`Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door
after her.'— <span id="an_sa2:13:18">18</span>  Now she had a garment of
many colours upon her; for with such robes were the king's daughters
that were virgins apparelled.—And his servant brought her out, and
bolted the door after her. <span id="an_sa2:13:19">19</span>  And Tamar
put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of many colours that was on
her; and she laid her hand on her head, and went her way, crying aloud
as she went.

<span id="an_sa2:13:20">20</span>  And Absalom her brother said unto
her: \`Hath  <span id="fr_133"></span>[a](#fn_130.md) Amnon thy brother
been with thee? but now hold thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother;
take not this thing to heart.' So Tamar remained desolate in her brother
Absalom's house. <span id="an_sa2:13:21">21</span>  But when king David
heard of all these things, he was very wroth. <span
id="an_sa2:13:22">22</span>  And Absalom spoke unto Amnon neither good
nor bad; for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister
Tamar.

<span id="an_sa2:13:23">23</span>  And it came to pass after two full
years, that Absalom had sheepshearers in Baal-hazor, which is beside
Ephraim; and Absalom invited all the king's sons. <span
id="an_sa2:13:24">24</span>  And Absalom came to the king, and said:
\`Behold now, thy servant hath sheep-shearers; let the king, I pray
thee, and his servants go with thy servant.' <span
id="an_sa2:13:25">25</span>  And the king said to Absalom: \`Nay, my
son, let us not all go, lest we be burdensome unto thee.' And he pressed
him; howbeit he would not go, but blessed him. <span
id="an_sa2:13:26">26</span>  Then said Absalom: \`If not, I pray thee,
let my brother Amnon go with us.' And the king said unto him: \`Why
should he go with thee?' <span id="an_sa2:13:27">27</span>  But Absalom
pressed him, and he let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him. <span
id="an_sa2:13:28">28</span>  And Absalom commanded his servants, saying:
\`Mark ye now, when Anmon's heart is merry with wine; and when I say
unto you: Smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not; have not I commanded
you? be courageous, and be valiant.' <span id="an_sa2:13:29">29</span> 
And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had commanded.
Then all the king's sons arose, and every man got him up upon his mule,
and fled.

<span id="an_sa2:13:30">30</span>  And it came to pass, while they were
in the way, that the tidings came to David, saying: \`Absalom hath slain
all the king's sons, and there is not one of them left.' <span
id="an_sa2:13:31">31</span>  Then the king arose, and rent his garments,
and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes
rent. <span id="an_sa2:13:32">32</span>  And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah
David's brother, answered and said: \`Let not my lord suppose that they
have killed all the young men the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead;
for by the appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day
that he forced his sister Tamar. <span id="an_sa2:13:33">33</span>  Now
therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think
that all the king's sons are dead; for Amnon only is dead.'

<span id="an_sa2:13:34">34</span>  But Absalom fled. And the young man
that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there
came much people in a round-about

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

way by the hill-side. <span id="an_sa2:13:35">35</span>  And Jonadab
said unto the king: \`Behold, the king's sons are come; as thy servant
said, so it is.' <span id="an_sa2:13:36">36</span>  And it came to pass,
as soon as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king's sons
came, and lifted up their voice, and wept; and the king also and all his
servants wept very sore.

<span id="an_sa2:13:37">37</span>  But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai
the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. And \[David\] mourned for his son
every day.

<span id="an_sa2:13:38">38</span>  So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur,
and was there three years. <span id="an_sa2:13:39">39</span>  And the
soul of king David failed with longing for Absalom; for he was comforted
concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[381:a](sa2013.htm#fr_133.md) Heb. *Aminon*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 14](sa2014.md)

</div>
