<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2005)  [Next](sa2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 6

<span id="an_sa2:6:1">1</span>  And David again gathered together all
the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand. <span
id="an_sa2:6:2">2</span>  And David arose, and went with all the people
that were with him, from Baalejudah, to bring up from thence the ark of
God, whereupon is called the Name, even the name of the LORD of hosts
that sitteth upon the cherubim. <span id="an_sa2:6:3">3</span>  And they
set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of
Abinadab that was in the hill; and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab,
drove the new cart. <span id="an_sa2:6:4">4</span>  And they brought it
out of the house of Abinadab, which was in the hill, with the ark of
God, and Ahio went before the ark. <span id="an_sa2:6:5">5</span>  And
David and all the house of Israel played before the LORD with all manner
of instruments made of cypress-wood, and with harps, and with
psalteries, and with timbrels, and with sistra, and with cymbals.

<span id="an_sa2:6:6">6</span>  And when they came to the
threshing-floor of Nacon, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God,
and took hold of it; for the oxen stumbled. <span
id="an_sa2:6:7">7</span>  And the anger of the LORD was kindled against
Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the
ark of God. <span id="an_sa2:6:8">8</span>  And David was displeased,
because the LORD had broken forth upon Uzzah; and that place was called
 <span id="fr_130"></span>[b](#fn_127) Perez-uzzah, unto this day. <span
id="an_sa2:6:9">9</span>  And David was afraid of the LORD that day; and
he said: \`How shall the ark of the LORD come unto me?' <span
id="an_sa2:6:10">10</span>  So David would not remove the ark of the
LORD unto him into the city of David; but David carried it aside into
the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. <span id="an_sa2:6:11">11</span> 
And the ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite
three months;

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

and the LORD blessed Obed-edom, and all his house.

<span id="an_sa2:6:12">12</span>  And it was told king David, saying:
\`The LORD hath blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that pertaineth
unto him, because of the ark of God.' And David went and brought up the
ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David with joy.
<span id="an_sa2:6:13">13</span>  And it was so, that when they that
bore the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a
fatling. <span id="an_sa2:6:14">14</span>  And David danced before the
LORD with all his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod. <span
id="an_sa2:6:15">15</span>  So David and all the house of Israel brought
up the ark of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the horn.

<span id="an_sa2:6:16">16</span>  And it was so, as the ark of the LORD
came into the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out
at the window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the LORD;
and she despised him in her heart. <span id="an_sa2:6:17">17</span>  And
they brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in its place, in the
midst of the tent that David had pitched for it; and David offered
burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before the LORD. <span
id="an_sa2:6:18">18</span>  And when David had made an end of offering
the burnt-offering and the peace-offerings, he blessed the people in the
name of the LORD of hosts. <span id="an_sa2:6:19">19</span>  And he
dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel,
both to men and women, to every one a cake of bread, and a cake made in
a pan, and a sweet cake. So all the people departed every one to his
house.

<span id="an_sa2:6:20">20</span>  Then David returned to bless his
household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and
said: \`How did the king of Israel get him honour to-day, who uncovered
himself to-day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of
the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!' <span
id="an_sa2:6:21">21</span>  And David said unto Michal: \`Before the
LORD, who chose me above thy father, and above all his house, to appoint
me prince over the people of the LORD, over Israel, before the LORD will
I make merry. <span id="an_sa2:6:22">22</span>  And I will be yet more
vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight; and with the
handmaids whom thou hast spoken of, with them will I get me honour.'
<span id="an_sa2:6:23">23</span>  And Michal the daughter of Saul had no
child unto the day of her death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[372:b](sa2006.htm#fr_130) That is, *The breach
of Uzzah*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 7](sa2007)

</div>
