<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2014)  [Next](sa2016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 15

<span id="an_sa2:15:1">1</span>  And it came to pass after this, that
Absalom prepared him a chariot and horses, and fifty men to run before
him. <span id="an_sa2:15:2">2</span>  And Absalom used to rise up early,
and stand beside the

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

way of the gate; and it was so, that when any man had a suit which
should come to the king for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and
said: \`Of what city art thou?' And he said: \`Thy servant is of one of
the tribes of Israel.' <span id="an_sa2:15:3">3</span>  And Absalom said
unto him: \`See, thy matters are good and right; but there is no man
deputed of the king to hear thee.' <span id="an_sa2:15:4">4</span> 
Absalom said moreover: \`Oh that I were made judge in the land, that
every man who hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do
him justice!' <span id="an_sa2:15:5">5</span>  And it was so, that when
any man came nigh to prostrate himself before him, he put forth his
hand, and took hold of him, and kissed him. <span
id="an_sa2:15:6">6</span>  And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel
that came to the king for judgment; so Absalom stole the hearts of the
men of Israel.

<span id="an_sa2:15:7">7</span>  And it came to pass at the end of forty
years, that Absalom said unto the king: \`I pray thee, let me go and pay
my vow, which I have vowed unto the LORD, in Hebron. <span
id="an_sa2:15:8">8</span>  For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at
Geshur in Aram, saying: If the LORD shall indeed bring me back to
Jerusalem, then I will serve the LORD.' <span id="an_sa2:15:9">9</span> 
And the king said unto him: \`Go in peace.' So he arose, and went to
Hebron. <span id="an_sa2:15:10">10</span>  But Absalom sent spies
throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying: \`As soon as ye hear the
sound of the horn, then ye shall say: Absalom is king in Hebron.' <span
id="an_sa2:15:11">11</span>  And with Absalom went two hundred men out
of Jerusalem, that were invited, and went in their simplicity; and they
knew not any thing. <span id="an_sa2:15:12">12</span>  And Absalom sent
for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counsellor, from his city, even
from Giloh, while he offered the sacrifices. And the conspiracy was
strong; for the people increased continually with Absalom.

<span id="an_sa2:15:13">13</span>  And there came a messenger to David,
saying: \`The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.' <span
id="an_sa2:15:14">14</span>  And David said unto all his servants that
were with him at Jerusalem: \`Arise, and let us flee; for else none of
us shall escape from Absalom; make speed to depart, lest he overtake us
quickly, and bring down evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge
of the sword.' <span id="an_sa2:15:15">15</span>  And the king's
servants said unto the king: \`Behold, thy servants are ready to do
whatsoever my lord the king shall choose.' <span
id="an_sa2:15:16">16</span>  And the king went forth, and all his
household after him. And the king left ten women, that were concubines,
to keep the house. <span id="an_sa2:15:17">17</span>  And the king went
forth, and all the people after him; and they tarried in Beth-merhak.
<span id="an_sa2:15:18">18</span>  And all his servants passed on beside
him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the
Gittites, six hundred men that came after him from Gath, passed on
before the king.

<span id="an_sa2:15:19">19</span>  Then said the king to Ittai the
Gittite: \`Wherefore goest thou also with us? return, and abide with the
king; for thou art a foreigner, and also an exile from thine own place.
<span id="an_sa2:15:20">20</span>  Whereas thou earnest but yesterday,
should I this day make thee go up and down with us, seeing I go whither
I may? return thou, and take back thy brethren with thee in kindness and
truth.' <span id="an_sa2:15:21">21</span>  And Ittai answered the king,
and said: \`As the LORD liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely
in what place my lord the king shall be, whether for death or for life,
even there also will thy servant be.' <span id="an_sa2:15:22">22</span> 
And David said to Ittai: \`Go and pass over.' And Ittai the Gittite
passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

were with him. <span id="an_sa2:15:23">23</span>  And all the country
wept with a loud voice, as all the people passed over; and as the king
passed over the brook Kidron, all the people passed over, toward the way
of the wilderness.

<span id="an_sa2:15:24">24</span>  And, lo, Zadok also came, and all the
Levites with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God; and they set
down the ark of God—but Abiathar went up—until all the people had done
passing out of the city. <span id="an_sa2:15:25">25</span>  And the king
said unto Zadok: \`Carry back the ark of God into the city; if I shall
find favour in the eyes of the LORD, He will bring me back, and show me
both it, and His habitation; <span id="an_sa2:15:26">26</span>  but if
He say thus: I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let Him do to
me as seemeth good unto Him.' <span id="an_sa2:15:27">27</span>  The
king said also unto Zadok the priest: \`Seest thou? return into the city
in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the
son of Abiathar. <span id="an_sa2:15:28">28</span>  See, I will tarry in
the plains of the wilderness, until there come word from you to announce
unto me.' <span id="an_sa2:15:29">29</span>  Zadok therefore and
Abiathar carried the ark of God back to Jerusalem; and they abode there.

<span id="an_sa2:15:30">30</span>  And David went up by the ascent of
the mount of Olives, and wept as he went up; and he had his head
covered, and went barefoot; and all the people that were with him
covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.
<span id="an_sa2:15:31">31</span>  And one told David, saying:
\`Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom.' And David said:
\`O LORD, I pray Thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.'
<span id="an_sa2:15:32">32</span>  And it came to pass, that when David
was come to the top of the ascent, where God was wont to be worshipped,
behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat rent, and
earth upon his head. <span id="an_sa2:15:33">33</span>  And David said
unto him: \`If thou passest on with me, then thou wilt be a burden unto
me; <span id="an_sa2:15:34">34</span>  but if thou return to the city,
and say unto Absalom: I will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy
father's servant in time past, so will I now be thy servant; then wilt
thou defeat for me the counsel of Ahithophel. <span
id="an_sa2:15:35">35</span>  And hast thou not there with thee Zadok and
Abiathar the priests? therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou
shalt hear out of the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and
Abiathar the priests. <span id="an_sa2:15:36">36</span>  Behold, they
have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok's son, and Jonathan
Abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send unto me every thing that ye
shall hear.' <span id="an_sa2:15:37">37</span>  So Hushai David's friend
came into the city; and Absalom was at the point of coming into
Jerusalem.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 16](sa2016)

</div>
