<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2006)  [Next](sa2008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 7

<span id="an_sa2:7:1">1</span>  And it came to pass, when the king dwelt
in his house, and the LORD had given him rest from all his enemies round
about, <span id="an_sa2:7:2">2</span>  that the king said unto Nathan
the prophet: \`See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God
dwelleth within curtains.' <span id="an_sa2:7:3">3</span>  And Nathan
said to the king: \`Go, do all that is in thy heart; for the LORD is
with thee.' <span id="an_sa2:7:4">4</span>  And it came to pass the same
night, that the word of the LORD came unto Nathan, saying: <span
id="an_sa2:7:5">5</span>  \`Go and tell My servant David: Thus saith the
LORD: Shalt thou build Me a house for Me to dwell in? <span
id="an_sa2:7:6">6</span>  for I have not dwelt in a house since the day
that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day,
but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle. <span
id="an_sa2:7:7">7</span>  In all places wherein I have walked among all
the children of Israel, spoke I a word with any of the tribes of Israel,
whom I commanded to feed My people Israel, saying: Why have ye not built
Me a house of cedar? <span id="an_sa2:7:8">8</span>  Now therefore thus
shalt thou say unto My servant David: Thus saith the LORD of hosts: I
took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, that thou
shouldest be prince over My people, over Israel. <span
id="an_sa2:7:9">9</span>  And I have

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

been with thee whithersoever thou didst go, and have cut off all thine
enemies from before thee; and I will make thee a great name, like unto
the name of the great ones that are in the earth. <span
id="an_sa2:7:10">10</span>  And I will appoint a place for My people
Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and
be disquieted no more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict
them any more, as at the first, <span id="an_sa2:7:11">11</span>  even
from the day that I commanded judges to be over My people Israel; and I
will cause thee to rest from all thine enemies. Moreover the LORD
telleth thee that the LORD will make thee a house. <span
id="an_sa2:7:12">12</span>  When thy days are fulfilled, and thou shalt
sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, that shall
proceed out of thy body, and I will establish his kingdom. <span
id="an_sa2:7:13">13</span>  He shall build a house for My name, and I
will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever. <span
id="an_sa2:7:14">14</span>  I will be to him for a father, and he shall
be to Me for a son; if he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the
rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men; <span
id="an_sa2:7:15">15</span>  but My mercy shall not depart from him, as I
took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee. <span
id="an_sa2:7:16">16</span>  And thy house and thy kingdom shall be made
sure for ever before thee; thy throne shall be established for ever.'
<span id="an_sa2:7:17">17</span>  According to all these words, and
according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David.

<span id="an_sa2:7:18">18</span>  Then David the king went in, and sat
before the LORD; and he said: \`Who am I, O Lord GOD, and what is my
house, that Thou hast brought me thus far? <span
id="an_sa2:7:19">19</span>  And this was yet a small thing in Thine
eyes, O Lord GOD; but Thou hast spoken also of Thy servant's house for a
great while to come; and this too after the manner of great men, O Lord
GOD. <span id="an_sa2:7:20">20</span>  And what can David say more unto
Thee? for Thou knowest Thy servant, O Lord GOD. <span
id="an_sa2:7:21">21</span>  For Thy word's sake, and according to Thine
own heart, hast Thou wrought all this greatness, to make Thy servant
know it. <span id="an_sa2:7:22">22</span>  Therefore Thou art great, O
LORD GOD; for there is none like Thee, neither is there any God beside
Thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears. <span
id="an_sa2:7:23">23</span>  And who is like Thy people, like Israel, a
nation one in the earth, whom God went to redeem unto Himself for a
people, and to make Him a name, and to do for Thy land great things and
tremendous, even for you, \[in driving out\] from before Thy people,
whom Thou didst redeem to Thee out of Egypt, the nations and their gods?
<span id="an_sa2:7:24">24</span>  And Thou didst establish to Thyself
Thy people Israel to be a people unto Thee for ever; and Thou, LORD,
becamest their God. <span id="an_sa2:7:25">25</span>  And now, O LORD
God, the word that Thou hast spoken concerning Thy servant, and
concerning his house, confirm Thou it for ever, and do as Thou hast
spoken. <span id="an_sa2:7:26">26</span>  And let Thy name be magnified
for ever, that it may be said: The LORD of hosts is God over Israel; and
the house of Thy servant David shall be established before Thee. <span
id="an_sa2:7:27">27</span>  For Thou, O LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel, hast revealed to Thy servant, saying: I will build thee a house;
therefore hath Thy servant taken heart to pray this prayer unto Thee.
<span id="an_sa2:7:28">28</span>  And now, O Lord God, Thou alone art
God, and Thy words are truth, and Thou hast promised this good thing
unto Thy servant; <span id="an_sa2:7:29">29</span>  now therefore let it
please Thee to bless the house of Thy servant, that it may continue for
ever before Thee; for Thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it; and through Thy
blessing let the house of Thy servant be blessed for ever.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 8](sa2008.md)

</div>
