<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2017)  [Next](sa2019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 18

<span id="an_sa2:18:1">1</span>  And David numbered the people that were
with him, and set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over
them. <span id="an_sa2:18:2">2</span>  And David sent forth the people,
a third part under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of
Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the
hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said unto the people: \`I will
surely go forth with you myself also.' <span id="an_sa2:18:3">3</span> 
But the people said: \`Thou shalt not go forth; for if we flee away,
they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care for
us; but thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now it is better
that thou be ready to succour us out of the city.' <span
id="an_sa2:18:4">4</span>  And the king said unto them: \`What seemeth
you best I will do.' And the king stood by the gate-side, and all the
people went out by hundreds and by thousands. <span
id="an_sa2:18:5">5</span>  And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and
Ittai, saying: \`Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with
Absalom.' And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains
charge concerning Absalom.

<span id="an_sa2:18:6">6</span>  So the people went out into the field
against Israel; and the battle was in the forest of Ephraim. <span
id="an_sa2:18:7">7</span>  And the people of Israel were smitten there
before the servants of David, and there was a great slaughter there that
day of twenty thousand men. <span id="an_sa2:18:8">8</span>  For the
battle was there spread over the face of all the country; and the forest
devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.

<span id="an_sa2:18:9">9</span>  And Absalom chanced to meet the
servants of David. And Absalom was riding upon his mule, and the mule
went under the thick boughs of a great terebinth, and his head caught
hold of the terebinth, and he was

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

taken up between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under
him went on. <span id="an_sa2:18:10">10</span>  And a certain man saw
it, and told Joab, and said: \`Behold, I saw Absalom hanging in a
terebinth.' <span id="an_sa2:18:11">11</span>  And Joab said unto the
man that told him: \`And, behold, thou sawest it, and why didst thou not
smite him there to the ground? and I would have had to give thee ten
pieces of silver, and a girdle.' <span id="an_sa2:18:12">12</span>  And
the man said unto Joab: \`Though I should receive a thousand pieces of
silver in my hand, yet would I not put forth my hand against the king's
son; for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai,
saying: Beware that none touch the young man Absalom. <span
id="an_sa2:18:13">13</span>  Otherwise if I had dealt falsely against
mine own life—and there is no matter hid from the king—then thou thyself
wouldest have stood aloof.' <span id="an_sa2:18:14">14</span>  Then said
Joab: \`I may not tarry thus with thee.' And he took three darts in his
hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet
alive in the midst of the terebinth. <span id="an_sa2:18:15">15</span> 
And ten young men that bore Joab's armour compassed about and smote
Absalom, and slew him.

<span id="an_sa2:18:16">16</span>  And Joab blew the horn, and the
people returned from pursuing after Israel; for Joab held back the
people. <span id="an_sa2:18:17">17</span>  And they took Absalom, and
cast him into the great pit in the forest, and raised over him a very
great heap of stones; and all Israel fled every one to his tent.— <span
id="an_sa2:18:18">18</span>  Now Absalom in his life-time had taken and
reared up for himself the pillar, which is in the king's dale; for he
said: \`I have no son to keep my name in remembrance'; and he called the
pillar after his own name; and it is called Absalom's monument unto this
day.

<span id="an_sa2:18:19">19</span>  Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok:
\`Let me now run, and bear the king tidings, how that the LORD hath
avenged him of his enemies.' <span id="an_sa2:18:20">20</span>  And Joab
said unto him: \`Thou shalt not be the bearer of tidings this day, but
thou shalt bear tidings another day; but this day thou shalt bear no
tidings, forasmuch as the king's son is dead.' <span
id="an_sa2:18:21">21</span>  Then said Joab to the Cushite: \`Go tell
the king what thou hast seen.' And the Cushite bowed down unto Joab, and
ran. <span id="an_sa2:18:22">22</span>  Then said Ahimaaz the son of
Zadok yet again to Joab: \`But come what may, let me, I pray thee, also
run after the Cushite.' And Joab said: \`Wherefore wilt thou run, my
son, seeing that thou wilt have no reward for the tidings?' <span
id="an_sa2:18:23">23</span>  \`But come what may, \[said he,\] I will
run.' And he said unto him: \`Run.' Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the
Plain, and overran the Cushite.

<span id="an_sa2:18:24">24</span>  Now David sat between the two gates;
and the watchman went up to the roof of the gate unto the wall, and
lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold a man running alone. <span
id="an_sa2:18:25">25</span>  And the watchman cried, and told the king.
And the king said: \`If he be alone, there [are](errata.htm#9.md) tidings
in his mouth.' And he came apace, and drew. near. <span
id="an_sa2:18:26">26</span>  And the watchman saw another man running;
and the watchman called unto the porter, and said: \`Behold another man
running alone.' And the king said: \`He also bringeth tidings.' <span
id="an_sa2:18:27">27</span>  And the watchman said: I think the running
of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok.' And
the king said: \`He is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.'

<span id="an_sa2:18:28">28</span>  And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the
king: \`All is well.' And he bowed down before the king with his face to
the earth, and said: \`Blessed

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

be the LORD thy God, who hath delivered up the men that lifted up their
hand against my lord the king.' <span id="an_sa2:18:29">29</span>  And
the king said: \`Is it well with the young man Absalom?' And Ahimaaz
answered: \`When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I saw
a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.' <span
id="an_sa2:18:30">30</span>  And the king said: \`Turn aside, and stand
here.' And he turned aside, and stood still.

<span id="an_sa2:18:31">31</span>  And, behold, the Cushite came; and
the Cushite said: \`Tidings for my lord the king; for the LORD hath
avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against thee. <span
id="an_sa2:18:32">32</span>  And the king said unto the Cushite: \`Is it
well with the young man Absalom?' And the Cushite answered: \`The
enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise up against thee to do
thee hurt, be as that young man is.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 19](sa2019.md)

</div>
