<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2019)  [Next](sa2021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 20

<span id="an_sa2:20:1">1</span>  Now there happened to be there a base
fellow, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite; and he
blew the horn, and said: \`We have no portion in David, neither have we
inheritance in the son of Jesse; every man to his tents, O Israel.'
<span id="an_sa2:20:2">2</span>  So all the men of Israel went up from
following David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri; but the men of
Judah did cleave unto their king, from the Jordan even to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_sa2:20:3">3</span>  And David came to his house at
Jerusalem; and the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had
left to keep the house, and put them in ward, and provided them with
sustenance, but went not in unto them. So they were shut up unto the day
of their death, in widowhood, with their husband alive.

<span id="an_sa2:20:4">4</span>  Then said the king to Amasa: \`Call me
the men of Judah together within three days, and be thou here present.'
<span id="an_sa2:20:5">5</span>  So Amasa went to call the men of Judah
together; but he tarried longer than the set time which he had appointed
him. <span id="an_sa2:20:6">6</span>  And David said to Abishai: \`Now
will Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom; take thou
thy lord's servants, and pursue after hirn, lest he get him fortified
cities, and escape out of our sight.' <span id="an_sa2:20:7">7</span> 
And there went out after him Joab's men, and the Cherethites and the
Pelethites, and all the mighty men; and they went out of Jerusalem, to
pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri. <span id="an_sa2:20:8">8</span> 
When they

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa came to meet them. And
Joab was girded with his apparel of war that he had put on, and thereon
was a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath thereof;
and as he went forth it fell out. <span id="an_sa2:20:9">9</span>  And
Joab said to Amasa: \`Is it well with thee, my brother?' And Joab took
Amasa by the beard with his right hand to kiss him. <span
id="an_sa2:20:10">10</span>  But Amasa took no heed to the sword that
was in Joab's hand; so he smote him therewith in the groin, and shed out
his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died.

And Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.
<span id="an_sa2:20:11">11</span>  And there stood by him one of Joab's
young men, and said: \`He that favoureth Joab, and he that is for David,
let him follow Joab.' <span id="an_sa2:20:12">12</span>  And Amasa lay
wallowing in his blood in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw
that all the people stood still, he carried Amasa out of the highway
into the field, and cast a garment over him, when he saw that every one
that came by him stood still. <span id="an_sa2:20:13">13</span>  When he
was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab, to
pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

<span id="an_sa2:20:14">14</span>  And he went through all the tribes of
Israel unto Abel, and to Beth-maacah, and all the Berites; and they were
gathered together, and went in also after him. <span
id="an_sa2:20:15">15</span>  And they came and besieged him in Abel of
Beth-maacah, and they cast up a mound against the city, and it stood in
the moat; and all the people that were with Joab battered the wall, to
throw it down.

<span id="an_sa2:20:16">16</span>  Then cried a wise woman out of the
city: \`Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab: Come near hither, that I
may speak with thee.' <span id="an_sa2:20:17">17</span>  And he came
near unto her; and the woman said: \`Art thou Joab?' And he answered:
\`I am.' Then she said unto him: \`Hear the words of thy handmaid.' And
he answered: \`I do hear.' <span id="an_sa2:20:18">18</span>  Then she
spoke, saying: \`They were wont to speak in old time, saying: They shall
surely ask counsel at Abel; and so they ended the matter. <span
id="an_sa2:20:19">19</span>  We are of them that are peaceable and
faithful in Israel; seekest thou to destroy a city and a mother in
Israel? why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the LORD?' <span
id="an_sa2:20:20">20</span>  And Joab answered and said: \`Far be it,
far be it from me, that I should swallow up or destroy. <span
id="an_sa2:20:21">21</span>  The matter is not so; but a man of the
hill-country of Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, hath lifted up
his hand against the king, even against David; deliver him only, and I
will depart from the city.' And the woman said unto Joab: \`Behold, his
head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.' <span
id="an_sa2:20:22">22</span>  Then the woman went unto all the people in
her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and
threw it out to Joab. And he blew the horn, and they were dispersed from
the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the
king.

<span id="an_sa2:20:23">23</span>  Now Joab was over all the host of
Israel; and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and
over the Pelethites; <span id="an_sa2:20:24">24</span>  and Adoram was
over the levy; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder; <span
id="an_sa2:20:25">25</span>  and Sheva was scribe; and Zadok and
Abiathar were priests; <span id="an_sa2:20:26">26</span>  and Ira also
the Jairite was chief minister unto David.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 21](sa2021)

</div>
