<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gope25)  [Next](gope27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f24"></span>

OF HOW IMBAUN BECAME HIGH PROPHET IN ARADEC OF ALL THE GODS SAVE ONE

Imbaun was to be made High Prophet in Aradec, of All the Gods save One.

From Ardra, Rhoodra, and the lands beyond came all High Prophets of the
Earth to the Temple in Aradec of All the gods save One.

And then they told Imbaun how The Secret of Things was upon the summit
of the dome of the Hall of Night, but faintly writ, and in an unknown
tongue.

Midway in the night, between the setting and the rising sun, they led
Imbaun into the Hall of Night, and said to him, chaunting altogether:
"Imbaun, Imbaun, Imbaun, look up to the roof, where is writ The Secret
of Things, but faintly, and in an unknown tongue."

And Imbaun looked up, but darkness was so deep within the Hall of Night
that Imbaun was not even the High Prophets who came from Ardra, Rhoodra,
and the lands beyond, nor saw he aught in the Hall of Night at all.

Then called the High Prophets: "What seest thou, Imbaun?"

And Imbaun said: "I see naught."

Then called the High Prophets: "What knowest thou Imbaun?"

And Imbaun said: "I know naught."

Then spake the High Prophet of Eld of All the gods save One, who is
first on Earth of prophets: "O Imbaun! we have all looked upwards in the
Hall of Night towards the secret of Things, and ever it was dark, and
the Secret faint and in an unknown tongue. And now thou knowest what all
High Prophets know."

And Imbaun answered: "I know."

So Imbaun became High Prophet in Aradec of All the gods save One, and
prayed for all the people, who knew not that there was darkness in the
Hall of Night or that the secret was writ faint and in an unknown
tongue.

These are the words of Imbaun that he wrote in a book that all the
people might know:

"In the twentieth night of the nine hundredth moon, as night came up the
valley, I performed the mystic rites of each of the gods in the temple
as is my wont, lest any of the gods should grow angry in the night and
whelm us while we slept.

"And as I uttered the last of certain secret words I fell asleep in the
temple, for I was weary, with my head against the altar of Dorozhand.
Then in the stillness, as I slept, there entered Dorozhand by the temple
door in the guise of a man, and touched me on the shoulder, and I awoke.

"But when I saw that his eyes shone blue and lit the whole of the temple
I knew that he was a god though he came in mortal guise. And Dorozhand
said: 'Prophet of Dorozhand, behold that the people may know.' And he
showed me the paths of Sish stretching far down into the future time.
Then he bade me arise and follow whither he pointed, speaking no words
but commanding with his eyes.

"Therefore upon the twentieth night of the nine hundredth moon I walked
with Dorozhand adown the paths of Sish into the future time.

"And ever beside the way did men slay men. And the sum of their slaying
was greater than the slaying of the pestilence of any of the evils of
the gods.

"And cities arose and shed their houses in dust, and ever the desert
returned again to its own, and covered over and hid the last of all that
had troubled its repose.

"And still men slew men.

"And I came at last to a time when men set their yoke no longer upon
beasts but made them beasts of iron.

"And after that did men slay men with mists.

"Then, because the slaying exceeded their desire, there came peace upon
the world that was brought by the hand of the slayer, and men slew men
no more.

"And cities multiplied, and overthrew the desert and conquered its
repose.

"And suddenly I beheld that THE END was near, for there was a stirring
above Pegana as of One who grows weary of resting, and I saw the hound
Time crouch to spring, with his eyes upon the throats of the gods,
shifting from throat to throat, and the drumming of Skarl grew faint.

"And if a god may fear, it seemed that there was fear upon the face of
Dorozhand, and he seized me by the hand and led me back along the paths
of Time that I might not see THE END.

"Then I saw cities rise out of the dust again and fall back into the
desert whence they had arisen; and again I slept in the Temple of All
the gods save One, with my head against the altar of Dorozhand.

"Then again the Temple was alight, but not with light from the eyes of
Dorozhand; only dawn came all blue out of the East and shone through the
arches of the Temple. Then I awoke and performed the morning rites and
mysteries of All the gods save One, lest any of the gods be angry in the
day and take away the Sun.

"And I knew that because I who had been so near to it had not beheld THE
END that a man should never behold it or know the doom of the gods. This
They have hidden."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of How Imbaun Met Zodrak](gope27)

</div>
