<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gope10)  [Next](gope12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f09"></span>

THE DEEDS OF MUNG

(Lord of all Deaths between Pegana and the Rim)

Once, as Mung went his way athwart the Earth and up and down its cities
and across its plains, Mung came upon a man who was afraid when Mung
said: "I am Mung!"

And Mung said: "Were the forty million years before thy coming
intolerable to thee?"

And Mung said: "Not less tolerable to thee shall be the forty million
years to come!"

Then Mung made against him the sign of Mung and the Life of the Man was
fettered no longer with hands and feet.

At the end of the flight of the arrow there is Mung, and in the houses
and the cities of Men. Mung walketh in all places at all times. But
mostly he loves to walk in the dark and still, along the river mists
when the wind hath sank, a little before night meeteth with the morning
upon the highway between Pegana and the Worlds.

Sometimes Mung entereth the poor man's cottage; Mung also boweth very
low before The King. Then do the Lives of the poor man and of The King
go forth among the Worlds.

And Mung said: "Many turnings hath the road that Kib hath given every
man to tread upon the earth. Behind one of these turnings sitteth Mung."

One day as a man trod upon the road that Kib had given him to tread he
came suddenly upon Mung. And when Mung said: "I am Mung!" the man cried
out: "Alas, that I took this road, for had I gone by any other way then
had I not met with Mung."

And Mung said: "Had it been possible for thee to go by any other way
then had the Scheme of Things been otherwise and the gods had been other
gods. When MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI forgets to rest and makes again new gods it
may be that They will send thee again into the Worlds; and then thou
mayest choose some other way, and not meet with Mung."

Then Mung made the sign of Mung. And the Life of that man went forth
with yesterday's regrets and all old sorrows and forgotten
things—whither Mung knoweth.

And Mung went onward with his work to sunder Life from flesh, and Mung
came upon a man who became stricken with sorrow when he saw the shadow
of Mung. But Mung said: "When at the sign of Mung thy Life shall float
away there will also disappear thy sorrow at forsaking it." But the man
cried out: "O Mung! tarry for a little, and make not the sign of Mung
against me now, for I have a family upon the earth with whom sorrow will
remain, though mine should disappear because of the sign of Mung."

And Mung said: "With the gods it is always Now. And before Sish hath
banished many of the years the sorrows of thy family for thee shall go
the way of thine." And the man beheld Mung making the sign of Mung
before his eyes, which beheld things no more.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Chaunt of the Priests](gope12)

</div>
