[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0707)  [Next](t0709) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 7: Tract Baba Bathra (Last Gate)*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING UNCONDITIONAL AND CONDITIONAL SALES OR
GIFTS OF BUILDINGS, HOUSES, AND PALACES: WHAT IS AND WHAT IS NOT
INCLUDED; AND ALSO CONCERNING YARDS, BATH-HOUSES, AND PRESS-HOUSES FOR
OIL AND WINE. SALES OF WHOLE CITIES, VALLEYS, FIELDS, WELLS, ETC.

MISHNA *I*.: If one sells a house unconditionally, the yeziah which is
upon it is not included in the sale, even when it is open to the house,
neither the chamber which is inside, nor the roof if it has a railing
ten spans high. R. Jehudah, however, maintains that if it has the
appearance of a door, although it is less than ten spans high, it is not
included in the sale.

GEMARA: What does *yeziah* mean? Here (in this college) it was explained
as αετο--gable. <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) R. Joseph, however,
maintains that it is an upper floor with windows. According to the first
explanation, the latter one, which is more valuable, it is self-evident
is not included in the sale. But according to the latter explanation the
first one is included. R. Joseph taught: We find two additional names to
yeziah, mentioned in I Kings, vi. 5: "And he built on the wall of the
house a gallery (yeziah) round about." It is also named *Zelah* \[Ezek.
xli. 6\]: "And the side chambers--*Zelah*," etc. And also *To* \[ibid.
xl. 7\]: "And every cell (*To*)," etc. The last is also used in Midoth,
IV. 6: Said Mar Zutra: All that is mentioned above applies only when it
contains four ells. Said Rabhina to him: According to your theory, the
succeeding Mishna, which states: "Not the well (it does not matter
whether the well is merely dug in the ground or is surrounded by stone
walls), although it was written in the bill of sale that he sold to him
all that was in the height and depth, it is not included in the
sale"--means, also that if it does not contain four ells it is (and this
is certainly not so)? What comparison is this? The use of a well is not

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

the same as the use of a house, while the use of an upper floor is
identical with the use of the house; if it contains four ells, it is of
value and it is not included in the sale; but if less than this, it is
not of value.

"*Neither the inner chamber*." Was it necessary to teach this? If the
yeziah is not included, is it not self-evident that much less is the
chamber? It speaks of a case in which in the bill of sale were noted
some boundaries of the inner chamber, and lest one say that in such a
case it is included, the Mishna comes to teach us that it is not so. And
this is in accordance with R. Na'hman, who said in the name of Rabba b.
Abuhu that if one sells a house depending on a palace, although in the
bill of sale were noted the boundaries of the palace, the buyer cannot
claim that he sold him the whole palace, as it is to be considered that
the boundaries were noted only to make known where the palace was
situated. (Says the Gemara:) Let us see how was the case. If people make
a distinction in calling the one a house and the other a palace, and the
bill of sale specifies a house, then certainly he sold him a house, not
a palace. And if people call the whole building a house (not a palace),
then he certainly sold him the house with all its contents? It speaks of
a case in which the majority calls it a house, but the minority names it
palace. One might say that he sold him the entire building. R. Na'hman
comes to teach us that in such a case he ought to write in the bill of
sale: "The entire building is sold to you, and I reserve nothing for
myself." And because this was not mentioned, it is to be considered that
he sold him only one house of this building and the remainder he left
for himself. The same said again in the name of the same authority: If
one sold a field situated in a valley, although in the bill of sale are
specified the boundaries of the valley, he sold him only the field and
not the entire valley, as the specifying is to be considered necessary
in defining the situation of the valley only. Let us see how was the
case? If people make a distinction in calling the one field and the
other valley, and the bill of sale [specifies](errata.htm#11) a field,
then certainly he sold him a field (etc., etc., as above). And the
answer is also the same as above, that because it was not written in the
bill of sale that he had reserved nothing for himself, he sold him only
one field. And both cases were necessary for R. Na'hman to teach; since,
if he had taught only of a house, one might say that there is a
difference between using a palace and using a house. But in case of a
valley of which the use of

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

every part is equal, the entire valley is sold. And if he would teach
from a valley only, one might say that because there was no necessity
for the seller to specify which field of the valley he sold him, as
every part of it is used for one and the same purpose, therefore it is
considered that he sold him only one field. But in case of a palace the
chambers of which are for different uses, it ought to be specified in
the bill of sale which house was sold; and as it was not, the entire
building was sold: therefore both were necessary.

According to whom is the statement of R. Mari, the son of Samuel's
daughter, in the name of Abayi, that if one sells to his neighbor a
property, he must write in the bill of sale: "I reserve nothing of it
for myself"? In accordance with R. Na'hman's statement in the name of
Rabba b. Abuhu.

There was one who said to his buyer: I sell to you the ground of B.
Hyya. And there were two pieces of ground that were called B. Hyya (and
the buyer claimed that both were sold to him, while the seller insisted
that only one was sold to him). When the case came before R. Ashi, he
decided that only one was sold (as the seller said to him, "I sell you
the ground"--singular, and not the "grounds"); and if even the seller
had said the grounds, then it would signify two. And if such were three,
the third would not be sold unless he should say: "I sell you all the
ground I possess." And even then, if the seller possessed, besides this
ground, orchards and vineyards, the latter would not be sold. And if the
seller should say, "I sell you my *zihra*"(which means in the Persian
language fields and plants), then the orchards and vineyards belong to
the buyer, but not houses nor slaves, unless he said, "I sell to you all
properties I possess."

If in a bill of sale for real estate there was specified a boundary of a
length of one hundred ells on the west side, and of the length of fifty
ells only on the east side? Said Rabh: Title is given to the buyer
corresponding with the shorter boundary only (*i.e.*, that the
specifying of the one hundred ells on the west side is to be considered
only a mark to identify the beginning of his field).

Said both R. Kahana and R. Assi to Rabh: Let it be considered that he
sold to him a triangle (*i.e.*, that it should be measured from the end
of fifty on the east side to the one hundred of the west side, and the
other estate should not belong to him). And Rabh did not answer. (Says
the Gemara:) If the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

adjoining fields on the west side belonged to A and B, and on the east
side to C and D, and in the bill of sale was specified from the boundary
of A and B to the boundary of D on the other side, then even Rabh admits
that it is to be considered he sold him a triangle, as the boundary of C
was not mentioned.

If E owns a field adjoining A's field from east to west, and B's from
north to south, and he comes to sell it, he must write in the bill of
sale: "I sell you the field adjoining A's field from both sides, and
also B's from both sides." And it is not sufficient that he should
write: "My field, which is between A's and B's fields," as then he could
claim that he sold to him the half of it only (*i.e.*, a half on west
side adjoining A's and a half on south side adjoining B's, and the
remainder he reserved for himself). If in the bill of sale the three
boundaries of the field were specified, but not the fourth, according to
Rabh title is given to the buyer from all three boundaries, except a bed
of the fourth, which was not specified in the bill of sale. Samuel,
however, maintains that title is given to the whole, even to the fourth.
But R. Assi maintains that title is given to the buyer for one bed all
over this field only. And the reason of his theory is that he agrees
with Rabh, that from the fact that the fourth boundary is omitted in the
bill of sale, it is to be assumed that he reserved it for himself. And
this being reserved for himself, so was his intention with the other
boundaries, and the specifying of the three was meant to give him title
to one bed all over the field.

Said Rabha: The Halakha prevails that the buyer acquires title to the
whole field, even to the fourth boundary, provided it is contained in
the three boundaries; but if it is not contained, title is not given.
And even if it is, but it contains inoculated trees, or the fourth
boundary was of a size in which nine kabs of grain could be sown, it is
excluded.

Let us see! Rabha states that if there were inoculated trees, or it were
nine kabs, title is not given, from which it is to be understood that if
it is not contained properly, title is not given to the fourth boundary,
although it does not contain the above. We may infer from this statement
that although he has not written in the bill of sale that he reserved
nothing for himself (as is said above that so it must be written in a
bill of sale), it is supposed that he reserved nothing for himself, and
also that the Halakha prevails that if it is contained title is given,
provided there were not trees, and the size was less than nine kabs. But

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

if there were, title is not acquired. However, it was taught in the name
of Rabha just the reverse; and therefore, if such a case came before a
court, we must leave it to the consideration of the judges.

Rabba said: If A and B were partners in a field, and A sold his share to
C, stating in the bill of sale, "I sell you the half I have of this
ground," then all his share is sold, and he has reserved nothing for
himself. If, however, it states, "Half of the ground I possess," then he
sold him only a quarter of the whole field, which is half of his. And to
the question of Abayi: "Why should we make a difference between the two
statements (is it only because in the first statement the 'ground' was
mentioned later, and in the other statement the expression 'ground' is
mentioned first)?" Rabba kept silent. Said Abayi: I thought that because
he was silent he receded from his statement, and accepted my opinion;
but it was not so, as I have seen the bills of sale which were approved
by the court of my master, and in reference to the expression, "I sell
the half which I possess in the ground," the court has marked in its
approval "that a half of the whole field is sold to so and so," and in
reference to the bill of sale which was written, "A half of the ground I
possess," the court's approval was: "A quarter of the whole field is
sold to so and so." Rabha said again: If two partners have divided their
estate, and one of them says to another, "I sell you my share in the
ground," and he shows him the boundary, that it begins from the ground
belonging to his partner after the division, then all his share is sold.
But if the same shows him the boundary of his estate not from the place
which belongs after the division to his former partner, but from the
opposite side, then a field of nine kabs from his share is sold to him,
but not his entire share. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) And also
here Abayi questioned him the reason of the different decisions, at
which he again kept silent; and the schoolmen who heard this thought
that he had receded from his statement, and in both cases his whole
share was sold. In reality, however, it was not so. As R. Youmar b.
Shlamjah said: Abayi explained to me that there is no difference whether
he has shown him the boundary from which he has divided, or the opposite
side. If he has added

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

to his statement, "and all of its boundaries," then his entire share is
sold; but if he has added nothing, then a field of nine kabs only is
sold.

It is certain that, if a sick man said in his last will, "So and so
shall share my properties," he meant the exact half; but how is it if he
said, "Give a share to so and so in my properties"? Said Rabhina b.
Kisi: Come and hear the following Boraitha: If one said, "Give a share
to so and so in my well"--said Symmachos: No less than a quarter is
meant (as it is certain that he wanted to help him out in watering his
fields, and the rabbis suppose that a quarter of the well suffices for
this purpose). If, however, he said: "Give a share from my well in his
barrels" (in which the above purpose cannot be supposed), not less than
an eighth part is meant. (This Rashbam explains as implying that he
wished to help him out in watering his cattle. R. Gershom maintains: So
was then the custom--to fill their barrels with water, for the purpose
of using it the whole year.) And if it was said: "Give him a share from
my well for his pots," not less than a twelfth part is considered; and
if it was said: "Give him for his small vessels," then a sixteenth
part <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) of the well is meant.

Hence we see that, according to Symmachos, if he said, "Give him a share
in my well," without any additional remarks, a quarter is meant; and the
same is the case when he said, "Give him a share in my properties."

The rabbis taught: A Levite who sold a field to an Israelite with the
stipulation that the tithes of the field (which the Israelite must
separate) should belong to him, this stipulation is valid; and if the
stipulation was, "to me and to my children," if the Levite dies, the
tithe must be given to his children. But if he said, "So long as the
field may be in your hands," then, if the Israelite should sell it and
rebuy the same thereafter, the Levite has nothing more to do with it.
But why should the tithe belong to him? Is there not a rule that one
cannot grant a thing which is not as yet in existence, and as the
products of the field have not as yet come forth, consequently the tithe
is not in existence? The above stipulation is to be considered as

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

if he should say: The space in which the first tithe shall grow I
reserve for myself.

Said Resh Lakish: From this we may infer that if one sold a house with
the stipulation, "The upper *diæta* (chamber) shall remain for him," the
stipulation is valid. To what purpose does he state so? Is it not said
above that even without any stipulation, if it is not plainly stated in
the bill of sale that this *diæta* goes with the house, it remains the
owner's? Said R. Zebid: Resh Lakish meant to teach that if there was
such a stipulation, then the owner has a right to make enclosures in the
attic, facing the yard of this house, and the buyer cannot prevent him,
as the stipulation was for this purpose. And R. Papa maintains: If the
seller wants to build another attic upon that one, he may do so.

(Says the Gemara:) According to R. Zebid's explanation, it is correct,
what Resh Lakish said: "From *this* we may infer," as the above Boraitha
teaches that his stipulation is to be considered as reserving space for
himself. So also with the stipulation as to the attic--he reserves space
for himself to make enclosures, etc. But according to R. Papa's
explanation, how can this case be inferred from that Boraitha? This
difficulty remains.

R. Dimi of Nahardea said: If one sells a house with the intention of
giving title to all its contents, although the bill of sale states from
the bottom to the top, title is not acquired in wells, etc. (if such
there were), unless he writes: "You shall acquire title from the depth
of the earth to the height of the sky." And it is not sufficient to
state: "From the depth to the height of this house is sold to you"; and
the reason is because the last expression gives title only to that which
is beneath the house, like a cellar, basement, etc., and also to the
roof and the attic, but it does not suffice for the well and its stone
walls, which are not included in the same. However, the expression,
"from the depth of the earth to the height of the sky," includes them
also, and other caves which may be found beneath the house, and also
above the roof, if there is an attic that measures more than ten spans
in height and width.

The schoolmen <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) propounded a question:
If one has sold or presented the house to one man and the *diæta* to
another, should it be considered a reservation, or, because he sold the
*diæta* to

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

some one else, he reserved nothing for himself, and it cannot be
considered? And if you will say that such is not considered, how is it
if the seller said: "The house is sold to you except the *diæta*" (but
did not say, "I reserved it for myself")? Said Rabha in the name of R.
Na'hman: If we conclude that the house to one and the *diæta* to another
is not considered a reservation, the latter case, besides the *diæta*,
is to be considered, and it will be in accordance with R. Zebid, who
said above that if he likes to make enclosures, etc., he may do so.
Hence we see that, as he left the *diæta* for himself so he did with the
space of the enclosures.

MISHNA *II*.: Title is not given to a well, or to the stone wall thereof
(if this was not plainly mentioned in the bill of sale of the house),
although there is mentioned that he sold him the depth and the height;
however, the seller must buy a way to the well from the new owner of the
house. So is the decree of R. Aqiba. The sages, however, maintain that
it is not necessary; and R. Aqiba admits that it is not necessary for
the seller to buy a way if he said plainly that the well in question was
not included in the sale. If, however, the house was sold to some one,
and the well to some one else, it is not necessary for the latter to buy
the way to it from the owner of the house, according to R. Aqiba; but
according to the sages it is.

GEMARA: Rabhina was sitting and deliberating the difficulty of the
expressions in the Mishna, *Bour* (well) and *Duth* (a well surrounded
by a stone wall). Are they not for the same purpose? Why, then, was it
needed to mention both? Said Rabha to him: Come and hear the following
Boraitha: *Bour* and *Duth* both meant a well which is dug in the
ground, but the first means solid ground without a wall for containing
water, and the second means surrounded by a stone wall. (Hence if the
Mishna should mention the first, one might say that because it is not
surrounded by masonry it is not included in the sale; but the second,
which is a kind of building, is included. And if the second were
mentioned, one might say that because it is a separate building and of
value, therefore it is not included; but the first, which is not of
great value, is; therefore both are needed.) And so also explained Mar
the Elder, the son of R. Hisda, to R. Ashi.

"*He must buy a way*," etc. And the point of their differing is that R.
Aqiba holds that usually the seller sells his goods with a good eye
(explained above, [p. 98](t0707.htm#page_98)), and the rabbis hold

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the contrary. And wherever it is said: "R. Aqiba is in accordance with
his theory that the seller sells his goods with a good eye," the
argument is based upon this statement. \[And lest one say that the point
of their differing is something else, as, *e.g.*, the seller could not
intend that one should fly to his well through the air, etc., therefore
there is repeated in the latter part of the Mishna the same difference
of opinion, to teach that only in the supposition of a good and bad eye
is the point of their differing.\]

It was taught: R. Huna in the name of Rabh said: The Halakha prevails in
accordance with the sages; and R. Jeremiah b. Aba in the name of Samuel:
The Halakha prevails in accordance with R. Aqiba. Said the latter to the
former: Why, many times I said before Rabh that the Halakha prevailed in
accordance with R. Aqiba, and he said nothing to me. And he rejoined:
"That was because you taught before him the reverse--that R. Aqiba was
of the opinion that the seller sells with a bad eye." <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) Said Rabhina to R. Ashi: Shall we assume
that both Rabh and Samuel decided in accordance with their theories
elsewhere (Chap. I., p. 16), where they differ also concerning brothers
who have divided their inheritance; and if it is so, why have they
repeated this statement twice? (Answered R. Ashi:) It was necessary, as,
if one of the two were cited, one might say that Rabh so decided
concerning brothers, as one might claim: "I like to dwell in the house
wherein my parents dwelt." As it is written \[Ps. xlv. 17\]: "Instead of
thy fathers shall be thy children." But in the other cases he would
agree with Samuel. And if the other case were stated, one might say that
only in this Samuel differs with Rabh, but concerning brothers Samuel
agrees with him. Therefore both statements were needed.

Said R. Na'hman to R. Huna: Should the Halakha prevail as we declare, or
in accordance with you? And he answered: The Halakha should be
established in accordance with you, as you are nearer to the Exilarchs,
whose judges are competent and can be relied upon.

It was taught: <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) Two houses, one
beyond the other, so that one has to pass the other in going to the
street or the yard, and both are sold, or presented as a gift, to two
different persons---

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

neither of them has the right to pass the other's house without his
permission, and much less when the inner house is sold and the outer is
presented as a gift. But how is the case if the outer house is sold, and
the inner is presented as a gift? The schoolmen were about to say that
the same is the case. However, they were opposed from the following
Mishna, which states, in the last Mishna of this chapter, that "there is
a difference with a gift," etc., from which we see that all agree that
he who makes a gift does so with a good eye. The same is the case here,
when the owner of the house has at one time sold the outer, and made a
gift of the inner, as it was with a good eye, so that he shall have a
right to pass.

MISHNA *III*.: If one sells a house, the door is sold, but not the key
to it; the stationary mortar in the house, but not the movable--the
ετροβιλος; (every revolving body--here, however, is meant the lower
stone of a handmill), but not the mill-funnel, nor an oven or a stove.
If, however, he said to him, "The house with all its contents," all of
these are sold.

GEMARA: This Mishna is not in accordance with R. Meir, who said: If one
has sold a vineyard, he has sold all the vessels which are used for
same.

The rabbis taught: If one has sold a house, he sold with it the door,
the bolt, and lock, but not the key; the engraved mortar, but not that
which is only attached; the lower stone, but not the mill-funnel, nor
the oven or stove nor the handmill. R. Eliezer, however, maintains that
all that is attached to the ground is to be considered as the ground
proper. If, however, the seller said, "The house and all its contents,"
all of them are sold. But in any case, the well, the surrounding stones
thereof, and the *yeziah* are not sold.

R. Nehemiah b. R. Joseph sent a message by a woman to Rabha b. R. Huna
the minor <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) in the city of Nahardea:
When this woman shall appear before you, you shall collect on her behalf
the tenth of all the properties belonging to her father, for her
support, even from the lower stones of the handmills. Said R. Ashi: When
we were with R. Kahana we used to collect for such a purpose even from
the rent of the houses (the law is, that for the support of a daughter a
tenth of the real

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

estate is to be collected, and R. Ashi holds that the rent of real
estate is to be considered the same for this purpose).

MISHNA *IV*.: If one sold a yard, the houses, wells, cellars, and caves
are included, but not movable property. If, however, he said, "with all
their contents," all is sold; in any case, if there were bath or press
houses, they are not included. R. Eliezer, however, maintains: If one
has sold the yard without any explanation, he has sold only the ground
thereof, but nothing else. (Even if, according to the amount which was
paid by the buyer, it seems that all its contents are sold, as the law
of deceiving does not apply to real estate.--Rashbam.)

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: If one sells a yard, the outer houses, the
inner ones, *Beth Hulsauth*, <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) and
stores which are open inside are included in the sale, but not those
which are open outside. If, however, they are open on both sides, they
are included. R. Eliezer, however, maintains that if one sold the yard
he sold only the *moles* (*i.e.*, the great mass of the air). The text
says if they are open from both sides they are sold with it; but has not
R. Hyya taught that they are not? This presents no difficulty. Our
Boraitha speaks of that of which the main use was inside, and R. Hyya
speaks of that of which the main use was outside.

"*Eliezer said*," etc. Said Rabha: If the seller said: "I sell you this
foreyard," all agree that the houses are included; but if he said: "I
sell you the yard," they differ. According to the rabbis, the yard with
all its contents is meant, as the yard of the tabernacle, which is
written, "the length of the yard" \[Ex. xxvii.\], and all its contents
is meant; and R. Eliezer holds that with the word "yard" is meant the
air only.

Rabha in the name of R. Na'hman said: If one has made a hazakah on the
*Chulsu*, title is acquired in the ground to a depth at which silver or
gold, if found, belongs to him. Is this not self-evident? Has not Samuel
said: If one sold ten fields in ten different countries, as soon as he
has made a hazakah on one of them, title is acquired to all? Lest one
say that there is a difference, as the surface of the earth is alike
everywhere, and the fields are similarly adapted for planting, they are
therefore considered as if they were joined each to the other; but in
our case the use of the two things mentioned is different,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and one might say that title is not given to the ground-therefore
Rabha's statement.

MISHNA *V*.: If one sells a press-house, the sale includes the trough,
the press-beam or press-stone, and the poles, but not the boards that
are put on grapes while pressing; neither the wheel nor the treading
rod. If, however, he told him, "This press-house, with all its
contents," all is sold. R. Eliezer, however, maintains that the
expression "press-house" means the treading-rod only.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: If one sell a press-house, the sale includes
the bronze plates that prevent the grapes from scattering, the trough,
the press-beams, and lower stones of the handmill, but not the upper
stones. If, however, he said, "With all its contents," all is sold. In
any case, neither the boards which are put on the grapes while pressing,
nor the sacks, nor the packing-bags are sold. R. Eliezer, however,
maintains that he who sells a press-house sells the treading-rod also,
as the expression "press-house" means chiefly the "treading-rod."

MISHNA *VI*.: If one sell a bath-house, the sale does not include the
boards on the floor (the baths at that time were heated beneath the
stone floors, and boards were placed on the floor for stepping upon),
the basin, neither the curtains on the doors. If, however, he said,
"With all its contents," all is sold; but in any case the sale does not
include the channels with water, nor the wood piles prepared for the
bath-house.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: If one has sold a bathhouse, the sale
includes the separate houses for keeping the boards, the tubs, the
basins, and the curtains; but not the boards proper, neither the tubs,
nor the basins, nor the curtains. If, however, he said to him, "With all
its contents," all is sold. In any case, however, the channels that
contain water for the use of bathing in the summer and rainy seasons are
not sold, nor the houses for storing the wood, unless he said: "The
bathhouse with all its implements," then the sale includes everything
that may be used for bathing purposes.

There was a man who said: "I sell you the press-house with all its
implements," and there were some stores outside of the press-house, in
which poppy was spread out for drying purposes, and the buyer claimed
that they were also included, while the seller claimed they were not.
The case came before R. Joseph, who decided in accordance with the
Boraitha just cited,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

that in such a case everything that maybe used for that purpose is sold.
Said Abayi to him: But does not R. Hyya teach the contrary? Therefore
said R. Ashi: It must be investigated how the sale was; if he said, "the
press-house with all its implements and also its boundaries," then title
is given to all of them, but not otherwise.

MISHNA *VII*.: If one sells a town, the sale includes houses, wells,
caves, bath and press houses, pigeon-houses, and also Beth Hashal'hin,
but not the movable property, unless he said, "the town with all its
contents"; then, even if there were cattle or slaves, they are also
included in the sale. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: He who sells a town
sells also the *santer* (the meaning will be explained farther on).

GEMARA: Said R. A'ha b. R. Ivya to R. Ashi: From this Mishna is to be
understood that slaves are considered movable property; as, if they were
to be considered real estate, then they would be sold with the town
without any stipulation. Answered he: Even according to your theory that
they are considered movable property, why does the Mishna state that if
he said, "*even* with all its contents," slaves are sold also, from
which is to be understood that they are not movable property proper? And
what could you answer to this--that there is a difference between
movable property that must be carried and that which is self-moving? The
same answer can apply also to the theory that slaves are considered real
estate, as there is a difference between stationary real estate "and
that which is self-moving."

"*Sold the santer*." What does this word mean? Here in Babylon they
explained it "guardsman," or "bailiff" (a slave). Simeon b. Abtulmus
said: It means a *pagus* (land that surrounds the town). According to
him who explains it as "guardsman," etc., so much the more is the
*pagus* included in the sale; but according to him who explains it as a
*pagus*, the guardsman is not included. An objection was raised from our
Mishna, which states: "press-houses and Beth Hashal'hin," and the
schoolmen explained the expression *shal'hin* (which everywhere means
dry field) as meaning the gardens around the town, which also usually
ought to be watered. And this is correct only for him who explains the
word *santer* as a *pagus*, when the Mishna is to be explained thus: The
first Tana holds that only the gardens around the town are included, but
not anything else; and R. Simeon b. Gamaliel came to add the *pagus*;
which, according

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

to his opinion, is also included. But according to him who explains
*santer* as a "guardsman," if it be assumed that the first Tana speaks
about gardens, should R. Simeon answer him with a "guardsman"? Nay! The
explanation of the word *shal'hin* is not gardens, as you thought, but,
as is everywhere explained, dry land, which means *pagus*. \[And this
explanation is correct, as it is written \[Job, v. 10\]: "And sendeth
out waters," etc., which is the translation of *Veshilea'h*.\] And R.
Simeon b. Gamaliel came to say: Not only a *pagus*, but even the
"guardsman," is also included.

Come and hear another objection! R. Jehudah said: The *santer* is not
included, but the *anqlmus* (the scribe of the city, who was usually a
slave to whom all the surrounding fields on which the taxes were to be
collected was known). Hence as the scribe *anqlmus* means a man, so also
must *santer* mean a man? Why? *Santer* may mean a *pagus*, and
*anqlmus* a man. But this cannot be, because of the latter part of the
said Boraitha, which states: It does not include, however, the *shirih*,
neither the villages around the town, nor the forests which are near it,
and also not the *vivarium* of wild beasts, fowl, or fish. And to the
question, What means the word *shirih*? it was said by R. Aba: It means
pieces of paguses (*i.e.*, dry land surrounding the town, broken by
rocks). Now can you say that part of the *pagus* is not sold, while the
whole *pagus* is? Reverse the names! R. Jehudah said: The *anqlmus* is
not sold, but the *santer* is.

But how can you say that R. Jehudah is in accordance with R. Simeon?
Does he not hold with the rabbis, who said: "The villages that surround
the town are not sold," while R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said plainly in a
Boraitha: The sale of the town includes the villages near by also? It
does not matter. R. Jehudah may agree with him in one thing, and differ
in another.

"*'Vivarium' of wild beasts*," etc. There is a contradiction from the
following Boraitha: If villages belong to the town, they are not sold
with it; if the town contains one part of the sea, or it has a vivarium
of wild beasts, fowl, or fish, they are sold therewith. This presents no
difficulty! One Boraitha speaks of when the entrance to the *vivarium*
was from the city, and the other speaks of when the entrance was from
the field. But does not the first Boraitha state: Nor the forests which
face the town (which means also the entrance from the town)? Read: The
forests that are separated from it.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

MISHNA *VIII*.: If one sells a field, the sale includes the stones which
are needed for its use; and if it was a vineyard, the sticks which are
used for keeping the vines in order. Also the stalks that are attached
to the ground, the reed-bushes if they take a space less than that in
which a quarter of a kab can be sown, the hut (where the watchman
guards) if it is not smeared with clay, and a carob or a sycamore
uninoculated; but not the stones, the sticks of a vineyard which are not
for use at that time, neither the grain that is not attached to the
ground. If, however, he says, "with all its contents," all is sold. In
any case, however, the sale does not include the reed-bushes if they
take more space than said above, and not the hut if smeared with clay,
and not a carob or sycamore when inoculated.

GEMARA: What stones are to be considered to be needed for use? Here in
this college it was explained, stones which are prepared for laying upon
the sheaves, that they may not be scattered by the wind. Ula, however,
said: It means stones that are arranged for a wall.

But did not R. Hyya teach: The stones that were gathered in heaps for
this purpose? Read: arranged. To him who explains the stones as for
laying upon the sheaves--according to R. Meir, who says elsewhere that
if one sells a vineyard all the things which are useful for it are sold
therewith, the stones in question are included, even when they are
placed outside the field; and according to his opponents, only when they
are placed in the field and prepared for this purpose. And to Ula's
explanation that it means stones for a wall--according to R. Meir even
when they were not arranged, and to his opponents only when they were
arranged.

"*The sticks*," etc. The school of R. Yanai says: It means posts for
supporting the vine, in order to prevent its bending. And according to
R. Meir, even when they were not prepared for this purpose; and to the
rabbis his opponents, however, only when already placed under the vine.

"*Stalks which are attached*," etc. Even when they are ripe for
harvesting.

"*The reed-bushes*," etc. Although they are growing separately, or thick
ones, which have nothing to do with the vineyard.

"*The hut*," etc. Although it was not attached to the ground.

"*And the carob*," etc. Although thick and strong.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

"*But not the stones*," etc. According to R. Meir, when they were not
prepared for this purpose, and according to the rabbis when they were
outside of the field; and also to Ula's explanation--according to R.
Meir, when they were not prepared, and to the rabbis, when they were not
arranged.

"*The posts for supporting*," etc. According to R. Meir, when they were
not prepared, and according to the rabbis, when they were not placed
under the vine.

"*When they were not attached*," etc. Even so they still needed the
ground for drying.

"*And not the reed-bushes*." Although they are still small. And R. Hyya
b. Aba said in the name of R. Johanan: Not reed-bushes only, but even if
there was a small bed of spices, having a separate name, it is not
included in the sale. Said R. Papa: Provided they are called the spices
of so and so.

"*And not the hut*," etc. Although it were attached to the ground.

"*Nor the carob*," etc. Whence is this deduced? Said R. Jehudah in the
name of Rabh: From \[Gen. xxxiii. 17\]: "And the field of Ephron . . .
and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all its borders
round about, were made sure"; from which is to be understood that all
those without the borders were excluded (and so also the inoculated
carob, etc., are of separate value and had nothing to do with his
field). Said R. Mesharshia: From this passage we infer that the boundary
is sold to the buyer with the field biblically; *i.e.*, because it is
written "round about," which is the boundary, and was sold by Ephron
with the field.

R. Jehudah said: It is advisable for one who sells his estate to write
in the bill of sale "acquire title to the trees, to the young plants,
also to those trees that do not yield fruit." And although title is
given to all these, even if it were not so written, it is better for the
bill of sale to contain the words just mentioned. If one said: "I sell
you the ground and date trees," then, if there were such on his estate,
he must give him two of them; and if there were not, he has to buy two
for him; and if he possesses them, but they were mortgaged, he has to
redeem two for him. If he said: "I sell you the estate with the date
trees," if the estate contains such the sale is valid; and if not, the
sale is void. If he said: "An estate on which there are date trees," and
there were none, the sale is valid; for he meant, it is fit for them. If
he said: "I sell to you this estate,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

except such and such a tree," it is to be investigated whether this tree
is a good one that yields much fruit--then he reserves it for himself;
but if it was a bad one, which yields no fruit at all, or only a little,
and in this field were better ones, so much the more does he reserve
them for himself. If he said: "I sell you this field, except the trees,"
if there were many kinds of trees they are certainly not included; but
even if it contained only date trees or vines, they are excluded also.
If, however, there were trees and vines, the trees only are excluded;
and if there were date trees and vines, the date trees are excluded but
not the vines.

Rabh said: A date tree is considered a reservation only when he must
ascend with a rope for gathering the fruit; but if not so high, it is
not considered a reservation. The judges of the Exile (Samuel and
Karna), however, maintain: If it does not hinder the yoke of oxen which
are ploughing around it, it is not considered a reservation; but if it
does hinder, it is. However, they do not differ, as Rabh speaks of a
date tree and they treat of other trees.

R. A'ha b. Huna questioned R. Shesheth: How is it if the seller says:
Accept the half of such and such a carob? It is certain to me that he
does not acquire title to other carobs; but I doubt whether he acquires
title to the half of the carob in question? And the answer was: He does
not. He objected to him from the following Boraitha: If he said, "Accept
the half of such and such a carob," title is not acquired to the other
carobs, by which is to be understood that he does not to the other
carobs, but he does to the half in question? And he answered: Nay! Even
to the half left to the buyer, title is not given, this case being
similar to one in which it was said, "I sell you this field, except the
half of such and such a one." Were we to assume that the buyer acquires
title to all his fields except the half in question, although he said
plainly, "I sell you *this* field," it must be said he does not acquire
title to any except to that which he had shown him; and that his remark,
"except the half field," etc., was but redundance. The same is the case
here. If he said, "I sell you this field, except the half tree," the
last word is to be considered redundance.

R. Amram questioned R. Hisda: If one has deposited something with his
neighbor, and taken from him a receipt (approved by witnesses), and
thereafter the depositary claims that he has returned the bailment, how
is the law? May it be said that,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

because if he were to claim that the bailment was taken away from him by
force, he would be trusted, the same should be the case with the claim,
"I have returned," or the depositor has a right to say: If it were so,
how comes thy receipt in my hands? And he answered: He is to be trusted
when he takes an oath, the same being the case when the depositary
claims "it was taken away from me by force"--he must take an oath.

Shall we assume that R. Amram and R. Hisda differ on the same point as
the Tanaim of the following Boraitha differ: If one holds a document
which witnesses to an amount of money given by him to his deceased
partner for a half profit, and claims that the amount was not returned
to him, while the orphans say that they are not certain whether the
amount was returned? The judges of the Exile said: The plaintiff has to
take an oath, and collects the whole amount. The judges of Palestine,
however, maintain that he collects only the half with this oath. And all
of them agree with the sages of Nahardea, that of the money which is
given for the purpose of a half profit half of the amount is considered
a loan and the other half a deposit. (See Middle Gate, p. 277.) Now is
it not to be supposed that the point of their differing is that one
party holds that the claim of the plaintiff, "The document in my hand
gives evidence that the amount was not returned," is to be listened to,
and the other party (who says that with the oath he collects the half
only) maintains that such is not considered evidence? Nay! All agree
with R. Hisda, and the point of their differing is, that one party holds
if the deceased had returned, he would have notified his heirs, and the
other holds it may be that death prevented him from doing so.

R. Huna b. Abi sent the following message: A depositary who claims that
he had returned the bailment, although his receipt is still in the hands
of the depositor, is to be trusted (with an oath), and with a document
of a half profit in the hands of the plaintiff suing the orphans, he may
swear and collect the whole amount. Do these two statements contradict
each other (as in the case of a depositary the document is in the hand
of the plaintiff, and the *defendant* is trusted with an oath, and in
the case of a half profit the *plaintiff* is trusted with an oath)? The
latter case is different, because, if the deceased had made return, he
would have notified his heirs. Said Rabha: The Halakha prevails
concerning orphans, that he takes only the half with an oath. Mar Zutra,
however, said: The Halakha

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

prevails with the judges of the Exile. And to the objection of Rabhina,
that Rabha had long ago decided that he takes only the half with an
oath, he answered: We have learned the reverse; *i.e.*, that the judges
of the Exile hold that he takes the half only with an oath, and the
Palestinians, that he collects the whole amount. Hence my decision is
the same as Rabha's.

MISHNA *IX*.: In selling a field, if it contains a well, cistern, or
pigeon-house, no matter whether they are still in use or damaged, they
are not included in the sale. However, the seller must buy a way from
the buyer for passing to them. So is the decree of R. Aqiba. The sages,
however, say that it is not necessary. R. Aqiba, however, admits that if
the bill of sale states, "except the above things," he need not buy a
way. If the seller sold the above separately to another--according to R.
Aqiba it is not necessary for the buyer of them to buy a passage, and
according to the sages it is. This is all said concerning a sale; but if
the owner of the field has made a gift of it, title is given to the
field with all its contents. The same is the case when brothers divide
their inheritance, and the field falls in a share of one of them: he
acquires title to all its contents.

If one made a hazakah on the estate of a childless proselyte, the
hazakah applies to all the above-mentioned things, if they were to be
found on it. If one consecrate his field, all that is to be found in it
is sanctified. R. Simeon, however, said: The above-mentioned things are
not included in the sanctification; but if there was an inoculated carob
or a trunk of a sycamore, it is included, because while growing they are
nourished by the sanctified ground.

GEMARA: What is the difference between a sale and a gift? Jehudah b.
N'qusa explained before Rabbi: The one who makes a gift, if he desires
to reserve any part of it for himself, he ought to state so plainly,
which is not the case with a seller, who needs money: the details of the
sale must be determined by the buyer, and if not so done, the seller has
the preference.

There was a man who said in his will: Give to so and so my house that
contains a hundred barrels (*i.e.*, that within the width, length, and
height of the house ten barrels square could be placed). After
investigation it was found that the house contained one hundred and
twenty barrels (*i.e.*, twelve rows, each of ten barrels), and no other
house was found on the deceased's estate. And Mar Zutra said: The will
states a hundred, but not a hundred and twenty. Said R. Ashi to him:

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Did not our Mishna
state: All this is said concerning a sale, but concerning a gift title
is given to all; and the reason is that he who makes a gift does it with
a good eye? The same is the case here. The deceased thought that it
contained a hundred only. He therefore said so, that the donee should be
aware that he bequeathed him such a big house, but not to exclude it if
it contained still more than he thought, as it must be supposed it was
given to him with a good eye.

"*If one consecrated his field*," etc. R. Huna said: Although the rabbis
have declared that he who buys two trees that are between others does
not acquire title to the ground beneath, if the seller has sold the
ground with the trees, but reserved two trees for himself, the ground
beneath belongs to him. And even R. Aqiba's theory, that usually a
seller sells with a good eye, is only concerning a well, etc., which
does not cause any harm to the ground; but as for trees, which while
nourishing do so, if the buyer should not agree that the ground beneath
should belong to the seller, he would tell him to cut down the trees and
go; and if he did not do so, it must be supposed that he was willing
that the trees with the ground beneath should remain to the seller
forever, so that in case the trees should wither he might plant others
instead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[147:1](t0708.htm#fr_34) The commentator Rashbam
explains it as a shelter in the rear; and R. Joseph's explanation means
the same, but with windows. Our explanation, however, is in, accordance
with Schönhak's Dictionary, which seems to us to be the proper one.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[151:1](t0708.htm#fr_35) In the text are only a
few words, their meaning being very obscure. The commentators Rashbam
and Rabana Gershom differ in their explanation, and in the first saying
of Rabba we have adopted Rashbam's interpretation, and in the second
Gershom's, though both are very complicated and difficult.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[152:1](t0708.htm#fr_36) The reason is,
according to Rashbam, that all those quantities were known for said
Purposes. However, he himself was not satisfied with this exposition,
and explained it in accordance with Symmachos's theory elsewhere, that
all doubtful moneys or properties must be divided. But it is very
complicated, and therefore we leave its interpretation to the reader.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[153:1](t0708.htm#fr_37) Transferred from 148*b*
in this Tract.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[155:1](t0708.htm#fr_38) This explanation is the
best we can offer, not to contradict Rashbam and R. Gershom (*q. v.*).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[155:2](t0708.htm#fr_39) This is a Boraitha with
the unusual expression Itemar. See Explanatory Remarks (back of title
page).

<span id="fn_40"></span>[156:1](t0708.htm#fr_40) According to Halpern he
was of the time of R. Huna the Exilarch, and was called "minor" to
distinguish him from the former. Others, however, say that it must be
Hamnunah.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[157:1](t0708.htm#fr_41) A Beth Hulsauth,
according to Rashbam, means sand of which glass is made; to Gershom, it
means rock. Schönhak, however, maintains that it is a Greek word,
meaning *bank*. The reader may choose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](t0709)
