[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0718)  [Next](t0720) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 7: Tract Baba Bathra (Last Gate)*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

# CHAPTER IX.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE SUPPORT OF UNMARRIED DAUGHTERS
AFTER THE DEATH OF THEIR FATHER, IF AMONG THE CHILDREN WERE AN
HERMAPHRODITE OR AN ANDROGYN. MAY OR MAY NOT ONE BEQUEATH HIS ESTATE TO
STRANGERS IF HE HAS CHILDREN? DOES THE SECOND WILL ABOLISH THE FIRST? IF
A SICK PERSON RECOVERS AFTER MAKING A GIFT WHILE SICK, MAY HE RETRACT OR
NOT? IF SUDDEN DEATH OCCUR TO MANY PERSONS, AND IT IS NOT KNOWN WHO DIED
FIRST, AND EACH OF THE HEIRS CLAIMS FOR HIS BENEFIT.

MISHNA *I*.: If one dies, and leave sons and daughters, if the
inheritance is of great worth, then the sons inherit, and the daughters
must be supported from it; and if a moderate one, the daughters must be
supported, and the sons may go a-begging. Admon, however, said: Because
I am a male shall I suffer? Said Rabban Gamaliel: It seems to me that
Admon is right.

GEMARA: What is to be considered great worth? Said R. Jehudah in the
name of Rabh: It shall be sufficient for all of them to be supported for
twelve months. And he (Jehudah) added: When I told the Halakha before
Samuel, he said: Such is the decree of R. Gamaliel b. Rabbi. The sages,
however, maintain: It shall suffice to support all of them until the
daughters become of age. So also it was taught by Rabbin, according to
others by Rabba b. b. Hana, when he came from Palestine, in the name of
R. Johanan: If the inheritance suffices to support all of them until the
daughters become of age, it is considered of great worth; and if less,
it is considered moderate. How is this to be understood? If it does not
suffice to support all of them, shall the daughters take the entire
inheritance, leaving nothing for the sons? Therefore said Rabha: There
must be deducted from the inheritance the amount which will suffice for
the daughters until they become of age; and the remainder shall be given
to the sons.

It is certain that if for some reason the estates become less

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

in value after the father's death, and do not suffice for the support of
the daughters until they become of age, and also for the sons' support,
both have already acquired title, and must be satisfied with that which
falls to their lot (*i.e.*, the daughters have no right to claim that
they shall be supported until of age from the share of their brothers).
But how is it if the estate increased in value after death? Shall we
assume that the increase belongs to the heirs, and therefore the sons
may have the benefit of it? Or, as they had nothing in it when their
father died, they are considered entirely cut off from this inheritance,
and have nothing to do with the increase? Come and hear what R. Assi
said in the name of R. Johanan: If orphans hastened and sold out from
this inheritance before the daughters summoned them, the sale is valid,
and the daughters have no right to take it away from the buyers,
according to the rule that it cannot be collected from encumbered estate
for the support of the daughters. (Hence we see the sons are considered
heirs, notwithstanding that the estate was not of great worth.)
Consequently they have a share in the increase.

R. Jeremiah was sitting before R. Abuhu, and questioned him as follows:
If the estates were of great worth, but there was a promissory note in
the hands of a creditor, which ought to be collected from the estates,
should the estates, because of the note, be considered moderate, so that
the support should be for the daughters and the sons should go
a-begging? Or, until collected, should all of them be supported, without
taking into consideration that after collecting nothing might remain for
the support of the daughters? And should you decide that the promissory
note, although not yet collected, diminishes the value of the estates,
for the reason that the amount due will be collected in any event, even
should the creditor die, how is it if the deceased left a step-daughter
whom he has to support, according to the marriage contract of his wife,
until she shall become of age, and the amount of her support diminishes
the estate from being of great worth, and stamps it moderate? How, then,
should the inheritance be considered, should the step-daughter die, and
then, the obligation being gone, the estates remain of great worth.
There is still another question. If the deceased left a widow and a
daughter, and the estates left could support only one of them, who

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

has the preference? And R. Abuhu answered: Go to-day, and come
to-morrow. And when he came he said to him: Of all the questions, I can
decide the last one. As R. Aba said in the name of R. Assi: The sages
have enacted that when there is a widow with a daughter she shall have
similar treatment to that of a sister who remains with her brother. As
in the latter case, if the estate is moderate she must be supported,
although her brothers remain beggars, so also the widow as against a
-daughter-the widow must be supported and the daughter may go a-begging.

"*Admon, however, said: Because I am a male*," etc. How is this to be
understood? Said Rabha: He means to say: Because I am a male, and ought
to inherit all the estates where the inheritance is of great worth,
leaving for my sister only the support for her livelihood until of age,
shall I remain a beggar when there is a moderate estate?

MISHNA *II*.: If one leave sons, daughters, and an hermaphrodite (if it
is doubtful whether male or female), and the inheritance is of great
worth, the males may count same among the females; but when the
inheritance is moderate, the females may count same among the males.

If one say: "If my pregnant wife should bear a male, he shall take a
mana," and she bears a male, the mana is to be given to him; "If a
female, she shall take two hundred zuz," she takes two hundred. If a
male a mana, and a female two hundred zuz, and she had born a male and a
female? The male takes one hundred and the female two hundred zuz. But
if she bears an hermaphrodite, he takes nothing. If, however, he said:
"What she shall bear shall take," then he takes accordingly. And the
same is the case if there were no heirs but he--he inherits all.

GEMARA: The Mishna states: They count same among the daughters, which
means he shall be treated like them. But does not the later part state:
If she bears an hermaphrodite, he takes nothing? Said Abayi: It means
that the males counted him among the females; but the latter have the
right not to accept him, and he remains without any support. Rabha,
however, maintains: They pass him and he must be similarly supported.
And the latter part of our Mishna is in accordance with Rabban Simeon b.
Gamaliel of the following Mishna: If

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

she bears an hermaphrodite or an androgyn, which is at times a male and
at times a female, R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: No sanctity rests upon
them. (The cited Mishna treats: If one made a vow for the offspring of a
gravid cow--if a male, it shall be a burnt-offering; and if a female, a
peace-offering.)

An objection was raised from the following: "An hermaphrodite inherits
like a son, and is supported like a daughter." And this can be correct
only according to Rabha: That he is considered an heir, like a son, in a
moderate inheritance; and is supported, like a daughter, in one of great
worth. But according to Abayi, who said above that he takes nothing, how
do you find that he shall be supported like a daughter? Even according
to your theory, how do you explain Rabha's statement, that as an heir,
like a son, he takes something of a moderate inheritance? In such a case
the sons take nothing; hence he means to say that he is *considered* an
heir like a son--to be a beggar. So also you can explain the Mishna: He
is in condition to have support like a daughter, but, nevertheless. he
does not get any.

"*If one says: If my pregnant wife shall bear a male*," etc. Shall we
assume that a daughter is better to him than a soil (as the Mishna says,
"If a male one hundred, and a daughter two hundred")? Concerning
inheritance, a male is better to him, as he bears his name; and
concerning a gift, a daughter is better to him, as it is more difficult
for her to make a living than for a male. Samuel, however, maintains
that the Mishna treats of when his wife was pregnant with her first
child; and it is in accordance with R. Hisda, who said elsewhere: If the
first child is a female, it is a good sign for future sons, according to
some because she will educate the sons; and according to some, that she
should not be afflicted by a covetous eye. Said R. Hisda: As for me, I
always give preference to females over males. And if you wish, it may be
said that our Mishna is in accordance with R. Jehudah in the following
Boraitha: It is a meritorious act for one to support his daughters, and
so much the more his sons who occupy themselves with the Torah. So is
the decree of R. Meir. R. Jehudah, however, said: It is a meritorious
act to support the sons, and so much the more to support the daughters,
because of their humiliation (if they should have to beg).

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

There was one who said to his wife: I bequeath my estate to the child
with which you are pregnant. Said R. Huna: This means that he designed
to give title to an embryo, and an embryo cannot acquire title. R.
Na'hman objected to R. Huna from our Mishna, which states: If my wife
shall bear a male, he shall take a mana, etc. And he answered him: I do
not know who has taught our Mishna (*i.e.*, I do not find our Mishna to
be in accordance with the majority, nor a single one of the sages). But
let R. Na'hman say that the Mishna treats of when the bequeather said: I
bequeath the estate to the child after my wife has borne it? R. Huna is
in accordance with his principle that the child does not acquire title
even after birth. (As it was taught:) R. Na'hman said: If one bequeaths
to an embryo, title is not given; but if he said, "after he is born,"
title is given. R. Huna, however, maintains that even then title is not
given. But R. Shesheth is of the opinion that in either case title is
given. And he added: I deduce my statement from the following Boraitha:
"If a proselyte supposed to be childless dies, and Israelites have
robbed his estate, and thereafter they hear that he has a son, or that
his wife is pregnant, they are obliged to return it. If, however, they
have returned it, and thereafter they hear that the son is dead, or that
his wife has had a miscarriage, and they again take the estate, he who
made a hazakah in the second instance has acquired title, but he who
made the same in the first instance has not." Now, if it be remembered
that an embryo does not acquire title, why should title not be given to
them who made a hazakah in the first instance? Said Abayi: There is a
difference with an inheritance which came of itself: In such a case the
embryo acquires title. Rabha, however, said: Even in case an inheritance
came by itself, the embryo does not acquire title; and the reason why
title is not given to them who made a hazakah in the first instance is
because they were still uncertain whether the property taken would
remain with them, as there was still a doubt whether children were left.
But in the second instance they were sure of their ground.

Come and hear another objection: "A child of one day inherits and
bequeaths (*e.g.*, if his father dies when he was even one day old, he
inherits from his father; and if at birth the estate of his deceased
father came to him, and he dies when he was

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

one day old, his relatives inherit from him). We see, then--only when he
was one day old, but not when in embryo. This was explained by Rabh
Shesheth: He inherits the estate of his mother, to bequeath to his
brothers on his father's side. And this can be only when he was alive
one day after his mother; but not when he was in embryo, as he died
before his mother. And a son does not inherit from his mother, when once
in his grave, so that his brothers on his father's side could inherit
from him.

Shall we assume that in case the mother dies while pregnant the embryo
dies first? Perhaps she dies first? There happened such a case, and the
embryo moved convulsively thrice. Said Mar b. R. Ashi: Such a movement
was without any life, such as the movement of the tail of a lizard. Mar
b. R. Joseph in the name of Rabha said: The cited Boraitha means to say
that a child of one day diminishes the share of a first-born . E.g., a
first-born takes a double share--*i.e.*, twice as much as each of his
other brothers. But if there were added a male child of one day, the
estate must be divided into five parts, if there are four brothers, of
which the first-born takes a double share. And if this child dies
afterwards, his share is to be divided equally among the four brothers.
This is only when he was old one day, but not when an embryo; because
\[it is written, Deut. xxi. 15\], "and they *bear* him children." As the
same said also on the same authority: A son who was born after the death
of his father does not diminish the share of the first-born, as it reads
in the verse just cited "bear *him*"; but when born after his death, it
was not born to him.

All that was said here was taught in the city of Sura. In Pumbeditha,
however, it was taught as follows: Mar b. R. Joseph said in the name of
Rabha: A first-born who was born after the death of his father does not
take a double share. As it is written \[ibid., 17\]: "Shall he
acknowledge," and when he is dead he cannot acknowledge. The Halakha
prevails in accordance with all the versions said by Mar b. R. Joseph in
the name of Rabha.

R. Itz'hak in the name of R. Johanan said: He who bequeaths to an
embryo, title is not acquired. And should you object to this statement
from our Mishna, which states: "If one bequeaths a mana to the embryo,
he takes it after he is born,"

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I may tell you
that this is said only of a father, whose mind is near to his son; but
it cannot be done by a stranger. Said Samuel to R. Hana of Bagdad: You
may bring to me ten persons, and I will teach in their presence that
title is given if one bequeaths to an embryo. The Halakha, however,
prevails that title is not given.

There was one who said to his wife: I bequeath my estate to the children
who shall be born of you by me. And his elder son came and said: What
becomes of me? And the father answered: You will take a share as one of
the brothers. Now, the children which are to be born can certainly not
acquire any title; but the question is, does the elder son, when he came
to share with his brothers born thereafter, take a double share, as his
father bequeathed to him a part of his estate when his brothers were not
yet in existence? Or does he share with them equally? According to R.
Abbin, R. Miicha, and R. Jeremiah, he *is* entitled to a double share;
and according to R. Abuhu, Hanina b. Papi, and R. Itz'hak of Naf'ha, he
is not. Said R. Abuhu to R. Jeremiah: With whom should the Halakha
prevail--with us or with you? And he answered: Certainly with us, as we
are older than you; and not with you, who are still young scholars. And
R. Abuhu rejoined: Does this depend upon age? It depends upon reason,
and our reason is better than yours. And what is it? questioned R.
Jeremiah again. And he answered: Go to R. Abbin, and ask him, as I have
already explained to him the reason at the college; and he shook his
head in sign of assent. He went to him, and he told him: Because this
case is similar to that of one who says: "You and this ass shall acquire
title to this article," would title be given to him? Is this not to
explain: You shall acquire title as the ass? The same is the case if one
says: You shall share with the children, which are not yet in existence
even in pregnancy. Hence title is not acquired in either case. It was
taught: If one says: "Acquire title to this as the ass," certainly title
is not given; but if he says: "Acquire title, you and the ass,"
according to R. Na'hman title is given to a half. And R. Huna said: This
man said nothing. R. Shesheth, however, said: He has acquired title to
the whole of it. Said R. Mordecai to R. Ashi: R. Ivia raised an
objection from a Mishna in Tract Kiduchin: It happened with

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

five women, among them two sisters, that one presented to them a basket
with dry figs, saying: You are all betrothed to me with this basket. And
one of the women accepted the basket for them all. And when the case
came before the sages, they said: The sisters are not betrothed.
Hence--only the sisters? But the strangers were. Why? Is this not
similar to the case: You and the ass shall acquire (*i.e.*, as the
sisters could not under any circumstances be betrothed to one person,
the other women must also be treated similarly)? And he answered: That
is what R. Huna dreamt--that R. Ivia was going to raise a question (and
now I see that R. Huna's dream was true). However, the objection does
not hold good, as that Boraitha was explained: In case the man has
added: All of you who are fit to be my wives.

There was one who said to his wife: My estate shall be for you and your
children. And R. Joseph decided: One half of the estate belongs to her,
and the other half to her children. And he added: I deduce my decision
from the following Boraitha: Rabbi said: It is [written](errata.htm#20)
\[Lev. xxiv. 9\]: "And it shall belong to Aaron and to his sons,"
meaning a half shall be for Aaron and a half for his sons. Said Abayi to
him: What comparison is this? Aaron was fit to receive a share; and
therefore the Merciful One mentioned him, that he should take a half.
But in this case a woman is not fit to be an heir at all, when there are
male children. Would it not be sufficient that she should take an equal
share with her children? Is that so? Did not such a case happen in
Nahardea, and Samuel collected for the woman a half; and also in
Tiberias, and Johanan collected for her a half? Furthermore, when R.
Itz'hak b. Joseph came from Palestine, he told: It happened that the
government had taxed the citizens of the city and those who had real
estate for the manufacture of a crown for the ruler, and Rabbi decided a
half should be collected from the citizens, and the other from the
owners of real estate. But what comparison is that with what was told by
R. Itz'hak? As to that one, it is known that in previous orders from the
government they applied only to the rich citizens, and those who
possessed real estate only assisted them, with the consent of the
government. But the order in question was written: Both the rich, and
real-estate owners are taxed. Therefore Rabbi's decision.

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

R. Zera objected from the following: If one said: I intend to bring a
meal-offering, of one hundred tenths of an ephah--to bring it in two
vessels--he may bring sixty in one vessel and forty in the other.
However, if he brought fifty and fifty, in two vessels, he has fulfilled
his duty. We see, then, that only when he does so it is valid; but the
law prescribes that he must bring sixty in one and forty in the other.
Hence we see that equal halves is not to be understood when he says in
two parts? Nay, this cannot be compared. We are witnesses that he
intended to bring a great offering; and the expression "in two vessels"
was because he was aware that it could not be put into one. Therefore
there must be put in one vessel as much as it can contain, and the
remainder in the other one.

(Says the Gemara:) The Halakha prevails in accordance with R. Joseph in
the three cases: the case of a field, mentioned in the eighth chapter
([p. 254](t0718.htm#page_254)), in the case of a sudarium mentioned in
the preceding chapter ([p. 253](t0718.htm#page_253)), and in this case
of the half. There was one who had sent home pieces of silk, without any
order to which member of his household they belonged, and R. Ami
decided: Those which are fit for the sons, they shall use; and those
which are fit for the daughters, shall be used by them. This law,
however, holds good only in case he had no daughters-in-law; but if such
a case should happen when there are daughters-in-law, and his own
daughters are married, it is to be supposed that he sent them to the
daughters-in-law. If, however, his own daughters were unmarried, he
would not neglect his daughters, and it is to be supposed that he sent
them for them.

There was one who said in his will: My *sons* shall inherit my estate.
However, he had only one son, and some daughters. And the question
arose: By the expression "sons" in the plural, does he mean the one son
only, excluding the daughters, or does he mean to include them? Said
Rabha: There is a verse in Num. xxvi. 8, "And the *sons* of Pallu:
Eliab." And R. Joseph said: There is another verse in I Chron. ii. 8,
"And the *sons* of Ethan: Azaryah." There was another, who said: "My
estate shall belong to my sons," and he had only one son and a grandson.
And the question arose: Whether people are used to call grandsons also
sons? R. Hbiba said:

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They are. And Mar
b. Ashi maintains: They are not. And there is a Boraitha in accordance
with the latter, namely: If one vowed not to derive any benefit from his
sons, he may derive it from the grandsons.

MISHNA *III*.: If one left grown-up and minor sons, and the former
improved the estate, the improvement shall be divided equally. If,
however, they said: "Observe in what condition the estate was left by
our father, and it shall be known that we are going to improve it for
our own sake," they have a right to take the benefit for themselves. The
same is the case with a widow. If she had improved it without any
remark, the improvement belongs to all the heirs. But if she remarked,
"Seeing in what condition my husband left," etc., the benefit belongs to
her.

GEMARA: Said R. Hbiba, son of R. Joseph b. Rabha in the name of his
grandfather: The Mishna means to say that they have improved the estate,
not at their own expense, but .at that of the estate (*i.e.*, they went
only to the trouble of hiring laborers for improving, but at the expense
of the estate). But if they had expended from their own, then the
benefit belongs to them without any remarks. Is that so? Did not R.
Hanina say: If their father left them only covered wells (which are
usually higher for watering fields), the improvement is for all? We see,
then, that although the wells required much trouble to preserve them
from pollution, and they should be always covered, the improvement is
nevertheless for all? This case is different. It requires only that they
shall be watched; and this can be done by minors also.

"*Observe in what condition*," etc. R. Saphra's father left money, and
R. Saphra took it for business purposes. His brothers summoned him
before Rabha (demanding a share from the profits). Said Rabha to them:
R. Saphra is a great man, and would not leave his study to trouble
himself for the sake of others.

"*If she had improved it*," etc. But what has a woman to do with the
estate of orphans? (The law dictates as to whether she shall take what
belongs to her according to her marriage contract, and depart; or shall
take upon herself the trouble of the orphans, and be supported from the
estate. But she .has no right to any profit.) Said R. Jeremiah: It
treats in case

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

the woman were an heir (*i.e.*, if the will reads: She shall share
equally with the orphans). <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_92) But if
so, it is self-evident. Lest one say: As it is not usual for a woman to
occupy herself with business, therefore it should be considered as she
remarked--she is doing it for herself, it comes to teach us that it is
not so.

"*In what condition my husband left it*," etc. Is this not self-evident?
Lest one say: Because of the pleasure she takes in thinking that people
praise her for troubling herself for the orphans' sake, she relinquishes
the benefit in spite of her previous remark, it comes to teach us that
it is not so.

R. Hanina said: If one has made the wedding of his son in one of his
houses, the son acquires title to the house: provided the son was of
age, married a virgin, and she was his first wife, and this wedding was
the first of his house. It is certain that when the father has separated
for this wedding a house with an attic, the son acquires title to the
house, but not to the attic. But how is it if on the house was a
balcony? or there were two houses, one inside of the other? Is title
given to both, or only to that in which the wedding took place? These
questions remain undecided. An objection was raised: If the father had
separated for his son a house and furniture, the son acquires title to
the furniture, but not to the house? This Boraitha treats of when the
treasurer of his father was still in the house. So said R. Jeremiah. And
the Nahardean said: Even when there was left his pigeon-coop. And both
R. Jehudah and R. Papi said: It suffices if his father left there a
vessel with roasted fish (*i.e.*, this shows that he has not
relinquished his right to the house). Mar Zutra left his sandals in the
wedding house which he separated for his son, and R. Ashi a bottle of
oil (for the purpose said above). Said Mar Zutra: The following three
things the rabbis enacted as laws, <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_93)
without giving any reason: The case just mentioned; and that which was
said above in the name of Samuel: If one has bequeathed

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

all his estates to his wife, she is considered a guardian only; and also
that which was said by Rabh. If A said to B: You owe me a mana, give it
to C, and all the three were present, title is given to C.

MISHNA *IV*.: Brothers partners in business. If one of them was taken by
the government to work for it, the damage caused by his absence, and
also the profit for the business during that time, must be counted to
the partnership. If, however, he becomes sick, and has to be cured, it
is at his own expense.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: If the government had appointed one of the
brothers as a collector, or a military purveyor, if this was because of
the duty of the house, it must be counted for all of them, but if it was
because of his personal fitness, then it is for himself. Is this not
self-evident, because the duty of the house must be counted for all? It
treats of when he was a genius. Lest one say: In such a case it must rot
be counted for the house, because he was taken on account of his genius,
it comes to teach us that it is not so.

The rabbis taught: If one of the brothers took two hundred zuz, to begin
the study of the Torah, or to learn a trade, they may say to him: If you
are with us, you have to be supported; but not otherwise. But why not
support him, by deducting what his labor was worth to the house? This
may be a support to R. Huna's statement, who said elsewhere: The
blessing of the house increases when there are more people (*i.e.*,
because the expenses of the house do not decrease when there is one
person less). But, after all, let them support him even in his absence
for the profits, owing to his share after deducting his labor and the
expenses. Yea, this in reality they have to do.

"*If, however, he becomes sick*," etc. Rabbin sent a message in the name
of R. Ilah: The Mishna means to say: In case he himself causes his
sickness; but if he was occasionally sick, the cure must be at the
expense of the house. What does it mean: "Caused by himself"? As R.
Hanina says: All sickness comes from Providence, except cold. As it is
written \[Prov. xxii. 5\]: "Thorns <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_94)
and snares are in the way of the perverse man; he that doth guard his
soul will keep far from them."

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

MISHNA *V*.: If, while the father of the house was still alive, he sent
through some of the brothers presents to weddings of his friends, and
after his death some of the brothers married and the presents were
returned to them by the same friends, it is to be counted to the income
of the house; as the wedding presents may be replevined by the court.
If, however, one presents to his friends pitchers of wine or oil, it is
not to be replevined by the court, as this is reckoned a bestowing of
favors only.

GEMARA: There is a contradiction from the following: "If the father
sent, through one of his sons, a present to the wedding of his friend,
and told him to remain there during the wedding, then, when this present
returns to the son's wedding, it belongs to him only. If, however, a
wedding present was sent to the father, the returning must be at the
expense of the house." Hence we see that the son may preserve the
returning present for himself; and this contradicts our Mishna. Said R.
Assi in the name of R. Johanan: Our Mishna also treats: When the wedding
present was first sent to the father. But does not the Mishna state:
Through some of the brothers? Read to some of the brothers. But the
Mishna states farther on: If it was returned? It means: If this came to
be returned by the brothers, it must be returned at the expense of the
house. R. Assi himself, however, said: It presents no difficulty (there
is no necessity for such a complicated explanation of the Mishna, as it
can be explained thus). Our Mishna treats: When the father sent the
present through one of his sons, without designating that the returns
should belong to him, then the returns belong to the house. And the
Boraitha treats: When the father has nominated one of his sons to
deliver the present, so that the returning should belong to him. Samuel,
however, said: The law is to be practised in accordance with the
Boraitha. And our Mishna treats: In case the son through whom the
present was sent dies childless, and his brother came to marry his wife,
who according to the law is also his heir. However, this present he does
not inherit from him; because there is a rule that this brother does not
inherit property which was not yet in the deceased's possession, but has
to come to him in the future. (Says the Gemara:) From Samuel's statement
is to be inferred that the one who has received

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

the present is obliged to return, even if the donator were dead. Why,
then, let him say: Give me my friend who presented it to me, and I shall
enjoy myself and give him a present, as he did to me. But as this cannot
be, I am not obliged to anything. As we have learned in the following
Boraitha: At those places where it is customary to return the presents
which the bride has given to her groom at the time of betrothal, and she
dies before marriage) they must be returned. At the place where it is
not customary, they must not. And R. Joseph b. Abba in the name of Mar
Uqba, quoting Samuel, said: Even at those places where it is customary
to return, it is only in case the bride dies; but when the groom, it
must not be returned, for the reason that she may say: Give me my
husband, and I will enjoy myself with him, as for that purpose he gave
them to me. Hence he may say also: Give me my friend, and I will enjoy
with him. Said R. Joseph: It speaks of when his friend was at the
wedding and had enjoyed himself with him all the seven days of the
wedding, and the groom suddenly dies before the present was returned to
him.

Shall we assume that in the above-mentioned claim of the bride, "Give me
my husband," etc., the Tanaim of the following Boraitha differ: If one
has betrothed a woman, and dies before marriage (and the marriage
contract was already written), a virgin collects two hundred and a widow
one hundred zuz. Concerning the presents given at the betrothal,
however, it is to be practised as is customary at that place. So is the
decree of R. Nathan. R. Jehudah the Prince, however, said: In reality,
it was decided that in the place where it is customary to return, it
must be returned; and where it is not customary it must not. Now does
not R. Jehudah repeat what was said by the first Tana? It must then be
assumed that the point of the difference is: If the bride may claim:
"Give me my husband," etc., and the Boraitha is not complete and should
read thus: If one betroths a woman, a virgin collects two hundred and a
widow one hundred zuz, provided he has withdrawn from the contract. But
if she dies, if it was in a place where it was. customary to return, it
must be done so; and if where it was not, it must not. But all this is
in case she dies. But if he dies, there is to be no return, as she may
claim: Give me my husband, etc. And to this R. Jehudah the Prince came
to say:

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Even in the latter
case it must be done according to the custom of that place, as such a
claim is not to be considered? Nay! All agree that the claim in question
is to be considered; and there is no difference between them in case he
dies. But in case she dies, they differ. And the point of their
difference is: Whether the presents with which she was betrothed should
be considered lost forever. According to R. Nathan, they are not so
considered; and according to R. Jehudah, they are. But does not the
Boraitha state that where it is customary to return, it must be so done?
This means presents which were given by him aside from the betrothal.
And the Tanaim of this Boraitha are in accordance with the Tanaim of the
following: If one has betrothed his bride with a talent (a
coin--according to some one hundred and twenty manas, and to others
sixty, and according to Rashbam twenty-five), a virgin collects two
hundred zuz besides the talent, and a widow one hundred. So is the
decree of R. Meir. R. Jehudah, however, maintains: A virgin two hundred,
and a widow one hundred of the talent; and the remainder must be
returned. But R. Jose said: If he has betrothed her with twenty, he may
give her thirty halves; and if with thirty, he may give her twenty
halves. Let us see of what kind of case this Boraitha speaks. In case
*she* dies, there is no longer any marriage contract; and if he dies,
why should she return the remainder? Is it not said above that all agree
that the betrothal money must not be returned, as the claim: "Give me my
husband," etc., is to be considered? And if you should say: It speaks in
case she had sinned; then if intentionally, has she still a right to her
marriage contract? And if unintentionally, he may marry her if he be a
commoner. It must be then said that it speaks of when the groom was a
priest, and she was *forced* to sin (and in such a case a commoner may,
and a priest may not marry her). And the point of their difference is,
that R. Meir holds the money of betrothal to be lost forever, and R.
Jehudah holds that it is not; and to R. Jose it was doubtful whether yes
or no. And therefore he maintains that, according to the rule, doubtful
money is to be divided. If he has betrothed her with twenty selas
(eighty zuz), she has to return to him forty zuz. However, he has to
complete the amount belonging to a widow as a marriage contract, which
is one hundred zuz; therefore he gives her thirty half-selas, which

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

are sixty zuz, and this completes the mana to which she is entitled. And
if he betrothed her with thirty selas, she has to return to him fifteen,
and he must give her twenty half-selas more. Said R. Joseph b. Minumi in
the name of R. Na'hman: Babylon is the place where it is customary to
return. And by Babylon he meant the city of Nahardea. But how is it with
the other cities in Babylon? Both Rabba and R. Joseph say: The betrothal
money is not to be returned; but the presents are. Said R. Papa: The
Halakha prevails, whether he or she dies, or he has retracted, the
presents only are to be returned, but not the betrothal money. And in
case *she* has retracted, the betrothal money also. Amimar, however,
maintains that even in the latter case the money must not be returned,
for the reason that one may say that he is then allowed to be betrothed
to her sister (*i.e.*, if one should see the betrothal money returned,
he might think the betrothal cancelled, and he might marry her sister,
which is biblically prohibited so long as she is alive). But according
to R. Ashi: This is not to be feared, as the divorce in her hands
testifies that the betrothal was not cancelled. (Said the Gemara:) R.
Ashi's statement is not to be taken into consideration at all; as one
may be aware that she has returned the betrothal money, and not be aware
that she took a divorce.

"*May be replevined*," etc. The rabbis taught: The following five things
were said about wedding presents: (a) They may be collected by the
court; (b) they are returned at the time when the donator marries; (c)
they are not considered usurious (*i.e.*, if the return was of a greater
value than presented); (d) the Sabbatic year does not release them; (e)
a firstborn has no double share in them. They are collected by the
court, because they are considered a loan. They are not usurious,
because they were not presented with this intention. The Sabbatic year
does not release them, because the verse Deut. xv. 2 does not apply to
them. And the first-born does not take a double share in them, because
they are not as yet in existence, and he is not entitled to that which
will be an inheritance in the future.

R. Kahana said: The following is the rule: If one came into the city,
and heard that his comrade, who was at his wedding, marries, he must
come and make a present. The same is the

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

case if he heard the voice of the drum which announced the marriage of
his comrade; but if it was not drummed, the groom ought to let him know.
However, if he failed to do so, although he may be away, he nevertheless
must pay. In such a case, however, he may deduct for the meal of which
he has not partaken. And how much may he deduct? Said Abayi: The
inhabitants of the city of Ganna used to deduct one zuz. However, this
depends upon the value at which one would appraise the respect and honor
of attendance at the wedding banquet. The rabbis taught: If one has
married publicly, and thereafter, by returning the presents, he wishes
to be married privately, he has a right to say: As you did with me
publicly, I will do with you; but not when privately. The same is the
case if one has married a virgin, and the other marries a widow; or, if
one has married a second wife, and his comrade marries his first wife,
the former may say: As you have done with me, I will do with you. The
same is the case if to him it was done once, and his comrade demands
from him he shall do twice.

The rabbis taught: Who is like unto a wealthy man who is known to be
rich by his many cattle and estates? The one who is a master in Haggadah
(as he lectures everywhere, and becomes known to all). Who is like unto
a broker who does business at his home only and is not well known to the
community? The one who occupies himself with pilpulistic (dialectology,
one who is a master in dialectics). Who is like unto one who makes his
living by selling things which are to be measured--who gathers his money
little by little, which finally becomes a considerable amount? The one
who gathers the decisions of the rabbis, little by little, and finally
possesses a great deal of wisdom. However, all are dependent to the
owner of wheat, which is the Gemara, as only by the studying of it are
we able to understand the Mishnayoth and the Boraithas.

R. Zera in the name of Rabh said: It is written \[Prov. xv. 15\]: "All
the days of the afflicted are evil." It means: The masters of Gemara
(because they must find out how to decide the laws from the Mishnayoth,
which always need an explanation). "But he that is of a cheerful heart,"
etc., means: the one who is a master in Mishnayoth. Rabba, however,
maintains the reverse. He who is a master in Mishnayoth cannot come to
any conclusion about Halakha; but he who is a master in

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

Gemara knows how to decide Halakhas. And this is what R. Mesharshia said
in his name: It is written \[Eccl. x. 9\]: "He that moves stones will be
hurt through them," meaning the masters of the Mishna. "He that cleaveth
wood will be endangered thereby," means the masters of Gemara (because
they do not always succeed in finding out the correct decisions). R.
Hanina said: "All the days of the afflicted," etc., means him who has a
bad wife. "But he who is of a cheerful heart," etc., means him who has a
good wife. R. Janai said: "All the days of the afflicted," etc., means
one who is effeminate. "And he that is of a cheerful heart," etc., means
him who is hardened to the ways of the world. R. Johanan said: By the
first is meant him whose nature is merciful, and who takes to heart
everything which happens to his fellow-men; and by the second is meant
him who is callous. R. Jehoshua b. Levi said: The first means him who is
a pedant; and the second, him whose mind is worldly. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_95)

MISHNA *VI*.: If one sends presents to the house of his betrothed's
father, to the value of one hundred manas, and has partaken of the
betrothal meal, even for one dinar, they are not to be returned. If,
however, he did not partake, they may be returned in case of retraction.
If the presents were given for the purpose that the bride should bring
them, after her marriage, to her husband's house, they are to be
returned. But if such is to be used while she is yet in her father's
house, they are not.

GEMARA: Said Rabha: It means if he has partaken of no less than the
value of a dinar; but if less, he has a right to demand a return. Is
this not self-evident? The Mishna states a dinar? Lest one say this
statement is only general, but not particular, he came to say that this
is to be taken literally. Here in the Mishna it is eating. But how is it
if he drank, or his substitute had partaken? Also, how is it if they had
sent *to him*? Come and hear. R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel said: It
happened with one who had sent to his betrothed's father one hundred
*carrums* containing pitchers of wine and oil, and vessels of silver and
gold, and silk garments; and while he was joyful over the act, he rode
on his horse to the gate of

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

his betrothed's father, where they gave him a goblet of a warm beverage
which he drank while sitting on the horse. Thereafter he died before
marriage. And R. Aha, the mayor of that city, brought this case up
before the sages in the college of Usha, and they decided: Such presents
as may become spoiled before marriage are not to be returned, but such
as are in good condition may. Hence we see even if one has not eaten,
but drunk, it is the same. Infer from this also that the value of what
he had drunk was less than a dinar (as a goblet of warm beverage cannot
amount to a dinar). Said R. Ashi: Who can assure us that the goblet to
which they treated him was not worth a thousand zuz, as perhaps they had
ground a pearl <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_96) of that value in the
goblet? But infer from this that if they had sent to his house, it is
the same as if he had partaken of it at the house of his betrothed's
father? Nay! Perhaps at the gate of his betrothed's father is the same
as if he had partaken of it *inside* the house. The schoolmen
questioned: How is it when the presents have improved--*e.g.*, if he had
made presents in cattle and they brought offspring? Shall we say,
because they have to be returned to him, they are to be considered under
his control, and belong to him; or, because if they should be lost,
payment for them would be demanded, they are considered under the
control of his betrothed's father? This question remains undecided.

Rabha questioned: The presents which are usually spoiled during the time
from the betrothal to marriage--how is it if they were in good
condition; must they be returned, or not? Come and hear the Boraitha
cited above: "R. Aha, the mayor of that city, brought the matter up
before the sages of Usha, who decided: If they are liable to be spoiled,
they are not to be returned." Does it not mean although they are in good
condition? Nay, it may mean if they *were* spoiled. Come, then, and hear
the last part of our Mishna: "But if they be used while she is yet in
her father's house they are not? "This was explained by Rabha to be nets
and veils. R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh said: It happened with one who
sent to the house of his betrothed's father, wine, oil, and garments of
flax; all of them new of that year at the time of Pentecost.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But what news came
he to tell us? If you wish, he tells us the great value of the land of
Israel; and if you wish, it may be said that he came to teach us: If one
claims that he had done so at such a time, his claim is to be
considered. The same said again in the name of the same authority: It
happened with one, that he was told that his betrothed wife could not
smell. He went after her into a ruined building to test her, and said: I
perceive a smell of radishes (*i.e.*, he kept in his pockets some for
the purpose of testing her, whether she would smell them), and she
answered him sarcastically: If one should furnish me with the dates of
Jericho, I would eat them with the radishes I smell. Thereupon the
ruined building fell and she died. And the sages decided: Because her
husband entered the ruin only for the purpose of testing, he has no
right to inherit from her.

"*But if they be used while in her father's house*," etc. Rabbin the
elder was sitting before R. Papa and said: This is only in case death
occurred to one of them; but if he had retracted, the presents are to be
returned, but not what he had expended for the banquets. If, however,
she had retracted, even the value of a bundle of herbs is to be
returned. Said R. Huna b. R. Jehoshua: The value of the meat used at the
banquets must be appraised at the cheapest price. How cheap should it
be? A third of the existing price.

MISHNA *VII*.: If a sick person had bequeathed all his estates to
strangers, leaving some ground for himself, his gift is considered
valid. If, however, he left nothing, it is invalid.

GEMARA: Who is the Tana who holds that we may act in accordance with the
supposed intention of the bequeather (as the Mishna states, "If he left
nothing for himself it is invalid," which means, if the sick person
becomes cured, he may retract: because if he could know that he would
remain alive, he would not do so)? Said R. Na'hman: It is according to
Simeon b. Menasia of the previous chapter ([p.
291](t0718.htm#page_291)). R. Shesheth, however, maintains: This is in
accordance with R. Simeon of Shizuri of Tract Gittin (Chapter VI.,
Mishna 6), who said: Also who is dangerously sick. Who is the Tana of
what the rabbis taught in the following Tosephtha: If one was sick in
bed, and he was questioned to whom he bequeathed his estates, and he
said: "I thought that I had a son, but now that I am

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

convinced I have not, I bequeath my estates to so and so"; or, "I
thought that my wife was pregnant, but now that I know she is not, I
bequeath them to so and so"; and thereafter it became known that he left
a son, or that his wife was pregnant, this bequeathing counts
nothing--shall we assume that it is in accordance with R. Simeon b.
Menasia and not with the rabbis? Nay! It may be even in accordance with
the rabbis, as when he said: "I thought," etc., it is different. Why was
it supposed previously that this should not be in accordance with the
rabbis? Lest one say that the sick person said it only to mention his
sorrow, but he did not think that it should not be bequeathed if he did
have a son, it comes to teach us that it is not so. R. Zera in the name
of Rabh said: Whence do we deduce that a gift of a sick person must be
*biblically* considered? Because it is written \[Num. xxvii. 8\]: "Then
shall he cause to pass unto his daughter" (*i.e.*, it should be written
as elsewhere: You shall give the estates), it comes to teach that there
is another case which we have to pass, and this is the gift of a sick
person. R. Na'hman in the name of Rabba b. Abuhu, however, maintains
from \[ibid., verse 9\]: "Shall ye give his inheritance unto his
brothers" (which is also superfluous, as it should read: If no daughter,
then to the brothers), which teaches that there is another gift which is
to be considered valid, and that is, of a sick person. R. Menasia b.
Jeremiah said: It is deduced from \[II Kings, xx. 1\]: "Give thy charge
to thy house," etc., from which we see that concerning a sick person it
is sufficient when he charges without any writing. And Rami b. Ezekiel
said: From the following \[II Samuel, xvii. 23\]: "And Achithophel . . .
and gave his charge to his household," etc., we see that charging is
sufficient without any writing.

The rabbis taught: The following three things has Achithophel charged
his sons: You shall not quarrel with each other; you shall not rebel
against the kingdom of David; and if the Day of Pentecost be a clear
one, you may begin to sow wheat. Mar Zutra, however, said: It was taught
that he said: If it should be cloudy. Nahardeans said in the name of R.
Jacob: Not exactly clear, and not exactly cloudy; as, if it should be a
little cloudy, with a north. wind blowing, it is also considered clear.
Said R. Abba to R. Ashi: We, however, do not rely

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

upon the cited Boraitha, but on what is said by R. Itz'hak b. Abdimi in
Tract Yoma (p. 29, lines 14, 15, etc.).

\[There is a Boraitha by Abba Shaul: If the Day of Pentecost be clear,
it is a good sign for the whole year. R. Zebid said: If the first day of
the new year is a warm one, the whole year will be warm; and if cold,
the whole year will be so. And to what purpose was it said? Concerning
the prayer of the high priest on the Day of Atonement (that he should
pray accordingly).\] Rabha, however, in the name of R. Na'hman said: The
gift of a sick person is rabbinical. And it was so enacted that a sick
person should not become exhausted, being aware that, because he is sick
and cannot write down or sign his will, he can do nothing with his
property. But did, indeed, R. Na'hman say so? Did he not say: Although
Samuel decided: If one sold a promissory note to his neighbor, and
thereafter relinquished his right in it, his act is valid; and even his
heir may do so? He (Samuel) nevertheless admits that if he gave this
note to some one as a gift, he has no longer right to relinquish his
debt, even if he becomes cured. Now, this would be correct if the gift
of a sick person were biblical; but if it is rabbinical, why should he
not be able to relinquish it when cured? It is true it is not biblical,
but the rabbis have enacted that this law should be equal to a biblical
one.

Rabha in the name of R. Na'hman said: If a sick person said: "A shall
reside in such a house," or, "B shall consume the products of such and
such a tree," he said nothing, unless he said: "Give such and such a
house to A, that he may reside there"; "Give such and such a tree to B,
and he shall consume its products." Is it meant to say that R. Na'hman
holds that a sick person who verbally wills has no more right than one
who is in good health--*i.e.*, if one who is in good health should say:
"He shall reside there," it would not be considered a gift even if it
were done with the ceremony of a sudarium; then it would contradict
another saying of Rabha's in the name of R. Na'hman: If a sick person
said: "The loan made by me to A shall be given to B," he is to be
listened to, which is not the case with one in good health, as title
cannot be given to a loan which is made with the intention that the
borrower shall expend it. (Hence we see that a sick person has more
right than one in good health.) Said R. Papa: The reason of this law is,

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

because an heir inherits it, it is considered as if it were under the
control of the borrower. And farther on it is said that the gift of a
sick person is considered as an inheritance. R. Aha b. R. Aiqua,
however, said: To transfer a loan is lawful, even for him who is in good
health in case it were made in the presence of all three, as is said
above by R. Huna.

The schoolmen propounded a question: If the sick person bequeaths a tree
to A and the products of it to B, should it be considered as if he
reserved it for himself, in such a case it being said above that he
cannot retract when cured, or is it not so considered? And should you
decide that it is not so considered when he bequeaths the products to
another, how is it if he said: I bequeath the tree to A, except the
products. Is this considered as if he reserved some of the ground for
himself, or not? Said Rabha in the name of R. Na'hman: Even if it should
be decided, the products to another, it cannot be counted that he
reserved some of the ground for himself, it is to be counted as if he
left the products to himself, for the reason that if one left to
himself, he does it with a good eye. Said R. Abba to R. Ashi: We taught
R. Na'hman's statement as to what was said above ([p.
153](t0708.htm#page_153)) by Resh Lakish concerning a house and an
attic; and in accordance with R. Zebid's explanation there.

R. Joseph b. Minumi in the name of R. Na'hman said: A sick person who
has bequeathed all of his estates to strangers, it must be investigated
how was the case (*i.e.*, if he had divided them at one time). *E.g.*,
of my property such and such shall belong to A, and such and such to B,
etc.--as he could not do otherwise if he had made up his mind to divide
his estates in such a manner as if 'he were to die of his sickness, so
the last ones are not considered as if he would reserve some of his
estates for himself--all of them acquire title after his death. But in
case of cure he may retract from all of them, even from the first, but
if he so does after deliberating (*i.e.*, "Such and such shall be to A,"
then stops, and some time thereafter adds: "Such and such to B," etc.),
in case he was cured of this sickness he may retract only from the last
one, as he left nothing for himself--for it is to be supposed that if he
knew he would be cured he would not give away the last of his estate so
that he should remain a beggar--but not from the previous one.

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But why should not
we suppose, even in the latter case, that his intention was concerning
all of them, in case he should die, and the deliberation was as to who
was more worthy to be his inheritor? Usually a sick person who expects
to die makes up his mind for all his estates before he mentions any
name.

R. Aha b. Minumi in the name of R. Na'hman said: If a sick person has
bequeathed all his estates to strangers, and thereafter is cured, he
cannot retract, as it may be feared, perhaps, he has estates in another
country. But does not our Mishna state: In case he left nothing for
himself, he may? And according to this theory, how can such a case
occur? Said R. Hama: It may occur, if he said: *All* my estates,
wherever they may be found. Mar b. R. Ashi said: Our Mishna means to
say: In case it was clear to the people that he had no estates
elsewhere.

The schoolmen propounded a question: Should a retraction in part be
considered a retraction of all, or not (*e.g.*, if he first bequeaths
all his estates to A, and thereafter he bequeaths a part of same to B,
which, according to the law, he may do, the question arises whether A
has still the right to what was bequeathed to him at first, or the
retraction of a part annuls the first entirely)? Come and hear: "If one
bequeaths all his estates to A, and thereafter a part of them to B, B
acquires title, but A does not." Is it not to be assumed that it means
in case he dies? Nay! It means in case he was cured. And so it seems to
be from the latter part stated in the same Boraitha: "If he wrote, 'A
part of my estate shall belong to A and all the remainder to B,' the
latter acquires title, but not the first." And this statement is correct
in case he was cured; as then, bequeathing all the remainder to B, he
reserved nothing for himself; but if it speaks in case he dies, why
should both of them not acquire title? Said R. Yemar to R. Ashi: The
same might be said even when he was cured. If you decide that a
retraction in part is considered a retraction to all, it is correct that
title is given to B, as the first bequeathing to A is entirely annulled
with that which he has separated from it to B. But if you should decide
that a retraction in part does not annul the first, let this case be
considered as the case of "dividing" mentioned above, and title should
not be given to any of them.

The Halakha, however, prevails: "That a retraction in part

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

is considered entirely." And the first case mentioned in the just cited
Boraitha holds good for both, whether he dies or is cured; and the
latter case holds good only when he was cured.

R. Shesheth said: The expressions, "He shall take," "shall be rewarded,"
"shall make a hazakah," and "shall acquire title" are to be considered a
*gift*, from which he has no right to retract. A Boraitha adds: "Also
the expression 'shall inherit,' to him who is fit to be his direct
heir." And it is in accordance with Johanan b. Beroka.

The schoolmen questioned: How shall it be done, if he expresses himself:
A is the one who shall derive benefit from my estates? Does he mean all
of them shall belong to him, or that he shall derive *some* benefit from
them, but not all? This remains undecided. The same propounded another
question: How is it if he had sold all his estates while he was
sick--may he retract when cured, or not? And in answering this question,
at one time it was said by R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh: He may
retract; and at another time it was said by the same in the name of the
same authority: He may not. However, they do not contradict each other,
as the first decision holds good in case the money obtained was still in
his hands, and the second applies in case the seller had expended it by
paying his debts.

The schoolmen propounded another question: If a sick person has
confessed, "I owe so much to so and so," shall it be taken for granted,
and his creditors acquire title to the cash or estates left; or,
probably, that he said this for the purpose that, should he be cured,
his children should not think that he was rich, and therefore the man
whom he mentioned in his confession takes nothing? Come and hear: Aisur,
the proselyte, had thirteen thousand zuz with Rabha. R. Mari was his son
(whose mother Rachel, daughter of Samuel, who was in captivity, was
pregnant with him from the same Aisur when he was still a heathen before
marriage, and although he was born after the father had embraced
Judaism, according to the law he was not considered his son concerning
inheritance, and also must not be named after him, therefore Mari was
named Mari b. Rachel, after his mother). Said Rabha: I do not see any
lawful case which could make R. Mari inherit the money deposited with
me. By inheritance he cannot, as, according to the law, he is not
considered an heir. Should his father while sick make

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

it a gift to him, there is a rule that he who can be an heir is fit to
receive the gift, but not he who is not fit to be an heir. There is also
a rule that to coins title cannot be given by exchange; and if his
father would present him with real estate, which is lawful, his father
does not possess it; and if by transferring them from me to him in the
presence of all three of us, then certainly, if he would send after me,
I would not listen. Which R. Aiqua b. R. Ami opposed, saying: Why, then,
let Aisur confess that the money in question belongs to Mari, and with
his confession title would be given to him. While so discussing, Aisur
got wind of it, and confessed. Rabha became angry, saying: They are
instructing people how to make their claims good and do harm to me.

"*Reserving some ground for himself*," etc. But what is meant by this?
Said R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh: It means real estate, or ground by
which his livelihood is assured. And R. Jeremiah b. Abba maintains: The
same is the case when he left movable property. Said R. Zera: See how
the decisions of our elders correspond. Why is it said real estate?
Because it is supposed that a sick person would think, "If I should be
cured, I shall get my livelihood from this estate." The same is the case
if he left movable property; he relies upon it. R. Joseph, however,
opposed: I do not see such a correspondence at all. He who says "movable
property" does not correspond with our Mishna, which states plainly,
"ground" (real estate); and he who said "to be sufficient for his
livelihood" also does not correspond with it, which states "some real
estate," which cannot be explained that it should suffice for a
livelihood. Said Abayi to him: Does the Mishna mean in each case when it
mentions ground, that it is not changeable for movable property? Did not
R. Dimi b. Joseph say in the name of R. Elazar, referring to a Mishna in
Tract Gittin, in which also some ground is mentioned: Movable property
is also considered a remainder in that case? There it is different. It
should not state "ground" at all; but because it begins with the law of
Peah, which applies to ground no matter how small it is, etc., it uses
the same expression at the end. But in reality there is a difference
between real estate and movable property. It was also questioned: Is
this a rule--that wherever the expression, a trifle, is mentioned

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

in the Mishna, it does not mean a certain quantity? Is there not a
Mishna in Chulin: "If five sheep give some wool, the law of the first
shearing applies to it"? and to the question: What does "some wool"
mean? said Rabha: No less than a litra and a half, etc. Hence we see the
expression "some" means a certain quantity? There also it should not
state "some wool"; but because in the beginning it states: If each sheep
gives a litra and a half, it expresses in the latter case "some wool,"
as the quantity from every five sheep is only one litra and a half.

It is certain that if one says, "I bequeath my movable property to so
and so," he acquires title to all vessels or garments which are useful,
except wheat and barley. And if he says, "*All* my movable property,"
wheat and barley are also included; and even the grinder of a handmill,
but not the grindstone. And if he say, "All that is movable," even the
latter is included. But the question arises: If among his properties
were also bondsmen, is title given to them also, as they are also
considered movable property; or are slaves under the category of real
estate and title is not given?

Said R. Aha b. R. Ashi to R. Ivia: Come and hear Mishna 7 in Chapter IV.
of this tract, which states: If he said, "I sell the town, with all its
contents," slaves are included. From which it is to be inferred that
slaves are considered movable property; as if they were considered real
estate they ought to be included, even if he did not mention "with all
its contents." But can you infer from it that they are considered
movable property? Does not the Mishna express itself "even bondsmen";
and if they should be considered movable property, why "even"? We must
then say that there is a difference between movable property which must
be carried and that which is self-moving. The same answer can also apply
to the theory that slaves are considered real estate. (See previous
vol., p. 59.)

Rabha in the name of R. Na'hman said: In five cases the act of a gift is
not considered unless the bequeather writes "all my estates," and they
are: A sick person, his bondsmen, his wife, his children, and the
estates of a woman who has bequeathed them to some one for the purpose
that her future husband should not demand them at the marriage. "A sick

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

person"--as our Mishna states: If he reserved nothing for himself, the
bequeathing is not considered. "A slave"--as there is a Mishna which
states: If one has bequeathed all of his estates to a slave, the latter
becomes free. If, however, he reserved some for himself, he does not.
"His wife"--as is said above: If one bequeaths all his estate to his
wife, it is considered that he has appointed her as a guardian only. "To
his children"--as stated above: If one bequeaths all his estate to his
children, but reserves for his wife some ground, she loses the right of
her marriage contract. "And the estate of a woman who desires to hide it
from her future husband"--as the Master said elsewhere: In such a case
she must write all her estates, as only then she may retract after her
marriage. But if she reserved something for herself, she loses the
right. And in all those cases where they reserved for themselves movable
property, their acts were invalid, except in the case of a marriage
contract, to which the enactment of the rabbis was made for real estate
only. Amimar, however, maintains: If the movable property in question
was mentioned in the marriage contract, and while bequeathing all his
estate to his children he reserved it for himself, it is considered, and
his wife does not lose her right in the marriage contract.

If A bequeaths his estates to B, and among them were slaves, they are
included, as they are also called estate, as said above. Earth is
considered estate, as there is a Mishna: Estates which one can rely upon
can be acquired with money, with a bill of sale, and with hazakah.
Garments are also considered estate, as the same Mishna adds: And to
that which cannot be relied upon, title is given only by drawing. Coins
are also considered estate, from the same Mishna, which adds: Such
estates which cannot be relied upon may be obtained with that which may
be relied upon. <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_97) \[Here is repeated
from Baba Kama ([p. 236](t0717.htm#page_236)) what happened to R. Papa
when he had to collect twelve thousand zuz, as evidence that coins are
considered estate.\] Deeds are also considered estate. As Rabba b.
Itz'hak said: There are two kinds of deeds. If one said to witnesses:
"Give title of this field to so and so by a ceremony of a sudarium, and

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

write him a deed, he may retract as to the deed," but he cannot retract
as to the field itself, as title was already given. But if he said:
"Give title," etc., with the stipulation, "You shall write him a deed
also," he may retract from both. And R. Hyya b. Abbin in the name of R.
Huna said: There are three, kinds of deeds: the two just mentioned; and
the third, if the seller hastened and wrote the deed. As is said above:
If the. seller desire to write a bill of sale, he may do so even in the
absence of the buyer; as after the buyer makes a hazakah on the estate,
title is given to the deed wherever it may be found. As we have learned:
Estates which cannot be relied upon are obtained with that which is to
be relied upon, etc. (We see, then, that deeds are considered estate.)
[Cattle](errata.htm#21) are also so considered, as we have learned
(Tract Shekalim, Chapter IV., Mishna g): "If one devote his possessions,
and there are among them cattle. fit for the altar, male or female,"
etc. Fowl are also so considered, as we have learned \[ibid., h\]: "If
one devote his possessions, and among them . . . oils and birds," etc.
Tephilin are also so considered, as we have learned: "If one devote his
estates, among which tephilin were found, they must be left for him."

The schoolmen propounded a question: How is the case with the Holy
Scrolls--as they must not be sold, are they considered estate or not?
This remains undecided. The mother of R. Zutra b. Tubhia had transferred
to Zutra her estates because she was about to marry R. Zebid. However,
after marriage, Zebid divorced her. Then she came before R. Bibi b.
Abayi, claiming that she retracted from her transfer, as she told R.
Zutra plainly that only for the purpose of marriage had she transferred
her estates to him. But he said: You transferred them on account of
marriage, and you did marry. Said R. Huna b. R. Jehoshua: Because you
are weak you speak weak words (see above, [p. 306](t0718.htm#page_306)).
Even according to him who said: "If she wishes to hide her estates from
her future husband, title is given," it is only in case she does it
without any remark; but in this case she said plainly to her son that
she did it because of marriage. But now she is divorced.

The mother of Rami b. Hama bequeathed to him her estates on one evening,
and in the morning she bequeathed them to her son R. Uqba. Rami then
went to R. Shesheth,

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

who turned over the estates to him. And R. Uqba went to R. Na'hman's
court, and he decided that the estates belonged to him (Uqba). R.
Shesheth then went to R. Na'hman and questioned him: Why such a
decision? If it is because she retracted from the first, this would hold
good only should she be cured; but she was dead from this sickness, and
her first will ought to be listened to? And he answered: So said Samuel:
In such a case where a retraction holds good in case of a cure, it is
the same if the retraction was made while still sick. Rejoined R.
Shesheth: Samuel said so in case he has retracted and reserved the
estates for himself? But did he say also that he might bequeath to
another? And R. Na'hman answered. Yea! Samuel said plainly: One may do
so, whether for himself or for another.

The mother of R. Amram the Pious possessed a bundle of deeds, and while
dying she said: They shall be given to my son Amram. His brothers,
however, came to complain before R. Na'hman, claiming that Amram had not
made any drawing on the deeds; consequently he had not yet acquired
title to them. To which R. Na'hman answered: The words of a dying person
are considered as if written and delivered.

The sister of R. Tubi b. Matna bequeathed her estates to him on one
morning, and in the evening came R. Ahadbui, who cried before her,
claiming that people would say: The one brother is a scholar and the
other not, and she has bequeathed to him. When the case came before R.
Na'hman, he decided as he said above in Samuel's name, that the
retraction held good. The sister of R. Dimi b. Joseph owned a part of a
vineyard; and every time she became sick, she used to present it to him,
and when cured to retract. At one time she became sick and sent to him:
Come and acquire title to my estates.

And he answered: I do not want them. She, however, sent again to him:
Come and acquire title to them, so that, according to the law, I shall
not be able to retract. He then went, reserved a part thereof for her,
and then the ceremony of a sudarium was made. She again became cured,
and again retracted, and came to R. Na'hman requesting that he should
return to her her estates. And R. Na'hman summoned R. Dimi before the
court. But he was not willing to listen, saying: To what purpose shall I
go? All that was done was in

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

accordance with the law. She reserved of the estates for herself in case
she should be cured, etc. He then sent to him: If you will not appear
before the court, I shall prick you so that blood will not run (*i.e.*,
put him under the ban). Then R. Na'hman examined the witnesses how was
the case. And they said: The woman said thus: "Woe is me! I am dying,"
and then she said her will. To which R. Na'hman gave his decision: In
such a case it is considered that she made the will because she was
afraid she would die; and a will made in the fear of death may be
retracted.

It was taught: Concerning a gift in part of a sick person, it was said
before Rabha, in the name of Mar Zutra the son of R. Na'hman, who said
in the name of his father: In one respect it is equal to a gift by one
in good health; it means he cannot retract if cured; and in the other to
a will of a sick person, as it needs not the ceremony of a sudarium.
Said Rabha to them: I told you several times, "Do not put a clay-pot
(see Chapter I., [p. 14](t0705.htm#page_14)) on the neck of R. Na'hman."
R. Na'hman said thus: It is considered a gift of one in good health and
must be done with the ceremony of a sudarium. Rabha, however, objected
to R. Na'hman from our Mishna, which states: If he reserved some ground
for himself the gift is valid. Is it not to be assumed that no sudarium
is needed? And he answered: Nay! It must be done with the ceremony of a
sudarium. But does not the latter part state: If he reserved nothing,
title is not given? And if it is as you say, why should it not be the
same when made by a sudarium? And he answered: So said Samuel: If a sick
person has bequeathed all his estates to strangers, although made with a
sudarium, he may retract, because it is certain he made it in the fear
of death. R. Mesharshia objected to Rabha from the following: It
happened with the mother of Rukhl's sons that while sick she said: My
jewelry shall be given to my daughter, and is worth twelve manas. And
she died; and the sages listened to her will. (Hence we see that,
although it was a part of her estate, and it was not made with the
ceremony of a sudarium, it was nevertheless considered.) The case was,
because she had mentioned: I am certain I shall die, therefore I
bequeath this to my daughter. R. Huna b. R. Jehoshua, however, said: If
the sick person has commanded while dying, a sudarium is needed; and all
Boraithas

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

cited treat when the sick person has divided all his estates among
different persons. And in such a case it is said above that the rabbis
consider them as a gift of a sick person. The Halakha, however, prevails
that for a gift of a sick person in part a sudarium is needed, even when
he dies of that sickness; but if he commanded while dying, no sudarium
is needed in case he dies. But if he was cured he may retract, even if
it was done with a sudarium.

It was taught: A gift of a sick person, in which it was written that it
was made with a sudarium--it is considered based upon two sources, and
must be listened to. So declared the school of Rabh in the name of their
master. Samuel, however, said: I do not know what should be done in such
a case. The reason of the school of Rabh is: Because the will was made
on two bases, it is equal to both--a gift of one in good health, from
which he cannot retract, and to a gift of a sick person who said, "The
loan I have with A, shall be given to B." And the reason of Samuel, who
was doubtful in such a case, is: Perhaps the sick person made up his
mind not to give title without a deed, and such cannot be written after
death.

However, there is a contradiction from the following statement of
Rabh's, to his one decision just mentioned, and the same is it with
Samuel--namely: The message which Rabbin sent in the name of R. Abuhu
(above, pp. [300](t0718.htm#page_300)-1), in which both Rabh and Samuel
contradict themselves? Nay! There is no contradiction at all. Rabh it
does not contradict, because in one case he speaks where it was made
with a ceremony of a sudarium, and in the other where it was not. And to
Samuel also there is no contradiction, as his decision in the case cited
speaks when the sudarium was made to strengthen the act. (This will be
explained farther on.)

R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak was sitting behind Rabha, and Rabha before R.
Na'hman, who questioned him: Did Samuel indeed say that it is to be
feared the sick person had perhaps made up his mind to give title by a
deed only? Did not R. Jehudah say in his name: A sick person who has
bequeathed all his estates to strangers, although made with a sudarium,
if he was cured he may retract. Because it is known that this bequest
was only because he thought he would die. R. Na'hman gestured, and Rabha
remained silent. After R. Na'hman went out,

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

questioned R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak: Rabha, what does R. Na'hman mean by
his gesture? And he answered: He means that title is given when the act
was strengthened. And to the question: How is it known that the act was
strengthened? Said R. Hisda: If it was written: "In addition to his gift
the ceremony of a sudarium was made."

It is certain that if one bequeathed first to one, and thereafter to
another, it is as R. Dimi said above: The later will abolishes the
first. But how is it if he wrote and gave title with a sudarium to one,
and thereafter he did the same to another? According to Rabh: Title is
given to the first, as in his opinion it is similar to a gift by one who
is in good health. But according to Samuel title is given to the second,
as in his opinion it is similar to a gift of a sick person, and it is to
be feared that he had perhaps made up his mind to give title only by a
deed. So it was taught in the city of Sura. In Pumbeditha, however, it
was taught as follows: R. Jeremiah b. Abba said: A message was sent from
the college to Samuel: Let the master teach us--how is the law if one
has bequeathed his estate to strangers with a sudarium? And his answer
was: After a sudarium, nothing can be done. The schoolmen, however,
understood that Samuel's decision was only if it was bequeathed to
another; but if he became cured and wished to retract for the sake of
himself, he might do so. Said R. Hisda to them: When R. Huna came from
Khuphry, he explained that Samuel meant to say it holds good in any
event (*i.e.*, he cannot retract even for himself). There was one who
bequeathed his estates with a sudarium while he was sick, and thereafter
became cured and wanted to retract, and brought up his case in the court
of R. Huna. And R. Huna said to him: "I can do nothing for you, as you
acted not in accordance with those who wish to retract after cure. They
usually give title with one of the two--a document or a sudarium. You,
however, have done both; and such an act can by no means be abolished."
There was a deed of gift in which it was written: While I live and after
my death. Rabh considered this as a will upon death, because death was
mentioned. And Samuel considered it as a gift by one in good health,
because while "I live" was mentioned--explaining that the word death is
to be interpreted from time everlasting. Said Uhla: The

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

sages of Nahardea decided: The Halakha prevails with Rabh. Said Rabha:
If, however, it was written: "While I *still* live," title is given. And
Amimar said: The Halakha does not prevail with Rabha. Said R. Ashi to
him: Is this not self-evident? Have not the Nahardeans decided: The
Halakha prevails with Rabh? (And he rejoined:) One might say: When
"*still* alive." Rabh also admits: I came to say that it is not so.
There was such a case, which came before R. Na'hman in the city of
Nahardea, and he sent the plaintiff to R. Jeremiah b. Abba in the city
of Shum-Tamia, saying: Nahardea is the city of Samuel, and we cannot act
against him, though the Halakha prevails with Rabh. There was also such
a case which came before Rabha, and he decided in accordance with his
own theory. And the plaintiff was a woman, who troubled him very much,
saying: His decision was not in accordance with the law. He said then to
R. Papa b. R. Hanon, who was his scribe: Write her a document that she
won the case; but at the bottom write a few words from a Mishna in
Middle Gate: "He may hire other laborers or deceive them" (that the
court to which she shall bring my judgment will understand that I do not
agree with it). And she exclaimed: I see you desire to fool me--may your
ship sink! Rabha's followers dipped his clothes in water, to overcome
the curse of the woman. However, they did not succeed, as Rabha was
punished for this.

MISHNA *VIII*.: If in the deed it was not mentioned that he was sick,
and he claims that he was sick at the time of writing and had a right to
retract, while the plaintiff claims that he was in good health, it is
for him to bring evidence that be was sick. So is the decree of R. Meir.
The sages, however, say: There is a rule that it is always for the
plaintiff to bring evidence.

GEMARA: There was a deed of gift in which it was written that it was
done while he was sick in bed; but it was not mentioned that he died
from that sickness. And Rabha said: It does not matter, as in reality he
did die, and his grave is evidence. Said Abayi to him: But what evidence
is this that he died from that sickness? Perhaps he was then cured,
retracted, and thereafter died of another sickness? And that this is to
be feared we may infer from a ship which sinks, when it is seldom that
the men on board are saved. And, nevertheless, we apply

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

to such a case both the rigorous law concerning life and the rigorous
law concerning death (*i.e.*, the wives of those who were on board are
not allowed to marry, as perhaps their husbands are not dead, but have
drifted to the shore at another place and remain alive, and also must
not partake of Terumah in case their husbands were priests, as perhaps
they are dead). So much the more in our case, in which the majority of
sick persons become cured. Should we not fear that, because it was not
mentioned in the deed that he died from that sickness, he was cured?

Said R. Huna b. R. Jehoshua: The decision of Rabha in this case is in
accordance with R. Nathan of the following Boraitha (in such a case as
stated in our Mishna, it depends on circumstances): Who has to collect
from whom? If he, the bequeather, has to take out of their hands, he can
do so without any evidence; but if they have to collect from him,
evidence must be brought. So is the decree of R. Jacob. R. Nathan,
however, maintains: If the case comes on while he is in good health, it
is for him to bring evidence that he was sick when the deed was written.
On the other hand, they have to bring evidence that he was in good
health, if the case comes on while he is sick. (Hence we see that R.
Nathan's decision is according to the circumstances at the time the case
is before the court; and the same is Rabha's theory.)

"*The sages, however, say*," etc. What kind of evidence is required?
According to R. Huna: Witnesses shall testify that he was in good health
when the deed was written. And according to R. Hisda and Rabba b. R.
Huna: The evidence should be by approval of this deed (*i.e.*, the
defendant claims that he was then sick, and consequently the deed is
valueless; but if they bring evidence from the court that it was
approved by it, he must not be trusted, as it is to be supposed that the
court would not approve it if it was not aware that he was in good
health). R. Huna, who required witnesses, maintains: R. Meir and the
sages differ as R. Jacob and R. Nathan do. And R. Hisda and Rabba b. R.
Huna maintain: They (Meir and the rabbis) differ as to whether a deed
which is admitted by the signer must be approved by the court or not.
According to R. Meir, it is not necessary; and according to the rabbis,
it is.

Rab ha is also of the opinion that the evidence in question

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

must be witnesses. Said Abayi to him: What is your reason? Shall we
assume that because all other documents state it was done when he was on
his feet and in good health, and here it is not so mentioned, it is to
be assumed that he was then sick? Why not say to the contrary, as in all
documents of a sick person it is written: "It was done while he was sick
in bed," and here it is not mentioned, it is to be assumed that he was
then in good health? (And he answered:) Since it can be so said, and
also the contrary, therefore we leave the money or the article in the
hands of its possessor; and it is for the plaintiff to bring evidence.

The decision of this question is still in discussion, as R. Johanan and
Resh Lakish also differ. According to the former, witnesses are
required; and according to the latter, the approval of the deed.

R. Johanan objected to Resh Lakish from the following: It happened in
the city of Bene Brack that one sold the estate of his father, and died;
and his relatives complained that he was not of age when he died. And
they came and questioned R. Aqiba whether they had a right to examine
the corpse. And his answer was: First, you are not allowed to disgrace
the dead; and secondly, the signs of maturity are subject to change
after death. Now, according to my theory that witnesses are required, it
is correct: as the buyers required evidence from the relatives, which
they could not give, they asked for permission to examine the corpse.
But according to your theory that the evidence should be by approval of
the deed, let them, then, approve the documents, and hold the goods
without any, examination? And Resh Lakish answered: Do you think that
his estates were still in the possession of his relatives, and the
buyers were the plaintiffs? On the contrary, the estates were in the
hands of the buyers; and the relatives were the plaintiffs. (Says the
Gemara:) It seems to be so, as his relatives kept silence when Aqiba
told them they were not allowed to examine; and if the buyers were the
plaintiffs, they would certainly claim: We gave him money--let him be
disgraced and disgraced. However, this cannot be taken as a support, as
it can be said that therefore R. Aqiba said to them: "And secondly,
signs of maturity are subject to change," because of their claim: Let
him be disgraced.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

(It was taught) Resh Lakish questioned R. Johanan: There is a Mishna
among the Mishnayoth of Bar Kapara: If one worked up a field and
consumed the products as if he were the owner of it, and then one came
and claimed, "It is mine," but the occupant showed him a document,
whether bill of sale or deed of gift, and the plaintiff said, "I do not
recognize such a document at all," the signatures which are on the
document must be approved by the court (*i.e.*, it is sufficient that
the witnesses should testify before the court that they recognize their
signatures, but it is not necessary that they should testify that the
sale or gift was made in their presence). If, however, the plaintiff
claims: "I recognize this deed, but it was written only upon your
request for a special purpose; but I never sold"; or, "I sold to you and
never took any money," if the plaintiff brings evidence, then it must be
done accordingly; but if there is no evidence, the deed is in force.
Shall we assume that it is according to R. Meir, who said: "If one
recognizes his document, the approval of it is not necessary," and not
in accordance with the rabbis? And R. Johanan answered: Nay! I say that
all agree such a document does not need any approval. Said Resh Lakish
again: But there is a Mishna that they do differ. And he answered: That
Mishna treats that the witnesses themselves impair the deed (*i.e.*,
they testified that they signed it illegally). But can he, the giver of
the document, be supposed to impair it? Rejoined Resh Lakish: But in
your name it was said that you would approve the claim of the relatives
who asked permission for the examination (cited above), as it seemed to
you they were right. To which R. Johanan rejoined: This was said by
Elazar, but *I* never said such a thing. Said R. Zera: If R. Johanan
denies what was said by Elazar his disciple, will he also deny what was
said by R. Janai his master? The same said in the name of Rabbi: If one
admits that he wrote this document, it must nevertheless be approved. To
which R. Johanan said, answering him: Rabbi, is this not the same as our
Mishna states? The sages, however, say: It is for the plaintiff to bring
evidence. And there is no other evidence but the approval of the
document. And therefore (adds R. Zera), it seems that our master Joseph
Js right when he states in the name of R. Jehudah, quoting Samuel, that
the rabbis said approval is not needed to a document

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

which is admitted by the signer. And he who holds that he still needs an
approval is R. Meir. Also, by the expression of R. Johanan, "All agree,"
is meant the rabbis, as R. Meir was only a single individual who so
holds. But does not the Mishna state the reverse? And also the Boraitha,
does it not state in the name of the sages that it must be approved?
Reverse the names in the Mishna, as well as in the Boraitha. But was it
not stated above that R. Johanan is the one who requires that the
evidence mentioned in the Mishna should be witnesses? This statement is
also to be reversed (*i.e.*, R. Johanan said: The evidence should be
with the approval of the deed). Then the objection must be reversed
also--not that R. Johanan objected to Resh Lakish, but the reverse? Nay!
So said R. Johanan to Resh Lakish: According to my theory that I require
the evidence should be by the approval of the deed, it is correct that
the buyers took possession of the estate which was sold to them by the
alleged minor. But according to your theory, how can there be such a
case--that the buyers should possess the estate? Where could they find
witnesses who should testify that he was of age? And Resh Lakish
answered him: I admit to you that the claim of the relatives ought not
to be taken into consideration; for what was their claim as against the
deed in which witnesses signed that "he was of age"? And there is a rule
that witnesses have the preference; as it is assumed that witnesses
would not testify unless they were aware of the case. Hence concerning
this deed they would not sign it if they were not aware that he was of
age.

It was taught: What must be the age of one who has the right to sell the
estates left him by his father? Rabha in the name of R. Na'hman said:
Eighteen. And R. Huna b. Hinna in the name of the same authority said:
Twenty. R. Zera objected from the above case which happened in the city
of Bene Brack, to whom R. Aqiba said: The signs of maturity are subject
to change after death. And this can be correct in him who said eighteen,
as then his relatives questioned the law if the corpse might be
examined. But according to him who said twenty, of what use could the
examination be? At that time the signs of maturity are already
unrecognizable, as we have learned in a Mishna: If one gets to the age
of twenty,

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

and the signs of maturity are not visible, they have to bring evidence
that he has reached the age of twenty; and he, the castrate, is a legal
"saris," who does not perform the ceremony of Halitzah and also cannot
marry his brother's wife. Hence we see that after twenty the symptoms of
maturity are already unrecognizable. The answer was: Was it not taught
in addition to the Mishna by R. Samuel b. R. Itz'hak in the name of
Rabh: Provided the symptoms of a "saris" were visible. Said Rabha: It
seems that this explanation is right, as the Mishna states: "He, the
castrate, . . . 'saris,'" from which it is to be understood that such
signs were visible on the body; as if not, why should he be named
"castrate"? But how is it if neither the signs of maturity nor of a
"saris" were visible? How many years are needed, that he should be
considered of age? Taught R. Hyya: After he reaches the majority of life
(*i.e.*, thirty-six years, as life is considered seventy). It happened
that such cases were brought before R. Hyya by the mothers, questioning
him: What must be done, that the signs of age should appear? And he used
to answer: If the lad was thin, see he should become fat; and if he was
fat, he would advise that they should make him thin, as sometimes the
signs came earlier because of thinness, and sometimes because of
fatness.

The schoolmen propounded a question: How is he to be considered during
the nineteenth year--nineteen, which is still not of age, or twenty?
Rabha in the name of R. Na'hman said: The whole twentieth year, is he
considered nineteen? And Rabba b. R. Shila in the name of the same
authority said: As twenty. The statement of Rabha, however, was not
heard from him plainly; but it was so judged from the following act:
There was a lad who was between nineteen and twenty, who used to sell
his father's estate, and Rabha had annulled all his acts. People who saw
this thought that it was because he considered him not of age. In
reality, however, Rabha did so because signs of foolishness were seen in
him, as he used to free all his slaves. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_98)

Giddle b. Menarshia sent a message to Rabha: Let the master

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

teach us! How should a girl of fourteen years and one day who has a
knowledge of business be considered? And he answered: If she has a
knowledge of business, then her sale is valid, but not otherwise. Why
was the question for a female and not for a male child? Because so was
the case.

There was one lad, less than twenty, who had sold the estate of his
father, and his relatives instructed him that when he should be at the
court of Rabha he should eat dates and throw the pits at Rabha's person
(for the purpose that Rabha should see he was a fool, and so annul his
sales). He did so, and Rabha did indeed annul the sales. When the
judgment was written, the buyers instructed him to go into court and
say: The Book of Esther can be bought for one zuz, and the same is the
price for Rabha's judgment. And he did so. Rabha then decided: His sales
are valid. And when his relatives told him he was so instructed by the
buyers, Rabha answered: He understands business if it is explained to
him, and in such a case his acts are valid; and his previous act, that
he threw the pits at me, was because he is too much of a scamp.

Said R. Huna b. R. Jehoshua: Concerning witnesses--his testimony may be
considered at such an age (between nineteen and twenty). Said Mar Zutra:
But only concerning movable property, and not real estate. Said R. Ashi
to him: What is the reason that he is fit to be a witness for movable
property--because his sales are valid? If so, let children of six and
seven years be fit for this, as there is a Mishna: The purchase or sale
of movable property by minors is valid. And he answered: Witnesses must
be men, as it is [written](errata.htm#22) \[Deut. xix. 17\]: "Then shall
both the men who have the controversy stand before the Lord," etc.,
which cannot be applied to children.

Said Amimar: If a lad of thirteen years and one day presented a gift to
some one, his act is valid. Said R. Ashi to him: Why? Even concerning a
sale where he should receive money, the rabbis enacted that it should be
annulled, because he might sell too low. Shall we say, if he presents a
thing without any money his act is valid? (Said Amimar to him:) And
according to your theory, if such a lad bought a thing which is worth
six zuz for five, should this be considered? This is certainly not so,
because there is no difference whether it was worth more or less, as the
rabbis annulled all sales made by such a lad who

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

does not understand business. And the reason is that the rabbis were
aware that lads at such an age have an inclination for money; and if you
should allow one to sell, he would sell all the estates of his father
for a small amount. But concerning a gift it is different, as if he
would not have any benefit from it, he would not do so; and therefore
the rabbis enacted that his gift should be considered, so that others
should also please him. R. Na'hman in the name of Samuel said: A young
man before twenty may be examined for the signs of maturity concerning
betrothals, divorces, the ceremony of Halitzah, and protesting against
marriage, and as to selling the estates left him by his father. The
Halakha, however, prevails, that between nineteen and twenty he is
considered as before nineteen; and it prevails also in accordance with
Giddle b. Menarshia, with Mar Zutra, and also with Amimar, and with all
the laws which are stated by R. Na'hman in the name of Samuel.

MISHNA *IX*.: If one divides his estates verbally, no matter if he was
in good health or dangerously sick, according to R. Elazar to real
estate title is given by money, by a deed, and by a hazakah; and to
movable property, title is given by drawing only. He was then told that
it happened with the mother of the sons of Rukhl, who was sick and said:
Give my jewelry, which is worth twelve manas, to my daughter, that the
sages had listened thereto. And he answered: The sons of Rukhl ought to
have been buried by their mother while they were still young (*i.e.*,
they had bad habits, and therefore the sages fined them, that they
should not inherit from their mother).

GEMARA: There is a Boraitha: R. Eliezer said to the sages: It happened
with an inhabitant of the city of Mruni, who was in Jerusalem, that he
possessed much movable property which he desired to present to different
persons; and he was told that he could not give them title, unless he
did so together with some real estate. He went then and bought a rock
near Jerusalem, and said: The north side of the rock shall belong to A,
and with it one hundred sheep and one hundred barrels; and the south to
B, and with it one hundred sheep and one hundred barrels. And when he
was dead, the sages approved his will. Hence we see that, though the
rock could not be considered real estate, as it could not be used for
anything, nevertheless title was given. And he was answered:

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is no
support, as the Mrunian was in good health when he did so; but this
cannot be done by a sick person.

R. Levi said: It is allowed to make the ceremony of a sudarium with a
sick person even on Sabbath, lest he become exhausted; but not because
the Halakha is in accordance with R. Eliezer of the following Mishna.

MISHNA *X*.: R. Eliezer said: If it happens that a sick person divides
his estates verbally on Sabbath, it may be listened to, because it is
prohibited to write; but not on week days. R. Jehoshua, however,
maintains: It was said on Sabbath, *a fortiori* when it happened on week
days. Similar to this is: One may acquire title for a minor, but not for
adults. So is the decree of R. Eliezer. R. Jehoshua said: For a minor,
and *a fortiori* for an adult.

GEMARA: Our Mishna is in accordance with R. Jehudah, as we have learned
in the following Boraitha: R. Meir said: The reverse is the case. If
this happened on week days, his words must be listened to, because he is
allowed to write; but not on Sabbath, because he is not allowed to
write. So is the decree of R. Eliezer. R. Jehoshua said, on the
contrary: It was said on week days, and so much the more on Sabbath. R.
Jehudah, however, said: R. Eliezer's decree was, if on Sabbath, his
words must be listened to, because he is not allowed to write; but not
on week days, when he is allowed to write. And R. Jehoshua's decree was
to the contrary. And the same is the case as to the latter part of the
Mishna.

MISHNA *XI*.: Suppose a house falls upon A and his father, or on any
persons, that one of them has to be bequeather and the other inheritor,
and it is not known who dies first, and to the estate there is a claim
from the widow for her marriage contract, and from other creditors. The
heirs of the father say that the son died first; and the creditors say
that the father died first, and the son afterward. (*I.e.*, the
creditors of the son who had a right to the estate only if he died after
his father, so that with the death of his father the inheritance came to
him. But if he was dead before his father, he has nothing in the estate.
And this is what his brothers claim, that the creditors have no right in
the estate left by their father. Concerning a marriage contract, that
will be explained in the Gemara.) According to the school of Shamai,
they have to divide; and according to

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

the school of Hillel, the estate must be left in the hands of the
present occupants. <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_99)

If it happened that the house fell on him and his wife, the heirs of the
husband claim that the woman dies first, consequently her husband has
inherited from her; and the heirs of his wife claim that he died first,
consequently they have a right to her marriage contract and also to her
own estate. They have to divide, according to the school of Shamai. But
the school of Hillel say: They must leave the estate in the hands of its
present occupant. And the occupants are to be considered as follows: The
estates belonging to the marriage contract are to be considered as in
the hands of the husband's heirs. But her own estates, which she brought
with her to her husband, and which ought to go out with her by death or
divorce, are to be considered in the hands of the heirs of *her* father.

If, however, the house falls on one and his mother, both schools agree
that it must be divided. R. Aqiba, however, said: I hold that they (the
schools) differ in the latter case also; and the school of Hillel are
still of the opinion that estates must be left in the hands of the
occupants. Said Ben Azai to him: We deplore that the schools differ in
the former cases, and you come to add the third one, in which the rabbis
testify that they have agreed.

GEMARA: The estates which were brought by the deceased woman, mentioned
in the Mishna--to her husband for usage of fruit only, according to the
school of Beth Hillel. Who is to be considered the occupant? According
to R. Johanan: The heirs of the husband. According to R. Elazar: The
heirs of the woman. R. Simeon b. Lakish, however, said in the name of
Bar Kapara: Such must be divided. And the reason of this statement was
taught by Bar Kapara himself, that as the claims of both parties are
equal (*i.e.*, the heirs of the husband claim that all the products of
this estate belonged to the deceased, as he had a right to sell them,
and therefore they belong to his heirs; and the opponents claim that
they were only to be used while he was alive, and therefore what was not

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

consumed by him, if his wife were alive she would certainly take with
her estate; hence it belonged to her, and after her death to us), it is
to be considered doubtful money, the law of which is division.

"*R. Aqiba said . . . in the hands of the occupants*." But who are
considered their occupants? R. Aila said: The heirs of the mother; and
R. Zera: The heirs of the son. When R. Zera ascended to Palestine, he
retracted from his statement in Babylon and accepted the system of R.
Aila. Rabba, however, retained the system of R. Zera as a Halakha. Said
R. Zera: From my retraction, I see that the air of the land of Israel
makes one wise; as after I came here I saw that my statement while I was
still in Babylon was erroneous. <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_100)

"*Said Ben Azai to him*," etc. Said R. Simlai: Infer from this that Ben
Azai was an associate disciple of R. Aqiba; as if he were a disciple
only, he would have said to him, "The *master* said," and not, "And you
(thou)."

A message was sent from Palestine as follows: If a son has sold his
share of the inheritance of his father to some one, and dies while the
father was still alive, and thereafter his father died, the son of the
seller has a right to take away the goods from the buyer. (Because, at
the time sold, the seller has nothing as yet in his hands, and the sale
was for that which would be his in the future; and as the son died
before his father the goods were never his, and his son is now the heir
of his grandfather, to whom the goods in question belong; hence he has a
right to take them away.) And this is a complicated case in the law of
money matters. But let the buyers say: Your father has sold, and you are
taking away? What a claim is this! Cannot the plaintiff say: My basis is
my grandfather, from whom I inherit (and my father had not any right to
sell this--as explained above); and that such a claim is to be
considered may be supported by \[Ps. xlv. 17\]: "Instead of thy fathers
shall be thy children: thou shalt appoint them as princes in all the
land." Hence it is not at all a complicated case in money

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

matters. And if such there be, it would be the following: A first-born
who sold the share prescribed to him while his father was still alive,
and died before his father, the first-born's son has a right to take
away from the buyers after the death of his grandfather. Hence his
father sold that to which he was entitled; and his son, whose basis is
his deceased father, takes the goods away. And this is complicated, as
he cannot say, "My basis is my grandfather," for the grandfather had
nothing to do with the double share of the first-born son. But even this
cannot be called a complicated case, as he may claim, "My basis is my
grandfather, and not my father, who has never possessed the goods he
sold; for now only do I take the place of my father, who was a
first-born, and take his share." Hence it is in accordance with the
usual law. Therefore, if in the message of Palestine was said "a
complicated case," it might be the following: If one sign a document
before he robbed some one, and thereafter he became a robber, who is no
longer competent to be a witness, he has no right to testify to his
handwriting; but others, who know his handwriting, may. Hence he is not
trusted, and the others who came upon his basis are trusted. Is this not
complicated? But perhaps it treats of when his handwriting was already
approved by the court, while he was still righteous? Therefore it is to
be assumed that they meant the following case: If one signed a document
as a witness to a stranger, and thereafter he became his son-in-law, he
has no right to testify to his signature; but others may testify that
they recognize the writing of the son-in-law, and then it may be relied
upon. Hence he is not trusted, and others are. And you cannot say that
it means only when his handwriting was already approved by the court at
that time, as R. Joseph b. Minumi in the name of R. Na'hman said
plainly: Even in case it was not. However, even this cannot be called
complicated, as it may be said that it is thus decreed by the law. A
son-in-law must not witness in a case of his father-in-law, not because
it is feared he may lie, but because it is prohibited, even if the
son-in-law were Moses our master. Therefore we must come to the
conclusion that the complication lies in the first case mentioned in the
message, and the objection based on the cited verse is not to be taken
into consideration, as the verse speaks of a "blessing." But bow can you
say that it

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

speaks of a blessing, and nothing is to be inferred from it? Does not
our Mishna state: "If the house falls upon him and his son, or any
persons," etc.? Does it not mean, by the "heirs of the father,"
grandsons, and "any persons," brothers of the deceased? Now, if you bear
in mind that one cannot say, "I come on the basis of my grandfather," as
the cited verse cannot serve as a support, then, even when the son dies
first, how is it? Let the creditors say: We claim the inheritance of the
father? Nay! By "the heirs of the father" is meant the deceased's
brothers; and by "any persons," his uncles, brothers of his father.

"*One and his mother*," etc. R. Shesheth was questioned: Nay! A son
inherits from his mother when he is already in the grave, so that his
brothers from his father's side should inherit from him? (The
illustration may be found above, [p. 317](#page_317).) Answered R.
Shesheth: This we have learned in the following Boraitha: If the father
was taken into captivity and died there, and at the same time his son
dies in his country, or *vice versa*, and it was not known who died
first, the heirs of the father and the heirs of the son (on his mother's
side) may divide among themselves the inheritance. Now, if the son while
in the grave could inherit from his mother, even if he dies first, let
him inherit from his grandfather on his mother's side, and then his
brothers on the father's side would inherit from him. Infer from this
that while in the grave nothing is to be inherited. Said R. Aha b.
Minumi to Abayi: This may be inferred also from our Mishna, which states
that concerning one and his mother all agree that they must divide. And
if the law of inheriting in the grave were in force, let him inherit
from his mother while in the grave, the same to revert to his brothers
on the father's side. Hence such a law does not hold good. And why not?
Said Abayi: There is the same expression in the Scripture concerning the
inheritance of a husband from his wife, and a son from his mother. As
the first does not inherit while in the grave, so it is with the second,
etc. (This has already been explained in Chapter VIII., [p.
254](t0718.htm#page_254)) (Here is repeated the whole story of Bar
Sisin's estate, preceding volume, pp. 86-87.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[322:1](t0719.htm#fr_93) The commentators
Rashbam, Tosphath, and Bach discuss at length how the widow is an heir
also, illustrating, *e.g.*, if one has married the daughter of his
brother, who has no other children besides her, and the brother has
inherited the estate of their father, and thereafter both brothers die,
then the widow of the one brother is also an heir to the estate of her
grandfather, which belonged to her father, who had no heirs except her.
There are also some other illustrations, but all are complicated. We
give the last, which is simple.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[322:2](t0719.htm#fr_94) Gershom explains
*Sinaic* laws, with which Rashbam does not agree.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[323:1](t0719.htm#fr_95) The term in Hebrew is
"zinim," and "zinha" means cold; and so it is taken by the Talmud. The
basis of Leeser's translation is unknown.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[329:1](t0719.htm#fr_96) The second explanation
to this verse by the same authority will be in Chapter XI. of Tract
Sanhedrin as the proper place.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[330:1](t0719.htm#fr_97) In ancient times they
used to grind pearls and diamonds in medicine.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[339:1](t0719.htm#fr_98) In the Talmud, wherever
it means real estate, the expression is estates which one can rely
upon--which means that if they are mortgaged for a loan the lender may
rely upon them, as they cannot be lost by fire, etc.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[350:1](t0719.htm#fr_99) At that time it was
prohibited to free a bondsman without a good reason, according to Roman
and Persian, as well as to Jewish laws.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[354:1](t0719.htm#fr_100) The Gemara to this
Mishna we transfer to Mishna 8 of the succeeding chapter, as the proper
place. We also deemed it necessary to put all three Mishnas which treat
of falling houses together, though in the original text they are in
three separate places.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[355:1](t0719.htm#fr_101) The commentators
differ concerning the explanation of this, as well as concerning the
completion of the text. Rashbam affirms that Rabba was not in the text
at all. Gershom changes the question concerning the cases in the Mishna
and explains them differently. We have done what we could to make the
passage intelligible to the reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](t0720)
