[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010327)  [Next](1010329) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXI-p1.1"></span>Letter XXI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 391.)

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXI-p3.1"></span>To My Lord Bishop Valerius, Most Blessed and
Venerable, My Father Most Warmly Cherished with True Love in the Sight
of the Lord, Augustin, Presbyter, Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p4"></span>1. Before all things I ask your pious
wisdom to take into consideration that, on the one hand, if the duties
of the office of a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, be discharged in a
perfunctory and time-serving manner, no work can be in this life more
easy, agreeable, and likely to secure the favour of men, especially in
our day, but none at the same time more miserable, deplorable, and
worthy of condemnation in the sight of God; and, on the other hand, that
if in the office of bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, the orders of the
Captain of our salvation be observed, there is no work in this life more
difficult, toilsome, and hazardous, especially in our day, but none at
the same time more blessed in the sight of God. <span
id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) But what the proper mode of
discharging these duties is, I did not learn either in boyhood or in the
earlier years of manhood; and at the time when I was beginning to learn
it, I was constrained as a just correction for my sins (for I know not
what else to think) to accept the second place at the helm, when as yet
I knew not how to handle an oar.

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p6"></span>2. But I think that it was the purpose of
my Lord hereby to rebuke me, because I presumed, as if entitled by
superior knowledge and excellence, to reprove the faults of many sailors
before I had learned by experience the nature of their work. Therefore,
after I had been sent in among them to share their labours, then I began
to feel the rashness of my censures; although even before that time I
judged this office to be beset <span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXI-Page_238"></span>with many dangers. And hence the tears
which some of my brethren perceived me shedding in the city at the time
of my ordination, and because of which they did their utmost with the
best intentions to console me, but with words which, through their not
knowing the causes of my sorrow, did not reach my case at all. <span
id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480) But my experience has made me
realize these things much more both in degree and in measure than I had
done in merely thinking of them: not that I have now seen any new waves
or storms of which I had not previous knowledge by observation, or
report, or reading, or meditation; but because I had not known my own
skill or strength for avoiding or encountering them, and had estimated
it to be of some value instead of none. The Lord, however, laughed at
me, and was pleased to show me by actual experience what I am.

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p8"></span>3. But if He has done this not in
judgment, but in mercy, as I confidently hope even now, when I have
learned my infirmity, my duty is to study with diligence all the
remedies which the Scriptures contain for such a case as mine, and to
make it my business by prayer and reading to secure that my soul be
endued with the health and vigour necessary for labours so responsible.
This I have not yet done, because I have not had time; for I was
ordained at the very time when I was thinking of having, along with
others, a season of freedom from all other occupation, that we might
acquaint ourselves with the divine Scriptures, and was intending to make
such arrangements as would secure unbroken leisure for this great work.
Moreover, it is true that I did not at any earlier period know how great
was my unfitness for the arduous work which now disquiets and crushes my
spirit. But if I have by experience learned what is necessary for a man
who ministers to a people in the divine sacraments and word, only to
find myself prevented from now obtaining what I have learned that I do
not possess, do you bid me perish, father Valerius? Where is your
charity? Do you indeed love me? Do you indeed love the Church to which
you have appointed me, thus unqualified, to minister? I am well assured
that you love both; but you think me qualified, whilst I know myself
better; and yet I would not have come to know myself if I had not
learned by experience.

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p9"></span>4. Perhaps your Holiness replies: I wish
to know what is lacking to fit you for your office. The things which I
lack are so many, that I could more easily enumerate the things which I
have than those which I desire to have. I may venture to say that I know
and unreservedly believe the doctrines pertaining to our salvation. But
my difficulty is in the question how I am to use this truth in
ministering to the salvation of others, seeking what is profitable not
for myself alone, but for many, that they may be saved. And perhaps
there may be, nay, beyond all question there are, written in the sacred
books, counsels by the knowledge and acceptance of which the man of God
may so discharge his duties to the Church in the things of God, or at
least so keep a conscience void of offence in the midst of ungodly men,
whether living or dying, as to secure that that life for which alone
humble and meek Christian hearts sigh is not lost. But how can this be
done, except, as the Lord Himself tells us, by asking, seeking,
knocking, that is, by praying, reading, and weeping? For this I have by
the brethren made the request, which in this petition I now renew, that
a short time, say till Easter, be granted me by your unfeigned and
venerable charity.

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p10"></span>5. For what shall I answer to the Lord
my Judge? Shall I say, “I was not able to acquire the things of which I
stood in need, because I was engrossed wholly with the affairs of the
Church”? What if He thus reply: “Thou wicked servant, if property
belonging to the Church (in the collection of the fruits of which great
labour is expended) were suffering loss under some oppressor, and it was
in thy power to do something in defence of her rights at the bar of an
earthly judge, wouldst thou not, leaving the field which I have watered
with my blood, go to plead the cause with the consent of all, and even
with the urgent commands of some? And if the decision given were against
the Church, wouldst thou not, in prosecuting an appeal, go across the
sea; and would no complaint be heard summoning thee home from an absence
of a year or more, because thy object was to prevent another from taking
possession of land required not for the souls, but for the bodies of the
poor, whose hunger might nevertheless be satisfied in a way much easier
and more acceptable to me by my living trees, if these were cultivated
with care? Wherefore, then, dost thou allege that thou hadst not time to
learn how to cultivate my field?” Tell me, I beseech you, what could I
reply? Are you perchance willing that I should say, “The aged Valerius
is to blame; for, believing me to be instructed in all things necessary,
he declined, with a determination proportioned to his love for me, to
give me permission to learn what I had not acquired?”

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p11"></span>6. Consider all these things, aged
Valerius; consider them, I beseech you, by the goodness and severity of
Christ, by His mercy and judgment, by Him who has inspired you with such
love for me that I dare not displease you, even when the advantage of my
soul is at stake. <span id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXI-Page_239"></span>You, moreover, appeal to God and to
Christ to bear witness to me concerning your innocence and charity, and
the sincere love which you bear to me, just as if all these were not
things about which I may myself willingly take my oath. I therefore
appeal to the love and affection which you have thus avouched. Have pity
on me, and grant me, for the purpose for which I have asked it, the time
which I have asked; and help me with your prayers, that my desire may
not be in vain, and that my absence may not be without fruit to the
Church of Christ, and to the profit of my brethren and fellow-servants.
I know that the Lord will not despise your love interceding for me,
especially in such a cause as this; and accepting it as a sacrifice of
sweet savour, He will restore me to you, perhaps, within a period
shorter than I have craved, thoroughly furnished for His service by the
profitable counsels of His written word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[237:1480](1010328.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="vii.1.XXI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p5"></span> \[A most noble sentence, which contains,
as in a nutshell, a whole system of pastoral theology.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[238:1481](1010328.htm#fr_1480) <span
id="vii.1.XXI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXI-p7"></span> They thought Augustin was disappointed
at being made only presbyter and not colleague of Valerius as bishop.
See Possidius, *Aug. Vita*, c. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXII](1010329)
