[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010149)  [Next](1010151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.IX.VII"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.IX.VII-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Of the Church Hymns Instituted
at Milan; Of the Ambrosian Persecution Raised by Justina; And of the
Discovery of the Bodies of Two Martyrs.</span>

<span id="vi.IX.VII-p2"></span>15. Not long had the Church of Milan
begun to employ this kind of consolation and exhortation, the brethren
singing together with great earnestness of voice and heart. For it was
about a year, or not much more, since Justina, the mother of the
boy-Emperor Valentinian, persecuted <span
id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) Thy servant Ambrose in the interest of
her heresy, to which she had been seduced by the Arians. The pious
people kept guard in the church, prepared to die with their bishop, Thy
servant. There my mother, Thy handmaid, bearing a chief part of those
cares and watchings, lived in prayer. We, still unmelted by the heat of
Thy Spirit, were yet moved by the astonished and disturbed city. At this
time it was instituted that, after the manner of the Eastern Church,
hymns and psalms should be sung, lest the people should pine away in the
tediousness of sorrow; which custom, retained from then till now, is
imitated by many, yea, by almost all of Thy congregations throughout the
rest of the world.

<span id="vi.IX.VII-p4"></span>16. Then didst Thou by a vision make
known to Thy renowned bishop <span id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) the
spot where lay the bodies of Gervasius and Protasius, the martyrs (whom
Thou hadst in Thy secret storehouse preserved uncorrupted for so many
years), whence Thou mightest at the fitting time produce them to repress
the feminine but royal fury. For when they were revealed and dug up and
with due honour transferred to the Ambrosian Basilica, not only they who
were troubled with unclean spirits (the devils confessing themselves)
were healed, but a certain man also, who had been blind <span
id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758) many years, a well-known citizen of
that city, having asked and been told the reason of the people’s
tumultuous joy, rushed forth, asking his guide to lead him thither.
Arrived there, he begged to be permitted to touch with his handkerchief
the bier of Thy saints, whose death is precious in Thy sight. <span
id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) When he had done this, and put it to
his eyes, they were forthwith opened. Thence did the fame spread; thence
did Thy praises burn,—shine; thence was the mind of that enemy, though
not yet enlarged to the wholeness of believing, restrained from the fury
of persecuting. Thanks be to Thee, O my God. Whence and whither hast
Thou thus led my remembrance, that I should confess these <span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span id="vi.IX.VII-Page_135"></span>things
also unto Thee,—great, though I, forgetful, had passed them over? And
yet then, when the “savour” of Thy “ointments” was so fragrant, did we
not “run after Thee.” <span id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760) And so I
did the more abundantly weep at the singing of Thy hymns, formerly
panting for Thee, and at last breathing in Thee, as far as the air can
play in this house of grass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_756"></span>[134:757](1010150.htm#fr_756) <span
id="vi.IX.VII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VII-p3"></span> The Bishop of Milan who preceded Ambrose
was an Arian, and though Valentinian the First approved the choice of
Ambrose as bishop, Justina, on his death, greatly troubled the Church.
Ambrose subsequently had great influence over both Valentinian the
Second and his brother Gratian. The persecution referred to above, says
Pusey, was “to induce him to give up to the Arians a church,—the Portian
Basilica without the walls; afterwards she asked for the new Basilica
within the walls, which was larger.” See Ambrose, *Epp.* 20–22; *Serm.
c. Auxentium de Basilicis Tradendis*, pp. 852–880, ed. Bened.; cf.
Tillemont, *Hist. Eccl. St. Ambroise*, art. 44-48, pp. 76–82.
Valentinian was then at Milan. See next sec., the beginning of note.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[134:758](1010150.htm#fr_757) <span
id="vi.IX.VII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VII-p5"></span> *Antistiti.*

<span id="fn_758"></span>[134:759](1010150.htm#fr_758) <span
id="vi.IX.VII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VII-p6"></span> Augustin alludes to this, amongst other
supposed miracles, in his *De Civ. Dei*, xxii. 8; and again in *Serm.*
cclxxxvi. sec. 4, where he tells us that the man, after being cured,
made a vow that he would for the remainder of his life serve in that
Basilica where the bodies of the martyrs lay. St. Ambrose also examines
the miracle at great length in one of his sermons. We have already
referred in note 5, p. 69 to the origin of these false miracles in the
early Church. Lecture vi. series 2, of Blunt’s *Lectures on the Right
Use of the Early Fathers*, is devoted to an examination of the various
passages in the Ante-Nicene Fathers where the continuance of miracles in
the Church is either expressed or implied. The reader should also refer
to the note on p. 485 of vol. ii. of the *City of God*, in this series.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[134:760](1010150.htm#fr_759) <span
id="vi.IX.VII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VII-p7"></span> [Ps.
116.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015)<span
id="vi.IX.VII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[135:761](1010150.htm#fr_760) <span
id="vi.IX.VII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VII-p8"></span> [Cant.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)<span id="vi.IX.VII-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](1010151)
