[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010346)  [Next](1010348) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XL"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p1.1"></span>Letter XL.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397.)

<span id="vii.1.XL-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p3.1"></span>To My Lord Much Beloved, and Brother Worthy of
Being Honoured and Embraced with the Most Sincere Devotion of Charity,
My Fellow-Presbyter Jerome, Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p5"></span>1. I thank you that, instead of a mere
formal salutation, you wrote me a letter, though it was much shorter
than I would desire to have from you; since nothing that comes from you
is tedious, however much time it may demand. Wherefore, although I am
beset with great anxieties about the affairs of others, and that, too,
in regard to secular matters, I would find it difficult to pardon the
brevity of your letter, were it not that I consider that it was written
in reply to a yet shorter letter of my own. Address yourself, therefore,
I entreat you, to that exchange of letters by which we may have
fellowship, and may not permit the distance which separates us to keep
us wholly apart from each other; though we are in the Lord bound
together by the unity of the Spirit, even when our pens rest and we are
silent. The books in which you have laboured to bring treasures from the
Lord’s storehouse give me almost a complete knowledge of you. For if I
may not say, “I know you,” because I have not seen your face, it may
with equal truth be said that you do not know yourself, for you cannot
see your own face. If, however, it is this alone which constitutes your
acquaintance with yourself, that you know your own mind, we also have no
small knowledge of it through your writings, in studying which we bless
God that to yourself, to us, to all who read your works, He has given
you as you are.

<span id="vii.1.XL-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p6.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p7"></span>2. It is not long since, among other
things, a certain book of yours came into my hands, the name of which I
do not yet know, for the manuscript itself had not the title written, as
is customary, on the first page. The brother with whom it was found said
that its title is *Epitaphium*,—a name which we might believe you to
have approved, if we found in the work a notice of the lives or writings
of those only who are deceased. Inasmuch, however, as mention is there
made of the works of some who were at the time when it was written, or
are even now, alive, we wonder why you either gave this title to it, or
permitted others to believe that you had done so. The book itself has
our complete approval as a useful work.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span id="vii.1.XL-Page_273"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p8"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p8.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p9"></span>3. In your exposition of the Epistle of
Paul to the Galatians I have found one thing which causes me much
concern. For if it be the case that statements untrue in themselves, but
made, as it were, out of a sense of duty in the interest of
religion, <span id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604) have been admitted
into the Holy Scriptures, what authority will be left to them? If this
be conceded, what sentence can be produced from these Scriptures, by the
weight of which the wicked obstinacy of error can be broken down? For as
soon as you have produced it, if it be disliked by him who contends with
you, he will reply that, in the passage alleged, the writer was uttering
a falsehood under the pressure of some honourable sense of duty. And
where will any one find this way of escape impossible, if it be possible
for men to say and believe that, after introducing his narrative with
these words, “The things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I
lie not,” <span id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605) the apostle lied
when he said of Peter and Barnabas, “I saw that they walked not
uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel ”? <span
id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606) For if they did walk uprightly,
Paul wrote what was false; and if he wrote what was false *here*, when
did he say what was true? Shall he be supposed to say what is true when
his teaching corresponds with the predilection of his reader, and shall
everything which runs counter to the impressions of the reader be
reckoned a falsehood uttered by him under a sense of duty? It will be
impossible to prevent men from finding reasons for thinking that he not
only might have uttered a falsehood, but was bound to do so, if we admit
this canon of interpretation. There is no need for many words in
pursuing this argument, especially in writing to you, for whose wisdom
and prudence enough has already been said. I would by no means be so
arrogant as to attempt to enrich by my small coppers <span
id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607) your mind, which by the divine gift
is golden; and none is more able than yourself to revise and correct
that work to which I have referred.

<span id="vii.1.XL-p14"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p14.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p15"></span>4. You do not require me to teach you in
what sense the apostle says, “To the Jews I became as a Jew, that I
might gain the Jews,” <span id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) and
other such things in the same passage, which are to be ascribed to the
compassion of pitying love, not the artifices of intentional deceit. For
he that ministers to the sick becomes as if he were sick himself; not,
indeed, falsely pretending to be under the fever, but considering, with
the mind of one truly sympathizing, what he would wish done for himself
if he were in the sick man’s place. Paul was indeed a Jew; and when he
had become a Christian, he had not abandoned those Jewish sacraments
which that people had received in the right way, and for a certain
appointed time. Therefore, even although he was an apostle of Christ, he
took part in observing these; but with this view, that he might show
that they were in no wise hurtful to those who, even after they had
believed in Christ, desired to retain the ceremonies which by the law
they had learned from their fathers; provided only that they did not
build on these their hope of salvation, since the salvation which was
foreshadowed in these has now been brought in by the Lord Jesus. For the
same reason, he judged that these ceremonies should by no means be made
binding on the Gentile converts, because, by imposing a heavy and
superfluous burden, they might turn aside from the faith those who were
unaccustomed to them.

<span id="vii.1.XL-p17"></span>5. The thing, therefore, which he rebuked
in Peter was not his observing the customs handed down from his
fathers—which Peter, if he wished, might do without being chargeable
with deceit or inconsistency, for, though now superfluous, these customs
were not hurtful to one who had been accustomed to them—but his
compelling the Gentiles to observe Jewish ceremonies, <span
id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609) which he could not do otherwise
than by so acting in regard to them as if their observance was, even
after the Lord’s coming, still necessary to salvation, against which
truth protested through the apostolic office of Paul. Nor was the
Apostle Peter ignorant of this, but he did it through fear of those who
were of the circumcision. Manifestly, therefore, Peter was truly
corrected, and Paul has given a true narrative of the event, unless, by
the admission of a falsehood here, the authority of the Holy Scriptures
given for the faith of all coming generations is to be made wholly
uncertain and wavering. For it is neither possible nor suitable to state
within the compass of a letter how great and how unutterably evil must
be the consequences of such a concession. It might, however, be shown
seasonably, and with less hazard, if we were conversing together.

<span id="vii.1.XL-p19"></span>6. Paul had forsaken everything peculiar
to the Jews that was evil, especially this: “That, being ignorant of
God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, they had not submitted themselves unto the righteousness
of God.” <span id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610) In this, moreover,
he differed from them: that after the passion and resurrection of
Christ, in whom had been given and made manifest the mystery of grace,
according to the order of Melchizedek, they still considered it binding
on them to celebrate, not out of mere reverence for old customs, but as
necessary to salvation, the sacraments of the old econ<span
id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span id="vii.1.XL-Page_274"></span>omy,
which were indeed at one time necessary, else had it been unprofitable
and vain for the Maccabees to suffer martyrdom, as they did, for their
adherence to them. <span id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611) Lastly, in
this also Paul differed from the Jews: that they persecuted the
Christian preachers of grace as enemies of the law. These and all
similar errors and sins he declares that he “counted but loss and dung
that he might win Christ;” <span id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612)
but he does not, in so saying, disparage the ceremonies of the Jewish
law, if only they were observed after the custom of their fathers, in
the way in which he himself observed them, without regarding them as
necessary to salvation, and not in the way in which the Jews affirmed
that they must be observed, nor in the exercise of deceptive
dissimulation such as he had rebuked in Peter. For if Paul observed
these sacraments in order, by pretending to be a Jew, to gain the Jews,
why did he not also take part with the Gentiles in heathen sacrifices,
when to them that were without law he became as without law, that he
might gain them also? The explanation is found in this, that he took
part in the Jewish sacrifices, as being himself by birth a Jew; and that
when he said all this which I have quoted, he meant, not that he
pretended to be what he was not, but that he felt with true compassion
that he must bring such help to them as would be needful for himself if
he were involved in their error. Herein he exercised not the subtlety of
a deceiver, but the sympathy of a compassionate deliverer. In the same
passage the apostle has stated the principle more generally: “To the
weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak; I am made all things
to all men, that I might by all means save some,” <span
id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613) —the latter clause of which guides
us to understand the former as meaning that he showed himself one who
pitied the weakness of another as much as if it had been his own. For
when he said, “Who is weak, and I am not weak?” <span
id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614) he did not wish it to be supposed
that he pretended to suffer the infirmity of another, but rather that he
showed it by sympathy.

<span id="vii.1.XL-p25"></span>7. Wherefore I beseech you, apply to the
correction and emendation of that book a frank and truly Christian
severity, and chant what the Greeks call <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p25.1"></span> παλινῴδια</span>. For incomparably more
lovely than the Grecian Helen is Christian truth: In her defence, our
martyrs have fought against Sodom with more courage than the heroes of
Greece displayed against Troy for Helen’s sake. I do not say this in
order that you may recover the faculty of spiritual sight, <span
id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615) —far be it from me to say that you
have lost it!—but that, having eyes both clear and quick in discernment,
you may turn them towards that from which, in unaccountable
dissimulation, you have turned them away, refusing to see the calamitous
consequences which would follow on our once admitting that a writer of
the divine books could in any part of his work honourably and piously
utter a falsehood.

<span id="vii.1.XL-p27"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XL-p27.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p28"></span>8. I had written some time ago a letter
to you on this subject, <span id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616) which
was not delivered to you, because the bearer to whom it was entrusted
did not finish his journey to you. From it I may quote a thought which
occurred to me while I was dictating it, and which I ought not to omit
in this letter, in order that, if your opinion is still different from
mine, and is better, you may readily forgive the anxiety which has moved
me to write. It is this: If your opinion is different, and is according
to truth (for only in that case can it be better than mine), you will
grant that “a mistake of mine, which is in the interest of truth, cannot
deserve great blame, if indeed it deserves blame at all, when it is
possible for you to use truth in the interest of falsehood without doing
wrong.” <span id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617)

<span id="vii.1.XL-p31"></span>9. As to the reply which you were pleased
to give me concerning Origen, I did not need to be told that we should,
not only in ecclesiastical writers, but in all others, approve and
commend what we find right and true, but reject and condemn what we find
false and mischievous. What I craved from your wisdom and learning (and
I still crave it), was that you should acquaint us definitely with the
points in which that remarkable man is proved to have departed from the
belief of the truth. Moreover, in that book in which you have mentioned
all the ecclesiastical writers whom you could remember, and their works,
it would, I think, be a more convenient arrangement if, after naming
those whom you know to be heretics (since you have chosen not to pass
them without notice), you would add in what respect their doctrine is to
be avoided. Some of these heretics also you have omitted, and I would
fain know on what grounds. If, however, perchance it has been from a
desire not to enlarge that volume unduly that you refrained from adding
to a notice of heretics, the statement of the things in which the
Catholic Church has authoritatively condemned them, I beg you not to
grudge bestowing on this subject, to which with humility and brotherly
love I direct your attention, a portion of that literary labour by which
already, by the grace of the Lord our God, you have in no small measure
stimulated and assisted the saints in the study of the Latin tongue, and
publish in one small book (if your <span id="page_275">p. 275</span>
<span id="vii.1.XL-Page_275"></span>other occupations permit you) a
digest of the perverse dogmas of all the heretics who up to this time
have, through arrogance, or ignorance, or self-will, attempted to
subvert the simplicity of the Christian faith; a work most necessary for
the information of those who are prevented, either by lack of leisure or
by their not knowing the Greek language, from reading and understanding
so many things. I would urge my request at greater length, were it not
that this is commonly a sign of misgivings as to the benevolence of the
party from whom a favour is sought. Meanwhile I cordially recommend to
your goodwill in Christ our brother Paulus, to whose high standing in
these regions I bear before God willing testimony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[273:1605](1010347.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p10"></span> \[*Velut officiosa mendacia.*\]

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[273:1606](1010347.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p11"></span> [Gal.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020)<span id="vii.1.XL-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[273:1607](1010347.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p12"></span> [Gal.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span id="vii.1.XL-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[273:1608](1010347.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p13"></span> \[*Obolis meis.*\]

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[273:1609](1010347.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
9.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020)<span id="vii.1.XL-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[273:1610](1010347.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p18"></span> [Gal.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span id="vii.1.XL-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[273:1611](1010347.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p20"></span> [Rom.
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="vii.1.XL-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[274:1612](1010347.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p21"></span> [2 Macc.
7.1](../../../bib/apo/ma2007.htm#001)<span id="vii.1.XL-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[274:1613](1010347.htm#fr_1612) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p22"></span> [Phil.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="vii.1.XL-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[274:1614](1010347.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p23"></span> [1 Cor.
9.22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022)<span id="vii.1.XL-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[274:1615](1010347.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p24"></span> [2 Cor.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.XL-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[274:1616](1010347.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p26"></span> The reference here is to the story of
the poet Stesichorus, who, having lost his sight as a judgment for
writing an attack on Helen, was miraculously healed when he wrote a poem
in retractation.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[274:1617](1010347.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p29"></span> \[Epist. XXVIII.\]

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[274:1618](1010347.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="vii.1.XL-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XL-p30"></span> See Letter XXVIII. sec. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLI](1010348)
