[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010425)  [Next](1010427) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXVI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p3.1"></span>To Augustin, My Lord Most Venerable, and
Father Singularly Worthy of All Possible Service from Me, I, Marcellinus
Send Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p4"></span>1. The noble Volusianus read to me the
letter of your Holiness, and, at my urgent solicitation, he read to many
more the sentences which had won my admiration, for, like everything
else coming from your pen, they were worthy of admiration. Breathing as
it did a humble spirit, and rich in the grace of divine eloquence, it
succeeded easily in pleasing the reader. What especially pleased me was
your strenuous effort to establish and hold up the steps of one who is
somewhat hesitating, by counselling him to form a good resolution. For I
have every day some discussion with the same man, so far as my
abilities, or rather my lack of talent, may enable me. Moved by the
earnest entreaties of his pious mother, I am at pains to visit him
frequently, and he is so good as to return my visits from time to time.
But on receiving this letter from your venerable Eminence, though he is
kept back from firm faith in the true God by the influence of a class of
persons who abound in this city, he was so moved, that, as he himself
tells me, he was prevented only by the fear of undue prolixity in his
letter from unfolding to you every possible difficulty in regard to the
Christian faith. Some things, however, he has very earnestly asked you
to explain, expressing himself in a polished and accurate style, and
<span id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-Page_473"></span>with the perspicuity and brilliancy of
Roman eloquence, such as you will yourself deem worthy of approbation.
The question which he has submitted to you is indeed worn threadbare in
controversy, and the craftiness which, from the same quarter, assails
with reproaches the Lord’s incarnation is well known. But as I am
confident that whatever you write in reply will be of use to a very
large number, I would approach you with the request, that even in this
question you would condescend to give a thoroughly guarded answer to
their false statement that in His works the Lord performed nothing
beyond what other men have been able to do. They are accustomed to bring
forward their Apollonius and Apuleius, and other men who professed
magical arts, whose miracles they maintained to have been greater than
the Lord’s.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p5"></span>2. The noble Volusianus aforesaid
declared also in the presence of a number, that there were many other
things which might not unreasonably be added to the question which he
has sent, were it not that, as I have already stated, brevity had been
specially studied by him in his letter. Although, however, he forbore
from writing them, he did not pass them over in silence. For he is wont
to say that, even if a reasonable account of the Lord’s incarnation were
now given to him, it would still be very difficult to give a
satisfactory reason why this God, who is affirmed to be the God also of
the Old Testament, is pleased with new sacrifices after having rejected
the ancient sacrifices. For he alleges that nothing could be corrected
but that which is proved to have been previously not rightly done; or
that what has once been done rightly ought not to be altered in the very
least. That which has been rightly done, he said, cannot be changed
without wrong, especially because the variation might bring upon the
Deity the reproach of inconstancy. Another objection which he stated
was, that the Christian doctrine and preaching were in no way consistent
with the duties and rights of citizens; because, to quote an instance
frequently alleged, among its precepts we find, “Recompense to no man
evil for evil,” <span id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) and,
“Whosoever shall smite thee on one cheek, turn to him the other also;
and if any man take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also; and
whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain;” <span
id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512) —all which he affirms to be
contrary to the duties and rights of citizens. For who would submit to
have anything taken from him by an enemy, or forbear from retaliating
the evils of war upon an invader who ravaged a Roman province? The other
precepts, as your Eminence understands, are open to similar objections.
Volusianus thinks that all these difficulties may be added to the
question formerly stated, especially because it is manifest (though he
is silent on this point) that very great calamities have befallen the
commonwealth under the government of emperors observing, for the most
part, the Christian religion. <span id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p9"></span>3. Wherefore, as your Grace
condescends along with me to acknowledge, it is important that all these
difficulties be met by a full, thorough, and luminous reply (since the
welcome answer of your Holiness will doubtless be put into many hands);
especially because, while this discussion was going on, a distinguished
lord and proprietor in the region of Hippo was present, who ironically
said some flattering things concerning your Holiness, and affirmed that
he had been by no means satisfied when he inquired into these matters
himself.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p10"></span>I, therefore, not unmindful of your
promise, but insisting on its fulfilment, beseech you to write, on the
questions submitted, treatises which will be of incredible service to
the Church, especially at the present time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[473:2512](1010426.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p6"></span> [Rom.
12.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[473:2513](1010426.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p7"></span> [Matt.
5.39-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[473:2514](1010426.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVI-p8"></span> See Gibbon, chap. xv. vol. II. p.
326.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXVII](1010427)
