[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010364)  [Next](1010366) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LIX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LIX-p1.1"></span>Letter LIX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 401.)

<span id="vii.1.LIX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LIX-p3.1"></span>To My Most Blessed Lord and Venerable Father
Victorinus, My Brother in the Priesthood, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LIX-p4"></span>1. Your summons to the Council reached me
on the fifth day before the Ides of November, in the evening, and found
me very much indisposed, so that I could not possibly attend. However, I
submit to your pious and wise judgment whether certain perplexities
which the summons occasioned were due to my own ignorance or to
sufficient grounds. I read in that summons that it was written also to
the districts of Mauritania, which, as we know, have their own primates.
Now, if these provinces were to be represented in a Council held in
Numidia, it was by all means proper that the names of some of the more
eminent bishops who are in Mauritania should be attached to the circular
letter; and not finding this, I have been greatly surprised. Moreover,
to the bishops of Numidia it has been addressed in such a confused and
careless manner, that my own name I find in the third place, although I
know my proper order to be much further down in the roll of bishops.
This wrongs others, and grieves me. Moreover, our venerable father and
colleague, Xantippus of Tagosa, says that the primacy belongs to him,
and by very many he is regarded as the primate, and he issues such
letters as you have sent. Even supposing that this be a mistake, which
your Holiness can easily discover and correct, certainly his name should
not have been omitted in the summons which you have issued. If his name
had been placed in the middle of the list, and not in the first line, I
would have wondered much; how much greater, then, is my surprise, when I
find in it no mention whatever made of him who, above all others,
behoved to be present in the Council, that by the bishops of all the
Numidian churches this question of the order of the primacy might be
debated before any other!

<span id="vii.1.LIX-p5"></span>2. For these reasons, I might even
hesitate to come to the Council, lest the summons in which so many
flagrant mistakes are found should be a forgery; even were I not
hindered both by the shortness of the notice, and manifold other
important engagements standing in the way. I therefore beg you, most
blessed prelate, to excuse me, and to be pleased to give attention, in
the first instance, to bring about between your Holiness and the aged
Xantippus a cordial mutual understanding as to the question which of you
ought to summon the Council; or at least, as I think would be still
better, let both of you, without prejudging the claim of either,
conjointly call together our colleagues, especially those who have been
nearly as long in the episcopate as yourselves, who may easily discover
and decide which of you has truth on his side, <span
id="fr_1857"></span>[1858](#fn_1857) that this question may be settled
first among a few of you; and then, when the mistake has been rectified,
let the younger bishops be gathered together, who, having no others whom
it would be either possible or right for them to accept as witnesses in
this matter but yourselves, are meanwhile at a loss to know to which of
you the preference is to be given.

<span id="vii.1.LIX-p7"></span>I have sent this letter sealed with a
ring which represents a man’s profile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1857"></span>[317:1858](1010365.htm#fr_1857) <span
id="vii.1.LIX-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LIX-p6"></span> The primacy in Numidia belonged not to
the bishop of the most important town, but to the oldest bishop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LX](1010366)
