[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010439)  [Next](1010441) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 414.)

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p3.1"></span>To My Lord Evodius Most Blessed, My Brother
and Partner in the Episcopal Office, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p4"></span>1. The question which you have proposed
to me from the epistle of the Apostle Peter is one which, as I think you
are aware, is wont to perplex me most seriously, namely, how the words
which you have quoted are to be understood on the supposition that they
were spoken concerning hell? I therefore refer this question back to
yourself, that if either you yourself be able, or can find any other
person who is able to do so, you may remove and terminate my
perplexities on the subject. If the Lord grant to me ability to
understand the words before you do, and it be in my power to impart what
I receive from Him to you, I will not withhold it from a friend so truly
loved. In the meantime, I will communicate to you the things in the
passage which occasion difficulty to me, that, keeping in view these
remarks on the words of the apostle, you may either exercise your own
thoughts on them, or consult any one whom you find competent to
pronounce an opinion.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p5"></span>2. After having said that “Christ was
put to death in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit,” the apostle
immediately went on to say: “in which also He went and preached unto the
spirits in prison; which sometime were unbelieving, <span
id="fr_2672"></span>[2673](#fn_2672) when once the long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few,
that is, eight souls were saved by water;” thereafter he added the
words: “which baptism also now by a like figure has saved you.” <span
id="fr_2673"></span>[2674](#fn_2673) This, therefore, is felt by me to
be difficult. If the Lord when He died preached in hell to spirits in
prison, why were those who continued unbelieving while the ark was a
preparing the only ones counted worthy of this favour, namely, the
Lord’s descending into hell? For in the ages between the time of Noah
and the passion of Christ, there died many thousands of so many nations
whom He might have found in hell. I do not, of course, speak here of
those who in that period of time had believed in God, as, *e.g.* the
prophets and patriarchs of Abraham’s line, or, going farther back, Noah
himself and his house, who had been saved by water (excepting perhaps
the one son, who afterwards was rejected), and, in addition to these,
all others outside of the posterity of Jacob who were believers in God,
such as Job, the citizens of Nineveh, and any others, whether mentioned
in Scripture or existing unknown to us in the vast human family at any
time. I speak only of those many thousands of men who, ignorant of God
and devoted to the worship of devils or of idols, had passed out of this
life from the time of Noah to the passion of Christ. How was it that
Christ, finding these in hell, did not preach to them, but preached only
to those who were unbelieving in the days of Noah when the ark was a
preparing? Or if he preached to all, why has Peter mentioned only these,
and passed over the innumerable multitude of others?

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p8"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p8.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p9"></span>3.—It is established beyond question
that the Lord, after He had been put to death in the flesh, “descended
into hell;” for it is impossible to gainsay either that utterance of
prophecy, “Thou wilt not leave my soul in <span id="page_516">p.
516</span> <span id="vii.1.CLXIV-Page_516"></span>hell,” <span
id="fr_2674"></span>[2675](#fn_2674) —an utterance which Peter himself
expounds in the Acts of the Apostles, lest any one should venture to put
upon it another interpretation,—or the words of the same apostle, in
which he affirms that the Lord “loosed the pains of hell, in which it
was not possible for Him to be holden.” <span
id="fr_2675"></span>[2676](#fn_2675) Who, therefore, except an infidel,
will deny that Christ was in hell? As to the difficulty which is found
in reconciling the statement that the pains of hell were loosed by Him,
with the fact that He had never begun to be in these pains as in bonds,
and did not so loose them as if He had broken off chains by which He had
been bound, this is easily removed when we understand that they were
loosed in the same way as the snares of huntsmen may be loosed to
prevent their holding, not because they have taken hold. It may also be
understood as teaching us to believe Him to have loosed those pains
which could not possibly hold Him, but which were holding those to whom
He had resolved to grant deliverance.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p12"></span>4. But who these were it is
presumptuous for us to define. For if we say that all who were found
there were then delivered without exception, who will not rejoice if we
can prove this? Especially will men rejoice for the sake of some who are
intimately known to us by their literary labours, whose eloquence and
talent we admire,—not only the poets and orators who in many parts of
their writings have held up to contempt and ridicule these same false
gods of the nations, and have even occasionally confessed the one true
God, although along with the rest they observed superstitious rites, but
also those who have uttered the same, not in poetry or rhetoric, but as
philosophers: and for the sake of many more of whom we have no literary
remains, but in regard to whom we have learned from the writings of
these others that their lives were to a certain extent praiseworthy, so
that (with the exception of their service of God, in which they erred,
worshipping the vanities which had been set up as objects of public
worship, and serving the creature rather than the Creator) they may be
justly held up as models in all the other virtues of frugality,
self-denial, chastity, sobriety, braving of death in their country’s
defence, and faith kept inviolate not only to fellow-citizens, but also
to enemies. All these things, indeed, when they are practised with a
view not to the great end of right and true piety, but to the empty
pride of human praise and glory, become in a sense worthless and
unprofitable; nevertheless, as indications of a certain disposition of
mind, they please us so much that we would desire those in whom they
exist, either by special preference or along with the others, to be
freed from the pains of hell, were not the verdict of human feeling
different from that of the justice of the Creator.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p13"></span>5. These things being so, if the
Saviour delivered all from that place, and, to quote the terms of the
question in your letter, “emptied hell, so that now from that time
forward the last judgment was to be expected,” the following things
occasion not unreasonable perplexity on this subject, and are wont to
present themselves to me in the meantime when I think on it. First, by
what authoritative statements can this opinion be confirmed? For the
words of Scripture, that “the pains of hell were loosed” by the death of
Christ, do not establish this, seeing that this statement may be
understood as referring to Himself, and meaning that he so far loosed
(that is, made ineffectual) the pains of hell that He Himself was not
held by them, especially since it is added that it was “impossible for
Him to be holden of them.” Or if any one \[objecting to this
interpretation\] ask the reason why He chose to descend into hell, where
those pains were which could not possibly hold Him who was, as Scripture
says, “free among the dead,” <span id="fr_2676"></span>[2677](#fn_2676)
in whom the prince and captain of death found nothing which deserved
punishment, the words that “the pains of hell were loosed” may be
understood as referring not to the case of all, but only of some whom He
judged worthy of that deliverance; so that neither is He supposed to
have descended thither in vain, without the purpose of bringing benefit
to any of those who were there held in prison, nor is it a necessary
inference that what divine mercy and justice granted to some must be
supposed to have been granted to all.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p15"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p15.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p16"></span>6. As to the first man, the father of
mankind, it is agreed by almost the entire Church that the Lord loosed
him from that prison; a tenet which must be believed to have been
accepted not without reason,—from whatever source it was handed down to
the Church,—although the authority of the canonical Scriptures cannot be
brought forward as speaking expressly in its support, <span
id="fr_2677"></span>[2678](#fn_2677) though this seems to be the opinion
which is more than any other borne out by these words in the book of
Wisdom. <span id="fr_2678"></span>[2679](#fn_2678) Some add to this
\[tradition\] that the same favour was bestowed on the holy men of
antiquity,—on Abel, Seth, Noah and his house, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
the other patriarchs and prophets, they also being loosed from those
pains at the time when the Lord descended into hell.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p19"></span>7. But, for my part, I cannot see how
Abra<span id="page_517">p. 517</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-Page_517"></span>ham, into whose bosom also the pious
beggar in the parable was received, can be understood to have been in
these pains; those who are able can perhaps explain this. But I suppose
every one must see it to be absurd to imagine that only two, namely,
Abraham and Lazarus, were in that bosom of wondrous repose before the
Lord descended into hell, and that with reference to these two alone it
was said to the rich man, “Between us and you there is a great gulf
fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither
can they pass to us that would pass from thence.” <span
id="fr_2679"></span>[2680](#fn_2679) Moreover, if there were more than
two there, who will dare to say that the patriarchs and prophets were
not there, to whose righteousness and piety so signal testimony is borne
in the word of God? What benefit was conferred in that case on them by
Him who loosed the pains of hell, in which they were not held, I do not
yet understand, especially as I have not been able to find anywhere in
Scripture the name of hell used in a good sense. And if this use of the
term is nowhere found in the divine Scriptures, assuredly the bosom of
Abraham, that is, the abode of a certain secluded rest, is not to be
believed to be a part of hell. Nay, from these words themselves of the
great Master in which He says that Abraham said, “Between us and you
there is a great gulf fixed,” it is, as I think, sufficiently evident
that the bosom of that glorious felicity was not any integral part of
hell. For what is that great gulf but a chasm completely separating
those places between which it not only is, but is fixed? Wherefore, if
sacred Scripture had said, without naming hell and its pains, that
Christ when He died went to that bosom of Abraham, I wonder if any one
would have dared to say that He “descended into hell.”

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p21"></span>8. But seeing that plain scriptural
testimonies make mention of hell and its pains, no reason can be alleged
for believing that He who is the Saviour went thither, except that He
might save from its pains; but whether He did save all whom He found
held in them, or some whom He judged worthy of that favour, I still ask:
that He was, however, in hell, and that He conferred this benefit on
persons subjected to these pains, I do not doubt. Wherefore, I have not
yet found what benefit He, when He descended into hell, conferred upon
those righteous ones who were in Abraham’s bosom, from whom I see that,
so far as regarded the beatific presence of His Godhead, He never
withdrew Himself; since even on that very day on which He died, He
promised that the thief should be with Him in paradise at the time when
He was about to descend to loose the pains of hell. Most certainly,
therefore, He was, before that time, both in paradise and the bosom of
Abraham in His beatific wisdom, and in hell in His condemning power; for
since the Godhead is confined by no limits, where is He not present? At
the same time, however, so far as regarded the created nature, in
assuming which at a certain point of time, He, while continuing to be
God, became man—that is to say, so far as regarded His soul, He was in
hell: this is plainly declared in these words of Scripture, which were
both sent before in prophecy and fully expounded by apostolical
interpretation: “Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell.” <span
id="fr_2680"></span>[2681](#fn_2680)

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p23"></span>9. I know that some think that at the
death of Christ a resurrection such as is promised to us at the end of
the world was granted to the righteous, founding this on the statement
in Scripture that, in the earthquake by which at the moment of His death
the rocks were rent and the graves were opened, many bodies of the
saints arose and were seen with Him in the Holy City after He rose.
Certainly, if these did not fall asleep again, their bodies being a
second time laid in the grave, it would be necessary to see in what
sense Christ can be understood to be “the first begotten from the
dead,” <span id="fr_2681"></span>[2682](#fn_2681) if so many preceded
Him in the resurrection. And if it be said, in answer to this, that the
statement is made by anticipation, so that the graves indeed are to be
supposed to have been opened by that earthquake at the time when Christ
was hanging on the cross, but that the bodies of the saints did not rise
then, but only after Christ had risen before them,—although on this
hypothesis of anticipation in the narrative, the addition of these words
would not hinder us from still believing, on the one hand, that Christ
was without doubt “the first begotten from the dead,” and on the other,
that to these saints permission was given, when He went before them, to
rise to an eternal state of incorruption and immortality,there still
remains a difficulty, namely, how in that case Peter could have spoken
as he did, saying what was without doubt perfectly true, when he
affirmed that in the prophecy quoted above the words, that “His flesh
should not see corruption,” referred not to David but to Christ, and
added concerning David, “He is buried, and his sepulchre is with us to
this day,” <span id="fr_2682"></span>[2683](#fn_2682) —a statement which
would have had no force as an argument unless the body of David was
still undisturbed in the sepulchre; for of course the sepulchre might
still have been there even had the saint’s body been raised up
immediately after his death, and had thus not seen corruption. But it
seems hard that David should not be <span id="page_518">p. 518</span>
<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-Page_518"></span>included in this resurrection of
the saints, if eternal life was given to them, since it is so
frequently, so clearly, and with such honourable mention of his name,
declared that Christ was to be of David’s seed. Moreover, these words in
the Epistle to the Hebrews concerning the ancient believers, “God having
provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect,” <span id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683) will be
endangered, if these believers have been already established in that
incorruptible resurrection-state which is promised to us when we are to
be made perfect at the end of the world.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p27"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p27.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p28"></span>10. You perceive, therefore, how
intricate is the question why Peter chose to mention, as persons to
whom, when shut up in prison, the gospel was preached, those only who
were unbelieving in the days of Noah when the ark was a preparing—and
also the difficulties which prevent me from pronouncing any definite
opinion on the subject. An additional reason for my hesitation is, that
after the apostle had said, “Which baptism now by a like figure saves
you (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good conscience towards God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who is
on the right hand of God, having swallowed up death that we might be
made heirs of eternal life; and having gone into heaven, angels, and
authorities, and powers being made subject to Him,” he added: “Forasmuch
then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves
likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath
ceased from sin; that he no longer should live the rest of his time in
the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God;” after which he
continues: “For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought
the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts,
excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries:
wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them to the same
excess of riot, speaking evil of you; who shall give account to Him that
is ready to judge the quick and the dead.” After these words he
subjoins: “For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that
are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but
live according to God in the Spirit.” <span
id="fr_2684"></span>[2685](#fn_2684)

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p30"></span>11. Who can be otherwise than
perplexed by words so profound as these? He saith, “The gospel was
preached to the dead;” and if by the “dead” we understand persons who
have departed from the body, I suppose he must mean those described
above as “unbelieving in the days of Noah,” or certainly all those whom
Christ found in hell. What, then, is meant by the words, “That they
might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God
in the spirit”? For how can they be judged in the flesh, which if they
be in hell they no longer have, and which if they have been loosed from
the pains of hell they have not yet resumed? For even if “hell was,” as
you put in your question, “emptied,” it is not to be believed that all
who were then there have risen again in the flesh, or those who,
arising, again appeared with the Lord resumed the flesh for this
purpose, that they might be in it judged according to men; but how this
could be taken as true in the case of those who were unbelieving in the
days of Noah I do not see, for Scripture does not affirm that they were
made to live in the flesh, nor can it be believed that the end for which
they were loosed from the pains of hell was that they who were delivered
from these might resume their flesh in order to suffer punishment. What,
then, is meant by the words, “That they might be judged according to men
in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit?” Can it mean that
to those whom Christ found in hell this was granted, that by the gospel
they were quickened in the spirit, although at the future resurrection
they must be judged in the flesh, that they may pass, through some
punishment in the flesh, into the kingdom of God? If this be what is
meant, why were only the unbelievers of the time of Noah (and not also
all others whom Christ found in hell when He went thither) quickened in
spirit by the preaching of the gospel, to be afterwards judged in the
flesh with a punishment of limited duration? But if we take this as
applying to all, the question still remains why Peter mentioned none but
those who were unbelieving in the days of Noah.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p31"></span>12. I find, moreover, a difficulty in
the reason alleged by those who attempt to give an explanation of this
matter. They say that all those who were found in hell when Christ
descended thither had never heard the gospel, and that that place of
punishment or imprisonment was emptied of all these, because the gospel
was not published to the whole world in their lifetime, and they had
sufficient excuse for not believing that which had never been proclaimed
to them; but that thenceforth, men despising the gospel when it was in
all nations fully published and spread abroad would be inexcusable, and
therefore after the prison was then emptied there still remains a just
judgment, in which those who are contumacious and unbelieving shall be
punished even with eternal fire. Those who hold this opinion do not
consider that the same excuse is available for all those who have, even
after Christ’s resurrection, departed this life before the gospel came
to them. For even after the Lord came back from hell, it was not the
case that no one was from that time forward permitted <span
id="page_519">p. 519</span> <span id="vii.1.CLXIV-Page_519"></span>to go
to hell without having heard the gospel, seeing that multitudes
throughout the world died before the proclamation of its tidings came to
them, all of whom are entitled to plead the excuse which is alleged to
have been taken away from those of whom it is said, that because they
had not before heard the gospel, the Lord when He descended into hell
proclaimed it to them.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p32"></span>13. This objection may perhaps be met
by saying that those also who since the Lord’s resurrection have died or
are now dying without the gospel having been proclaimed to them, may
have heard it or may now hear it where they are, in hell, so that there
they may believe what ought to be believed concerning the truth of
Christ, and may also have that pardon and salvation which those to whom
Christ preached obtained; for the fact that Christ ascended again from
hell is no reason why the report concerning Him should have perished
from recollection there, for from this earth also He has gone ascending
into heaven, and yet by the publication of His gospel those who believe
in Him shall be saved; moreover, He was exalted, and received a name
that is above every name, for this end, that in His name every knee
should bow, not only of things in heaven and on earth, but also of
things under the earth. <span id="fr_2685"></span>[2686](#fn_2685) But
if we accept this opinion, according to which we are warranted in
supposing that men who did not believe while they were in life can in
hell believe in Christ, who can bear the contradictions both of reason
and faith which must follow? In the first place, if this were true, we
should seem to have no reason for mourning over those who have departed
from the body without that grace, and there would be no ground for being
solicitous and using urgent exhortation that men would accept the grace
of God before they die, lest they should be punished with eternal death.
If, again, it be alleged that in hell those only believe to no purpose
and in vain who refused to accept here on earth the gospel preached to
them, but that believing will profit those who never despised a gospel
which they never had it in their power to hear another still more absurd
consequence is involved, namely, that forasmuch as all men shall
certainly die, and ought to come to hell wholly free from the guilt of
having despised the gospel; since otherwise it can be of no use to them
to believe it when they come there, the gospel ought not to be preached
on earth, a sentiment not less foolish than profane.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p34"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p34.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p35"></span>14. Wherefore let us most firmly hold
that which faith, resting on authority established beyond all question,
maintains: “that Christ died according to the Scriptures,” and that “He
was buried,” and that “He rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures,” and all other things which have been written concerning Him
in records fully demonstrated to be true. Among these doctrines we
include the doctrine that He was in hell, and, having loosed the pains
of hell, in which it was impossible for Him to be holden, from which
also He is with good ground believed to have loosed and delivered whom
He would, He took again to Himself that body which He had left on the
cross, and which had been laid in the tomb. These things, I say, let us
firmly hold; but as to the question propounded by you from the words of
the Apostle Peter, since you now perceive the difficulties which I find
in it, and since other difficulties may possibly be found if the subject
be more carefully studied, let us continue to investigate it, whether by
applying our own thoughts to the subject, or by asking the opinion of
any one whom it may be becoming and possible to consult.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p36"></span>15. Consider, however, I pray you,
whether all that the Apostle Peter says concerning spirits shut up in
prison, who were unbelieving in the days of Noah, may not after all have
been written without any reference to hell, but rather to those times
the typical character of which he has transferred to the present time.
For that transaction had been typical of future events, so that those
who do not believe the gospel in our age, when the Church is being built
up in all nations, may be understood to be like those who did not
believe in that age while the ark was a preparing; also, that those who
have believed and are saved by baptism may be compared to those who at
that time, being in the ark, were saved by water; wherefore he says, “So
baptism by a like figure saves you.” Let us therefore interpret the rest
of the statements concerning them that believed not so as to harmonise
with the analogy of the figure, and refuse to entertain the thought that
the gospel was once preached, or is even to this hour being preached in
hell in order to make men believe and be delivered from its pains, as if
a Church had been established there as well as on earth.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p37"></span>16. Those who have inferred from the
words, “He preached to the spirits in prison,” that Peter held the
opinion which perplexes you, seem to me to have been drawn to this
interpretation by imagining that the term “spirits” could not be applied
to designate souls which were at that time still in the bodies of men,
and which, being shut up in the darkness of ignorance, were, so to
speak, “in prison,”—a prison such as that from which the Psalmist sought
deliverance in the prayer, “Bring my soul out of prison, that I may
praise Thy name;” <span id="fr_2686"></span>[2687](#fn_2686) which is in
another <span id="page_520">p. 520</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-Page_520"></span>place called the “shadow of
death,” <span id="fr_2687"></span>[2688](#fn_2687) from which
deliverance was granted, not certainly in hell, but in this world, to
those of whom it is written, “They that dwell in the land of the shadow
of death, upon them hath the light shined.” <span
id="fr_2688"></span>[2689](#fn_2688) But to the men of Noah’s time the
gospel was preached in vain, because they believed not when God’s long
suffering waited for them during the many years in which the ark was
being built (for the building of the ark was itself in a certain sense a
preaching of mercy); even as now men similar to them are unbelieving,
who, to use the same figure, are shut up in the darkness of ignorance as
in a prison, beholding in vain the Church which is being built up
throughout the world, while judgment is impending, as the flood was by
which at that time all the unbelieving perished; for the Lord says: “As
it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son
of man; they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and the flood
came and destroyed them all.” <span id="fr_2689"></span>[2690](#fn_2689)
But because that transaction was also a type of a future event, that
flood was a type both of baptism to believers and of destruction to
unbelievers, as in that figure in which, not by a transaction but by
words, two things are predicted concerning Christ, when He is
represented in Scripture as a stone which was destined to be both to
unbelievers a stone of stumbling, and to believers a
foundation-stone. <span id="fr_2690"></span>[2691](#fn_2690)
Occasionally, however, also in the same figure, whether it be in the
form of a typical event or of a parable, two things are used to
represent one, as believers were represented both by the timbers of
which the ark was built and by the eight souls saved in the ark, and as
in the gospel similitude of the sheepfold Christ is both the shepherd
and the door. <span id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691)

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p44"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p44.1"></span>Chap. VI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p45"></span>17. And let it not be regarded as an
objection to the interpretation now given, that the Apostle Peter says
that Christ Himself preached to men shut up in prison who were
unbelieving in the days of Noah, as if we must consider this
interpretation inconsistent with the fact that at that time Christ had
not come. For although he had not yet come in the flesh, as He came when
afterwards He “showed Himself upon earth, and conversed with men,” <span
id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692) nevertheless he certainly came
often to this earth, from the beginning of the human race, whether to
rebuke the wicked, as Cain, and before that, Adam and his wife, when
they sinned, or to comfort the good, or to admonish both, so that some
should to their salvation believe, others should to their condemnation
refuse to believe,—coming then not in the flesh but in the spirit,
speaking by suitable manifestations of Himself to such persons and in
such manner as seemed good to Him. As to this expression, “He came in
the spirit,” surely He, as the Son of God, is a Spirit in the essence of
His Deity, for that is not corporeal; but what is at any time done by
the Son without the Holy Spirit, or without the Father, seeing that all
the works of the Trinity are inseparable?

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p47"></span>18. The words of Scripture which are
under consideration seem to me of themselves to make this sufficiently
plain to those who carefully attend to them: “For Christ hath died once
for our sins, the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God;
being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit: in which
also He came and preached unto the spirits in prison, who sometime were
unbelieving, when the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the ark was a preparing.” The order of the words is now, I
suppose, carefully noted by you: “Christ being put to death in the
flesh, but quickened in the spirit;” in which spirit He came and
preached also to those spirits who had once in the days of Noah refused
to believe His word; since before He came in the flesh to die for us,
which He did once, He often came in the spirit, to whom He would, by
visions instructing them as He would, coming to them assuredly in the
same spirit in which He was quickened when He was put to death in the
flesh in His passion. Now what does His being quickened in the spirit
mean if not this, that the same flesh in which alone He had experienced
death rose from the dead by the quickening spirit?

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p48"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p48.1"></span>Chap. VII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p49"></span>19. For who will dare to say that
Jesus was put to death in His soul, *i.e.* in the spirit which belonged
to Him as man, since the only death which the soul can experience is
sin, from which He was absolutely free when for us He was put to death
in the flesh? For if the souls of all men are derived from that one
which the breath of God gave to the first man, by whom “sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men,” <span
id="fr_2693"></span>[2694](#fn_2693) either the soul of Christ is not
derived from the same source as other souls, because He had absolutely
no sin, either original or personal, on account of which death could be
supposed to be merited by Him, since He paid on our behalf that which
was not on His own account due by Him, in whom the prince of this world,
who had the power of death, found nothing <span
id="fr_2694"></span>[2695](#fn_2694) —and there is nothing unreasonable
in the supposition that <span id="page_521">p. 521</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-Page_521"></span>He who created a soul for the first man
should create a soul for Himself; or if the soul of Christ be derived
from Adam’s soul He in assuming it to Himself, cleansed it so that when
He came into this world He was born of the Virgin perfectly free from
sin either actual or transmitted. If, however, the souls of men are not
derived from that one soul, and it is only by the flesh that original
sin is transmitted from Adam, the Son of God created a soul for Himself,
as He creates souls for all other men, but He united it not to sinful
flesh, but to the “likeness of sinful flesh.” <span
id="fr_2695"></span>[2696](#fn_2695) For He took, indeed, from the
Virgin the true substance of flesh; not, however, “sinful flesh,” for it
was neither begotten nor conceived through carnal concupiscence, but
mortal, and capable of change in the successive stages of life, as being
like unto sinful flesh in all points, sin excepted.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p53"></span>20. Therefore, whatever be the true
theory concerning the origin of souls,—and on this I feel it would be
rash for me to pronounce, meanwhile, any opinion beyond utterly
rejecting the theory which affirms that each soul is thrust into the
body which it inhabits as into a prison, where it expiates some former
actions of its own of which I know nothing, it is certain, regarding the
soul of Christ, not only that it is, according to the nature of all
souls, immortal, but also that it was neither put to death by sin nor
punished by condemnation, the only two ways in which death can be
understood as experienced by the soul; and therefore it could not be
said of Christ that with reference to the soul He was “quickened in the
spirit.” For He was quickened in that in which He had been put to death;
this, therefore, is spoken with reference to His flesh, for His flesh
received life again when the soul returned to it, as it also had died
when the soul departed. He was therefore said to be “put to death in the
flesh,” because He experienced death only in the flesh, but “quickened
in the spirit,” because by the operation of that Spirit in which He was
wont to come and preach to whom He would, that same flesh in which He
came to men was quickened and rose from the grave.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p54"></span>21. Wherefore, passing now to the
words which we find farther on concerning unbelievers, “Who shall give
account to Him who is ready to judge the quick and the dead,” there is
no necessity for our understanding the “dead” here to be those who have
departed from the body. For it may be that the apostle intended by the
word “dead” to denote unbelievers, as being spiritually dead, like those
of whom it was said, “Let the dead bury their dead,” <span
id="fr_2696"></span>[2697](#fn_2696) and by the word “living” to denote
those who believe in Him, having not heard in vain the call, “Awake,
thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light;” <span id="fr_2697"></span>[2698](#fn_2697) of whom also the Lord
said: “The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.” <span
id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698) On the same principle of
interpretation, also, there is nothing compelling us to understand the
immediately succeeding words of Peter—“For this cause was the gospel
preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according
to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit” <span
id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699) —as describing what has been done
in hell. “For for this cause has the gospel been preached” in this life
“to the dead,” that is, to the unbelieving wicked, “that” when they
believed “they might be judged according to men in the flesh,”—that is,
by means of various afflictions and by the death of the body itself; for
which reason the same apostle says in another place: “The time is come
that judgment must begin at the house of God,” <span
id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700) —“but live according to God in the
spirit,” since in that same spirit they had been dead while they were
held prisoners in the death of unbelief and wickedness.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p60"></span>22. If this exposition of the words of
Peter offend any one, or, without offending, at least fail to satisfy
any one, let him attempt to interpret them on the supposition that they
refer to hell: and if he succeed in solving my difficulties which I have
mentioned above, so as to remove the perplexity which they occasion, let
him communicate his interpretation to me; and if this were done, the
words might possibly have been intended to be understood in both ways,
but the view which I have propounded is not thereby shown to be false.

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p61"></span>I wrote and sent by the deacon Asellus
a letter, which I suppose you have received, giving such answers as I
could to the questions which you sent before, excepting the one
concerning the vision of God by the bodily senses, on which a larger
treatise must be attempted. In your last note, to which this is a reply,
you propounded two questions concerning certain words of the Apostle
Peter, and concerning the soul of the Lord, both of which I have
discussed,—the former more fully, the latter briefly. <span
id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701) I beg you not to grudge the trouble
of sending me another copy of the letter containing the question whether
it is possible for the substance of the Deity to be seen in a bodily
form as limited to place; for it has, I know not how, gone amissing
here, and though long sought for, has not been found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2672"></span>[515:2673](1010440.htm#fr_2672) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p6"></span> *Increduli.*

<span id="fn_2673"></span>[515:2674](1010440.htm#fr_2673) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p7"></span> [1 Pet.
3.18-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2674"></span>[516:2675](1010440.htm#fr_2674) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p10"></span> [Ps.
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2675"></span>[516:2676](1010440.htm#fr_2675) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p11"></span> [Acts
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p11.1"></span>, in which the words rendered by Augustin
“inferni dolores” are: <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p11.2"></span> τὰς ὠδῖνας τοῦ θανάτου</span>.

<span id="fn_2676"></span>[516:2677](1010440.htm#fr_2676) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p14"></span> [Ps.
88.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2677"></span>[516:2678](1010440.htm#fr_2677) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p17"></span> We give the original of this
important sentence:—“De illo quidem primo homine patre generis humani,
quod eum inde solverit Ecclesia fere tota consentit: quod eam non
inaniter credidisse credendum est, undecumque hoc traditum sit, etiamsi
canonicarum Scripturarum hinc expressa non proferatur auctoritas.”

<span id="fn_2678"></span>[516:2679](1010440.htm#fr_2678) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p18"></span> [Wis.
10:1](../../../bib/apo/wis010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/apo/wis010.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2679"></span>[517:2680](1010440.htm#fr_2679) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p20"></span> [Luke
16.26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2680"></span>[517:2681](1010440.htm#fr_2680) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p22"></span> [Ps.
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2681"></span>[517:2682](1010440.htm#fr_2681) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p24"></span> [Rev.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2682"></span>[517:2683](1010440.htm#fr_2682) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p25"></span> [Acts
2.28](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#028)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[518:2684](1010440.htm#fr_2683) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p26"></span> [Heb.
11.40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#040)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2684"></span>[518:2685](1010440.htm#fr_2684) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p29"></span> [1 Pet.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2685"></span>[519:2686](1010440.htm#fr_2685) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p33"></span> *Infernorum.* [Phil.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2686"></span>[519:2687](1010440.htm#fr_2686) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p38"></span> [Ps.
142.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2687"></span>[520:2688](1010440.htm#fr_2687) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p39"></span> [Ps.
107.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2688"></span>[520:2689](1010440.htm#fr_2688) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p40"></span> [Isa.
9.2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2689"></span>[520:2690](1010440.htm#fr_2689) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p41"></span> [Luke
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2690"></span>[520:2691](1010440.htm#fr_2690) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42"></span> [Ps.
118.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42.1"></span>; [Isa.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014), [Isa.
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42.2"></span>; [Dan.
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42.3"></span>; [Matt.
21.44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42.4"></span>; [Luke
20.17](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42.5"></span>; [Acts
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42.6"></span>; [Rom.
9.33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42.7"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[520:2692](1010440.htm#fr_2691) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p42.8"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p43"></span> [John
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[520:2693](1010440.htm#fr_2692) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p46"></span> [Baruch
3.37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#037)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2693"></span>[520:2694](1010440.htm#fr_2693) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p50"></span> [Rom.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2694"></span>[520:2695](1010440.htm#fr_2694) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p51"></span> [John
14.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2695"></span>[521:2696](1010440.htm#fr_2695) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p52"></span> [Rom.
8.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2696"></span>[521:2697](1010440.htm#fr_2696) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p55"></span> [Matt.
8.22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2697"></span>[521:2698](1010440.htm#fr_2697) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p56"></span> [Eph.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[521:2699](1010440.htm#fr_2698) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p57"></span> [John
5.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[521:2700](1010440.htm#fr_2699) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p58"></span> [1 Pet.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[521:2701](1010440.htm#fr_2700) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p59"></span> [1 Pet.
4.17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[521:2702](1010440.htm#fr_2701) <span
id="vii.1.CLXIV-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXIV-p62"></span> See paragraphs 19 and 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXV](1010441)
