[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010445)  [Next](1010447) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXXIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 416.)

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p3.1"></span>To Donatus, a Presbyter of the Donatist
Party, Augustin, a Bishop of the Catholic Church, Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p4"></span>1. If you could see the sorrow of my
heart and my concern for your salvation, you would perhaps take pity on
your own soul, doing that which is pleasing to God, by giving heed to
the word which is not ours but His; and would no longer give to His
Scripture only a place in your memory, while shutting it out from your
heart. You are angry because you are being drawn to salvation, although
you have drawn so many of our fellow Christians to destruction. For what
did we order beyond this, that you should be arrested, brought before
the authorities, and guarded, in order to prevent you from perishing? As
to your having sustained bodily injury, you have yourself to blame for
this, as you would not use the horse which was immediately brought to
you, and then dashed yourself violently to the ground; for, as you well
know, your companion, who was brought along with you, arrived uninjured,
not having done any harm to himself as you did.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p5"></span>2. You think, however, that even what
we have done to you should not have been done, because, in your opinion,
no man should be compelled to that which is good. Mark, therefore, the
words of the apostle: “If a man desire the office of a bishop, he
desireth a good work,” and yet, in order to make the office of a bishop
be accepted by many men, they are seized against their will, <span
id="fr_2811"></span>[2812](#fn_2811) subjected to importunate
persuasion, shut up and detained in custody, and made to suffer so many
things which they dislike, until a willingness to undertake the good
work is found in them. How much more, then, is it fitting that you
should be drawn forcibly away from a pernicious error, in which you are
enemies to your own souls, and brought to acquaint yourselves with the
truth, or to choose it when known, not only in order to your holding in
a safe and advantageous way the honour belonging to your office, but
also in order to preserve you from perishing miserably! You say that God
has given us free will, and that therefore no man should be compelled
even to good. Why, then, are those whom I have above referred to
compelled to that which is good? Take heed, therefore, to something
which you do not wish to consider. The aim towards which a good will
compassionately devotes its efforts is to secure that a bad will be
rightly directed. For who does not know that a man is not condemned on
any other ground than because his bad will deserved it, and that no man
is saved who has not a good will? Nevertheless, it does not follow from
this that those who are loved should be cruelly left to yield themselves
with impunity to their bad will; but in so far as power is given, they
ought to be both prevented from evil and compelled to good.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p7"></span>3. For if a bad will ought to be
always left to its own freedom, why were the disobedient and murmuring
Israelites restrained from evil by such severe chastisements, and
compelled to come into the land of promise? If a bad will ought always
to be left to its own freedom, why was Paul not left to the free use of
that most perverted will with which he persecuted the Church? Why was he
thrown to the ground that he might be blinded, and struck blind that he
might be changed, and changed that he might be sent as an apostle, and
sent that he might suffer for the truth’s sake such wrongs as he had
inflicted on others when he was in error? If a bad will ought always to
be left to its own freedom, why is a father instructed in Holy Scripture
not only to correct an obstinate son by words of rebuke, but also to
beat his sides, in order that, being compelled and subdued, he may be
guided to good conduct? <span id="fr_2812"></span>[2813](#fn_2812) For
which reason Solomon <span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-Page_545"></span>also says: “Thou shalt beat him with
the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell.” <span
id="fr_2813"></span>[2814](#fn_2813) If a bad will ought always to be
left to its own freedom, why are negligent pastors reproved? and why is
it said to them, “Ye have not brought back the wandering sheep, ye have
not sought the perishing”? <span id="fr_2814"></span>[2815](#fn_2814)
You also are sheep belonging to Christ, you bear the Lord’s mark in the
sacrament which you have received, but you are wandering and perishing.
Let us not, therefore, incur your displeasure because we bring back the
wandering and seek the perishing; for it is better for us to obey the
will of the Lord, who charges us to compel you to return to His fold,
than to yield consent to the will of the wandering sheep, so as to leave
you to perish. Say not, therefore, what I hear that you are constantly
saying, “I wish thus to wander; I wish thus to perish;” for it is better
that we should so far as is in our power absolutely refuse to allow you
to wander and perish.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p11"></span>4. When you threw yourself the other
day into a well, in order to bring death upon yourself, you did so no
doubt with your free will. But how cruel the servants of God would have
been if they had left you to the fruits of this bad will, and had not
delivered you from that death! Who would not have justly blamed them?
Who would not have justly denounced them as inhuman? And yet you, with
your own free will, threw yourself into the water that you might be
drowned. They took you against your will out of the water, that you
might not be drowned. You acted according to your own will, but with a
view to your destruction; they dealt with you against your will, but in
order to your preservation. If, therefore, mere bodily safety behoves to
be so guarded that it is the duty of those who love their neighhour to
preserve him even against his own will from harm, how much more is this
duty binding in regard to that spiritual health in the loss of which the
consequence to be dreaded is eternal death! At the same time let me
remark, that in that death which you wished to bring upon yourself you
would have died not for time only but for eternity, because even though
force had been used to compel you—not to accept salvation, not to enter
into the peace of the Church, the unity of Christ’s body, the holy
indivisible charity, but—to suffer some evil things, it would not have
been lawful for you to take away your own life.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p12"></span>5. Consider the divine Scriptures,
and examine them to the utmost of your ability, and see whether this was
ever done by any one of the just and faithful, though subjected to the
most grievous evils by persons who were endeavouring to drive them, not
to eternal life, to which you are being compelled by us, but to eternal
death. I have heard that you say that the Apostle Paul intimated the
lawfulness of suicide, when he said, “Though I give my body to be
burned,” <span id="fr_2815"></span>[2816](#fn_2815) supposing that
because he was there enumerating all the good things which are of no
avail without charity, such as the tongues of men and of angels, and all
mysteries, and all knowledge, and all prophecy, and the distribution of
one’s goods to the poor, he intended to include among these good things
the act of bringing death upon one-self. But observe carefully and learn
in what sense Scripture says that any man may give his body to be
burned. Certainly not that any man may throw himself into the fire when
he is harassed by a pursuing enemy, but that, when he is compelled to
choose between doing wrong and suffering wrong, he should refuse to do
wrong rather than to suffer wrong, and so give his body into the power
of the executioner, as those three men did who were being compelled to
worship the golden image, while he who was compelling them threatened
them with the burning fiery furnace if they did not obey. They refused
to worship the image: they did not cast themselves into the fire, and
yet of them it is written that they “yielded their bodies, that they
might not serve nor worship any god except their own God.” <span
id="fr_2816"></span>[2817](#fn_2816) This is the sense in which the
apostle said, “If I give my body to be burned.”

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p15"></span>6. Mark also what follows:—“If I
have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.” To that charity you are
called; by that charity you are prevented from perishing: and yet you
think, forsooth, that to throw yourself headlong to destruction, by your
own act, will profit you in some measure, although, even if you suffered
death at the hands of another, while you remain an enemy to charity it
would profit you nothing. Nay, more, being in a state of exclusion from
the Church, and severed from the body of unity and the bond of charity,
you would be punished with eternal misery even though you were burned
alive for Christ’s name; for this is the apostle’s declaration, “Though
I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me
nothing.” Bring your mind back, therefore, to rational reflection and
sober thought; consider carefully whether it is to error and to impiety
that you are being called, and, if you still think so, submit patiently
to any hardship for the truth’s sake. If, however, the fact rather be
that you are living in error and in impiety, and that in the Church to
which you are called truth and piety are found, because there is
Christian unity and the love (*charitas*) of the Holy Spirit, why <span
id="page_546">p. 546</span> <span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-Page_546"></span>do
you labour any longer to be an enemy to yourself?

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p16"></span>7. For this end the mercy of the
Lord appointed that both we and your bishops met at Carthage in a
conference which had repeated meetings, and was largely attended, and
reasoned together in the most orderly manner in regard to the grounds of
our separation from each other. The proceedings of that conference were
written down; our signatures are attached to the record: read it, or
allow others to read it to you, and then choose which party you prefer.
I have heard that you have said that you could to some extent discuss
the statements in that record with us if we would omit these words of
your bishops: “No case forecloses the investigation of another case, and
no person compromises the position of another person.” You wish us to
leave out these words, in which, although they knew it not, the truth
itself spoke by them. You will say, indeed, that here they made a
mistake, and fell through want of consideration into a false opinion.
But we affirm that here they said what was true, and we prove this very
easily by a reference to yourself. For if in regard to these bishops of
your own, chosen by the whole party of Donatus on the understanding that
they should act as representatives, and that all the rest should regard
whatever they did as acceptable and satisfactory, you nevertheless
refuse to allow them to compromise your position by what you think to
have been a rash and mistaken utterance on their part, in this refusal
you confirm the truth of their saying: “No case forecloses the
investigation of another case, and no person compromises the position of
another person.” And at the same time you ought to acknowledge, that if
you refuse to allow the conjoint authority of so many of your bishops
represented in these seven to compromise Donatus, presbyter in
Mutugenna, it is incomparably less reasonable that one person,
Cæcilianus, even had some evil been found in him, should compromise the
position of the whole unity of Christ, the Church, which is not shut up
within the one village of Mutugenna, but spread abroad throughout the
entire world.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p17"></span>8. But, behold, we do what you have
desired; we treat with you as if your bishops had not said: “No case
forecloses the investigation of another case, and no person compromises
the position of another person.” Discover, if you can, what they ought,
rather than this, to have said in reply, when there was alleged against
them the case and the person of Primianus, <span
id="fr_2817"></span>[2818](#fn_2817) who, notwithstanding his joining
the rest of the bishops in passing sentence of condemnation on those who
had passed sentence of condemnation upon him, nevertheless received back
into their former honours those whom he had condemned and denounced, and
chose to acknowledge and accept rather than despise and repudiate the
baptism administered by these men while they were “dead” (for of them it
was said in the notable decree \[of the Council of Bagai\], that “the
shores were full of dead men”), and by so doing swept away the argument
which you are accustomed to rest on a perverse interpretation of the
words: “Qui baptizatur a mortuo quid ei prodest lavacrum ejus?” <span
id="fr_2818"></span>[2819](#fn_2818) If, therefore, your bishops had not
said: “No case forecloses the investigation of another case, and no
person compromises the position of another person,” they would have been
compelled to plead guilty in the case of Primianus; but, in saying this,
they declared the Catholic Church to be, as we mentioned, not guilty in
the case of Cæcilianus.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p20"></span>9. However, read all the rest and
examine it well. Mark whether they have succeeded in proving any charge
of evil brought against Cæcilianus himself, through whose person they
attempted to compromise the position of the Church. Mark whether they
have not rather brought forward much that was in his favour, and
confirmed the evidence that his case was a good one, by a number of
extracts which, to the prejudice of their own case, they produced and
read. Read these or let them be read to you. Consider the whole matter,
ponder it carefully, and choose which you should follow: whether you
should, in the peace of Christ, in the unity of the Catholic Church, in
the love of the brethren, be partaker of our joy, or, in the cause of
wicked discord, the Donatist faction and impious schism, continue to
suffer the annoyance caused to you by the measures which out of love to
you we are compelled to take.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p21"></span>10. I hear that you have remarked
and often quote the fact recorded in the gospels, that the seventy
disciples went back from the Lord, and that they had been left to their
own choice in this wicked and impious desertion, and that to the twelve
who alone remained the Lord said, “Will ye also go away?” <span
id="fr_2819"></span>[2820](#fn_2819) But you have neglected to remark,
that at that time the Church was only beginning to burst into life from
the recently planted seed, and that there was not yet fulfilled in her
the prophecy: “All kings shall fall down before Him; yea, all nations
shall serve <span id="page_547">p. 547</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-Page_547"></span>Him;” <span
id="fr_2820"></span>[2821](#fn_2820) and it is in proportion to the more
enlarged accomplishment of this prophecy that the Church wields greater
power, so that she may not only invite, but even compel men to embrace
what is good. This our Lord intended then to illustrate, for although He
had great power, He chose rather to manifest His humility. This also He
taught, with sufficient plainness, in the parable of the Feast, in which
the master of the house, after He had sent a message to the invited
guests, and they had refused to come, said to his servants: “Go out
quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the
poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind. And the servant said,
Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and yet there is room. And the
Lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.” <span
id="fr_2821"></span>[2822](#fn_2821) Mark, now, how it was said in
regard to those who came first, “bring them in;” it was not said,
“compel them to come in,”—by which was signified the incipient condition
of the Church, when it was only growing towards the position in which it
would have strength to compel men to come in. Accordingly, because it
was right that when the Church had been strengthened, both in power and
in extent, men should be compelled to come in to the feast of
everlasting salvation, it was afterwards added in the parable, “The
servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and yet there is
room. And the Lord said unto the servants, Go out into the highways and
hedges, and compel them to come in.” Wherefore, if you were walking
peaceably, absent from this feast of everlasting salvation and of the
holy unity of the Church, we should find you, as it were, in the
“highways;” but since, by multiplied injuries and cruelties, which you
perpetrate on our people, you are, as it were, full of thorns and
roughness, we find you as it were in the “hedges,” and we compel you to
come in. The sheep which is compelled is driven whither it would not
wish to go, but after it has entered, it feeds of its own accord in the
pastures to which it was brought. Wherefore restrain your perverse and
rebellious spirit, that in the true Church of Christ you may find the
feast of salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2811"></span>[544:2812](1010446.htm#fr_2811) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p6"></span> An example is furnished in the case
of Castorius, Letter LXIX.; *Letters*, p. 326.

<span id="fn_2812"></span>[544:2813](1010446.htm#fr_2812) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p8"></span> Eccles. 30.12<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2813"></span>[545:2814](1010446.htm#fr_2813) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p9"></span> [Prov.
23.14](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2814"></span>[545:2815](1010446.htm#fr_2814) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p10"></span> [Ezek.
34.4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2815"></span>[545:2816](1010446.htm#fr_2815) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
13.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2816"></span>[545:2817](1010446.htm#fr_2816) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p14"></span> [Dan.
3.28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2817"></span>[546:2818](1010446.htm#fr_2817) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p18"></span> Primianus, Donatist bishop in
Carthage, was in 393 deposed by a factious clique of bishops, who
appointed Maximianus in his place. The other Donatist bishops, however,
assembled in the following year at Bagai in Numidia, and, reversing the
decision of their co-bishops deposed them in turn, and passed a sentence
to which, as stated in the text, they did not inexorably adhere. The
matter is referred to in Letter XLIII. p. 276.

<span id="fn_2818"></span>[546:2819](1010446.htm#fr_2818) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p19"></span> [Ecclus.
34.25](../../../bib/apo/sir034.htm#025)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p19.1"></span>, translated, accurately enough, in our
English version: “He that washeth himself after touching a dead body, if
he touch it again, what availeth his washing?” The Donatist, in quoting
the passage to support their practice of re-baptizing Catholics, omitted
the clause, “et iterum tangit mortuum,” and translated the sentence
thus: “He that is baptized by one who is dead, what availeth his
baptism?” It would be difficult to quote from the annals of controversy
a more flagrant example of ignorant ingenuity in the wresting of words
to serve a purpose.

<span id="fn_2819"></span>[546:2820](1010446.htm#fr_2819) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p22"></span> [John
6.67](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#067)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2820"></span>[547:2821](1010446.htm#fr_2820) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p23"></span> [Ps.
72.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2821"></span>[547:2822](1010446.htm#fr_2821) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p24"></span> [Luke
14.21-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXIII-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXXX](1010447)
