[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010397)  [Next](1010399) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XCII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XCII-p1.1"></span>Letter XCII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408.)

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCII-p3.1"></span>To the Noble and Justly Distinguished Lady
Italica, a Daughter Worthy of Honour in the Love of Christ, Bishop
Augustin Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p4"></span>1. I have learned, not only by your
letter, but also by the statements of the person who brought it to me,
that you earnestly solicit a letter from me, believing that you may
derive from it very great consolation. What you may gain from my letter
it is for yourself to judge; I at least felt that I should neither
refuse nor delay compliance with your request. May your own faith and
hope comfort you, and that love which is shed abroad in the hearts of
the pious by the Holy Ghost, <span id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124)
whereof we have now a portion as an earnest of the whole, in order that
we may learn to desire its consummate fulness. For you ought not to
consider yourself desolate while you have Christ dwelling in your heart
by faith; nor ought you to sorrow as those heathens who have no hope,
seeing that in regard to those friends, who are not lost, but only
called earlier than ourselves to the country whither we shall follow
them, we have hope, resting on a most sure promise, that from this life
we shall pass into that other life, in which they shall be to us more
beloved as they shall be better known, and in which our pleasure in
loving them shall not be alloyed by any fear of separation.

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p6"></span>2. Your late husband, by whose decease
you are now a widow, was truly well known to you, but better known to
himself than to you. And how could this be, when you saw his face, which
he himself did not see, if it were not that the inner knowledge which we
have of ourselves is more certain, since no man “knoweth the things of a
man, save the spirit of man which is in man”? <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) but when the Lord cometh, “who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts,” <span id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126)
then shall nothing in any one be concealed from his neighbour; nor shall
there be anything which any one might reveal to his friends, but keep
hidden from strangers, for no stranger shall be there. What tongue can
describe the nature and the greatness of that light by which all those
things which are now in the hearts of men concealed shall be made
manifest? who can with our weak faculties even approach it? Truly that
Light is God Himself, for “God is Light, and in Him is no darkness at
all;” <span id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) but He is the Light of
purified minds, not of these bodily eyes. And the mind shall then be,
what meanwhile it is not, able to see that light.

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p10"></span>3. But this the bodily eye neither now
is, nor shall then be, able to see. For everything which can be seen by
the bodily eye must be in some place, nor can be everywhere in its
totality, but with a smaller part of itself occupies a smaller space,
and with a larger part a larger space. It is not so with God, who is
invisible and incorruptible, “who only hath immortality, dwelling in the
light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen nor can
see.” <span id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) For He cannot be seen
by men through the bodily organ by which men see corporeal things. For
if He were inaccessible to the minds also of the saints, it would not be
said, “They looked unto Him, and were lightened” \[translated by Aug.,
“Draw near unto Him, and be enlightened”\]; <span
id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) and if He was invisible to the
minds of the saints, it would not be said, “We shall see Him as He is:”
for consider the whole context there in that Epistle of John: “Beloved,”
he says, “now are we the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what we
shall be: but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him;
for we shall see Him as He is.” <span
id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130) We shall therefore see Him
according to the measure in which we shall be like Him; because now the
measure in which we do not see Him is according to the measure of our
unlikeness to Him. We shall therefore see Him by means of that in which
we shall be like Him. But who would be so infatuated as to assert that
we either are or shall be in our bodies like unto God? The likeness
spoken of is therefore in the inner man, “which is renewed in knowledge
after the image of Him that created him.” <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) And we shall become the more like
unto Him, the more we advance in knowledge of Him and in love; because
“though our outward man perish, our inward man is renewed day by
day,” <span id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) yet so as that, however
far one may have become advanced in this life, he is far short of that
perfection of likeness which is fitted for seeing God, as the apostle
says, “face to face.” <span id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133) If by
these words we were to understand the bodily face, it would follow that
God has a face such as ours, and <span id="page_381">p. 381</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCII-Page_381"></span>that between our face and His there must
be a space intervening when we shall see Him face to face. And if a
space intervene, this presupposes a limitation and a definite
conformation of members and other things, absurd to utter, and impious
even to think of, by which most empty delusions the natural man, which
“receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God,” <span
id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134) is deceived.

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p18"></span>4. For some of those who talk thus
foolishly affirm, as I am informed, that we see God now by our minds,
but shall then see Him by our bodies; yea, they even say that the wicked
shall in the same manner see Him. Observe how far they have gone from
bad to worse, when, unpunished for their foolish speaking, they talk at
random, unrestrained by either fear or shame. They used to say at first,
that Christ endowed only His own flesh with this faculty of seeing God
with the bodily eye; then they added to this, that all the saints shall
see God in the same way when they have received their bodies again in
the resurrection; and now they have granted that the same thing is
possible to the wicked also. Well, let them grant what gifts they
please, and to whom they please: for who may say anything against men
giving away that which is their own? for he that speaketh a lie,
speaketh of his own. <span id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135) Be it
yours, however, in common with all who hold sound doctrine, not to
presume to take in this way from your own any of these errors; but when
you read, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God,” <span
id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136) learn from it that the impious
shall not see Him: for the impious are neither blessed nor pure in
heart. Moreover, when you read, “Now we see through a glass
darkly, <span id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137) but then face to
face,” <span id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138) learn from this that
we shall then see Him face to face by the same means by which we now see
Him through a glass darkly. In both cases alike, the vision of God
belongs to the inner man, whether when we walk in this pilgrimage still
by faith, in which it uses the glass and the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XCII-p22.2"></span>αἴνιγμα</span>, or when, in the country
which is our home, we shall perceive by sight, which vision the words
“face to face” denote.

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p23"></span>5. Let the flesh raving with carnal
imaginations hear these words: “God is a Spirit, and they that worship
Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth.” <span
id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139) If this be the manner of
worshipping Him, how much more of seeing Him! For who durst affirm that
the Divine essence is seen in a corporal manner, when He has not
permitted it to be worshipped in a corporal manner? They think, however,
that they are very acute in saying and in pressing as a question for us
to answer: Was Christ able to endow His flesh so as that He could with
His eyes see the Father, or was He not? If we reply that He was not,
they publish abroad that we have denied the omnipotence of God; if, on
the other hand, we grant that He was able, they affirm that their
argument is established by our reply. How much more excusable is the
folly of those who maintain that the flesh shall be changed into the
Divine substance, and shall be what God Himself is, in order that thus
they may endow with fitness for seeing God that which is meanwhile
removed by so great diversity of nature from likeness to Him! Yet I
believe they reject from their creed, perhaps also refuse to hear, this
error. Nevertheless, if they were in like manner pressed with the
question above quoted, as to whether God can or cannot do this \[viz.
change our flesh into the Divine substance\], which alternative will
they choose? Will they limit His power by answering that He cannot; or
if they concede that He can, will they by this concession grant that it
shall be done? Let them get out of the dilemma which they have proposed
to others as above, in the same way by which they get out of this
dilemma proposed to others by them. Moreover, why do they contend that
this gift is to be attributed only to the eyes, and not to all the other
senses of Christ? Shall God then be a sound, that He may be perceived by
the ear? and an exhalation, that He may be discerned by the sense of
smell? and a liquid of some kind, that He may be also imbibed? and a
solid body, that He may be also touched? No, they say. What then? we
reply; can God be this, or can He not? If they say He cannot, why do
they derogate from the omnipotence of God? If they say He can, but is
not willing, why do they show favour to the eyes alone, and grudge the
same honour to the other senses of Christ? Do they carry their folly
just as far as they please? How much better is our course, who do not
prescribe limits to their folly, but would fain prevent them from
entering into it at all!

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p25"></span>6. Many things may be brought forward
for the confutation of that madness. Meanwhile, however, if at any time
they assail your ears, read this letter to the supporters of such error,
and do not count it too great a labour to write back to me as well as
you can what they say in reply. Let me add that our hearts are purified
by faith, because the vision of God is promised to us as the reward of
faith. Now, if this vision of God were to be through the bodily eyes, in
vain are the souls of saints exercised for receiving it; nay, rather, a
soul which cherishes such sentiments is not exercised in itself, but is
wholly in the flesh. For where will it dwell more reso<span
id="page_382">p. 382</span> <span id="vii.1.XCII-Page_382"></span>lutely
and fixedly than in that by means of which it expects that it shall see
God? How great an evil this would be I rather leave to your own
intelligence to observe, than labour to prove by a long argument.

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p26"></span>May your heart dwell always under the
Lord’s keeping, noble and justly distinguished lady, and daughter worthy
of honour in the love of Christ! Salute from me, with the respect due to
your worth, your sons, who are along with yourself honourable, and to me
dearly beloved in the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[380:2125](1010398.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p5"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="vii.1.XCII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[380:2126](1010398.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p7"></span> [1 Cor.
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[380:2127](1010398.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="vii.1.XCII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[380:2128](1010398.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p9"></span> [1 John
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)<span id="vii.1.XCII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[380:2129](1010398.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p11"></span> [1 Tim.
6.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[380:2130](1010398.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p12"></span> [Ps.
34.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[380:2131](1010398.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p13"></span> [1 John
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[380:2132](1010398.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p14"></span> [Col.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[380:2133](1010398.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p15"></span> [2 Cor.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[380:2134](1010398.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p16"></span> [2 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[381:2135](1010398.htm#fr_2134) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p17"></span> [1 Cor.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[381:2136](1010398.htm#fr_2135) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p19"></span> [John
8.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[381:2137](1010398.htm#fr_2136) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p20"></span> [Matt.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[381:2138](1010398.htm#fr_2137) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XCII-p21.1"></span>ἐν αἰνίγματι</span>.

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[381:2139](1010398.htm#fr_2138) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p22"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[381:2140](1010398.htm#fr_2139) <span
id="vii.1.XCII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCII-p24"></span> [John
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.XCII-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XCIII](1010399)
