[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010068)  [Next](1010070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.IV.X"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.X-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.IV.X-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—That All Things Exist that They May
Perish, and that We are Not Safe Unless God Watches Over Us.</span>

<span id="vi.IV.X-p2"></span>15. “Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts,
<span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span id="vi.IV.X-Page_73"></span>cause
Thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) For whithersoever the soul of man
turns itself, unless towards Thee, it is affixed to sorrows, <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) yea, though it is affixed to beauteous
things without Thee and without itself. And yet they were not unless
they were from Thee. They rise and set; and by rising, they begin as it
were to be; and they grow, that they may become perfect; and when
perfect, they wax old and perish; and all wax not old, but all perish.
Therefore when they rise and tend to be, the more rapidly they grow that
they may be, so much the more they hasten not to be. This is the way of
them. <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) Thus much hast Thou given
them, because they are parts of things, which exist not all at the same
time, but by departing and succeeding they together make up the
universe, of which they are parts. And even thus is our speech
accomplished by signs emitting a sound; but this, again, is not
perfected unless one word pass away when it has sounded its part, in
order that another may succeed it. Let my soul praise Thee out of all
these things, O God, the Creator of all; but let not my soul be affixed
to these things by the glue of love, through the senses of the body. For
they go whither they were to go, that they might no longer be; and they
rend her with pestilent desires, because she longs to be, and yet loves
to rest in what she loves. But in these things no place is to be found;
they stay not—they flee; and who is he that is able to follow them with
the senses of the flesh? Or who can grasp them, even when they are near?
For tardy is the sense of the flesh, because it is the sense of the
flesh, and its boundary is itself. It sufficeth for that for which it
was made, but it is not sufficient to stay things running their course
from their appointed starting-place to the end appointed. For in Thy
word, by which they were created, they hear the fiat, “Hence and
hitherto.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_306"></span>[73:307](1010069.htm#fr_306) <span
id="vi.IV.X-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.X-p3"></span> [Ps.
80.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019)<span id="vi.IV.X-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[73:308](1010069.htm#fr_307) <span
id="vi.IV.X-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.X-p4"></span> See iv. cc. 1, 12, and vi. c. 16, below.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[73:309](1010069.htm#fr_308) <span
id="vi.IV.X-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.X-p5"></span> It is interesting in connection with the
above passages to note what Augustin says elsewhere as to the *origin*
of the law of death in the sin of our first parents. In his *De Gen. ad
Lit*. (vi. 25) he speaks thus of their condition in the garden, and the
provision made for the maintenance of their life: “Aliud est *non posse
mori*, sicut quasdam naturas immortales creavit Deus; aliud est autem
*posse non mori*, secundum quem modum primus creatus est homo
immortalis.” Adam, he goes on to say, was *able to avert death*, by
partaking of the tree of life. He enlarges on this doctrine in Book
xiii. *De Civ. Dei*. He says (sec. 20): “Our first parents decayed not
with years, nor drew nearer to death—a condition secured to them in
God’s marvellous grace by the tree of life, which grew along with the
forbidden tree in the midst of Paradise.” Again (sec. 19) he says: “Why
do the philosophers find that absurd which the Christian faith preaches,
namely, that our first parents were so created, that, if they had not
sinned, they would not have been dismissed from their bodies by any
death, but would have been endowed with immortality as the reward of
their obedience, and would have lived eternally with their bodies?” That
this was the doctrine of the early Church has been fully shown by Bishop
Bull in his *State of Man before the Fall*, vol. ii. Theophilus of
Antioch was of opinion (*Ad Autolyc.* c. 24) that Adam might have gone
on from strength to strength, until at last he “would have been taken up
into heaven.” See also on this subject Dean Buckland’s *Sermon on
Death*; and Delitzsch, *Bibl. Psychol*. vi. secs. 1 and 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](1010070)
