[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010263)  [Next](1010265) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XII.XXXI"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXXI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XII.XXXI-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.—Moses is Supposed to Have
Perceived Whatever of Truth Can Be Discovered in His Words.</span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXXI-p2"></span>42. Thus, when one shall say, “He
\[Moses\] meant as I do,” and another, “Nay, but as I do,” I suppose
that I am speaking more religiously when I say, “Why not rather as both,
if both be true?” And if there be a third truth, or a fourth, and if any
one seek any truth altogether different in those words, why may not he
be believed to have seen all these, through whom one God hath tempered
the Holy Scriptures to the senses of many, about to see therein things
true but different? I certainly,—and I fearlessly declare it from my
heart,—were I to write anything to have the highest authority, should
prefer so to write, that whatever of truth any one might apprehend
concerning these matters, my words should re-echo, rather than that I
should set down one true opinion so clearly on this as that I should
exclude the rest, that which was false in which could not offend me.
Therefore am I unwilling, O my God, to be so headstrong as not to
believe that from Thee this man \[Moses\] hath received so much. He,
surely, when he wrote those words, perceived and thought whatever of
truth we have been able to discover, yea, and whatever we have not been
able, nor yet are able, though still it may be found in them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](1010265)
