[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010396)  [Next](1010398) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XCI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XCI-p1.1"></span>Letter XCI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408.)

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCI-p3.1"></span>To My Noble Lord and Justly Honoured Brother
Nectarius, Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p4"></span>1. I do not wonder that, though your
limbs are chilled by age, your heart still glows with patriotic fire. I
admire this, and, instead of grieving, I rejoice to learn that you not
only remember, but by your life and practice illustrate, the maxim that
there is no limit either in measure or in time to the claims which their
country has upon the care and service of right-hearted men. Wherefore we
long to have you enrolled in the service of a higher and nobler country,
through holy love, to which (up to the measure of our capacity) we are
sustained amid the perils and toils which we meet with among those whose
welfare we seek in urging them to make that country their own. Oh that
we had you such a <span id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCI-Page_377"></span>citizen of that country, that you would
think that there ought to be no limit either in measure or in time to
your efforts for the good of that small portion of her citizens who are
on this earth pilgrims! This would be a better loyalty, because you
would be responding to the claims of a better country; and if you
resolved that in your time on earth your labours for her welfare should
have no end, you would in her eternal peace be recompensed with joy that
shall have no end.

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p5"></span>2. But till this be done,—and it is not
beyond hope that you should be able to gain, or should even now be most
wisely considering that you ought to gain, that country to which your
father has gone before you,—till this be done, I say, you must excuse us
if, for the sake of that country which we desire never to leave, we
cause some distress to that country which you desire to leave in the
full bloom of honour and prosperity. As to the flowers which thus bloom
in your country, if we were discussing this subject with one of your
wisdom, we have no doubt that you would be easily convinced, or rather,
would yourself readily perceive, in what way a commonwealth should
flourish. The foremost of your poets has sung of certain flowers of
Italy; but in your own country we have been taught by experience, not
how it has blossomed with heroes, so much as how it has gleamed with
weapons of war: nay, I ought to write how it has burned rather than how
it has gleamed; and instead of the weapons of war, I should write the
fires of incendiaries. If so great a crime were to remain unpunished,
without any rebuke such as the miscreants have deserved, do you think
that you would leave your country in the full bloom of honour and
prosperity? O blooming flowers, yielding not fruit, but thorns! Consider
now whether you would prefer to see your country flourish by the piety
of its inhabitants, or by their escaping the punishment of their crimes;
by the correction of their manners, or by outrages to which impunity
emboldens them. Compare these things, I say, and judge whether or not
you love your country more than we do; whether its prosperity and honour
are more truly and earnestly sought by you or by us.

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p6"></span>3. Consider for a little those books, *De
Republica*, from which you imbibed that sentiment of a most loyal
citizen, that there is no limit either in measure or in time to the
claims which their country has upon the care and service of
right-hearted men. Consider them, I beseech you, and observe how great
are the praises there bestowed upon frugality, self-control, conjugal
fidelity, and those chaste, honourable, and upright manners, the
prevalence of which in any city entitles it to be spoken of as
flourishing. Now the Churches which are multiplying throughout the world
are, as it were, sacred seminaries of public instruction, in which this
sound morality is inculcated and learned, and in which, above all, men
are taught the worship due to the true and faithful God, who not only
commands men to attempt, but also gives grace to perform, all those
things by which the soul of man is furnished and fitted for fellowship
with God, and for dwelling in the eternal heavenly kingdom. For this
reason He hath both foretold and commanded the casting down of the
images of the many false gods which are in the world. For nothing so
effectually renders men depraved in practice, and unfit to be good
members of society, as the imitation of such deities as are described
and extolled in pagan writings.

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p7"></span>4. In fact, those most learned men (whose
*beau ideal* of a republic or commonwealth in this world was, by the
way, rather investigated or described by them in private discussions,
than established and realized by them in public measures) were
accustomed to set forth as models for the education of youth the
examples of men whom they esteemed eminent and praiseworthy, rather than
the example given by their gods. And there is no question that the young
man in Terence, <span id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) who,
beholding a picture upon the wall in which was portrayed the licentious
conduct of the king of the gods, fanned the flame of the passion which
mastered him, by the encouragement which such high authority gave to
wickedness, would not have fallen into the desire, nor have plunged into
the commission, of such a shameful deed if he had chosen to imitate Cato
instead of Jupiter; but how could he make such a choice, when he was
compelled in the temples to worship Jupiter rather than Cato? Perhaps it
may be said that we should not bring forward from a comedy arguments to
put to shame the wantonness and the impious superstition of profane men.
But read or recall to mind how wisely it is argued in the books above
referred to, that the style and the plots of comedies would never be
approved by the public voice if they did not harmonize with the manners
of those who approved them; wherefore, by the authority of men most
illustrious and eminent in the commonwealth to which they belonged, and
engaged in debating as to the conditions of a perfect commonwealth, our
position is established, that the most degraded of men may be made yet
worse if they imitate their gods,—gods, of course, which are not true,
but false and invented.

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p9"></span>5. You will perhaps reply, that all those
things which were written long ago concerning the life and manners of
the gods are to be far otherwise than literally understood and
interpreted by the wise. Nay, we have heard within the last few <span
id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span id="vii.1.XCI-Page_378"></span>days
that such wholesome interpretations are now read to the people when
assembled in the temples. Tell me, is the human race so blind to truth
as not to perceive things so plain and palpable as these? When, by the
art of painters, founders, hammermen, sculptors, authors, players,
singers, and dancers, Jupiter is in so many places exhibited in flagrant
acts of lewdness, how important it was that in his own Capitol at least
his worshippers might have read a decree from himself prohibiting such
crimes! If, through the absence of such prohibition, these monsters, in
which shame and profanity culminate, are regarded with enthusiasm by the
people, worshipped in their temples, and laughed at in their theatres;
if, in order to provide sacrifices for them, even the poor must be
despoiled of their flocks; if, in order to provide actors who shall by
gesture and dance represent their infamous achievements, the rich
squander their estates, can it be said of the communities in which these
things are done, that they flourish? The flowers with which they bloom
owe their birth not to a fertile soil, nor to a wealthy and bounteous
virtue; for them a worthy parent is found in that goddess Flora, <span
id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) whose dramatic games are celebrated
with a profligacy so utterly dissolute and shameless, that any one may
infer from them what kind of demon that must be which cannot be appeased
unless—not birds, nor quadrupeds, nor even human life—but (oh, greater
villany!) human modesty and virtue, perish as sacrifices on her altars.

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p11"></span>6. These things I have said, because of
your having written that the nearer you come to the end of life, the
greater is your desire to leave your country in a safe and flourishing
condition. Away with all these vanities and follies, and let men be
converted to the true worship of God, and to chaste and pious manners:
then will you see your country flourishing, not in the vain opinion of
fools, but in the sound judgment of the wise; when your fatherland here
on earth shall have become a portion of that Fatherland into which we
are born not by the flesh, but by faith, and in which all the holy and
faithful servants of God shall bloom in the eternal summer, when their
labours in the winter of time are done. We are therefore resolved,
neither on the one hand to lay aside Christian gentleness, nor on the
other to leave in your city that which would be a most pernicious
example for all others to follow. For success in this dealing we trust
to the help of God, if His indignation against the evil-doers be not so
great as to make Him withhold His blessing. For certainly both the
gentleness which we desire to maintain, and the discipline which we
shall endeavour without passion to administer, may be hindered, if God
in His hidden counsels order it otherwise, and either appoint that this
so great wickedness be punished with a more severe chastisement, or in
yet greater displeasure leave the sin without punishment in this world,
its guilty authors being neither reproved nor reformed.

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p12"></span>7. You have, in the exercise of your
judgment, laid down the principles by which a bishop should be
influenced; and after saying that your town has fallen disastrously by a
grievous misdemeanour on the part of your citizens, which must be
punished with great severity if they are dealt with according to the
rigour of the civil law, you add: “But a bishop is guided by another
law; his duty is to promote the welfare of men, to interest himself in
any case only with a view to the benefit of the parties, and to obtain
for other men the pardon of their sins at the hand of the Almighty
God.” <span id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) This we by all means
labour to secure, that no one be visited with undue severity of
punishment, either by us or by any other who is influenced by our
interposition; and we seek to promote the true welfare of men, which
consists in the blessedness of well-doing, not in the assurance of
impunity in evil-doing. We do also seek earnestly, not for ourselves
alone, but on behalf of others, the pardon of sin: but this we cannot
obtain, except for those who have been turned by correction from the
practice of sin. You add, moreover: “I beseech you with all possible
urgency to secure that if the matter is to be made the subject of a
prosecution, the guiltless be protected, and a distinction drawn between
the innocent and those who did the wrong.”

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p14"></span>8. Listen to a brief account of what was
done, and let the distinction between innocent and guilty be drawn by
yourself. In defiance of the most recent laws, <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123) certain impious rites were
celebrated on the Pagan feast-day, the calends of June, no one
interfering to forbid them, and with such unbounded effrontery that a
most insolent multitude passed along the street in which the church is
situated, and went on dancing in front of the building,—an outrage which
was never committed even in the time of Julian. When the clergy
endeavoured to stop this most illegal and insulting procedure, the
church was assailed with stones. About eight days after that, when the
bishop had called the attention of the authorities to the well-known
laws on the subject, and they were preparing to carry out that which the
law prescribed, the church was a <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCI-Page_379"></span>second time assailed with stones. When,
on the following day, our people wished to make such complaint as they
deemed necessary in open court, in order to make these villains afraid,
their rights as citizens were denied them. On the same day there was a
storm of hailstones, that they might be made afraid, if not by men, at
least by the divine power, thus requiting them for their showers of
stones against the church; but as soon as this was over they renewed the
attack for the third time with stones, and at last endeavoured to
destroy both the buildings and the men in them by fire: one servant of
God who lost his way and met them they killed on the spot, all the rest
escaping or concealing themselves as they best could; while the bishop
hid himself in some crevice into which he forced himself with
difficulty, and in which he lay folded double while he heard the voices
of the ruffians seeking him to kill him, and expressing their
mortification that through his escaping them their principal design in
this grievous outrage had been frustrated. These things went on from
about the tenth hour until the night was far advanced. No attempt at
resistance or rescue was made by those whose authority might have had
influence on the mob. The only one who interfered was a stranger,
through whose exertions a number of the servants of God were delivered
from the hands of those who were trying to kill them, and a great deal
of property was recovered from the plunderers by force: whereby it was
shown how easily these riotous proceedings might have been either
prevented wholly or arrested, if the citizens, and especially the
leading men, had forbidden them, either from the first or after they had
begun.

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p16"></span>9. Accordingly you cannot in that
community draw a distinction between innocent and guilty persons, for
all are guilty; but perhaps you may distinguish degrees of guilt. Those
are in a comparatively small fault, who, being kept back by fear,
especially by fear of offending those whom they knew to have leading
influence in the community and to be hostile to the Church, did not dare
to render assistance to the Christians; but all are guilty who consented
to these outrages, though they neither perpetrated them nor instigated
others to the crime: more guilty are those who perpetrated the wrong,
and most guilty are those who instigated them to it. Let us, however,
suppose that the instigation of others to these crimes is a matter of
suspicion rather than of certain knowledge, and let us not investigate
those things which can be found out in no other way than by subjecting
witnesses to torture. Let us also forgive those who through fear thought
it better for them to plead secretly with God for the bishop and His
other servants, than openly to displease the powerful enemies of the
Church. What reason can you give for holding that those who remain
should be subjected to no correction and restraint? Do you really think
that a case of such cruel rage should be held up to the world as passing
unpunished? We do not desire to gratify our anger by vindictive
retribution for the past, but we are concerned to make provision in a
truly merciful spirit for the future. Now, wicked men have something in
respect to which they may be punished, and that by Christians, in a
merciful way, and so as to promote their own profit and well-being. For
they have these three things: the life and health of the body, the means
of supporting that life, and the means and opportunities of living a
wicked life. Let the two former remain untouched in the possession of
those who repent of their crime: this we desire, and this we spare no
pains to secure. But as to the third, upon it God will, if it please
Him, inflict punishment in His great compassion, dealing with it as a
decaying or diseased part, which must be removed with the pruning-knife.
If, however, He be pleased either to go beyond this, or not to permit
the punishment to go so far, the reason for this higher and doubtless
more righteous counsel remains with Him: our duty is to devote pains and
use our influence according to the light which is granted to us,
beseeching His approval of our endeavours to do that which shall be most
for the good of all, and praying Him not to permit us to do anything
which He who knoweth all things much better than we do sees to be
inexpedient both for ourselves and for His Church.

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p17"></span>10. When I went recently to Calama, that
under so grievous sorrow I might either comfort the downcast or soothe
the indignant among our people, I used all my influence with the
Christians to persuade them to do what I judged to be their duty at that
time. I then at their own request admitted to an audience the Pagans
also, the source and cause of all this mischief, in order that I might
admonish them what they should do if they were wise, not only for the
removal of present anxiety, but also for the obtaining of everlasting
salvation. They listened to many things which I said, and they preferred
many requests to me; but far be it from me to be such a servant as to
find pleasure in being petitioned by those who do not humble themselves
before my Lord to ask from Him. With your quick intelligence, you will
readily perceive that our aim must be, while preserving Christian
gentleness and moderation, to act so that we may either make others
afraid of imitating their perversity, or have cause to desire others to
imitate their profiling by correction. As for the loss sustained, this
is either borne by the Christians or remedied by the help of their
brethren. <span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCI-Page_380"></span>What concerns us is the gaining of souls,
which even at the risk of life we are impatient to secure; and our
desire is, that in your district we may have larger success, and that in
other districts we may not be hindered by the influence of your example.
May God in His mercy grant to us to rejoice in your salvation!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[377:2121](1010397.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="vii.1.XCI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p8"></span> *Eunuchus*, [Act
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#000)<span id="vii.1.XCI-p8.1"></span>
Sc. 5.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[378:2122](1010397.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="vii.1.XCI-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p10"></span> Here culminates in the original a play
upon words, towards which Augustin has been working with the ingenuity
of a rhetorician from the beginning of the second paragraph; but the
zest of his wit is necessarily lost in translation, because in our
language the words “flower” and “flourish” are not so immediately
suggestive of each other as the corresponding noun and verb in Latin
(*flos* and *florere*).

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[378:2123](1010397.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="vii.1.XCI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p13"></span> Letter XC. p. 376.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[378:2124](1010397.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="vii.1.XCI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCI-p15"></span> The law of Honorius, passed on Nov. 24,
407, forbidding the celebration of public heathen solemnities and
festivals (*quidquam, solemnitatis agitare*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XCII](1010398)
