[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010472)  [Next](1010474) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCL"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCL-p1.1"></span>Letter CCL.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p2"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCL-p2.1"></span>To His Beloved Lord and Venerable Brother and
Partner in the Priestly Office, Auxilius,</span>* <span
id="fr_3015"></span>[3016](#fn_3015) *<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCL-p3.1"></span>Augustin Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>*

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p4"></span>1. Our son Classicianus, a man of rank,
has addressed to me a letter complaining bitterly that he has suffered
excommunication wrongfully at the hand of your Holiness. His account of
the matter is, that he came to the church with a small escort suitable
to his official authority, and begged of you that you would not, to the
detriment of their own spiritual welfare, extend the privilege of the
sanctuary to men who, after violating an oath which they had taken on
the Gospel, were seeking in the house of faith itself assistance and
protection in their crime of breaking faith; that thereafter the men
themselves, reflecting on the sin which they had committed, went forth
from the church, not under violent compulsion, but of their own accord;
and that because of this transaction your Holiness was so displeased
with him, that with the usual forms of ecclesiastical procedure you
smote him and all his household with a sentence of excommunication.

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p5"></span>On reading this letter from him, being
very much troubled, the thoughts of my heart being agitated like the
waves of a stormy sea, I felt it impossible to forbear from writing to
you, to beg that if you have thoroughly examined your judgment in this
matter, and have proved it by irrefragable reasoning or Scripture
testimonies, you will have the kindness to teach me also the grounds on
which it is just that a son should be anathematized for the sin of his
father, or a wife for the sin of her husband, or a servant for the sin
of his master, or how it is just that even the child as yet unborn
should lie under an anathema, and be debarred, even though death were
imminent, from the deliverance provided in the laver of regeneration, if
he happen to be born in a family at the time when the whole household is
under the ban of excommunication. For this is not one of those judgments
merely affecting the body, in which, as we read in Scripture, some
despisers of God were slain with all their households, though these had
not been sharers in their impiety. In those cases, indeed, as a warning
to the survivors, death was inflicted on *bodies* which, as mortal, were
destined at some time to die; but a spiritual judgment, founded on what
is written, “That which ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven,” <span id="fr_3016"></span>[3017](#fn_3016) —is binding on
*souls*, concerning which it is said, “As the soul of the father is
mine, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth it
shall die.” <span id="fr_3017"></span>[3018](#fn_3017)

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p8"></span>2. It may be that you have heard that
other priests of great reputation have in some cases included the
household of a transgressor in the anathema pronounced on him; but these
could, perchance, if they were required, give a good reason for so
doing. For my own part, although I have been most grievously troubled by
the cruel excesses with which some men have vexed the Church, I have
never ventured to do as you have done, for this reason, that if any one
were to challenge me to justify such an act, I could give no
satisfactory reply. But if, perchance, the Lord has revealed to you that
it may be justly done, I by no means despise your youth and your
inexperience, as having been but recently elevated to high office in the
Church. Behold, though far advanced in life, I am ready to learn from
one who is but young; and notwithstanding the number of years for which
I have been a bishop, I am ready to learn from one who has not yet been
a twelvemonth in the same office, if he undertakes to teach me how we
can justify our conduct, either before men or before God, if we inflict
a spiritual punishment on innocent souls because of another person’s
crime, in which they are not involved in the same way as they are
involved in the original sin of Adam, <span id="page_590">p. 590</span>
<span id="vii.1.CCL-Page_590"></span>in whom “all have sinned.” For
although the son of Classicianus derived through his father, from our
first parent, guilt which behoved to be washed away by the sacred waters
of baptism, who hesitates for a moment to say that he is in no way
responsible for any sin which his father may have committed, since he
was born, without his participation? What shall I say of his wife? What
of so many souls in the entire household?—of which if even one, in
consequence of the severity which included the whole household in the
excommunication, should perish through departing from the body without
baptism, the loss thus occasioned would be an incomparably greater
calamity than the bodily death of an innumerable multitude, even though
they were innocent men, dragged from the courts of the sanctuary and
murdered. If, therefore, you are able to give a good reason for this, I
trust that you will in your reply communicate it to me, that I also may
be able to do the same; but if you cannot, what right have you to do,
under the promptings of inconsiderate excitement, an act for which, if
you were asked to give a satisfactory reason, you could find none?

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p9"></span>3. What I have said hitherto applies to
the case even on the supposition that our son Classicianus has done
something which might appear to demand most righteously at your hands
the punishment of excommunication. But if the letter which he sent to me
contained the truth, there was no reason why even he himself (even
though his household had been exempted from the stroke) should have been
so punished. As to this, however, I do not interfere with your Holiness;
I only beseech you to pardon him when he asks forgiveness, if he
acknowledges his fault; and if, on the other hand, you, upon reflection,
acknowledge that he did nothing wrong, since in fact the right rather
lay on his side who earnestly demanded that in the house of faith, faith
should be sacredly kept, and that it should not be broken in the place
where the sinfulness of such breach of faith is taught from day to day,
do, in this event, what a man of, piety ought to do,—that is to say, if
to you as a man anything has happened such as was confessed by one who
was truly a man of God in the words of the psalm, “Mine eye was
discomposed by anger,” <span id="fr_3018"></span>[3019](#fn_3018) fail
not to cry to the Lord, as he did, “Have pity on me, O Lord, for I am
weak,” <span id="fr_3019"></span>[3020](#fn_3019) so that He may stretch
forth His right hand to you, rebuking the storm of your passion, and
making your mind calm that you may see and may perform what is just;
for, as it is written, “the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness
of God.” <span id="fr_3020"></span>[3021](#fn_3020) And think not that,
because we are bishops, it is impossible for unjust passionate
resentment to gain secretly upon us; let us rather remember that,
because we are men, our life in the midst of temptation’s snares is,
beset with the greatest possible dangers. Cancel, therefore, the
ecclesiastical sentence which, perhaps under the influence of unusual
excitement, you have passed; and let the mutual love which, even from
the time when you were a catechumen, has united him and you, be restored
again; let strife be banished and peace invited to return, lest this man
who is your friend be lost to you, and the devil who is your enemy
rejoice over you both. Mighty is the mercy of our God; it may be that
His compassion shall hear even my prayer, imploring of Him that my
sorrow on your account may not be increased, but that rather what I have
begun to suffer may be removed; and may your youth, not despising my old
age, be encouraged and made full of joy by His grace! Farewell!

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p13"></span>\[Annexed to this letter is a fragment
of a letter written at the same time to Classicianus; it is as follows:—

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p14"></span>To restrain those who for the offence of
one soul bind a transgressor’s entire household, that is, a large number
of souls, under one sentence of excommunication, and especially to
prevent any one from departing this life unbaptized in consequence of
such an anathema,—also to decide the question whether persons ought not
to be driven forth even from a church, who seek a refuge there in order
that they may break the faith pledged to sureties, I desire with the
Lord’s help to use the necessary measures in our Council, and, if it be
necessary, to write to the Apostolic See; that, by a unanimous
authoritative decision of all, we may have the course which ought to be
followed in these cases determined and established. One thing I say
deliberately as an unquestionable truth, that if any believer has been
wrongfully excommunicated, the sentence will do harm rather to him who
pronounces it than to him who suffers this wrong. For it is by the Holy
Spirit dwelling in holy persons that any one is loosed or bound, and He
inflicts unmerited punishment upon no one; for by Him the love which
worketh not evil is shed abroad in our hearts. <span
id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021) \]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3015"></span>[589:3016](1010473.htm#fr_3015) <span
id="vii.1.CCL-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p3"></span> Probably the Bishop of Nurco, named
Auxilius, who was present at the conference in Carthage in 411.

<span id="fn_3016"></span>[589:3017](1010473.htm#fr_3016) <span
id="vii.1.CCL-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p6"></span> [Matt.
16.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.CCL-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3017"></span>[589:3018](1010473.htm#fr_3017) <span
id="vii.1.CCL-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p7"></span> [Ezek.
18.14](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.CCL-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3018"></span>[590:3019](1010473.htm#fr_3018) <span
id="vii.1.CCL-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p10"></span> [Ps.
6.8](../../../bib/sep/psa006.htm#008)<span id="vii.1.CCL-p10.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3019"></span>[590:3020](1010473.htm#fr_3019) <span
id="vii.1.CCL-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p11"></span> [Ps.
6.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#003)<span id="vii.1.CCL-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3020"></span>[590:3021](1010473.htm#fr_3020) <span
id="vii.1.CCL-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p12"></span> [Jas.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.CCL-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[590:3022](1010473.htm#fr_3021) <span
id="vii.1.CCL-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCL-p15"></span> This noble vindication of Christian
liberty merits quotation in the original:—“Illud plane non temere
dixerim, quod si quisquam fidelium fuerit anathematus injuste, ei potius
oberit qui faciet quam ei qui hanc patietur injuriam. Spiritus enim
sanctus habitans in sanctis, per quem quisque ligatur aut solvitur,
immeritam nulli pænam ingerit: per eum quippe diffunditur charitas in
cordibus nostris quæ non agit perperam.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCLIV](1010474)
