[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010326)  [Next](1010328) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XX-p1.1"></span>Letter XX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 390.)

<span id="vii.1.XX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XX-p3.1"></span>To Antoninus Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XX-p4"></span>1. As letters are due to you by two of us,
a part of our debt is repaid with very abundant usury when you see one
of the two in person; and since by his voice you, as it were, hear my
own, I might have refrained from writing, had I not been called to do it
by the urgent request of the very person whose journey to you seemed to
me to make this unnecessary. Accordingly I now hold converse with you
even more satisfactorily than if I were personally with you, because you
both read my letter, and you listen to the words of one in whose heart
you know that I dwell. I have with great joy studied and pondered the
letter sent by your Holiness, because <span id="page_237">p. 237</span>
<span id="vii.1.XX-Page_237"></span>it exhibits both your Christian
spirit unsullied by the guile of an evil age, and your heart full of
kindly feeling towards myself.

<span id="vii.1.XX-p5"></span>2. I congratulate you, and I give thanks
to our God and Lord, because of the hope and faith and love which are in
you; and I thank you, in Him, for thinking so well of me as to believe
me to be a faithful servant of God, and for the love which with
guileless heart you cherish towards that which you commend in me;
although, indeed, there is occasion rather for congratulation than for
thanks in acknowledging your goodwill in this thing. For it is
profitable for yourself that you should love for its own sake that
goodness which he of course loves who loves another because he believes
him to be good, whether that other be or be not what he is supposed to
be. One error only is to be carefully avoided in this matter, that we do
not think otherwise than truth demands, not of the individual, but of
that which is true goodness in man. But, my brother well beloved, seeing
that you are not in any degree mistaken either in believing or in
knowing that the great good for men is to serve God cheerfully and
purely, when you love any man because you believe him to share this
good, you reap the reward, even though the man be not what you suppose
him to be. Wherefore it is fitting that you should on this account be
congratulated; but the person whom you love is to be congratulated, not
because of his being for that reason loved, but because of his being
truly (if it is the case) such an one as the person who for this reason
loves him esteems him to be. As to our real character, therefore, and as
to the progress we may have made in the divine life, this is seen by Him
whose judgment, both as to that which is good in man, and as to each
man’s personal character, cannot err. For your obtaining the reward of
blessedness so far as this matter is concerned, it is sufficient that
you embrace me with your whole heart because you believe me to be such a
servant of God as I ought to be. To you, however, I also render many
thanks for this, that you encourage me wonderfully to aspire after such
excellence, by your praising me as if I had already attained it. Many
more thanks still shall be yours, if you not only claim an interest in
my prayers, but also cease not to pray for me. For intercession on
behalf of a brother is more acceptable to God when it is offered as a
sacrifice of love.

<span id="vii.1.XX-p6"></span>3. I greet very kindly your little son,
and I pray that he may grow up in the way of obedience to the salutary
requirements of God’s law. I desire and pray, moreover, that the one
true faith and worship, which alone is catholic, may prosper and
increase in your house; and if you think any labour on my part necessary
for the promotion of this end, do not scruple to claim my service,
relying upon Him who is our common Lord, and upon the law of love which
we must obey. This especially would I recommend to your pious
discretion, that by reading the word of God, and by serious conversation
with your partner, <span id="fr_1478"></span>[1479](#fn_1478) you should
either plant the seed or foster the growth in her heart of an
intelligent fear of God. For it is scarcely possible that any one who is
concerned for the soul’s welfare, and is therefore without prejudice
resolved to know the will of the Lord, should fail, when enjoying the
guidance of a good instructor, to discern the difference which exists
between every form of schism and the one Catholic Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[237:1479](1010327.htm#fr_1478) <span
id="vii.1.XX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XX-p7"></span> *Infirmiori vasi tuo.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXI](1010328)
