[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010434)  [Next](1010436) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CL"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CL-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CL-p1.1"></span>Letter CL.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CL-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CL-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 413.)

<span id="vii.1.CL-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CL-p3.1"></span>To Proba</span>* <span
id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645) <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CL-p4.1"></span>*and Juliana, Ladles Most Worthy of Honour,
Daughters Justly Famous and Most Distinguished, Augustin Sends Greeting
in the Lord.*</span>

<span id="vii.1.CL-p5"></span>You have filled our heart with a joy
singularly pleasant, because of the love we bear to you, and <span
id="page_504">p. 504</span> <span
id="vii.1.CL-Page_504"></span>singularly acceptable, because of the
promptitude with which the tidings came to us. For while the
consecration of the daughter of your house to a life of virginity is
being published by most busy fame in all places where you are known, and
that is everywhere, you have outstripped its flight by more sure and
reliable information in a letter from yourselves, and have made us
rejoice in certain knowledge before we had time to be questioning the
truth of any report concerning an event so blessed and remarkable. Who
can declare in words, or expound with adequate praises, how incomparably
greater is the glory and advantage gained by your family in giving to
Christ women consecrated to His service, than in giving to the world men
called to the honours of the consulship? For if it be a great and noble
thing to leave the mark of an honoured name upon the revolving ages of
this world, how much greater and nobler is it to rise above it by
unsullied chastity both of heart and of body! Let this maiden,
therefore, illustrious in her pedigree, yet more illustrious in her
piety, find greater joy in obtaining, through espousals to her divine
Lord, a pre-eminent glory in heaven, than she could have had in
becoming, through espousal to a human consort, the mother of a line of
illustrious men. This daughter of the house of Anicius has acted the
more magnanimous part, in choosing rather to bring a blessing on that
noble family by forbearing from marriage, than to increase the number of
its descendants, preferring to be already, in the purity of her body,
like unto the angels, rather than to increase by the fruit of her body
the number of mortals. For this is a richer and more fruitful condition
of blessedness, not to have a pregnant womb, but to develop the soul’s
lofty capacities; not to have the breasts flowing with milk, but to have
the heart pure as snow; to travail not with the earthly in the pangs of
labour, but with the heavenly in persevering prayer. May it be yours, my
daughters, most worthy of the honour due to your rank, to enjoy in her
that which was lacking to yourselves; may she be stedfast to the end,
abiding in the conjugal union that has no end. May many handmaidens
follow the example of their mistress; may those who are of humble rank
imitate this high-born lady, and may those who possess eminence in this
uncertain world aspire to that worthier eminence which humility has
given to her. Let the virgins who covet the glory of the Anician family
be ambitious rather to emulate its piety; for the former lies beyond
their reach, however eagerly they may desire it, but the latter shall be
at once in their possession if they seek it with full desire. May the
right hand of the Most High protect you, giving you safety and greater
happiness, ladies most worthy of honour, and most excellent daughters!
In the love of the Lord, and with all becoming respect, we salute the
children of your Holiness, and above all the one who is above the rest
in holiness. We have received with very great pleasure the gift sent as
a souvenir of her taking the veil. <span
id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[503:2646](1010435.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="vii.1.CL-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CL-p4"></span> See note to Letter CXXX. p. 459.

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[504:2647](1010435.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="vii.1.CL-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CL-p6"></span> *Velationis apophoretum.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLI](1010436)
