[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010353)  [Next](1010355) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XLVII"></span><span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLVII-Page_292"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p1.1"></span>Letter XLVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 398.)

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p3.1"></span>To the Honourable Publicola, My Much
Beloved Son, Augustin Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p4"></span>1. Your perplexities have, since I
learned them by your letter, become mine also, not because all those
things by which you tell me that you are disturbed, disturb my mind: but
I have been much perplexed, I confess, by the question how your
perplexities were to be removed; especially since you require me to give
a conclusive answer, lest you should fall into greater doubts than you
had before you applied to me to have them resolved. For I see that I
cannot give this, since, though I may write things which appear to me
most certain, if I do not convince you, you must be beyond question more
at a loss than before; and though it is in my power to use arguments
which weigh with myself, I may fail of convincing another by these.
However, lest I should refuse the small service which your love claims,
I have resolved after some consideration to write in reply.

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p5"></span>2. One of your doubts is as to using
the services of a man who has guaranteed his fidelity by swearing by his
false gods. In this matter I beg you to consider whether, in the event
of a man failing to keep his word after having pledged himself by such
an oath, you would not regard him as guilty of a twofold sin. For if he
kept the engagement which he had confirmed by this oath, he would be
pronounced guilty in this only, that he swore by such deities; but no
one would justly blame him for keeping his engagement. But in the case
supposed, seeing that he both swore by those whom he should not worship,
and did, notwithstanding his promise, what he should not have done, he
was guilty of two sins: whence it is obvious that in using, not for an
evil work, but for some good and lawful end, the service of a man whose
fidelity is known to have been confirmed by an oath in the name of false
gods, one participates, not in the sin of swearing by the false gods,
but in the good faith with which he keeps his promise. The faith which I
here speak of as kept is not that on account of which those who are
baptized in Christ are called faithful: that is entirely different and
far removed from the faith desiderated in regard to the arrangements and
compacts of men. Nevertheless it is, beyond all doubt, worse to swear
falsely by the true God than to swear truly by the false gods; for the
greater the holiness of that by which we swear, the greater is the sin
of perjury. It is therefore a different question whether he is not
guilty who requires another to pledge himself by taking an oath in the
name of his gods, seeing that he worships false gods. In answering this
question, we may accept as decisive those examples which you yourself
quoted of Laban and of Abimelech (if Abimelech did swear by his gods, as
Laban swore by the god of Nahor). This is, as I have said, another
question, and one which would perchance perplex me, were it not for
those examples of Isaac and Jacob, to which, for aught I know, others
might be added. It may be that some scruple might yet be suggested by
the precept in the New Testament, “Swear not at all;” <span
id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672) words which were in my opinion
spoken, not because it is a sin to swear a true oath, but because it is
a heinous sin to forswear oneself: from which crime our Lord would have
us keep at a great distance, when He charged us not to swear at all. I
know, however, that our opinion is different: wherefore it should not be
discussed at present; let us rather treat of that about which you have
thought of asking my advice. On the same ground on which you forbear
from swearing yourself, you may, if such be your opinion, regard it as
forbidden to exact an oath from another, although it is expressly said,
Swear not; but I do not remember reading anywhere in Holy Scripture that
we are not to take another’s oath. The question whether we ought to take
advantage of the concord which is established between other parties by
their exchange of oaths is entirely different. If we answer this in the
negative, I know not whether we could find any place on earth in which
we could live. For not only on the frontier, but throughout all the
provinces, the security of peace rests on the oaths of barbarians. And
from this it would follow, that not only the crops which are guarded by
men who have sworn fidelity in the name of their false gods, but all
things which enjoy the protection secured by the peace which a similar
oath has ratified, are defiled. If this be admitted by you to be a
complete absurdity, dismiss with it your doubts on the cases which you
named.

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p7"></span>3. Again, if from the threshing-floor
or wine-press of a Christian anything be taken, with his knowledge, to
be offered to false gods, he is guilty in permitting this to be done, if
it be in his power to prevent it. If he finds that it has been done, or
has not the power to prevent it, he uses without scruple the rest of the
grain or wine, as uncontaminated, just as we use fountains from which we
know that water has been taken to be used in idol-worship. The same
principle decides the question about baths. For we have no scruple about
inhaling the air into which we know that the smoke from all the altars
and incense of idolaters ascends. From which it is manifest, that the
thing forbidden is <span id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLVII-Page_293"></span>our devoting anything to the honour of
the false gods, or appearing to do this by so acting as to encourage in
such worship those who do not know our mind, although in our heart we
despise their idols. And when temples, idols, groves, etc., are thrown
down by permission from the authorities, although our taking part in
this work is a clear proof of our not honouring, but rather abhorring,
these things, we must nevertheless forbear from appropriating any of
them to our own personal and private use; so that it may be manifest
that in overthrowing these we are influenced, not by greed, but by
piety. When, however, the spoils of these places are applied to the
benefit of the community or devoted to the service of God, they are
dealt with in the same manner as the men themselves when they are turned
from impiety and sacrilege to the true religion. We understand this to
be the will of God from the examples quoted by yourself: the grove of
the false gods from which He commanded wood to be taken \[by Gideon\]
for the burnt-offering; and Jericho, of which all the gold, silver, and
brass was to be brought into the Lord’s treasury. Hence also the precept
in Deuteronomy: “Thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on
them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein; for it is an
abomination to the Lord thy God. Neither shalt thou bring an abomination
into thine house, lest thou become a cursed thing like it: but thou
shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a
cursed thing.” <span id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673) From which it
appears plainly, that either the appropriation of such spoils to their
own private use was absolutely forbidden, or they were forbidden to
carry anything of that kind into their own houses with the intention of
giving to it honour; for then this would be an abomination and accursed
in the sight of God; whereas the honour impiously given to such idols
is, by their public destruction, utterly abolished.

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p9"></span>4. As to meats offered to idols, I
assure you we have no duty beyond observing what the apostle taught
concerning them. Study, therefore, his words on the subject, which, if
they were obscure to you, I would explain as well as I could. He does
not sin who, unwittingly, afterwards partakes of food which he formerly
refused because it had been offered to an idol. A kitchen-herb, or any
other fruit of the ground, belongs to Him who created it; for “the earth
is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof,” and “every creature of God is
good.” <span id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674) But if that which the
earth has borne is consecrated or offered to an idol, then we must
reckon it among the things offered to idols. We must beware lest, in
pronouncing that we ought not to eat the fruits of a garden belonging to
an idol-temple, we be involved in the inference that it was wrong for
the apostle to take food in Athens, since that city belonged to Minerva,
and was consecrated to her as the guardian deity. The same answer I
would give as to the well or fountain enclosed in a temple, though my
scruples would be somewhat more awakened if some part of the sacrifices
be thrown into the said well or fountain. But the case is, as I have
said before, exactly parallel to our using of the air which receives the
smoke of these sacrifices; or, if this be thought to make a difference,
that the sacrifice, the smoke whereof mingles with the air, is not
offered to the air itself, but to some idol or false god, whereas
sometimes offerings are cast into the water with the intention of
sacrificing to the waters themselves, it is enough to say that the same
principle would preclude us from using the light of the sun, because
wicked men continually worship that luminary wherever they are tolerated
in doing so. Sacrifices are offered to the winds, which we nevertheless
use for our convenience, although they seem, as it were, to inhale and
swallow greedily the smoke of these sacrifices. If any one be in doubt
regarding meat, whether it has been offered to an idol or not, and the
fact be that it has not, when he eats that meat under the impression
that it has not been offered to an idol, he by no means does wrong;
because neither in fact, nor now in his judgment, is it food offered to
an idol, although he formerly thought it was. For surely it is lawful to
correct false impressions by others that are true. But if any one
believes that to be good which is evil, and acts accordingly, he sins in
entertaining that belief; and these are all sins of ignorance, in which
one thinks that to be right which it is wrong for him to do.

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p11"></span>5. As to killing others in order to
defend one’s own life, I do not approve of this, unless one happen to be
a soldier or public functionary acting, not for himself, but in defence
of others or of the city in which he resides, if he act according to the
commission lawfully given him, and in the manner becoming his
office. <span id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675) When, however, men
are prevented, by being alarmed, from doing wrong, it may be said that a
real service is done to themselves. The precept, “Resist not
evil,” <span id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676) was given to prevent
us from taking pleasure in revenge, in which the mind is gratified by
the sufferings of others, but not to make us neglect the duty of
restraining men from sin. From this it follows that one is not guilty of
homicide, because he has put up a wall <span id="page_294">p. 294</span>
<span id="vii.1.XLVII-Page_294"></span>round his estate, if any one is
killed by the wall falling upon him when he is throwing it down. For a
Christian is not guilty of homicide though his ox may gore or his horse
kick a man, so that he dies. On such a principle, the oxen of a
Christian should have no horns, and his horses no hoofs, and his dogs no
teeth. On such a principle, when the Apostle Paul took care to inform
the chief captain that an ambush was laid for him by certain
desperadoes, and received in consequence an armed escort, <span
id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677) if the villains who plotted his
death had thrown themselves on the weapons of the soldiers, Paul would
have had to acknowledge the shedding of their blood as a crime with
which he was chargeable. God forbid that we should be blamed for
accidents which, without our desire, happen to others through things
done by us or found in our possession, which are in themselves good and
lawful. In that event, we ought to have no iron implements for the house
or the field, lest some one should by them lose his own life or take
another’s; no tree or rope on our premises, lest some one hang himself;
no window in our house, lest some one throw himself down from it. But
why mention more in a list which must be interminable? For what good and
lawful thing is there in use among men which may not become chargeable
with being an instrument of destruction?

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p15"></span>6. I have now only to notice (unless I
am mistaken) the case which you mentioned of a Christian on a journey
overcome by the extremity of hunger; whether, if he could find nothing
to eat but meat placed in an idol’s temple, and there was no man near to
relieve him, it would be better for him to die of starvation than to
take that food for his nourishment? Since in this question it is not
assumed that the food thus found was offered to the idol (for it might
have been left by mistake or designedly by persons who, on a journey,
had turned aside there to take refreshment; or it might have been put
there for some other purpose), I answer briefly thus: Either it is
certain that this food was offered to the idol, or it is certain that it
was not, or neither of these things is known. If it is certain, it is
better to reject it with Christian fortitude. In either of the other
alternatives, it may be used for his necessity without any conscientious
scruple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[292:1673](1010354.htm#fr_1672) <span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p6"></span> [Matt.
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#036)<span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[293:1674](1010354.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p8"></span> [Deut.
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#026)<span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[293:1675](1010354.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p10"></span> [Ps.
24.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p10.1"></span>; [1 Cor.
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026)<span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p10.2"></span>; and [1 Tim.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p10.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[293:1676](1010354.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p12"></span> For Augustin’s mature view on this
subject, see his work, *De Libero Arbitrio,* i. 5. 13: “That it is wrong
to shed the blood of our fellow-men in defence of those things which
ought to be despised by us.”

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[293:1677](1010354.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p13"></span> [Matt.
5.39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[294:1678](1010354.htm#fr_1677) <span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLVII-p14"></span> [Acts
23.17-24](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.XLVII-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLVIII](1010355)
