[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010430)  [Next](1010432) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p1.1"></span>Letter CXLIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p3.1"></span>To My Honourable and Justly Esteemed Lords,
The Inhabitants of Cirta, of All Ranks, Brethren Dearly Beloved and
Longed For, Bishop Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p4"></span>1. If that which greatly distressed me
in your town has now been removed; if the obduracy of hearts which
resisted most evident and, as we might call it, notorious truth, has by
the force of truth been overcome; if the sweetness of peace is relished,
and the love which tends to unity is the occasion no longer of pain to
eyes diseased, but of light and vigour to eyes restored to health,—this
is God’s work, not ours; on no account would I ascribe these results to
human efforts, even had such a remarkable conversion of your whole
community taken place when I was with you, and in connection with my own
preaching and exhortations. The operation and the success are His who,
by His servants, calls men’s attention outwardly by the signs of things,
and Himself teaches men inwardly by the things themselves. The fact,
however, that whatever praiseworthy change has been wrought among you is
to be ascribed not to us, but to Him who alone doeth wonderful
works, <span id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580) is no reason for our
being more reluctant to be persuaded to visit you. For we ought to
hasten much more readily to see the works of God than our own works, for
we ourselves also, if we be of service in any work, owe this not to men
but to Him; wherefore the apostle says, “Neither is he that planteth
anything, neither he that watereth: but God that giveth the
increase.” <span id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581)

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p7"></span>2. You allude in your letter to a fact
which I also remember from classic literature, that by discoursing on
the benefits of temperance, Xenocrates suddenly converted Polemo from a
dissipated to a sober life, though this man was not only habitually
intemperate, but was actually intoxicated at the time. Now although this
was, as you have wisely and truthfully apprehended, a case not of
conversion to God, but of emancipation from the thraldom of
self-indulgence, I would not ascribe even the amount of improvement
wrought in him to the work of man, but to the work of God. For even in
the body, the lowest part of our nature, all excellent things, such as
beauty, vigour, health, and so on, are the work of God, to whom nature
owes its creation and perfection; how much more certain, therefore, must
it be that no other can impart excellent properties to the soul! For
what imagination of human folly could be more full of pride and
ingratitude than the notion that, although God alone can give comeliness
to the body, it belongs to man to give purity to the soul? It is written
in the book of Christian Wisdom, “I perceived that no one can have
self-restraint unless God give it to him, and that this is a part of
true wisdom to know whose gift it is.” <span
id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582) If, therefore, Polemo, when he
exchanged a life of dissipation for a life of sobriety, had so
understood whence the gift came, that, renouncing the superstitions of
the heathen, he had rendered worship to the Divine Giver, he would then
have become not only temperate, but truly wise and savingly religious,
which would have secured to him not merely the practice of virtue in
this life, but also the possession of immortality in the life to come.
How much less, then, should I presume to take to myself the honour of
your conversion, or of that of your people which you have now reported
to me, which, when I was neither speaking to you nor even present with
you, was accomplished unquestionably by divine power in all in whom it
has really taken place. This, therefore, know above all things, meditate
on this with devout humility. To God, my brethren, to God give thanks.
Fear Him, that ye may not go backward: love Him, that ye may go
forward. <span id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583)

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-Page_495"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p10"></span>3. If, however, love of men still
keeps some secretly alienated from the flock of Christ, while fear of
other men constrains them to a feigned reconciliation, I charge all such
to consider that before God the conscience of man has no covering, and
that they can neither impose on Him as a Witness, nor escape from Him as
a Judge. But if, by reason of anxiety as to their own salvation,
anything as to the question of the unity of Christ’s flock perplex them,
let them make this demand upon themselves,—and it seems to me a most
just demand,—that in regard to the Catholic Church, *i.e.* the Church
spread abroad over the whole world, they believe rather the words of
Divine Scripture than the calumnies of human tongues. Moreover, with
respect to the schism which has arisen among men (who assuredly,
whatsoever they may be, do not frustrate the promises of God to Abraham,
“In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,” <span
id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584) —promises believed when brought to
their ears as a prophecy, but denied, forsooth, when set before their
eyes as an accomplished fact), let them meanwhile ponder this one very
brief, but, if I mistake not, unanswerable argument: the question out of
which the dispute arose either has or has not been tried before
ecclesiastical tribunals beyond the sea; if it has not been tried before
these, then no guilt in this matter is chargeable on the whole flock of
Christ in the nations beyond the sea, in communion with which we
rejoice, and therefore their separation from these guiltless communities
is an act of impious schism; if, on the other hand, the question has
been tried before the tribunal of these churches, who does not
understand and feel, nay, who does not see, that those whose communion
is now separated from these churches were the party defeated in the
trial? Let them therefore choose to whom they should prefer to give
credence, whether to the ecclesiastical judges who decided the question,
or to the complaints of the vanquished litigants. Observe wisely how
impossible it is for them reasonably to answer this brief and most
intelligible dilemma; nevertheless, it were easier to turn Polemo from a
life of intemperance, than to drive them out of the madness of
inveterate error.

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p12"></span>Pardon me, my noble and worthy lords,
brethren most dearly beloved and longed for, for writing you a letter
more prolix than agreeable, but fitted, as I think, to benefit rather
than to flatter you. As to my coming to you, may God fulfil the desire
which we both equally cherish! For I cannot express in words, but I am
sure you will gladly believe, with what fervour of love I burn to see
you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[494:2581](1010431.htm#fr_2580) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p5"></span> [Ps.
72.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[494:2582](1010431.htm#fr_2581) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[494:2583](1010431.htm#fr_2582) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p8"></span> [Wisd.
8.21](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[494:2584](1010431.htm#fr_2583) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p9"></span> *Deum timete ne deficiatis, amate ut
proficiatis.*

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[495:2585](1010431.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXLIV-p11"></span> [Gen.
26.4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.CXLIV-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXLV](1010432)
