[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010402)  [Next](1010404) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XCVII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XCVII-p1.1"></span>Letter XCVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408.)

<span id="vii.1.XCVII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCVII-p3.1"></span>To Olympius, My Excellent and Justly
Distinguished Lord, and My Son Worthy of Much Honour in Christ, Augustin
Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVII-p4"></span>1. Although, when we heard recently of
your having obtained merited promotion to the highest rank, we felt
persuaded, however uncertain we still were in some degree as to the
truth of the report, that towards the Church of which we rejoice to know
that you are truly a son, there was no other feeling in your mind than
that which you have now made patent to us in your letter, nevertheless,
having now read that letter in which you have been pleased of your own
accord to send to us, when we were full of backwardness and diffidence,
a most gracious exhortation to use our humble efforts in pointing out to
you how the Lord, by whose gift you are thus powerful, may from time to
time, by means of your pious obedience, bring assistance to His Church,
we write to you with the more abundant confidence, my excellent and
justly distinguished lord, and my son worthy of much honour in Christ.

<span id="vii.1.XCVII-p5"></span>2. Many brethren, indeed, holy men who
are my colleagues, have, by reason of the troubles of the church here,
gone—I might almost say as fugitives—to the emperor’s most illustrious
court; and these brethren you may have already seen, or may have
received from Rome their letters, in connection with their respective
occasions of appeal. I have not had it in my power to consult them
before writing; nevertheless, I was unwilling to miss the opportunity of
sending a letter by the bearer, my brother and fellow-presbyter, who has
been compelled, though in mid-winter, to make the best of his way into
those parts, under pressing necessity, in order to save the life of a
fellow-citizen. I write, therefore, to salute you, and to charge you by
the love which you have in Christ Jesus our Lord, to see that your good
work be hastened on with the utmost diligence, in order that the enemies
of the Church may know that those laws concerning the demolition of
idols and the correction of heretics which were sent into Africa <span
id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span id="vii.1.XCVII-Page_406"></span>while
Stilicho yet lived, were framed by the desire of our most pious and
faithful emperor; for they either cunningly boast, or unwillingly
imagine that this was done without his knowledge, or against his will,
and thus they render the minds of the ignorant full of seditious
violence, and excite them to dangerous and vehement enmity against us.

<span id="vii.1.XCVII-p6"></span>3. I do not doubt that, in submitting
this in the way of petition or respectful suggestion to the
consideration of your Excellency, I act agreeably to the wishes of all
my colleagues throughout Africa; and I think that it is your duty to
take measures, as could be easily done, on whatever opportunity may
first arise, to make it understood by these vain men (whose salvation we
seek, although they resist us), that it was to the care, not of
Stilicho, but of the son of Theodosius, that those laws which have been
sent into Africa for the defence of the Church of Christ owed their
promulgation. On account of these things, then, the presbyter whom I
have mentioned already, the bearer of this letter, who is from the
district of Milevi, was ordered by his bishop, the venerable Severus,
who joins me in cordial salutations to you, whose love we esteem most
genuine, to pass through Hippo-regius, where I am; because, when we
happened to meet together in time of serious tribulation and distress to
the Church, we sought an opportunity of writing to your Highness, but
found none. I had indeed already sent one letter in regard to the
business of our holy brother and colleague Boniface, bishop of Cataqua;
but the heavier calamities destined to cause us greater agitation had
not then befallen us, regarding which, and the means whereby something
may be done with the best counsel for their prevention or punishment,
according to the method of Christ, the bishops who have sailed hence on
that errand will be able more conveniently to confer with you, in whose
cordial goodwill towards us we rejoice, inasmuch as they are able to
report to you something which has been, so far as limited time
permitted, the result of careful and united consultation. But as to this
other matter, namely, that the province be made to know how the mind of
our most gracious and religious emperor stands towards the Church, I
recommend, nay, I beg, beseech, and implore you, to take care that no
time be lost, but that its accomplishment be hastened, even before you
see the bishops who have gone from us, so soon as shall be possible for
you, in the exercise of your most eminent vigilance on behalf of the
members of Christ who are now in circumstances of the utmost danger; for
the Lord has provided no small consolation for us under these trials,
seeing that it has pleased Him to put much more now than formerly in
your power, although we were already filled with joy by the number and
the magnitude of your good offices.

<span id="vii.1.XCVII-p7"></span>4. We rejoice much in the firm and
stedfast faith of some, and these not few in number, who by means of
these laws have been converted to the Christian religion, or from schism
to Catholic peace, for whose eternal welfare we are glad to run the risk
of forfeiting temporal welfare. For on this account especially we now
have to endure at the hands of men, exceedingly and obdurately perverse,
more grievous assaults of enmity, which some of them, along with us,
bear most patiently; but we are in very great fear because of their
weakness, until they learn, and are enabled by the help of the Lord’s
most compassionate grace, to despise with more abundant strength of
spirit the present world and man’s short day. May it please your
Highness to deliver the letter of instructions which I have sent to my
brethren the bishops when they come, if, as I suppose, they have not yet
reached you. For we have such confidence in the unfeigned devotion of
your heart, that with the Lord’s help we desire to have you not only
giving us your assistance, but also participating in our consultations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XCVIII](1010404)
