[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010401)  [Next](1010403) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XCVI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XCVI-p1.1"></span>Letter XCVI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCVI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408.)

<span id="vii.1.XCVI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCVI-p3.1"></span>To Olympius, My Lord Greatly Beloved, and My
Son Worthy of Honour and Regard As a Member of Christ, Augustin Sends
Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVI-p4"></span>1. Whatever your rank may be in
connection with the course of this world, I have the greatest confidence
in addressing you as my much-loved, true-hearted Christian
fellow-servant Olympius. For I know that this name, in your esteem,
excels all other glorious and lofty titles. Reports have indeed reached
me that you have obtained some promotion in worldly honour, but no
information confirming the truth of the rumour had come to me up to the
time when this opportunity of writing to you occurred. Since, however, I
know that you have learned from the Lord not to mind high things, but to
condescend to those who are lightly esteemed by men, whatever the
pinnacle to which you may have been raised, we take for granted, my lord
greatly beloved, and son worthy of honour and regard as a member of
Christ, that you will still make a letter from me welcome, just as you
were wont to do. And as to your worldly prosperity, I do not doubt that
you will wisely use it for your eternal gain; so that the greater the
influence which you acquire in the commonwealth on this earth, the more
will you devote yourself to the interests of the heavenly city to which
you owe your birth in Christ, forasmuch as this shall be more abundantly
repaid to you in the land of the living, <span id="page_405">p.
405</span> <span id="vii.1.XCVI-Page_405"></span>and in the true peace
which yields sure and endless joys. <span
id="fr_2304"></span>[2305](#fn_2304)

<span id="vii.1.XCVI-p6"></span>2. I again commend to your kind
consideration the petition of my brother and colleague Boniface, in the
hope that what could not be done before may be in your power now. He
might perhaps, indeed, legally retain, without any further difficulty,
that which his predecessor had acquired, though under another name than
his own, and which he had begun to possess in name of the church; but we
do not wish, since his predecessor was in debt to the public exchequer,
to have this burden upon our conscience. For that act of fraud was none
the less truly fraud because perpetrated at the expense of the public
revenue. The same Paul (the predecessor of Boniface), when he was made
bishop, being about to surrender all his effects because of the
accumulated burden of arrears due to the public exchequer, having
secured payment of a bond by which a certain sum of money was due to
him, bought with it, as if for the church, in the name of a family then
very powerful, these few fields by the produce of which he might support
himself, in order that, in respect to these also, after his old
practice, he might escape annoyance at the hands of the collectors of
the revenue, although he was paying no tax. Boniface, however, when
ordained over the same church, on his death, hesitated to take the
fields which he had thus held; and although he might have contented
himself with asking from the emperor no more than a remission of the
fiscal arrears which his predecessor had incurred on this small
property, he preferred to confess without reserve that Paul had bought
the property at an auction with money of his own, at a time when he was
bankrupt as a debtor to the public revenue, so that now the Church may,
if possible, obtain possession of this, not through the secret fraud of
her bishop, but by an open act of the Christian emperor’s liberality.
And if this be impossible, the servants of God prefer to bear the
hardship of want, rather than obtain the supply of that which they
require under reproaches of conscience for dishonourable dealing.

<span id="vii.1.XCVI-p7"></span>3. I beg you to condescend to give your
support to this petition, because he has resolved not to bring forward
the decision in his favour which was formerly obtained, lest it should
preclude him from the liberty of making a second application; for the
answer then given fell short of what he desired. And now, since you are
of the same kindly disposition that you formerly were, but possessed of
greater influence, I do not despair of this being easily granted by the
Lord’s help, in consideration of your claims on the emperor; and if even
you were to ask the gift of the property in your own name, and present
it to the church of which I have spoken, who would find fault with your
request; nay, rather, who would not commend it, as dictated not by
personal covetousness, but by Christian piety? May the mercy of the Lord
our God shield you, and make you more and more happy in Christ, my lord
and son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2304"></span>[405:2305](1010402.htm#fr_2304) <span
id="vii.1.XCVI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVI-p5"></span> This Olympius was appointed in 408
(<span class="c9"><span id="vii.1.XCVI-p5.1"></span>A.D.</span>) to the
office of highest authority in the court of Honorius (magister
officiorum), in room of Stilicho, who was put to death at Ravenna on
account of suspected complicity with the authors of the sedition which
threatened the life of the emperor at Pavia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XCVII](1010403)
