[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010317)  [Next](1010319) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XI-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XI-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XI-p2.1"></span>Letter XI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XI-p3"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XI-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389.)

<span id="vii.1.XI-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XI-p4.1"></span>To Nebridius Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XI-p5"></span>1. When the question, which has long been
brought before me by you with something even <span id="page_229">p.
229</span> <span id="vii.1.XI-Page_229"></span>of friendly chiding, as
to the way in which we might live together, was seriously disturbing my
mind, and I had resolved to write to you, and to beg an answer from you
bearing exclusively on this subject, and to employ my pen on no other
theme pertaining to our studies, in order that the discussion of this
matter between us might be brought to an end, the very short and
indisputable conclusion stated in your letter lately received at once
delivered me from all further solicitude; your statement being to the
effect that on this matter there ought to be no further deliberation,
because as soon as it is in my power to come to you, or in your power to
come to me, we shall feel alike constrained to improve the opportunity.
My mind being thus, as I have said, at rest, I looked over all your
letters, that I might see what yet remained unanswered. In these I have
found so many questions, that even if they were easily solved, they
would by their mere number more than exhaust the time and talents of any
man. But they are so difficult, that if the answering of even one of
them were laid upon me, I would not hesitate to confess myself heavily
burdened. The design of this introductory statement is to make you
desist for a little from asking new questions until I am free from debt,
and that you confine yourself in your answer to the statement of your
opinion of my replies. At the same time, I know that it is to my own
loss that I postpone for even a little while the participation of your
divine thoughts.

<span id="vii.1.XI-p6"></span>2. Hear, therefore, the view which I hold
concerning the mystery of the Incarnation which the religion wherein we
have been instructed commends to our faith and knowledge as having been
accomplished in order to our salvation; which question I have chosen to
discuss in preference to all the rest, although it is not the most
easily answered. For those questions which are proposed by you
concerning this world do not appear to me to have a sufficiently direct
reference to the obtaining of a happy life; and whatever pleasure they
yield when investigated, there is reason to fear lest they take up time
which ought to be devoted to better things. With regard, then, to the
subject which I have at this time undertaken, first of all I am
surprised that you were perplexed by the question why not the Father,
but the Son, is said to have become incarnate, and yet were not also
perplexed by the same question in regard to the Holy Spirit. For the
union of Persons in the Trinity is in the Catholic faith set forth and
believed, and by a few holy and blessed ones understood, to be so
inseparable, that whatever is done by the Trinity must be regarded as
being done by the Father, and by the Son, and by the Holy Spirit
together; and that nothing is done by the Father which is, not also done
by the Son and by the Holy Spirit; and nothing done by the Holy Spirit
which is not also done by the Father and by the Son; and nothing done by
the Son which is not also done by the Father and by the Holy Spirit.
From which it seems to follow as a consequence, that the whole Trinity
assumed human nature; for if the Son did so, but the Father and the
Spirit did not, there is something in which they act separately. <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) Why, then, in our mysteries and
sacred symbols, is the Incarnation ascribed only to the Son? This is a
very great question, so difficult, and on a subject so vast, that it is
impossible either to give a sufficiently clear statement, or to support
it by satisfactory proofs. I venture, however, since I am writing to
you, to indicate rather than explain what my sentiments are, in order
that you, from your talents and our intimacy, through which you
thoroughly know me, may for yourself fill up the outline.

<span id="vii.1.XI-p8"></span>3. There is no nature, Nebridius—and,
indeed, there is no substance—which does not contain in itself and
exhibit these three things: first, that it *is*; next, that it is *this*
or *that*; and third, that as far as possible it *remains* as it is. The
first of these three presents the original cause of nature from which
all things exist; the second presents the form <span
id="fr_1461"></span>[1462](#fn_1461) according to which all things are
fashioned and formed in a particular way; the third presents a certain
permanence, so to speak, in which all things are. Now, if it be possible
that a thing can *be*, and yet not be *this* or *that*, and not *remain*
in its own generic form; or that a thing can be *this* or *that*, and
yet not *be*, and not *remain* in its own generic form, so far as it is
possible for it to do so; or that a thing can *remain* in its own
generic form according to the force belonging to it, and yet not *be*,
and not be *this* or *that*,—then it is also possible that in that
Trinity one Person can do something in which the others have no part.
But if you see that whatever is must forthwith be *this* or *that*, and
must *remain* so far as possible in its own generic form, you see also
that these Three do nothing in which all have not a part. I see that as
yet I have only treated a portion of this question, which makes its
solution difficult. But I wished to open up briefly to you—if, indeed, I
have succeeded in this—how great in the system of Catholic truth is the
doctrine of the inseparability of the Persons of the Trinity, and how
difficult to be understood.

<span id="vii.1.XI-p10"></span>4. Hear now how that which disquiets your
mind may disquiet it no more. The mode of existence (Species—the second
of the three above named) which is properly ascribed to the Son, has to
do with training, and with a certain art, if I may use that word in
regard to such things, and with the exercise of intellect, by <span
id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span id="vii.1.XI-Page_230"></span>which
the mind itself is moulded in its thoughts upon things. Therefore, since
by that assumption of human nature the work accomplished was the
effective presentation to us of a certain training in the right way of
living, and exemplification of that which is commanded, under the
majesty and perspicuousness of certain sentences, it is not without
reason that all this is ascribed to the Son. For in many things which I
leave your own reflection and prudence to suggest, although the
constituent elements be many, some one nevertheless stands out above the
rest, and therefore not unreasonably claims a right of possession, as it
were, of the whole for itself: as, *e.g.*, in the three kinds of
questions above mentioned, <span id="fr_1462"></span>[1463](#fn_1462)
although the question raised be whether a thing is or not, this involves
necessarily also both *what* it is (this or that), for of course it
cannot *be* at all unless it be something, and whether it ought to be
approved of or disapproved of, for whatever *is* is a fit subject for
some opinion as to its *quality*; in like manner, when the question
raised is *what* a thing is, this necessarily involves both that it
*is*, and that its quality may be tried by some standard; and in the
same way, when the question raised is what is the *quality* of a thing,
this necessarily involves that that thing *is*, and is *something*,
since all things are inseparably joined to themselves;—nevertheless, the
question in each of the above cases takes its name not from all the
three, but from the special point towards which the inquirer directed
his attention. Now there is a certain training necessary for men, by
which they might be instructed and formed after some model. We cannot
say, however, regarding that which is accomplished in men by this
training, either that it does not exist, or that it is not a thing to be
desired \[*i.e.* we cannot say *what* it is, without involving an
affirmation both of its *existence* and of its *quality*\]; but we seek
first to know *what* it is, for in knowing this we know that by which we
may infer that it is something, and in which we may remain. Therefore
the first thing necessary was, that a certain rule and pattern of
training be plainly exhibited; and this was done by the divinely
appointed method of the Incarnation, which is properly to be ascribed to
the Son, in order that from it should follow both our knowledge, through
the Son, of the Father Himself, *i.e.* of the one first principle whence
all things have their being, and a certain inward and ineffable charm
and sweetness of remaining in that knowledge, and of despising all
mortal things,—a gift and work which is properly ascribed to the Holy
Spirit. Wherefore, although in all things the Divine Persons act
perfectly in common, and without possibility of separation, nevertheless
their operations behoved to be exhibited in such a way as to be
distinguished from each other, on account of the weakness which is in
us, who have fallen from unity into variety. For no one ever succeeds in
raising another to the height on which he himself stands, unless he
stoop somewhat towards the level which that other occupies.

<span id="vii.1.XI-p12"></span>You have here a letter which may not
indeed put an end to your disquietude in regard to this doctrine, but
which may set your own thoughts to work upon a kind of solid foundation;
so that, with the talents which I well know you to possess, you may
follow, and, by the piety in which especially we must be stedfast, may
apprehend that which still remains to be discovered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[229:1461](1010318.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="vii.1.XI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XI-p7"></span> *A liquid præter invicem faciunt.*

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[229:1462](1010318.htm#fr_1461) <span
id="vii.1.XI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XI-p9"></span> Species.

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[230:1463](1010318.htm#fr_1462) <span
id="vii.1.XI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XI-p11"></span> *An sit, quid sit, quale sit*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XII](1010319)
