[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010392)  [Next](1010394) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 405.)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p3.1"></span>To His Brother Emeritus, Beloved and
Longed For, Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p4"></span>1. I know that it is not on the
possession of good talents and a liberal education that the salvation of
the soul depends; but when I hear of any one who is thus endowed holding
a different view from that which truth imperatively insists upon on a
point which admits of very easy examination, the more I wonder at such a
man, the more I burn with desire to make his acquaintance, and to
converse with him; or if that be impossible, I long to bring his mind
and mine into contact by exchanging letters, which wing their flight
even between places far apart. As I have heard that you are such a man
as I have spoken of, I grieve that you should be severed and shut out
from the Catholic Church, which is spread abroad throughout the whole
world, as was foretold by the Holy Spirit. What your reason for this
separation is I do not know. For it is not disputed that the party of
Donatus is wholly unknown to a great part of the Roman world, not to
speak of the barbarian nations (to whom also the apostle said that he
was a debtor <span id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085) ) whose
communion in the Christian faith is joined with ours, and that in fact
they do not even know at all when or upon what account the dissension
began. Now, unless you admit these Christians to be innocent of those
crimes with which you charge the Christians of Africa, you must confess
that all of you are defiled by participation in the wicked actions of
all worthless characters, so long as they succeed (to put the matter
mildly) in escaping detection among you. For you do occasionally expel a
member from your communion, in which case his expulsion takes place only
after he has committed the crime for which he merited expulsion. Is
there not some intervening time during which he escapes detection before
he is discovered, convicted, and condemned by you? I ask, therefore,
whether he involved you in his defilement so long as he was not
discovered by you? You answer, “By no means.” If, then, he were not to
be discovered at all, he would in that case never involve you in his
defilement; for it sometimes happens that the crimes committed by men
come to light only after their death, yet this does not bring guilt upon
those Christians who communicated with them while they were alive. Why,
then, have you severed yourselves by so rash and profane schism from the
communion of innumerable Eastern Churches, in which all that you truly
or falsely affirm to have been done in Africa has been and still is
utterly unknown?

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-Page_366"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p6"></span>2. For it is quite another question
whether or not there be truth in the assertions made by you. These
assertions we disprove by documents much more worthy of credit than
those which you bring forward, and we further find in your own documents
more abundant proof of those positions which you assail. But this is, as
I have said, another question altogether, to be taken up and discussed
when necessary. Meanwhile, let your mind give special attention to this:
that no one can be involved in the guilt of unknown crimes committed by
persons unknown to him. Whence it is manifest that you have been guilty
of impious schism in separating yourselves from the communion of the
whole world, to which the things charged, whether truly or falsely, by
you against some men in Africa, have been and still are wholly unknown;
although this also should not be forgotten, that even when known and
discovered, bad men do not harm the good who are in a Church, if either
the power of restraining them from communion be wanting, or the
interests of the Church’s peace forbid this to be done. For who were
those who, according to the prophet Ezekiel, <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086) obtained the reward of being marked
before the destruction of the wicked, and of escaping unhurt when they
were destroyed, but those who sighed and cried for the sins and
iniquities of the people of God which were done in the midst of them?
Now who sighs and cries for that which is unknown to him? On the same
principle, the Apostle Paul bears with false brethren. For it is not of
persons unknown to him that he says, “All seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ’s;” yet these persons he shows plainly to have
been beside him. And to what class do the men belong who have chosen
rather to burn incense to idols or surrender the divine books than to
suffer death, if not to those who “seek their own, not the things of
Jesus Christ”?

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p8"></span>3. I omit many proofs which I might
give from Scripture, that I may not make this letter longer than is
needful; and I leave many more things to be considered by yourself in
the light of your own learning. But I beseech you mark this, which is
quite enough to decide the whole question: If so many transgressors in
the one nation, which was then the Church of God, did not make those who
were associated with them to be guilty like themselves; if that
multitude of false brethren did not make the Apostle Paul, who was a
member of the same Church with them, a seeker not of the things of Jesus
Christ, but of his own,—it is manifest that a man is not made wicked by
the wickedness of any one with whom he goes to the altar of Christ, even
though he be not unknown to him, provided only that he do not encourage
him in his wickedness, but by a good conscience disallowing his conduct
keep himself apart from him. It is therefore obvious that, to be art and
part with a thief, one must either help him in the theft, or receive
with approbation what he has stolen. This I say in order to remove out
of the way endless and unnecessary questions concerning the conduct of
men, which are wholly irrelevant when advanced against our position.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p9"></span>4. If, however, you do not agree with
what I have said, you involve the whole of your party in the reproach of
being such men as Optatus was, while, notwithstanding your knowledge of
his crimes, he was tolerated in communion with you; and far be it from
me to say this of such a man as Emeritus, and of others of like
integrity among you, who are, I am sure, wholly averse to such deeds as
disgraced him. For we do not lay any charge against you but the one of
schism, which by your obstinate persistence in it you have now made
heresy. How great this crime is in the judgment of God Himself, you may
see by reading what without doubt you have read ere now. You will find
that Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up by an opening of the earth
beneath them, <span id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087) and that all
the others who had conspired with them were devoured by fire breaking
forth in the midst of them. As a warning to men to shun this crime, the
Lord God signalized its commission with this immediate punishment, that
He might show what He reserves for the final recompense of persons
guilty of a similar transgression, whom His great forbearance spares for
a time. We do not, indeed, find fault with the reasons by which you
excuse your tolerating Optatus among you. We do not blame you, because
at the time when he was denounced for his furious conduct in the mad
abuse of power, when he was impeached by the groans of all
Africa,—groans in which you also shared, if you are what good report
declares you to be,—a report which, God knows, I most willingly
believe,—you forbore from excommunicating him, lest he should under such
sentence draw away many with him, and rend your communion asunder with
the frenzy of schism. But this is the thing which is itself an
indictment against you at the bar of God, O brother Emeritus, that
although you saw that the division of the party of Donators was so great
an evil, that it was thought better that Optatus should be tolerated in
your communion than that division should be introduced among you, you
nevertheless perpetuate the evil which was wrought in the division of
the Church of Christ by your forefathers.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p11"></span>5. Here perhaps you will be
disposed, under <span id="page_367">p. 367</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-Page_367"></span>the exigencies of debate, to attempt
to defend Optatus. Do not so, I beseech you; do not so, my brother: it
would not become you; and if it would perchance be seemly for any one to
do it (though, in fact, nothing is seemly which is wrong), it assuredly
would be unseemly for Emeritus to defend Optatus. Perhaps you reply that
it would as little become you to accuse him. Granted, by all means.
Take, then, the course which lies between defending and accusing him.
Say, “Every man shall bear his own burden;” <span
id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088) “Who art thou that judgest another
man’s servant?” <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) If, then,
notwithstanding the testimony of all Africa,—nay more, of all regions to
which the name of Gildo was carried, for Optatus was not less notorious
than he,—you have not dared to pronounce judgment concerning Optatus,
lest you should rashly decide in regard to one unknown to you, is it, I
ask, either possible or right for us, proceeding solely on your
testimony, to pronounce sentence rashly upon persons whom we do not
know? Is it not enough that you should charge them with things of which
you have no certain knowledge, without our pronouncing them guilty of
things of which we know as little as yourselves? For even though Optatus
were in peril through the falsehood of detractors, you defend not him,
but yourself, when you say, “I do not know what his character was.” How
much more obvious, then, is it that the Eastern world knows nothing of
the character of those Africans with whom, though much less known to you
than Optatus, you find fault! Yet you are disjoined by scandalous schism
from Churches in the East, the names of which you have and you read in
the sacred books. If your most famous and most scandalously notorious
Bishop of Thamugada <span id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090) was at
that very time not known to his colleague, I shall not say in Cæsarea,
but in Sitifa, so close at hand, how was it possible for the Churches of
Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, Philippi, Thessalonica, Antioch, Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, and others which were founded in Christ by the
apostles, to know the case of these African traditors, whoever they
were; or how was it consistent with justice that they should be
condemned by you for not knowing it? Yet with these Churches you hold no
communion. You say they are not Christian, and you labour to rebaptize
their members. What need I say? What complaint, what protest is
necessary here? If I am addressing a right-hearted man, I know that with
you I share the keenness of the indignation which I feel. For you
doubtless see at once what I might say if I would.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p15"></span>6. Perhaps, however, your
forefathers formed of themselves a council, and placed the whole
Christian world except themselves under sentence of excommunication.
Have you come so to judge of things, as to affirm that the council of
the followers of Maximianus who were cut off from you, as you were cut
off from the Church, was of no authority against you, because their
number was small compared with yours; and yet claim for your council an
authority against the nations, which are the inheritance of Christ, and
the ends of the earth, which are His possession? <span
id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091) I wonder if the man who does not
blush at such pretensions has any blood in his body. Write me, I beseech
you, in reply to this letter; for I have heard from some, on whom I
could not but rely, that you would write me an answer if I were to
address a letter to you. Some time ago, moreover, I sent you a letter;
but I do not know whether you received it or answered it, and perhaps
your reply did not reach me. Now, however, I beg you not to refuse to
answer this letter, and state what you think. But do not occupy yourself
with other questions than the one which I have stated, for this is the
leading point of a well-ordered discussion of the origin of the schism.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p17"></span>7. The civil powers defend their
conduct in persecuting schismatics by the rule which the apostle laid
down: “Whoso resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God; and
they that resist shall receive to themselves judgment. For rulers are
not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be
afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise
of the same: for he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou
do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain:
for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
doeth evil.” <span id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092) The whole
question therefore is, whether schism be not an evil work, or whether
you have not caused schism, so that your resistance of the powers that
be is in a good cause and not in an evil work, whereby you would bring
judgment on yourselves. Wherefore with infinite wisdom the Lord not
merely said, “Blessed are they who are persecuted,” but added, “for
righteousness’ sake.” <span id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093) I
desire therefore to know from you, in the light of what I have said
above, whether it be a work of righteousness to originate and perpetuate
your state of separation from the Church. I desire also to know whether
it be not rather a work of unrighteousness to condemn unheard the whole
Christian world, either because it has not heard what you have heard, or
because no proof has been furnished to it of charges which were rashly
believed, or without <span id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-Page_368"></span>sufficient evidence advanced by you,
and to propose on this ground to baptize a second time the members of so
many churches founded by the preaching and labours either of the Lord
Himself while He was on earth, or of His apostles; and all this on the
assumption that it is excusable for you either not to know the
wickedness of your African colleagues who are living beside you, and are
using the same sacraments with you, or even to tolerate their misdeeds
when known, lest the party of Donatus should be divided, but that it is
inexcusable for them, though they reside in most remote regions, to be
ignorant of what you either know, or believe, or have heard, or imagine,
concerning men in Africa. How great is the perversity of those who cling
to their own unrighteousness, and yet find fault with the severity of
the civil powers!

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p20"></span>8. You answer, perhaps, that
Christians ought not to persecute even the wicked. Be it so; let us
admit that they ought not: but is it lawful to lay this objection in the
way of the powers which are ordained for this very purpose? Shall we
erase the apostle’s words? Or do your <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p20.1"></span>Mss.</span> not contain the words which
I mentioned a little while ago? But you will say that we ought not to
communicate with such persons. What then? Did you withdraw, some time
ago, from communion with the deputy Flavianus, on the ground of his
putting to death, in his administration of the laws, those whom he found
guilty? Again, you will say that the Roman emperors are incited against
you by us. Nay, rather blame yourselves for this, seeing that, as was
long ago foretold in the promise concerning Christ, “Yea, all kings
shall fall down before him,” <span id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094)
they are now members of the Church; and you have dared to wound the
Church by schism, and still presume to insist upon rebaptizing her
members. Our brethren indeed demand help from the powers which are
ordained, not to persecute you, but to protect themselves against the
lawless acts of violence perpetrated by individuals of your party, which
you yourselves, who refrain from such things, bewail and deplore; just
as, before the Roman Empire became Christian, the Apostle Paul took
measures to secure that the protection of armed Roman soldiers should be
granted him against the Jews who had conspired to kill him. But these
emperors, whatever the occasion of their becoming acquainted with the
crime of your schism might be, frame against you such decrees as their
zeal and their office demand. For they bear not the sword in vain; they
are the ministers of God to execute wrath upon those that do evil.
Finally, if some of our party transgress the bounds of Christian
moderation in this matter, it displeases us; nevertheless, we do not on
their account forsake the Catholic Church because we are unable to
separate the wheat from the chaff before the final winnowing, especially
since you yourselves have not forsaken the Donatist party on account of
Optatus, when you had not courage to excommunicate him for his crimes.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p22"></span>9. You say, however, “Why seek to
have us joined to you, if we be thus stained with guilt?” I reply:
Because you still live, and may, if you are willing, be restored. For
when you join yourselves to us, *i.e.* to the Church of God, the
heritage of Christ, who has the ends of the earth as his possession, you
are restored so that you live in vital union with the Root. For the
apostle says of the branches which were broken off: “God is able to
graft them in again.” <span id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) We
exhort you to change, in so far as concerns your dissent from the
Church; although, as to the sacraments which you had, we admit that they
are holy, since they are the same in all. Wherefore we desire to see you
changed from your obstinacy, that is, in order that you who have been
cut off may be vitally united to the Root again. For the sacraments
which you have not changed are approved by us as you have them; else, in
our attempting to correct your sin, we should do impious wrong to those
mysteries of Christ which have not been deprived of their worth by your
unworthiness. For even Saul did not, with all his sins, destroy the
efficacy of the anointing which he received; to which anointing David,
that pious servant of God, showed so great respect. We therefore do not
insist upon rebaptizing you, because we only wish to restore to you
connection with the Root: the form of the branch which has been cut off
we accept with approval, if it has not been changed; but the branch,
however perfect in its form, cannot bear fruit, except it be united to
the root. As to the persecution, so gentle and tempered with clemency,
which you say you suffer at the hands of our party, while unquestionably
your own party inflict greater harm in a lawless and irregular way upon
us,—this is one question: the question concerning baptism is wholly
distinct from it; in regard to it, we inquire not where it is, but where
it profits. For wherever it is, it is the same; but it cannot be said of
him who receives it, that wherever he is, he is the same. We therefore
detest the impiety of which men as individuals are guilty in a state of
schism; but we venerate everywhere the baptism of Christ. If deserters
carry with them the imperial standards, these standards are welcomed
back again as they were, if they have remained unharmed, when the
deserters are either punished with a severe sentence, or, in the
exercise of clemency, <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-Page_369"></span>restored. If, in regard to this, any
more particular inquiry is to be made, that is, as I have said another
question; for in these things, the practice of the Church of God is the
rule of our practice.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p24"></span>10. The question between us,
however, is, whether your Church or ours is the Church of God. To
resolve this, we must begin with the original inquiry, why you became
schismatics. If you do not write me an answer, I believe that before the
bar of God I shall be easily vindicated as having done my duty in this
matter; because I have sent a letter in the interests of peace to a man
of whom I have heard that, excepting only his adherence to schismatics,
he is a good and well-educated man. Be it yours to consider how you
shall answer Him whose forbearance now demands your praise, and His
judgment shall in the end demand your fears. If, however, you write a
reply to me with as much care as you see me to have bestowed upon this,
I believe that, by the mercy of God, the error which now keeps us apart
shall perish before the love of peace and the logic of truth. Observe
that I have said nothing about the followers of Rogatus, <span
id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096) who call you Firmiani, as you call
us Macariani. Nor have I spoken of your bishop of Rucata (or Rusicada),
who is said to have made an agreement with Firmus, promising, on
condition of the safety of all his adherents, that the gates should be
opened to him, and the Catholics given up to slaughter and pillage. Many
other such things I pass unnoticed. Do you therefore in like manner
desist from the commonplaces of rhetorical exaggeration concerning
actions of men which you have either heard of or known; for you see how
I am silent concerning deeds of your party, in order to confine the
debate to the question upon which the whole matter hinges, namely, the
origin of the schism.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p26"></span>My brother, beloved and longed for,
may the Lord our God breathe into you thoughts tending towards
reconciliation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[365:2086](1010393.htm#fr_2085) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p5"></span> [Rom.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[366:2087](1010393.htm#fr_2086) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p7"></span> Ch. ix. 4–6.

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[366:2088](1010393.htm#fr_2087) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p10"></span> [Num.
16.31-35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[367:2089](1010393.htm#fr_2088) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p12"></span> [Gal.
6.5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[367:2090](1010393.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p13"></span> [Rom.
14.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[367:2091](1010393.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p14"></span> Optatus.

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[367:2092](1010393.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p16"></span> [Ps.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[367:2093](1010393.htm#fr_2092) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p18"></span> [Rom.
13.2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[367:2094](1010393.htm#fr_2093) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p19"></span> [Matt.
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[368:2095](1010393.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p21"></span> [Ps.
72.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[368:2096](1010393.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p23"></span> [Rom.
11.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#023)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[369:2097](1010393.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXVII-p25"></span> Rogatus, bishop of Cartenna in
Mauritania, who left the Donatists and suffered much persecution at the
hands of Firmus, a brother of Gildo; hence the Donatists were named by
the Rogatists Firmiani. See Augustin, *Contra Literas Petiliani*, book
ii. ch. 83.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXXVIII](1010394)
