[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010450)  [Next](1010452) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXCII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXCII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXCII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXCII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 418.)

<span id="vii.1.CXCII-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXCII-p3.1"></span>To My Venerable Lord and Highly Esteemed
and Holy Brother, Cælestine</span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXCII-p3.2"></span>, <span
id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887) *Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.*</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCII-p5"></span>1. I was at a considerable distance
from home when the letter of your Holiness addressed to me at Hippo
arrived by the hands of the clerk Projectus. When I had returned home,
and, having read your letter, felt myself to be owing you a reply, I was
still waiting for some means of communicating with you, when, lo! a most
desirable opportunity presented itself in the departure of our very dear
brother the acolyte Albinus, who leaves us immediately. Rejoicing,
therefore, in your health, which is most earnestly desired by me, I
return to your Holiness the salutation which I was owing. But I always
owe <span id="page_556">p. 556</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXCII-Page_556"></span>you love, the only debt which, even
when it has been paid, holds him who has paid it a debtor still. For it
is given when it is paid, but it is owing even after it has been given,
for there is no time at which it ceases to be due. Nor when it is given
is it lost, but it is rather multiplied by giving it; for in possessing
it, not in parting with it, it is given. And since it cannot be given
unless it is possessed, so neither can it be possessed unless it is
given; nay, at the very time when it is given by a man it increases in
that man, and, according to the number of persons to whom it is given,
the amount of it which is gained becomes greater. Moreover, how can that
be denied to friends which is due even to enemies? To enemies, however,
this debt is paid with caution, whereas to friends it is repaid with
confidence. Nevertheless, it uses every effort to secure that it
receives back what it gives, even in the case of those to whom it
renders good for evil. For we wish to have as a friend the man whom, as
an enemy, we truly love, for we do not sincerely love him unless we wish
him to be good, which he cannot be until he be delivered from the sin of
cherished enmities.

<span id="vii.1.CXCII-p6"></span>2. Love, therefore, is not paid away in
the same manner as money; for, whereas money is diminished, love is
increased by paying it away. They differ also in this,—that we give
evidence of greater goodwill to the man to whom we may have given money
if we do not seek to have it returned; but no one can be a true donor of
love unless he lovingly insist on its repayment. For money, when it is
received, accrues to him to whom it is given, but forsakes him by whom
it is given; love, on the contrary, even when it is not repaid,
nevertheless increases with the man who insists on its repayment by the
person whom he loves; and not only so, but the person by whom it is
returned to him does not begin to possess it till he pays it back again.

<span id="vii.1.CXCII-p7"></span>Wherefore, my lord and brother, I
willingly give to you, and joyfully receive from you, the love which we
owe to each other. The love which I receive I still claim, and the love
which I give I still owe. For we ought to obey with docility the precept
of the One Master, whose disciples we both profess to be, when He says
to us by His apostle: “Owe no man anything, but to love one
another.” <span id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[555:2888](1010451.htm#fr_2887) <span
id="vii.1.CXCII-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCII-p4"></span> Cælestine, who was at the date of this
letter a deacon in Rome, was raised in 423 to succeed Boniface as Bishop
of Rome; he stands forty-second in the list of Popes. Letter CCIX. is
addressed to him.

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[556:2889](1010451.htm#fr_2888) <span
id="vii.1.CXCII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXCII-p8"></span> [Rom.
13.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.CXCII-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXCV](1010452)
