[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010153)  [Next](1010155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.IX.XI"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.XI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.IX.XI-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—His Mother, Attacked by Fever,
Dies at Ostia.</span>

<span id="vi.IX.XI-p2"></span>27. What reply I made unto her to these
things I do not well remember. However, scarcely five days after, or not
much more, she was prostrated by fever; and while she was sick, she one
day sank into a swoon, and was for a short time unconscious of visible
things. We hurried up to her; but she soon regained her senses, and
gazing on me and my brother as we stood by her, she said to us
inquiringly, “Where was I?” Then looking intently at us stupefied with
grief, “Here,” saith she, “shall you bury your mother.” I was silent,
and refrained from weeping; but my brother said something, wishing her,
as the happier lot, to die in her own country and not abroad. She, when
she heard this, with anxious countenance arrested him with her eye, as
savouring of such things, and then gazing at me, “Behold,” saith she,
“what he saith;” and soon after to us both she saith, “Lay this body
anywhere, let not the care for it trouble you at all. This only I ask,
that you will remember me at the Lord’s altar, wherever you be.” And
when she had given forth this opinion in such words as she could, she
was silent, being in pain with her increasing sickness.

<span id="vi.IX.XI-p3"></span>28. But, as I reflected on Thy gifts, O
thou invisible God, which Thou instillest into the hearts of Thy
faithful ones, whence such marvellous fruits do spring, I did rejoice
and give thanks unto Thee, calling to mind what I knew before, how she
had ever burned with anxiety respecting her burial-place, which she had
provided and prepared for herself by the body of her husband. For as
they had lived very peacefully together, her desire had also been (so
little is the human mind capable of grasping things divine) that this
should be added to that happiness, and be talked of among men, that
after her wandering beyond the sea, it had been granted her that they
both, so united on earth, should lie in the same grave. But when this
uselessness had, through the bounty of Thy goodness, begun to be no
longer in her heart, I knew not, and I was full of joy admiring what she
had thus disclosed to me; though indeed in that our conversation in the
window also, when she said, “What do I here any longer?” she appeared
not to desire to die in her own country. I heard afterwards, too, that
at the time we were at Ostia, with a maternal confidence she one day,
when I was absent, was speaking with certain of my friends on the
contemning of this life, and the blessing of death; and when they—amazed
at the courage which Thou hadst given to her, a woman—asked her whether
she did not dread leaving her body at such a distance from her own city,
she replied, “Nothing is far to God; nor need I fear lest He should be
ignorant at the end of the world of the place whence He is to raise me
up.” On the ninth day, then, of her sickness, the fifty-sixth year of
her age, and the thirty-third of mine, was that religious and devout
soul set free from the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](1010155)
