[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010165)  [Next](1010167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.IX"></span>

<span id="vi.X.IX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.IX-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Not Only Things, But Also
Literature and Images, are Taken from the Memory, and are Brought Forth
by the Act of Remembering.</span>

<span id="vi.X.IX-p2"></span>16. And yet are not these all that the
illimitable capacity of my memory retains. Here also is all that is
apprehended of the liberal sciences, and not yet forgotten—removed as it
were into an inner place, which is not a place; nor are they the images
which are retained, but the things themselves. For what is literature,
what skill in disputation, whatsoever I know of all the many kinds of
questions there are, is so in my memory, as that I have not taken in the
image and left the thing without, or that it should have sounded and
passed away like a voice imprinted on the ear by that trace, whereby it
might be recorded, as though it sounded when it no longer did so; or as
an odour while it passes away, and vanishes into wind, affects the sense
of smell, whence it conveys the image of itself into the memory, which
we realize in recollecting; or like food, which assuredly in the belly
hath now no taste, and yet hath a kind of taste in the memory, or like
anything that is by touching felt by the body, and which even when
removed from us is imagined by the memory. For these things themselves
are not put into it, but the images of them only are caught up, with a
marvellous quickness, and laid up, as it were, in most wonderful
garners, and wonderfully brought forth when we remember.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](1010167)
