[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010310)  [Next](1010312) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.IV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.IV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.IV-p1.1"></span>Letter IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.IV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.IV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 387.)

<span id="vii.1.IV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.IV-p3.1"></span>To Nebridius Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.IV-p4"></span>1. It is very wonderful how completely I
was taken by surprise, when, on searching to discover which of your
letters still remained unanswered, I found only one which held me as
your debtor,—that, namely, in which you request me to tell you how far
in this my leisure, which you suppose to be great, and which you desire
to share with me, I am making progress in learning to discriminate those
things in nature with which the senses are conversant, from those about
which the understanding is employed. But I suppose it is not unknown to
you, that if one becomes more and more fully imbued with false opinions,
the more fully and intimately one exercises himself in them, the
corresponding effect is still more easily produced in the mind by
contact with truth. Nevertheless my progress, like our physical
development, is so gradual, that it is difficult to define its steps
distinctly, just as though there is a very great difference between a
boy and a young man, no one, if daily questioned from his boyhood
onward, could at any one date say that now he was no more a boy, but a
young man.

<span id="vii.1.IV-p5"></span>2. I would not have you, however, so to
apply this illustration as to suppose that, in the vigour of a more
powerful understanding, I have arrived as it were at the beginning of
the soul’s manhood. For I am yet but a boy, though perhaps, as we say, a
promising boy, rather than a good-for-nothing. For although the eyes of
my mind are for the most part perturbed and oppressed by the
distractions produced by blows inflicted through things sensible, they
are revived and raised up again by that brief process of reasoning: “The
mind and intelligence are superior to the eyes and the common faculty of
sight; which could not be the case unless the things which we perceive
by intelligence were more real than the things which we perceive by the
faculty of sight.” I pray you to help me in examining whether any valid
objection can be brought against this reasoning. By it, meanwhile, I
find myself restored and refreshed; and when, after calling upon God for
help, I begin to rise <span id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span
id="vii.1.IV-Page_223"></span>to Him, and to those things which are in
the highest sense real, I am at times satisfied with such a grasp and
enjoyment of the things which eternally abide, that I sometimes wonder
at my requiring any such reasoning as I have above given to persuade me
of the reality of those things which in my soul are as truly present to
me as I am to myself.

<span id="vii.1.IV-p6"></span>Please look over your letters yourself,
for I own that you will be in this matter at greater pains than I, in
order to make sure that I am not perchance unwittingly still owing an
answer to any of them: for I can hardly believe that I have so soon got
from under the burden of debts which I used to reckon as so numerous;
albeit, at the same time, I cannot doubt that you have had some letters
from me to which I have as yet received no reply.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter V](1010312)
