[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010404)  [Next](1010406) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XCIX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p1.1"></span>Letter XCIX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408 <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p2.2"></span>or Beginning of</span> 409.)

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p3.1"></span>To the Very Devout Italica, an Handmaid of
God, Praised Justly and Piously by the Members of Christ, Augustin Sends
Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p4"></span>1. Up to the time of my writing this
reply, I had received three letters from your Grace, of which the first
asked urgently a letter from me, the second intimated that what I wrote
in answer had reached you, and the third, which conveyed the assurance
of your most benevolent solicitude for our interest in the matter of the
house belonging to that most illustrious and distinguished young man
Julian, which is in immediate contact with the walls of our Church. To
this last letter, just now received, I lose no time in promptly
replying, because your Excellency’s agent has written to me that he can
send my letter without delay to Rome. By his letter we have been greatly
distressed, because he has taken pains to acquaint us <span
id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315) with the things which are taking
place in the city (Rome) or around its walls, so as to give us reliable
information concerning that which we were reluctant to believe on the
authority of vague rumours. In the letters which <span id="page_411">p.
411</span> <span id="vii.1.XCIX-Page_411"></span>were sent to us
previously by our brethren, tidings were given to us of events,
vexatious and grievous, it is true, but much less calamitous than those
of which we now hear. I am surprised beyond expression that my brethren
the holy bishops did not write to me when so favourable an opportunity
of sending a letter by your messengers occurred, and that your own
letter conveyed to us no information concerning such painful tribulation
as has befallen you,—tribulation which, by reason of the tender
sympathies of Christian charity, is ours as well as yours. I suppose,
however, that you deemed it better not to mention these sorrows, because
you considered that this could do no good, or because you did not wish
to make us sad by your letter. But in my opinion, it does some good to
acquaint us even with such events as these: in the first place, because
it is not right to be ready to “rejoice with them that rejoice,” but
refuse to “weep with them that weep;” and in the second place, because
“tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope; and hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.” <span
id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316)

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p7"></span>2. Far be it, therefore, from us to
refuse to hear even of the bitter and sorrowful things which befall
those who are very dear to us! For in some way which I cannot explain,
the pain suffered by one member is mitigated when all the other members
suffer with it. <span id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317) And this
mitigation is effected not by actual participation in the calamity, but
by the solacing power of love; for although only some suffer the actual
burden of the affliction, and the others share their suffering through
knowing what these have to bear, nevertheless the tribulation is borne
in common by them all, seeing that they have in common the same
experience, hope, and love, and the same Divine Spirit. Moreover, the
Lord provides consolation for us all, inasmuch as He hath both
forewarned us of these temporal afflictions, and promised to us after
them eternal blessings; and the soldier who desires to receive a crown
when the conflict is over, ought not to lose courage while the conflict
lasts, since He who is preparing rewards ineffable for those who
overcome, does Himself minister strength to them while they are on the
field to battle.

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p9"></span>3. Let not what I have now written take
away your confidence in writing to me, especially since the reason which
may be pled for your endeavouring to lessen our fears is one which
cannot be condemned. We salute in return your little children, and we
desire that they may be spared to you, and may grow up in Christ, since
they discern even in their present tender age how dangerous and baneful
is the love of this world. God grant that the plants which are small and
still flexible may be bent in the right direction in a time in which the
great and hardy are being shaken. As to the house of which you speak,
what can I say beyond expressing my gratitude for your very kind
solicitude? For the house which we can give they do not wish; and the
house which they wish we cannot give, for it was not left to the church
by my predecessor, as they have been falsely informed, but is one of the
ancient properties of the church, and it is attached to the one ancient
church in the same way as the house about which this question has been
raised is attached to the other. <span
id="fr_2318"></span>[2319](#fn_2318)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[410:2316](1010405.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p5"></span> Tillemont (vol. xiii. note 44)
conjectures that the word “*non*” before “*nobis insinuare curavit*”
should not be in the text,—a conjecture which commends itself to our
judgment, though it is unsupported by <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p5.1"></span>Mss</span>.

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[411:2317](1010405.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p6"></span> [Rom.
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015), [Rom.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[411:2318](1010405.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
12.26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)<span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[411:2319](1010405.htm#fr_2318) <span
id="vii.1.XCIX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIX-p10"></span> We have no further information
regarding this affair. The prospect of an amicable settlement seems
remote.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter C](1010406)
