[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010026)  [Next](1010028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.I_1.XI"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XI-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XI-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.I_1.XI-p2.1"></span>Chapter XI.—Seized by Disease, His Mother
Being Troubled, He Earnestly Demands Baptism, Which on Recovery is
Postponed—His Father Not as Yet Believing in Christ.</span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XI-p3"></span>17. Even as a boy I had heard of eternal
life promised to us through the humility of the Lord our God
condescending to our pride, and I was signed with the sign of the cross,
and was seasoned with His salt <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)
even from the womb of my mother, who greatly trusted in Thee. Thou
sawest, O Lord, how at one time, while yet a boy, being suddenly seized
with pains in the stomach, and being at the point of death—Thou sawest,
O my God, for even then Thou wast my keeper, with what emotion of mind
and with what faith I solicited from the piety of my mother, and of Thy
Church, the mother of us all, the baptism of Thy Christ, my Lord and my
God. On which, the mother of my flesh being much troubled,—since she,
with a heart pure in Thy faith, travailed in birth <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) more lovingly for my eternal
salvation,—would, had I not quickly recovered, have without delay
provided for my initiation and washing by Thy life-giving sacraments,
confessing Thee, O Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins. So my
cleansing was deferred, as if I must needs, should I live, be further
polluted; because, indeed, the guilt contracted by sin would, after
baptism, be greater and more perilous. <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) Thus I at that time believed with my
mother and the whole house, except my father; yet he did not overcome
the influence of my mother’s piety in me so as to prevent my believing
in Christ, as he had not yet believed in Him. For she was desirous that
Thou, O my God, shouldst be my Father rather than he; and in this Thou
didst aid her to overcome her husband, to whom, though the better of the
two, she yielded obedience, because in this she yielded obedience to
Thee, who dost so command.

<span id="vi.I_1.XI-p7"></span>18. I beseech Thee, my God, I would
gladly know, if it be Thy will, to what end my baptism was then
deferred? Was it for my good that the reins were slackened, as it were,
upon me for me to sin? Or were they not slackened? If not, whence comes
it that it is still dinned into our ears on all sides, “Let him alone,
let him act as he likes, for he is not yet baptized”? But as regards
bodily health, no one exclaims, “Let him be more seriously wounded, for
he is not yet cured!” How much better, then, had it been for me to have
been cured at once; and then, by my own and my friends’ diligence, my
soul’s restored health had been kept safe in Thy keeping, who gavest it!
Better, in truth. But how numerous and great waves of temptation
appeared to hang over me after my childhood! These were foreseen by my
mother; and she preferred that the unformed clay should be exposed to
them rather than the image itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[50:161](1010027.htm#fr_160) <span
id="vi.I_1.XI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XI-p4"></span> “A rite in the Western churches, on
admission as a catechumen, previous to baptism, denoting the purity and
uncorruptedness and discretion required of Christians. See S. Aug. *De
Catechiz. rudib.* c. 26; Concil. Carth. 3, can. 5; and Liturgies in
*Assem. Cod. Liturg.* t. i.”—E. B. P. See also vi. 1, note, below.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[50:162](1010027.htm#fr_161) <span
id="vi.I_1.XI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XI-p5"></span> [Gal.
4.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="vi.I_1.XI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[50:163](1010027.htm#fr_162) <span
id="vi.I_1.XI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XI-p6"></span> Baptism was in those days frequently
(and for similar reasons to the above) postponed till the hour of death
approached. The doctors of the Church endeavoured to discourage this,
and persons baptized on a sick-bed (“clinically”) were, if they
recovered, looked on with suspicion. The Emperor Constantine was not
baptized till the close of his life, and he is censured by Dr. Newman
(*Arians* iii. sec. 1) for presuming to speak of questions which divided
the Arians and the Orthodox as “unimportant,” while he himself was both
unbaptized and uninstructed. On the postponing of baptism with a view to
unrestrained enjoyment of the world, and on the severity of the early
Church towards sins committed after baptism, see Kaye’s *Tertullian*,
pp. 234–241.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](1010028)
