[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010435)  [Next](1010437) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLI-p1.1"></span>Letter CLI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 413 OR 414.)

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLI-p3.1"></span>To Cæcilianus,</span>* <span
id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) *<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLI-p4.1"></span>My Lord Justly Renowned, and Son Most Worthy
of the Honour Due by Me to His Rank, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>*

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p5"></span>1. The remonstrance which you have
addressed to me in your letter is gratifying to me in proportion to the
love which it manifests. If, therefore, I attempt to clear myself from
blame in regard to my silence, the thing which I must attempt is to show
that you had no just cause for being displeased with me. But since
nothing gives me greater pleasure than that you condescended to take
offence at my silence, which I had supposed to be a matter of no moment
in the midst of your many cares, I will be pleading against myself if I
endeavour thus to clear myself from blame. For if you were wrong in
being displeased at me for not writing to you, this must be because of
your having such a poor opinion of me that you are absolutely
indifferent whether I speak or remain silent. Nay, the displeasure which
arises from your being distressed by my silence is not displeasure. I
therefore feel not so much grief at my withholding, as joy at your
desiring a communication from me. For it is an honour, not a vexation,
to me, that I should have a place in the remembrance of an old friend,
and a man who is (though you may not say it, yet it is our duty to
acknowledge it) of such eminent worth and greatness, holding a position
in a foreign country, and burdened with public responsibilities. Pardon
me, then, for expressing my gratitude that you did not regard me as a
person whose silence it was beneath you to resent. For now I am
persuaded, through that benevolence which distinguishes you more even
than your high rank, that in the midst of your numerous and important
occupations, not of a private nature, but public, involving the
interests of all, a letter from me may be esteemed by you not
burdensome, but welcome.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p6"></span>2. For when I had received the letter of
the holy father Innocentius, venerable for his eminent merits, which was
sent to me by the brethren, and which was, by manifest tokens, shown to
have been forwarded to me from your Excel<span id="page_505">p.
505</span> <span id="vii.1.CLI-Page_505"></span>lency, I formed the
opinion that the reason why no letter from you accompanied it was that,
being engrossed with more important affairs, you were unwilling to be
embarrassed by the trouble of correspondence. For it seemed certainly
not unreasonable to expect, that when you condescended to send me the
writings of a holy man, I should receive along with them some writings
of your own. I had therefore made up my mind not to trouble you with a
letter from me unless it was necessary for the purpose of commending to
you some one to whom I could not refuse the service of my intercession,
a favour which it is our custom to grant to all,—a custom which, though
involving much trouble, is not to be altogether condemned. I accordingly
did this recommending to your kindness a friend of mine, from whom I
have now received a letter, expressing his thanks, to which I add my
own, for your service.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p7"></span>3. If, however, I had formed any
unfavourable impression concerning you, especially in regard to the
matter of which, though it was not expressly named, a subtle odour, so
to speak, pervaded your whole letter, far would it have been from me to
write to you any such note in order to ask any favour for myself or
another. In that case I would either have been silent, waiting for a
time when I would have an opportunity of seeing you personally; or if I
considered it my duty to write on the subject, I would have given it the
first place in my letter, and would have treated it in such a way as to
make it almost impossible for you to show displeasure. For when,
notwithstanding remonstrances which, under an anxiety shared by you with
us, we addressed to him,—beseeching him vehemently, but in vain, to
forbear from piercing our hearts with so great sorrow, and mortally
wounding his own conscience by such grievous sin,—he <span
id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648) perpetrated his impious, savage,
and perfidious crime, I left Carthage immediately and secretly, for this
reason, lest the numerous and influential persons who in terror sought
refuge from his sword within the church should, imagining that my
presence could be of use to them, detain me by their passionate weeping
and groaning, so that I would be compelled, in order to secure the
preservation of their bodies, to supplicate a favour from one whom it
was impossible for me to rebuke in order to the welfare of his soul,
with the severity which his crime deserved. As for their personal
safety, I knew that the walls of the church sufficed for their
protection. But for myself \[if I remained to intercede with him on
their behalf\], it could only be in circumstances painfully
embarrassing, for he would not have tolerated my acting towards him as I
was bound to do, and I would have been compelled, moreover, to act in a
way which would have been unbecoming in me. At the same time, I was
truly sorry for the misfortune of my venerable co-bishop, the ruler of
such an important church, who was expected to regard it as his duty,
even after this man had been guilty of such infamous treachery, to treat
him with submissive deference, in order that the lives of others might
be spared. I confess the reason of my departure: it was that I would
have been unable to meet with the necessary fortitude so great a
calamity.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p9"></span>4. The same considerations which made me
then depart would have been the cause of my remaining silent to you, if
I believed you to have used your influence with him to avenge such
wicked injuries. This is believed in regard to you only by those who do
not know how, and how frequently, and in what terms, you expressed your
mind to us, when we were with anxious solicitude doing our utmost to
secure that, because he was so intimate with you, and you were so
constantly visiting him, and so often conversing alone with him, he
should all the more carefully guard your good name, and save you from
being supposed to have used no endeavour to prevent him from inflicting
that mode of death on persons said to be your enemies. This, indeed, is
not believed of you by me, nor by my brethren who heard you in
conversation, and who saw, both in your words and in every gesture, the
evidences of your heart’s good-will to those who were put to death. But,
I beseech you, forgive those by whom it is believed; for they are men,
and in the minds of men there are such lurking places and such depths
that, although all suspicious persons deserved to be blamed, they think
themselves that they even deserve praise for their prudence. There
existed reasons for the conduct imputed to you: we knew that you had
suffered very grievous injury from one of those whom he had suddenly
ordered to be arrested. His brother, also, in whose person especially he
persecuted the Church, was said to have answered you in terms implying
as it were some harsh accusation. Both were thought to be looked upon by
you with suspicion. When they, after being summoned, had gone away, you
still remained in the place, and were engaged, it was <span
id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span id="vii.1.CLI-Page_506"></span>said,
in conversation of a more private kind than usual with him \[Marinas\],
and then they were suddenly ordered to be detained. Men talked much of
your friendship with him as not recent, but of long standing. The
closeness of your intimacy, and the frequency of your private
conversations with him, confirmed this report. His power was at that
time great. The ease with which false accusations could be made against
any one was notorious. It was not a difficult thing to find some person
who would upon the promise of his own safety make any statements which
he might order to be made. All things at that time made it easy for any
man to be brought to death without any examination on the part of him
who ordered the execution, if even one witness brought forward what
seemed to be an odious and, at the same time, credible accusation.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p10"></span>5. Meanwhile, as it was rumored that the
power of the Church might deliver them, we were mocked with false
promises, so that not only with the consent, but, as it seemed, at the
urgent desire of Marinus, a bishop was sent to the Imperial Court to
intercede for them, the promise having been brought to the ear of the
bishops that, until some pleading should be heard there on behalf of the
prisoners, no examination of their case would be proceeded with. At
last, on the day before they were put to death, your Excellency came to
us; you gave us encouragement such as you had never before given, that
he might grant their lives as a favour to you before your departure
\[for Rome\], because you had solemnly and prudently said to him that
all his condescension in admitting you so constantly to familiar and
private conversation would bring to you disgrace rather than
distinction, and would have the effect, after the death of these men had
been a subject of conversation and consultation between you, of making
every one say that there could be no doubt what was to be the issue of
these conferences. When you informed us that you had said these things
to him, you stretched out your hand as you spoke towards the place at
which the sacraments of believers are celebrated, and while we listened
in amazement, you confirmed the statement that you had used these words
with an oath so solemn, that not only then, but even now after the
dreadful and unexpected death of the prisoners, it seems to me,
recalling to memory your whole demeanour, that it would be an aggravated
insult if I were to believe any evil concerning you. You said, moreover,
that he was so moved by these words of yours, that he purposed to give
the lives of these men to you as a present, in token of friendship,
before you set out on your journey.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p11"></span>6. Wherefore, I solemnly assure your
Grace, that when on the following day (the day on which the infamous
crime thus conceived was consummated) tidings were unexpectedly brought
to us that they had been led forth from prison to stand before him as
their judge, although we were in some alarm, nevertheless, after
reflecting on what you had said to us on the preceding day, and on the
fact that the day following was the anniversary of the blessed Cyprian,
I supposed that he had even purposely selected a day on which he might
not only grant your request, but also might aspire, by giving sudden joy
to the whole Church of Christ, to emulate the virtue of so great a
martyr, proving himself truly greater in using clemency in sparing life
than in possessing power to inflict death. Such were my thoughts, when
lo! a messenger burst into our presence, from whom, before we could ask
him how their trial was being conducted, we learned that they had been
beheaded. For care had been taken to arrange, as the scene of execution,
a place immediately adjoining, not appointed for the punishment of
criminals, but used for the recreation of the citizens, on which spot he
had ordered some to be executed a few days previously, with the design
(as is with good reason believed) of avoiding the odium of applying it
to this purpose for the first time in the case of these men, whom he
hoped to be able to snatch secretly from the Church interposing on their
behalf, by thus not only ordering their immediate execution, but also
ordering it to take place on the nearest available spot. He therefore
made it sufficiently manifest that he did not fear to cause cruel pain
to that Mother whose intervention he feared, namely, to the holy Church,
among whose faithful children, baptized in her bosom, we knew that he
himself was reckoned. Therefore, after the issue of so great a plot, in
which so much care had been used in negotiating with us that we were
made, even by you also, though unwittingly, almost free from solicitude,
and almost sure of their safety on the preceding day, who, judging of
the circumstances in the way in which ordinary men would judge of them,
could avoid regarding it as beyond question that by you also words were
given to us and life taken from them? Pardon, then, as I have said,
those who believe these things against you, although we do not believe
them, O excellent man.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p12"></span>7. Far be it, however, from my heart and
from my practice, however defective in many things, to intercede with
you for any one, or ask a favour from you for any one, if I believed you
to be responsible for this monstrous wrong, this villanous cruelty. But
I frankly confess to you, that if you continue, even after that event,
to be on the same footing of intimate friendship with him as you were
formerly, you must excuse my claiming freedom to be grieved; for by this
you would <span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLI-Page_507"></span>compel us to believe much which we would
rather disbelieve. It is, however, fitting that, as I do not believe you
guilty of the other things laid by some to your charge, I should not
believe this either. This friend of yours has, in the unexpected triumph
of sudden accession to power, done violence not less to your reputation
than to these men’s lives. Nor is it my design in this statement to
kindle hatred in your mind; in so doing I would belie my own feelings
and profession. But I exhort you to a more faithful exercise of love
towards him. For the man who so deals with the wicked as to make them
repent of their evil doings, is one who knows how to be angry with them,
and yet consult for their good; for as bad companions hinder men’s
welfare by compliance, so good friends help them by opposition to their
evil ways. The same weapon with which, in the proud abuse of power, he
took away the lives of others, inflicted a much deeper and more serious
wound on his own soul; and if he do not remedy this by repentance, using
wisely the long-suffering of God, he will be compelled to find it out
and feel it when this life is ended. Often, moreover, God in His wisdom
permits the life of good men in this world to be taken from them by the
wicked, that He may prevent men from believing that to suffer such
things is in their case a calamity. For what harm can result from the
death of the body to men who are destined to die some time? Or what do
those who fear death accomplish by their care but a short postponement
of the time at which they die? All the evil to which mortal men are
liable comes not from death but from life; and if in dying they have the
soul sustained by Christian grace, death is to them not the night of
darkness in which a good life ends, but the dawn in which a better life
begins. <span id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649)

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p14"></span>8. The life and conversation of the
elder of the two brothers appeared indeed more conformed to this world
than to Christ, although he also had after his marriage corrected to a
great extent the faults of his early irreligious years. It may,
nevertheless, have been not otherwise than in mercy that our merciful
God appointed him to be the companion of his brother in death. But as to
that younger brother, he lived religiously, and was eminent as a
Christian both in heart and in practice. The report that he would
approve himself such when commissioned to serve the Church <span
id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650) came before him to Africa, and this
good report followed him still when he had come. In his conduct, what
innocence! in his friendship, what constancy! in his study of Christian
truth, what zeal! in his religion, what sincerity! in his domestic life,
what purity! in his official duties, what integrity! What patience be
showed to enemies, what affability to friends, what humility to the
pious, what charity to all men! How great his promptitude in granting,
and his bashfulness in asking a favour! How genuine his satisfaction in
the good deeds, and his sorrow over the faults of men! What spotless
honour, noble grace, and scrupulous piety shone in him! In rendering
assistance, how compassionate he was! in forgiving injuries, how
generous! in prayer, how confiding! When well informed on any subject,
with what modesty he was wont to communicate useful knowledge! when
conscious of ignorance, with what diligence did he endeavour by
investigation to overcome the disadvantage! How singular was his
contempt for the things of time! how ardent his hope and his desires in
regard to the blessings that are eternal! He would have relinquished all
secular business and girded himself with the insignia of the Christian
warfare, had he not been prevented by his having entered into the
married state; for he had not begun to desire better things before the
time when, being already involved in these bonds, it would have been,
notwithstanding their inferiority, an unlawful thing for him to rend
them asunder.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p16"></span>9. One day when they were confined in
prison together, his brother said to him: “If I suffer these things as
the just punishment of my sins, what ill desert has brought you to the
same fate, for we know that your life was most strictly and earnestly
Christian?” He replied: “Supposing even that your testimony as to my
life were true, do you think that God is bestowing a small favour upon
me in appointing that my sins be punished in these sufferings, even
though they should end in death, instead of being reserved to meet me in
the judgment which is to come?” These words might perhaps lead some to
suppose that he was conscious of some secret immoralities. I shall
therefore mention what it pleased the Lord God to appoint that I should
hear from his lips, and know assuredly, to my own great consolation.
Being anxious about this very thing, as human nature is liable to fall
into such wickedness, I asked him, when I was alone with him after he
was confined in prison, if there was no sin for which he ought to seek
reconciliation with God <span id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651) by
some more severe and special penance. With characteristic modesty he
blushed at the mere mention of my suspicion, groundless though it was,
but thanked me most warmly for the warning, and with a grave, modest
smile he seized with both hands my right hand, and said: “I swear by the
sacraments which are dispensed to me by this hand, that I have neither
before <span id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLI-Page_508"></span>nor since my marriage been guilty of
immoral self-indulgence.” <span id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652)

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p19"></span>10. What evil, then, was brought to him
by death? Nay, rather, was it not the occasion of the greatest possible
good to him, because, in the possession of these gifts, he departed from
this life to Christ, in whom alone they are really possessed? I would
not mention these things in addressing you if I believed that you would
be offended by my praising him. But assuredly, as I do not believe this,
neither do I believe that his being put to death was even according to
your desire or wish, much less that it was done at your request. You,
therefore, with a sincerity proportioned to your innocence in this
matter, entertain, doubtless, along with us, the opinion that the man
who put him to death inflicted more cruel wrong on his own soul than on
the sufferer’s body, when, in despite of us, in despite of his own
promises, in despite of so many supplications and warnings from you, and
finally, in despite of the Church of Christ (and in her of Christ
Himself), he consummated his base machinations by putting this man to
death. Is the high position of the one worthy to be compared with the
lot of the other, prisoner though he was, when the man of power was
maddened by anger, while the sufferer in his prison was filled with joy?
There is nothing in all the dungeons of this world, nay, not even in
hell itself, to surpass the dreadful doom of darkness to which a villian
is consigned by remorse of conscience. Even to yourself, what evil did
he do? He did not destroy your innocence, although he grievously injured
your reputation; which, nevertheless, remains uninjured, both in the
estimation of those who know you better than we do, and in our
estimation, in whose presence the anxiety which, like us, you felt for
the prevention of such a monstrous crime, was expressed with so much
visible agitation that we could almost see with our eyes the invisible
workings of your heart. Whatever harm, therefore, he has done, he has
done to himself alone; he has pierced through his own soul, his own
life, his own conscience; in fine, he has by that blind deed of cruelty
destroyed even his own good name, a thing which the very worst of men
are usually fain to preserve. For to all good men he is odious in
proportion to his efforts to obtain, or his satisfaction in receiving,
the approbation of the wicked.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p20"></span>11. Could anything prove more clearly
that he was not under the necessity which he pretended—alleging that he
did this evil action as a good man who had no alternative—than the fact
that the proceeding was disapproved of by the person whose orders he
dared to plead as his excuse? The pious deacon by whose hand we send
this was himself associated with the bishop whom we had sent to
intercede for them; let him, therefore, relate to your Excellency how it
seemed good to the Emperor not even to give a formal pardon, lest by
this the stigma of a crime should be in some degree attached to them,
but a mere notice commanding them to be immediately set at liberty from
all further annoyance. By a purely gratuitous act of cruelty, and under
no pressure of necessity (although, perchance, there may have been other
causes which we suspect, but which it is unnecessary to state in
writing), he did outrageously vex the Church,—the Church to whose
sheltering bosom his brother once, in fear of death, had fled, to be
requited for protecting his life by finding him active in counselling
the perpetration of this crime,—the Church in which he himself had once,
when under the displeasure of an offended patron, sought an asylum which
could not be denied to him. If you love this man, show your detestation
of his crime; if you do not wish him to come into everlasting
punishment, shrink with horror from his society. You are bound to take
measures of this kind, both for your own good name and for his life; for
he who loves in this man what God hates, is, in truth, hating not only
this man but also his own soul.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p21"></span>12. These things being so, I know your
benevolence too well to believe that you were the author of this crime,
or an accomplice in its commission, or that with malicious cruelty you
deceived us: far be such conduct from your life and conversation! At the
same time, I would not wish your friendship to be of such a character as
tends to make him, to his own destruction, glory in his crime, and to
confirm the suspicions naturally cherished by men concerning you; but
rather let it be such as to move him to penitence, and to penitence
corresponding in quality and in measure to the remedy demanded for the
healing of such dreadful wounds. For the more you are an enemy to his
crimes, the more really will you be a friend to the man himself. It will
be interesting to us to learn, by your Excellency’s reply to this
letter, where you were on the day on which the crime was committed, how
you received the tidings, and what you did thereafter, and what you said
to him and heard from him when you next saw him; for I have not been
able to hear anything of you in connection with this affair since my
sudden departure on the succeeding day.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p22"></span>13. As to the remark in your letter that
you are now compelled to believe that I refuse to visit Carthage for
fear lest you should be seen there by me, you rather compel me by these
words to state explicitly the reasons of my absence. One reason is, that
the labour which <span id="page_509">p. 509</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLI-Page_509"></span>I am obliged to undergo in that city, and
which I could not describe without adding as much again to the length of
this letter, is more than I am able now to bear, since, in addition to
my infirmities peculiar to myself, which are known to all my more
intimate friends, I am burdened with an infirmity common to the human
family, namely, the weakness of old age. The other reason is, that, in
so far as leisure is granted me from the work imperatively demanded by
the Church, which my office specially binds me to serve, I have resolved
to devote the time entirely, if the Lord will, to the labour of studies
pertaining to ecclesiastical learning; in doing which I think that I
may, if it please the mercy of God, be of some service even to future
generations.

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p23"></span>14. There is, indeed, one thing in you,
since you wish to hear the truth, which causes me very great distress:
it is that, although qualified by age, as well as by life and character,
to do otherwise, you still prefer to be a catechumen; as if it were not
possible for believers, by making progress in Christian faith and
well-doing, to become so much the more faithful and useful in the
administration of public business. For surely the promotion of the
welfare of men is the one great end of all your great cares and labours.
And, indeed, if this were not to be the issue of your public services,
it would be better for you even to sleep both day and night than to
sacrifice your rest in order to do work which can contribute nothing to
the advantage of your fellow-men. Nor do I entertain the slightest doubt
that your Excellency . . .

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p24"></span>(*Cætera desunt.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[504:2648](1010436.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="vii.1.CLI-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p4"></span> Cæcilianus was raised in 409 to the
office of *præfectus prætorio* under Honorius, and is probably the
person to whom Augustin addressed Letter LXXXVI. p. 365, in 405 A.D.

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[505:2649](1010436.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="vii.1.CLI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p8"></span> From the beginning to the end of this
letter, Augustin studiously avoids naming the persons concerned in the
perfidious act of judicial murder, in connection with which the
suspicion of many had been fastened upon Cæcilianus. The person by whose
orders the sentence of death was carried into effect was Count Marinus,
the general by whom the attempt of Heraclianus (413 <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CLI-p8.1"></span>A.D.</span>) to seize the
imperial power was defeated, and who afterwards received a commission to
pass into Africa and punish those who had been implicated in the revolt
of Heraclianus. A commission of this kind opened a wide door for the
gratification of private revenge by enemies who did not scruple to bring
false accusations against the innocent; and among the victims of such
injustice were two brothers who had, by their zeal for the Catholic
Church, made themselves obnoxious to the Donatists. The elder of these
was Apringius, a magistrate to whom Augustin wrote a letter (the 134th)
recommending clemency in punishing the Donatists. The younger was
Marcellinus, concerning whom ses also note to Letter CXXXIII. p. 470.

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[507:2650](1010436.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="vii.1.CLI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p13"></span> In the original of this sentence there
is a characteristic antithesis of phrases: “Non sane mors eorum bonæ
vitæ occasus fuit sed melioris occasio.”

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[507:2651](1010436.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="vii.1.CLI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p15"></span> See note to letter CXXXIII. p. 470.

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[507:2652](1010436.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="vii.1.CLI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p17"></span> *Deum sibi placare.*

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[508:2653](1010436.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="vii.1.CLI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLI-p18"></span> *Me nullum esse expertum concubitum
præter uxorem.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLVIII](1010437)
