[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010008)  [Next](1010010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.3"></span><span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="iv.3-Page_7"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.3-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER III.—*Estimate of St. Augustin*.</span>

<span id="iv.3-p3"></span>Augustin, the man with upturned eye, with pen
in the left hand, and a burning heart in the right (as he is usually
represented), is a philosophical and theological genius of the first
order, towering like a pyramid above his age, and looking down
commandingly upon succeeding centuries. He had a mind uncommonly fertile
and deep, bold and soaring; and with it, what is better, a heart full of
Christian love and humility. He stands of right by the side of the
greatest philosophers of antiquity and of modern times. We meet him
alike on the broad highways and the narrow footpaths, on the giddy
Alpine heights and in the awful depths of speculation, wherever
philosophical thinkers before him or after him have trod. As a
theologian he is *facile princeps*, at least surpassed by no church
father, schoolman, or reformer. With royal munificence he scattered
ideas in passing, which have set in mighty motion other lands and later
times. He combined the creative power of Tertullian with the churchly
spirit of Cyprian, the speculative intellect of the Greek church with
the practical tact of the Latin. He was a Christian philosopher and a
philosophical theologian to the full. It was his need and his delight to
wrestle again and again with the hardest problems of thought, and to
comprehend to the utmost the divinely revealed matter of the
faith. <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) He always asserted, indeed,
the primacy of faith, according to his maxim: *Fides præcedit
intellectum*; appealing, with theologians before him, to the well known
passage of [Isaiah vii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)<span
id="iv.3-p4.1"></span> (in the LXX.): “*Nisi credideritis, non
intelligetis*.” <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) But to him faith
itself was an acting of reason, and from faith to knowledge, therefore,
there was a necessary transition. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)
He constantly looked below the surface to the hidden motives of actions
and to the universal laws of diverse events. The Metaphysician and the
Christian believer coalesced in him. His *meditatio* passes with the
utmost ease into *oratio*, and his *oratio* into *meditatio*. With
profundity he combined an equal clearness and sharpness of thought. He
was an extremely skilful and a successful dialectician, inexhaustible in
arguments and in answers to the objections of his adversaries.

<span id="iv.3-p7"></span>He has enriched Latin literature with a
greater store of beautiful, original, and pregnant proverbial sayings,
than any classic author, or any other teacher of the church. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="iv.3-Page_8"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p19"></span>He had a creative and decisive hand in almost
every dogma of the Latin church, completing some, and advancing others.
The centre of his system is the <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.3-p19.1"></span>free redeeming grace of God in Christ, operating
through the actual, historical church</span>. He is evangelical or
Pauline in his doctrine of sin and grace, but catholic (that is,
old-catholic, not Roman Catholic) in his doctrine of the church. The
Pauline element comes forward mainly in the Pelagian controversy, the
catholic-churchly in the Donatist; but each is modified by the other.

<span id="iv.3-p20"></span>Dr. Baur incorrectly makes *freedom* the
fundamental idea of the Augustinian system. But this much better suits
the Pelagian; while Augustin started (like Calvin and Schleiermacher)
from the idea of the absolute *dependence* of man upon God. He changed
his idea of freedom during the Pelagian controversy. Baur draws an
ingenious and suggestive comparison between Augustin and Origen, the two
greatest intellects among the church fathers. “There is no church
teacher of the ancient period,” says he, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) “who, in intellect and in grandeur and
consistency of view, can more justly be placed by the side of Origen
than Augustin; none who, with all the difference in individuality and in
mode of thought, so closely resembles him. How far both towered above
their times, is most clearly manifest in the very fact that they alone,
of all the theologians of the first six centuries, became the creators
of distinct systems, each proceeding from a definite idea, and each
completely carried out; and this fact proves also how much the one
system has that is analogous to the other. The one system, like the
other, is founded upon the idea of *freedom*; in both there is a
specific act, by which the entire development of human life is
determined; and in both this is an act which lies far outside of the
temporal consciousness of the individual; with this difference alone,
that in one system the act belongs to each separate individual himself,
and only falls outside of his temporal life and consciousness; in the
other, it lies within the sphere of the temporal history of man, but is
only the act of one individual. If in the system of Origen nothing gives
greater offence than the idea of the pre-existence and fall of souls,
which seems to adopt heathen ideas into the Christian faith, there is in
the system of Augustin the same overleaping of individual life and
consciousness, in order to explain from an act in the past the present
sinful condition of man; but the pagan Platonic point of view is
exchanged for one taken from the Old Testament.…What therefore
essentially distinguishes the system of Augustin from that of Origen, is
only this: the fall of Adam is substituted for the pre-temporal fall of
souls, and what in Origen still wears a heathen garb, puts on in
Augustin a purely Old Testament form.”

<span id="iv.3-p22"></span>The learning of Augustin was not equal to his
genius, nor as extensive as that of Origen and Eusebius, but still
considerable for his time, and superior to that of any of the Latin
fathers, with the single exception of Jerome. He had received in the
schools of Madaura and Carthage the usual philosophical and rhetorical
preparation for the forum, which stood him in good stead also in
theology. He was familiar with Latin literature, and was by no means
blind to the excellencies of the classics, though he placed them far
below the higher beauty of the Holy Scriptures. The *Hortensius* of
Cicero (a lost work) inspired him during his university course with
enthusiasm for philosophy and for the knowledge of truth for its own
sake; the study of Platonic and Neo-Platonic works (in the Latin version
of the rhetorician Victorinus) kindled in him an incredible fire <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) ; though in both he missed the holy name
of Jesus and the cardinal virtues of love and humility, and found in
them only beautiful ideals without power to conform <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> <span id="iv.3-Page_9"></span>him to them. His City of God, his
book on heresies, and other writings, show an extensive knowledge of
ancient philosophy, poetry, and history, sacred and secular. He refers
to the most distinguished persons of Greece and Rome; he often alludes
to Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Plotin, Porphyry, Cicero, Seneca,
Horace, Vergil, to the earlier Greek and Latin fathers, to Eastern and
Western heretics. But his knowledge of Greek literature was mostly
derived from Latin translations. With the Greek language, as he himself
frankly and modestly confesses, he had, in comparison with Jerome, but a
superficial acquaintance. <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) Hebrew he
did not understand at all. Hence, with all his extraordinary familiarity
with the Latin Bible, he made many mistakes in exposition. He was rather
a thinker than a scholar, and depended mainly on his own resources,
which were always abundant.

<span id="iv.3-p25"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p26"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.3-p26.1"></span>Notes</span>.—We note some of the most
intelligent and appreciative estimates of Augustin. <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.2"></span>Erasmus</span> (*Ep. dedicat. ad
Alfons. archiep. Tolet*. 1529) says, with an ingenious play upon the
name Aurelius Augustinus: “*Quid habet orbis christianus hoc scriptore
magis aureum vel augustius? ut ipsa vocabula nequaquam fortuito, sed
numinis providentia videantur indita viro. Auro sapientiæ nihil
pretiosius: fulgore eloquentiæ cum sapientia conjunctæ nihil
mirabilius.…Non arbitror alium esse doctorem, in quem opulentus ille ac
benignus Spiritus dotes suas omnes largius effuderit, quam in
Augustinum*.” The great philosopher <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.3-p26.3"></span>Leibnitz</span> (*Præfat. ad Theodic.* §34) calls
him “*virum sane magnum et ingenii stupendi*,” and “*vastissimo ingenio
præditum*.” Dr. <span class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.4"></span>
Baur</span>, without sympathy with his views, speaks enthusiastically of
the man and his genius. Among other things he says (*Vorlesungen über
Dogmengeschichte*, i. i. p. 61): “There is scarcely another theological
author so fertile and withal so able as Augustin. His scholarship was
not equal to his intellect; yet even that is sometimes set too low, when
it is asserted that he had no acquaintance at all with the Greek
language; for this is incorrect, though he had attained no great
proficiency in Greek<span class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.5"></span>.” C.
Bindemann</span> (a Lutheran divine) begins his thorough monograph (vol.
i. preface) with the well-deserved eulogium: “St. Augustin is one of the
greatest personages in the church. He is second in importance to none of
the teachers who have wrought most in the church since the apostolic
times; and it can well be said that among the church fathers the first
place is due to him, and in the time of the Reformation a Luther alone,
for fulness and depth of thought and grandeur of character, may stand by
his side. He is the summit of the development of the mediæval Western
church; from him descended the mysticism, no less than the
scholasticism, of the middle age; he was one of the strongest pillars of
the Roman Catholicism, and from his works, next to the Holy Scriptures,
especially the Epistles of Paul, the leader of the Reformation drew most
of that conviction by which a new age was introduced.” <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.6"></span> Staudenmaier</span>, a Roman
Catholic theologian, counts Augustin among those minds in which an
hundred others dwell (*Scotus Erigena*, i. p. 274). The Roman Catholic
philosophers <span class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.7"></span>A.
Günther</span> and <span class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.8"></span>Th.
Gangauf</span>, put him on an equality with the greatest philosophers,
and discern in him a providential personage endowed by the Spirit of God
for the instruction of all ages. A striking characterization is that of
the Old Catholic Dr. <span class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.9"></span>
Huber</span> (in his instructive work: *Die Philosophie der
Kirchenväter*, Munich, 1859, p. 312 sq.): “Augustin is a unique
phenomenon in Christian history. No one of the other fathers has left so
luminous traces of his existence. Though we find among them many rich
and powerful minds, yet we find in none the forces of personal
character, <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="iv.3-Page_10"></span>mind, heart, and will, so largely developed and
so harmoniously working. No one surpasses him in wealth of perceptions
and dialectical sharpness of thoughts, in depth and fervour of religious
sensibility, in greatness of aims and energy of action. He therefore
also marks the culmination of the patristic age, and has been elevated
by the acknowledgment of succeeding times as the first and the universal
church father.—His whole character reminds us in many respects of Paul,
with whom he has also in common the experience of being called from
manifold errors to the service of the gospel, and like whom he could
boast that he had laboured in it more abundantly than all the others.
And as Paul among the Apostles pre-eminently determined the development
of Christianity, and became, more than all the others, the expression of
the Christian mind, to which men ever afterwards return, as often as in
the life of the church that mind becomes turbid, to draw from him, as
the purest fountain, a fresh understanding of the gospel doctrine,—so
has Augustin turned the Christian nations since his time for the most
part into his paths, and become pre-eminently their trainer and teacher,
in the study of whom they always gain a renewal and deepening of their
Christian consciousness. Not the middle age alone, but the Reformation
also, was ruled by him, and whatever to this day boasts of the Christian
spirit, is connected at least in part with Augustin.” <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.10"></span>Villemain</span>, in his able
and eloquent, “*Tableau de l’éloquence Chrétienne au IVe siècle*”
(Paris, 1849, p. 373), commences his sketch of Augustin as follows:
“*Nous arrivons a l’homme le plus êtonnant de l’Eglise latine, à celui
qui portat le plus d’imagination dans la théologie, le plus d’éloquence
et même sensibilité dans la scholastique; ce fut saint Augustin.
Donnez-lui un autre siècle, placez-le dans meillêure civilisation; et
jamais homme n’aura paru doué d’un génie plus vaste et plus facile.
Métaphysique, histoire, antiquités, science des moers, connaissance des
arts, Augustin avait tout embrassé. Il écrit sur la musique comme sur le
libre arbitre; il explique le phénomène intellectual la de mémoire,
comme il raisonne sur la décadence de l’empire romain. Son esprit subtil
et vigoureux a souvent consumé dans des problèmes mystiques une force de
sagacité qui suffirait aux plus sublimes conceptions*.” <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.11"></span>Frédéric Ozanam</span>, in his
“La civilisation au cinquième siècle” (translated by A. C. Glyn, 1868,
Vol. I. p. 272), counts Augustin among the three or four great
metaphysicians of modern times, and says that his task was “to clear the
two roads open to Christian philosophy and to inaugurate its two methods
of mysticism and dogmatism.” <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.3-p26.12"></span>Nourrisson</span>, whose work on Augustin is
clothed with the authority of the Institute of France, assigns to him
the first rank among the masters of human thought, alongside of Plato
and Leibnitz, Thomas Aquinas and Bossuet. “*Si une critique toujours
respectueuse, mais d’une inviolable sincérité, est une des formes les
plus hautes de l’admiration, j’estime, au contraire, n’avoir fait
qu’exalter ce grand coeur, ce psychologue consolant et ému, ce
métaphysicien subtil et sublime, en un mot, cet attachant et poétique
génie, dont la place reste marquée, au premier rang, parmi les maîtres
de la pensée humaine, á côté de Platon et de Descartes, d’Aristote et de
saint Thomas, de Leibnitz et de Bossuet*.” (*La philosophie de saint
Augustin*, Par. 1866, tom. i. p. vii.) <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.3-p26.13"></span>Pressensé</span> (in art. Aug., in Smith & Wace,
*Dict. of Christ. Biography*, I. 222): “Aug. still claims the honour of
having brought out in all its light the fundamental doctrine of
Christianity; despite the errors of his system, he has opened to the
church the path of every progress and of every reform, by stating with
the utmost vigour the scheme of free salvation which he had learnt in
the school of St. Paul.” Among English and American writers, Dr. <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.14"></span>Shedd</span>, in the
Introduction to his edition of the *Confessions* (1860), has furnished a
truthful and forcible description of the mind and heart of St. Augustin.
I add the striking judgment of the octogenarian historian Dr. <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p26.15"></span>Karl Hase</span>
(*Kirschengeschichte auf der Grundlage akademischer Vorlesungen*,
Leipzig 1885, vol. I. 522): “The full significance of Augustin as an
author can be measured only from the consideration of the fact that in
the middle ages both scholasticism and mysticism lived of his riches,
and that afterwards Luther and Calvin drew out of his fulness. We find
in him both the sharp understanding which makes salvation depend on the
clearly defined dogma of the church, and the loving absorption of the
heart in God which scarcely needs any more the aid of the church. His
writings reflect all kinds of Christian thoughts, which lie a thousand
years apart and appear to be contradictions. How were they possible in
so systematic a thinker? Just as much as they were possible in
Christianity, of which he was a microcosmus. From the dogmatic abyss of
his hardest and most illiberal doctrines arise such liberal sentences as
these: ‘Him I shall not condemn in whom I find any thing of Christ;’
‘Let us not forget that in the very enemies are concealed the future
citizens.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[7:17](1010009.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.3-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p4"></span> Or, as he wrote to a friend about the year
410, *Epist*. 120, C. 1, § 2 (tom. ii. p. 347, ed. Bened. Venet.; in
older ed., *Ep.* 122): “*Ut quod credis intelligas…non ut fidem resinas,
sed ea quæ fidei firmitate jam tenes, etiam rationis luce conspicias.*”
He continues, ibid. c. 3: “*Absit namque, ut hoc in nobis Deus oderit,
in quo nos reliquis animalibus exccellentiores creavit. Absit, inquam,
ut ideo credamus, ne rationem accipiamus vel quæramus; cum etiam credere
non possemns, nisi rationales animas haberemus.*” In one of his earliest
works, *Contra Academ*. l. iii. c. 20, § 43, he says of himself: “*Ita
sum affectus, ut quid sit verum non credendo solum, sed etiam
intelligendo apprehendere impatienter desiderem.*”

<span id="fn_17"></span>[7:18](1010009.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.3-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.3-p5.1"></span>Ἐὰν μὴ πιστεύσητε, οὐδὲ μὴ συνῆτε</span>. But the
proper translation of the Hebrew is: “If ye will not believe \[in me,
<span class="Hebrew"><span id="iv.3-p5.2"></span>בִּי</span> for <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iv.3-p5.3"></span>כִּי</span>\], surely ye
shall not be established (or, not remain).”

<span id="fn_18"></span>[7:19](1010009.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.3-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p6"></span> Comp. *De præd. sanct*. cap. 2, § 5 (tom. x.
p. 792): “*Ipsum credere nihil aliud est quam cum assensione cogiitare.
Nom enim omnis qui cogitat, credit, cum ideo cogitant, plerique ne
credant: sed cogitat omnis qui credit, et credendo cogitat et cogitando
credit. Fides si non cogitetur, nulia est*.” *Ep*. 120, cap. 1, § 3
(tom. ii. 347), and *Ep*. 137, c. 4, § 15 (tom. ii. 408): *“Intellectui
fides aditum aperit, infidelitas claudit.*” Augustin’s view of faith and
knowledge is discussed at large by <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.3-p6.1"></span>Gangauf</span>, *<span
id="iv.3-p6.2"></span>Metaphysische Psychologie des heil. Augustinus*,
i. pp. 31–76, and by <span class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p6.3"></span>
Nourrisson</span>, *<span id="iv.3-p6.4"></span>La phliosophie de saint
Augustin*, tom. ii. 282–290.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[7:20](1010009.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.3-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p8"></span> Prosper Aquitanus collected in the year 450
or 451 from the works of Augustin 392 sentences (see the Appendix to the
tenth vol. of the Bened. ed. p. 223 sqq., and in Migne’s ed. of Prosper
Aquitanus, col. 427–496), with reference to theological purport and the
Pelagian controversies. We recall some of the best which he has omitted:

<span id="iv.3-p9"></span>“Novum Testamentum in Vetere latet, Vetus in
Novo pates.”

<span id="iv.3-p10"></span>“Distingue tempora, et concordabit
Scriptura.”

<span id="iv.3-p11"></span>“Cor nostrum inquietum est, donec requiescat
in Te.”

<span id="iv.3-p12"></span>“Da quod jubes, et jube quod vis.”

<span id="iv.3-p13"></span>“Non vincit nisi veritas, victoria veritatis
est caritas.”

<span id="iv.3-p14"></span>“Ubi amor, ibi trinitas.”

<span id="iv.3-p15"></span>“Fides præcedit intellectum.”

<span id="iv.3-p16"></span>“Deo servire vera libertas est.”

<span id="iv.3-p17"></span>“Nulia infelicitas frangit, quem felicitas
nulla corrumpit.”

<span id="iv.3-p18"></span>The famous maxim of ecclesiastical harmony:
“*In necessarlis unitas, in dublis* (or, *non ccessarlis) libertas, in
omnibus (in utrisque) caritas,*”—which is often ascribed to Augustin,
dates in this form not from him, but from a much later period. Dr. <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p18.1"></span>Lucke</span> (in a special
treatise on the antiquity of the author, the original form, etc., of
this sentence, Göttingen, 1850) traces the authorship to <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.3-p18.2"></span>Rupert Meldenius</span>, an
irenical German theologian of the seventeenth century. Baxter, also, who
lived during the intense conflict of English Puritanism and Episcopacy,
and grew weary of the “fury of theologians,” adopted a similar
sentiment. The sentence is held by many who differ widely in the
definition of what is “necessary” and what is “doubtful.” The meaning of
“charity in all things” is above doubt, and a moral duty of every
Christian, though practically violated by too many in all denominations.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[8:21](1010009.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.3-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p21"></span> *<span id="iv.3-p21.1"></span>Vorlesungen
über die christl. Dogmengeschichte*, vol. 1. P. 11. p. 30 sq.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[8:22](1010009.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.3-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p23"></span> Adv. Academicos, 1. ii. c. 2, § 5: *“Etiam
mihi ipsi de me incredibile incendium concitarunt.”* And in several
passages of the *Civitas Dei* (viii. 3–12 xxii. 27) he speaks very
favourably of Plato, and also of Aristotle, and thus broke the way for
the high authority of the Aristotelian philosophy with the scholastics
of the middle age.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[9:23](1010009.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.3-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p24"></span> It is sometimes asserted that he had no
knowledge at all of the Greek. So Gibbon, for example, says (ch.
xxxiii.): “The superficial learning of Augustin was confined to the
Latin language.” But this is a mistake. In his youth he had a great
aversion to the glorious language of Hellas because he had a bad teacher
and was forced to it (*Conf*. i. 14). He read the writings of Plato in a
Latin translation (vii. 9). But after his baptism, during his second
residence in Rome, he resumed the study of Greek with greater zest, for
the sake of his biblical studies. In Hippo he had, while presbyter, good
opportunity to advance in it, since his bishop, Aurelius, a native
Greek, understood his mother tongue much better than the Latin. In his
books he occasionally makes reference to the Greek. In his work *Contra
Jul*. i. c. 6 § 21 (tom. x. 510), he corrects the Pelagian Julian in a
translation from Chrysostom, quoting the original. *“Ego ipsa verba
Græca quæ a Joanne dicta sunt ponam:* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.3-p24.1"></span>διὰ τοῦτο καὶ τὰ παιδία βαπτίζομεν, καίτοι
ƒμαρτήματα οὐκ ἔχοντα,</span> *quod est Latine: Ideo et infantes
baptizamus, quamvis peccata non habentes.*” Julian had freely rendered
this: “*cum non sint coinquinati peccato,*” and had drawn the inference:
“*Sanctus Joannes Constantinopolitanus* \[John Chrysostom\] *negat esse
in parvulis originale peccatum.*” Augustin helps himself out of the
pinch by arbitrarily supplying *propria* to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.3-p24.2"></span>ἁμαρτήματα</span>, so that the idea of sin
inherited from another is not excluded. The Greek fathers, however, did
not consider hereditary corruption to be proper sin or guilt at all, but
only defect, weakness, or disease. In the *City of God*, lib. xix. c.
23, he quotes a passage from Porphyry’s <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.3-p24.3"></span>ἐκ λογίων φιλοσοφία</span>, and in book xviii.
23, he explains the Greek monogram <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.3-p24.4"></span>ἰχθύς</span>. He gives the derivation of several
Greek words, and correctly distinguishes between such synonyms as <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.3-p24.5"></span> γεννάω</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.3-p24.6"></span>τίκτω</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.3-p24.7"></span> εὐχή</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.3-p24.8"></span>προσευχή</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.3-p24.9"></span> πνοή</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.3-p24.10"></span>πνεῦμα</span>. It is
probable that he read Plotin, and the Panarion of Epiphanius or the
summary of it, in Greek (while the Church History of Eusebius he knew
only in the translation of Rufinus). But in his exegetical and other
works he very rarely consults the Septuagint or Greek Testament, and was
content with the very imperfect *Itala*, or the improved version of
Jerome (the *Vulgate*). The Benedictine editors overestimate his
knowledge of Greek. He himself frankly confesses that he knew very
little of it. *De Trinit*. 1. iii Proœm. (*“Graæcæ linguæ non sit nobis
tantus habitus, ut talium rerum libris legendis et intelligendis ullo
modo reperiamur idonei”*), and *Contra literas Petiliani* (written in
400),1. ii. c. 38 (*“Et ego quidem Græcæ linguæ perparum assecutus sum,
et prope nihil”*). On the philosophical learning of Augustin may be
compared <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.3-p24.11"></span>Nourrisson,</span> *l. c.* ii. p. 92 sqq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1010010)
