[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010094)  [Next](1010096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.IV"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.IV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.IV-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—He Recognises the Falsity of His
Own Opinions, and Commits to Memory the Saying of Ambrose.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.IV-p2"></span>5. As, then, I knew not how this image of
Thine should subsist, I should have knocked and propounded the doubt how
it was to be believed, and not have insultingly opposed it, as if it
were believed. Anxiety, therefore, as to what to retain as certain, did
all the more sharply gnaw into my soul, the more shame I felt that,
having been so long deluded and de<span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span
id="vi.VI.IV-Page_92"></span>ceived by the promise of certainties, I
had, with puerile error and petulance, prated of so many uncertainties
as if they were certainties. For that they were falsehoods became
apparent to me afterwards. However, I was certain that they were
uncertain, and that I had formerly held them as certain when with a
blind contentiousness I accused Thy Catholic Church, which though I had
not yet discovered to teach truly, yet not to teach that of which I had
so vehemently accused her. In this manner was I confounded and
converted, and I rejoiced, O my God, that the one Church, the body of
Thine only Son (wherein the name of Christ had been set upon me when an
infant), did not appreciate these infantile trifles, nor maintained, in
her sound doctrine, any tenet that would confine Thee, the Creator of
all, in space—though ever so great and wide, yet bounded on all sides by
the restraints of a human form.

<span id="vi.VI.IV-p3"></span>6. I rejoiced also that the old Scriptures
of the law and the prophets were laid before me, to be perused, not now
with that eye to which they seemed most absurd before, when I censured
Thy holy ones for so thinking, whereas in truth they thought not so; and
with delight I heard Ambrose, in his sermons to the people, oftentimes
most diligently recommend this text as a rule,—“The letter killeth, but
the Spirit giveth life;” <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) whilst,
drawing aside the mystic veil, he spiritually laid open that which,
accepted according to the “letter,” seemed to teach perverse
doctrines—teaching herein nothing that offended me, though he taught
such things as I knew not as yet whether they were true. For all this
time I restrained my heart from assenting to anything, fearing to fall
headlong; but by hanging in suspense I was the worse killed. For my
desire was to be as well assured of those things that I saw not, as I
was that seven and three are ten. For I was not so insane as to believe
that this could not be comprehended; but I desired to have other things
as clear as this, whether corporeal things, which were not present to my
senses, or spiritual, whereof I knew not how to conceive except
corporeally. And by believing I might have been cured, that so the sight
of my soul being cleared, <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) it
might in some way be directed towards Thy truth, which abideth always,
and faileth in naught. But as it happens that he who has tried a bad
physician fears to trust himself with a good one, so was it with the
health of my soul, which could not be healed but by believing, and, lest
it should believe falsehoods, refused to be cured—resisting Thy hands,
who hast prepared for us the medicaments of faith, and hast applied them
to the maladies of the whole world, and hast bestowed upon them so great
authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_446"></span>[92:447](1010095.htm#fr_446) <span
id="vi.VI.IV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.IV-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="vi.VI.IV-p4.1"></span>.
The spiritual or allegorical meaning here referred to is one that
Augustin constantly sought, as did many of the early Fathers, both Greek
and Latin. He only employs this method of interpretation, however, in a
qualified way—never going to the lengths of Origen or Clement of
Alexandria. He does not depreciate the letter of Scripture, though, as
we have shown above (iii. sec. 14, note), he went as far as he well
could in interpreting the history spiritually. He does not seem,
however, quite consistent in his statements as to the relative
prominence to be given to the literal and spiritual meanings, as may be
seen by a comparison of the latter portions of secs. 1 and 3 of book
xvii. of the *City of God*. His general idea may be gathered from the
following passage in the 21st sec. of book xiii.:—“Some allegorize all
that concerns paradise itself, where the first men, the parents of the
human race, are, according to the truth of Holy Scripture, recorded to
have been; and they understand all its trees and fruit-bearing plants as
virtues and habits of life, as if they had no existence in the external
world, but were only so spoken of or related for the sake of spiritual
meanings. As if there could not be a real terrestrial paradise! As if
there never existed these two women, Sarah and Hagar, nor the two sons
who were born to Abraham, the one of the bond-woman, the other of the
free, because the apostle says that in them the two covenants were
prefigured! or as if water never flowed from the rock when Moses struck
it, because therein Christ can be seen in a figure, as the same apostle
says: ‘Now that rock was Christ’ ([1 Cor.
10.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span
id="vi.VI.IV-p4.2"></span>).…These and similar allegorical
interpretations may be suitably put upon paradise without giving offence
to any one, while *yet we believe the strict truth of the history*,
confirmed by its circumstantial narrative of facts.” The allusion in the
above passage to Sarah and Hagar invites the remark, that in [Gal.
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)<span id="vi.VI.IV-p4.3"></span>,
the words in our version rendered, “which things are an allegory,”
should be, “which things are such as may be allegorized.” \[<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.VI.IV-p4.4"></span>Ἁτινά ἐστιν
ἀλληγορούμενα</span>. See Jelf, 398, sec. 2.\] It is important to note
this, as the passage has been quoted in support of the more extreme
method of allegorizing, though it could clearly go no further than to
sanction allegorizing by way of spiritual meditation upon Scripture, and
not in the interpretation of it—which first, as Waterland thinks
(*Works*, vol. v. p. 311), was the end contemplated by most of the
Fathers. Thoughtful students of Scripture will feel that we have no
right to make historical facts typical or allegorical, unless (as in the
case of the manna, the brazen serpent, Jacob’s ladder, etc.) we have
divine authority for so doing; and few such will dissent from the
opinion of Bishop Marsh (Lecture vi.) that the type must not only
resemble the antitype, but must have been *designed* to resemble it, and
further, that we must have the authority of Scripture for the existence
of such design. The text, “The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth
life,” as a perusal of the context will show, has nothing whatever to do
with either “literal” or “spiritual” meanings. Augustin himself
interprets it in one place (*De Spir. et Lit*. cc. 4, 5) as meaning the
killing letter of the law, as compared with the quickening power of the
gospel. “An opinion,” to conclude with the thoughtful words of Alfred
Morris on this

<span id="vi.VI.IV-p5"></span>Chapter ( *Words for the Heart and Life*,
p. 203), “once common must therefore be rejected. Some still talk of
‘letter’ and ‘spirit’ in a way which has no sanction here. The ‘letter’
with them is the literal meaning of the text, the ‘spirit’ is its
symbolic meaning. And, as the ‘spirit’ possesses an evident superiority
to the ‘letter,’ they fly away into the region of secret senses and
hidden doctrines, find types where there is nothing typical, and
allegories where there is nothing allegorical; make Genesis more
evangelical than the Epistle to the Romans, and Leviticus than the
Epistle to the Hebrews; mistaking lawful criticism for legal
Christianity, they look upon the exercise of a sober judgment as a proof
of a depraved taste, and forget that diseased as well as very powerful
eyes may see more than others. It is not the obvious meaning and the
secret meaning that are intended by ‘letter’ and ‘spirit,’ nor any two
meanings of Christianity, nor two meanings of any thing or things, but
the two systems of Moses and of Christ.” Reference may be made on this
whole subject of allegorical interpretation in the writings of the
Fathers to Blunt’s *Right Use of the Early Fathers*, series i. lecture
9.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[92:448](1010095.htm#fr_447) <span
id="vi.VI.IV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.IV-p6"></span> Augustin frequently dilates on this idea.
In sermon 88 (cc. 5, 6, etc.), he makes the whole of the ministries of
religion subservient to the clearing of the inner eye of the soul and in
his *De Trin.* i. 3, he says: “And it is necessary to purge our minds,
in order to be able to see ineffably that which is ineffable \[*i.e.*
the Godhead\], whereto not having yet attained, we are to be nourished
by faith, and led by such ways as are more suited to our capacity, that
we may be rendered apt and able to comprehend it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](1010096)
