[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010073)  [Next](1010075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.IV.XV"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.IV.XV-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV.—While Writing, Being Blinded by
Corporeal Images, He Failed to Recognise the Spiritual Nature of
God.</span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p2"></span>24. But not yet did I perceive the hinge
on which this impotent matter turned in Thy wisdom, O Thou Omnipotent,
“who alone doest great wonders;” <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328)
and my mind ranged through corporeal forms, and I defined and
distinguished as “fair,” that which is so in itself, and “fit,” that
which is beautiful as it corresponds to some other thing; and this I
supported by corporeal examples. And I turned my attention to the nature
of the mind, but the false opinions which I entertained of spiritual
things prevented me from seeing the truth. Yet the very power of truth
forced itself on my gaze, and I turned away my throbbing soul from
incorporeal substance, to lineaments, and colours, and bulky magnitudes.
And not being able to perceive these in the mind, I thought I could not
perceive my mind. And whereas in virtue I loved peace, and in
viciousness I hated discord, in the former I distinguished unity, but in
the latter a kind of division. And in that unity I conceived the
rational soul and the nature of truth and of the chief good <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) to consist. But <span id="page_76">p.
76</span> <span id="vi.IV.XV-Page_76"></span>in this division I,
unfortunate one, imagined there was I know not what substance of
irrational life, and the nature of the chief evil, which should not be a
substance only, but real life also, and yet not emanating from Thee, O
my God, from whom are all things. And yet the first I called a Monad, as
if it had been a soul without sex, <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) but the other a Duad,—anger in deeds
of violence, in deeds of passion, lust,—not knowing of what I talked.
For I had not known or learned that neither was evil a substance, nor
our soul that chief and unchangeable good.

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p7"></span>25. For even as it is in the case of deeds
of violence, if that emotion of the soul from whence the stimulus comes
be depraved, and carry itself insolently and mutinously; and in acts of
passion, if that affection of the soul whereby carnal pleasures are
imbibed is unrestrained,—so do errors and false opinions contaminate the
life, if the reasonable soul itself be depraved, as it was at that time
in me, who was ignorant that it must be enlightened by another light
that it may be partaker of truth, seeing that itself is not that nature
of truth. “For Thou wilt light my candle; the Lord my God will enlighten
my darkness; <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) and “of His fulness
have all we received,” <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) for “that
was the true Light which lighted every man that cometh into the
world;” <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) for in Thee there is “no
variableness, neither shadow of turning.” <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334)

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p12"></span>26. But I pressed towards Thee, and was
repelled by Thee that I might taste of death, for Thou “resistest the
proud.” <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) But what prouder than
for me, with a marvellous madness, to assert myself to be that by nature
which Thou art? For whereas I was mutable,—so much being clear to me,
for my very longing to become wise arose from the wish from worse to
become better,—yet chose I rather to think Thee mutable, than myself not
to be that which Thou art. Therefore was I repelled by Thee, and Thou
resistedst my changeable stiffneckedness; and I imagined corporeal
forms, and, being flesh, I accused flesh, and, being “a wind that
passeth away,” <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) I returned not to
Thee, but went wandering and wandering on towards those things that have
no being, neither in Thee, nor in me, nor in the body. Neither were they
created for me by Thy truth, but conceived by my vain conceit out of
corporeal things. And I used to ask Thy faithful little ones, my
fellow-citizens,—from whom I unconsciously stood exiled,—I used
flippantly and foolishly to ask, “Why, then, doth the soul which God
created err?” But I would not permit any one to ask me, “Why, then, doth
God err?” And I contended that Thy immutable substance erred of
constraint, rather than admit that my mutable substance had gone astray
of free will, and erred as a punishment. <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337)

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p16"></span>27. I was about six or seven and twenty
years of age when I wrote those volumes—meditating upon corporeal
fictions, which clamoured in the ears of my heart. These I directed, O
sweet <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span
id="vi.IV.XV-Page_77"></span>Truth, to Thy inward melody, pondering on
the “fair and fit,” and longing to stay and listen to Thee, and to
rejoice greatly at the Bridegroom’s voice, <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) and I could not; for by the voices of
my own errors was I driven forth, and by the weight of my own pride was
I sinking into the lowest pit. For Thou didst not “make me to hear joy
and gladness;” nor did the bones which were not yet humbled
rejoice. <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_328"></span>[75:329](1010074.htm#fr_328) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p3"></span> [Ps.
136.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#004)<span id="vi.IV.XV-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[75:330](1010074.htm#fr_329) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p4"></span> Augustin tells us (*De Civ. Dei*, xix. 1)
that Varro, in his lost book *De Philosophia*, gives two hundred and
eighty-eight different opinions as regards the chief good, and shows us
how readily they may be reduced in number. Now, as then, philosophers
ask the same questions. We have our hedonists, whose “good” is their own
pleasure and happiness; our materialists, who would seek the common good
of all; and our intuitionists, who aim at following the dictates of
conscience. When the pretensions of these various schools are examined
without prejudice, the conclusion is forced upon us that we must have
recourse to Revelation for a reconcilement of the difficulties of the
various systems; and that the philosophers, to employ Davidson’s happy
illustration (*Prophecies*, Introd.), forgetting that their faded taper
has been insensibly kindled by gospel light, are attempting now, as in
Augustin’s time (*ibid.* sec. 4), “to fabricate for themselves a
happiness in this life based upon a virtue as deceitful as it is proud.”
Christianity gives the golden key to the attainment of happiness, when
it declares that “godliness is profitable for all things, having the
promise of the life which now is, and of that which is to come ” ([1
Tim. 4.8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span
id="vi.IV.XV-p4.1"></span>). It was a saying of Bacon (*Essay on
Adversity*), that while “prosperity is the blessing of the old
Testament, adversity is the blessing of the New.” He would have been
nearer the truth had he said that while temporal rewards were the
special promise of the Old Testament, spiritual rewards are the special
promise of the New. For though Christ’s immediate followers had to
suffer “adversity” in the planting of our faith, adversity cannot
properly be said to be the result of following Christ. It has yet to be
shown that, on the whole, the greatest amount of real happiness does not
result, even in this life, from a Christian life, for virtue is, even
here, its own reward. The fulness of the reward, however, will only be
received in the life to come. Augustin’s remark, therefore, still holds
good that “life eternal is the supreme good, and death eternal the
supreme evil, and that to obtain the one and escape the other we must
live rightly” (*ibid.* sec. 4); and again, that even in the midst of the
troubles of life, “as we are saved, so we are made happy, by hope. And
as we do not as yet possess a present, but look for a future salvation,
so it is with our happiness,…we ought patiently to endure till we come
to the ineffable enjoyment of unmixed good.” See Abbé Anselme, *Sur le
Souverain Bien*, vol. v. serm. 1; and the last

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p5"></span>Chapter of Professor Sidgwick’s *Methods
of Ethics*, for the conclusions at which a mind at once lucid and
dispassionate has arrived on this question.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[76:331](1010074.htm#fr_330) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p6"></span> “Or ‘an unintelligent soul;’ very good
<span class="c9"><span id="vi.IV.XV-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> reading
‘*sensu*,’ the majority, it appears, ‘*sexu*.’ If we read ‘*sexu*,’ the
absolute unity of the first principle or Monad, may be insisted upon,
and in the inferior principle, divided into ‘violence’ and ‘lust,’
‘violence,’ as implying strength, may be looked on as the male, ‘lust’
was, in mythology, represented as female; if we take ‘*sensu*,’ it will
express the living but unintelligent soul of the world in the Manichæan,
as a pantheistic system.”—E. B. P.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[76:332](1010074.htm#fr_331) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p8"></span> [Ps.
18.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028)<span id="vi.IV.XV-p8.1"></span>.
Augustin constantly urges our recognition of the truth that God is the
“Father of lights.” From Him as our central sun, all light, whether of
wisdom or knowledge proceedeth, and if changing the figure, our candle
which He hath lighted be blown out, He again must light it. Compare
*Enar. in Ps.* xciii. 147; and *Sermons*, 67 and 341.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[76:333](1010074.htm#fr_332) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p9"></span> [John
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span id="vi.IV.XV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[76:334](1010074.htm#fr_333) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p10"></span> [John
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="vi.IV.XV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[76:335](1010074.htm#fr_334) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p11"></span> [Jas.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="vi.IV.XV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[76:336](1010074.htm#fr_335) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p13"></span> [Jas.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="vi.IV.XV-p13.1"></span>,
and [1 Pet. 5.5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span
id="vi.IV.XV-p13.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[76:337](1010074.htm#fr_336) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p14"></span> [Ps.
78.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)<span
id="vi.IV.XV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[76:338](1010074.htm#fr_337) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p15"></span> It may assist those unacquainted with
Augustin’s writings to understand the last three sections, if we set
before them a brief view of the Manichæan speculations as to the good
and evil principles, and the nature of the human soul:—(1) The
Manichæans believed that there were two principles or substances, one
good and the other evil, and that both were eternal and opposed one to
the other. The good principle they called God, and the evil, matter or
Hyle (*Con. Faust.* xxi. 1, 2). Faustus, in his argument with Augustin,
admits that they sometimes called the evil nature “God,” but simply as a
conventional usage. Augustin says thereon (*ibid*. sec. 4): “Faustus
glibly defends himself by saying, ‘We speak not of two gods, but of God
and Hyle;’ but when you ask for the meaning of Hyle, you find that it is
in fact another god. If the Manichæans gave the name of Hyle, as the
ancients did, to the unformed matter which is susceptible of bodily
forms, we should not accuse them of making two gods. But it is pure
folly and madness to give to matter the power of forming bodies, or to
deny that what has this power is God.” Augustin alludes in the above
passage to the Platonic theory of matter, which, as the late Dean Mansel
has shown us (*Gnostic Heresies, Basilides*, etc.), resulted after his
time in Pantheism, and which was entirely opposed to the dualism of
Manichæus. It is to this “power of forming bodies” claimed for matter,
then, that Augustin alludes in our text (sec. 24) as “not only a
substance but real life also.” (2) The human soul the Manichæans
declared to be of the same nature as God, though not created by Him—it
having originated in the intermingling of part of His being with the
evil principle, in the conflict between the kingdoms of light and
darkness (*in Ps.* cxl. sec. 10). Augustin says to Faustus: “You
generally call your soul not a temple, but a part or member of God ”
(*Con. Faust.* xx. 15); and thus, “identifying themselves with the
nature and substance of God” (*ibid.* xii. 13), they did not refer their
sin to themselves, but to the race of darkness, and so did not “prevail
over their sin.” That is, they denied original sin, and asserted that it
necessarily resulted from the soul’s contact with the body. To this
Augustin steadily replied, that as the soul was not of the nature of
God, but created by Him and endowed with free will, man was responsible
for his transgressions. Again, referring to the *Confessions*, we find
Augustin speaking consistently with his then belief, when he says that
he had not then learned that the soul was not a “chief and unchangeable
good” (sec. 24), or that “it was not that nature of truth” (sec. 25);
and that when he transgressed “he accused flesh” rather than himself;
and, as a result of his Manichæan errors (sec. 26), “contended that
God’s immutable substance erred of constraint, rather than admit that
his mutable substance had gone astray of free will, and erred as a
punishment.”

<span id="fn_338"></span>[77:339](1010074.htm#fr_338) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p17"></span> [John
3.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="vi.IV.XV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[77:340](1010074.htm#fr_339) <span
id="vi.IV.XV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.XV-p18"></span> [Ps.
51.8](../../../bib/vul/psa051.htm#008)<span id="vi.IV.XV-p18.1"></span>,
*Vulg.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](1010075)
