[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010339)  [Next](1010341) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p1.1"></span>Letter XXXIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 396.)

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p3.1"></span>To Proculeianus, My Lord, Honourable and
Most Beloved, Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p4"></span>1. The titles prefixed to this letter
I need not defend or explain at any length to you, though they may give
offence to the vain prejudices of ignorant men. For I rightly address
you as *lord*, seeing that we are both seeking to deliver each other
from error, although to some it may seem uncertain which of us is in
error before the matter has been fully debated; and therefore we are
mutually *serving* one another, if we sincerely labour that we may both
be delivered from the perversity of discord. That I labour to do this
with a sincere heart, and with the fear and trembling of Christian
humility, is not perhaps to most men manifest, but is seen by Him to
whom all hearts are open. What I without hesitation esteem *honourable*
in you, you readily perceive. For I do not esteem worthy of any honour
the error of schism, from which I desire to have all men delivered, so
far as is within my power; but yourself I do not for a moment hesitate
to regard as worthy of honour, chiefly because you are knit to me in the
bonds of a common humanity, and because there are conspicuous in you
some indications of a more gentle disposition, by which I am encouraged
to hope that you may readily embrace the truth when it has been
demonstrated to you. As for my *love* to you, I owe not less than He
commanded who so loved us as to bear the shame of the cross for our
sakes.

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p5"></span>2. Be not, however, surprised that I
have so long forborne from addressing your Benevolence; for I did not
think that your views were such as were with great joy declared to me by
brother Evodius, whose testimony I cannot but believe. For he tells me
that, when you met accidentally at the same house, and conversation
began between you concerning our hope, that is to say, the inheritance
of Christ, you were kindly pleased <span id="page_261">p. 261</span>
<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-Page_261"></span>to say that you were willing to
have a conference with me in the presence of good men. I am truly glad
that you have condescended to make this proposal: and I can in no wise
forego so important an opportunity, given by your kindness, of using
whatever strength the Lord may be pleased to give me in considering and
debating with you what has been the cause, or source, or reason of a
division so lamentable and deplorable in that Church of Christ to which
He said: “Peace I give you, my peace I leave unto you. <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556)

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p7"></span>3. I heard from the brother aforesaid
that you had complained of his having said something in answer to you in
an insulting manner; but, I pray you, do not regard it as an insult, for
I am sure it did not proceed from an overbearing spirit, as I know my
brother well. But if, in disputing in defence of his own faith and the
Church’s love, he spoke perchance with a degree of warmth something
which you regarded as wounding your dignity, that deserves to be called,
not contumacy, but boldness. For he desired to debate and discuss the
question, not to be merely submitting to you and flattering you. For
such flattery is the oil of the sinner, with which the prophet does not
desire to have his head anointed; for he saith: “The righteous shall
correct me in compassion, and rebuke me; but the oil of the sinner shall
not anoint my head.” <span id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557) For he
prefers to be corrected by the stern compassion of the righteous, rather
than to be commended with the soothing oil of flattery. Hence also the
saying of the prophet: “They who pronounce you happy cause you to
err.” <span id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558) Therefore also it is
commonly and justly said of a man whom false compliments have made
proud, “his head has grown;” <span id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559)
for it has been increased by the oil of the sinner, that is, not of one
correcting with stern truth, but of one commending with smooth flattery.
Do not, however, suppose me to mean by this, that I wish it to be
understood that you have been corrected by brother Evodius, as by a
righteous man; for I fear lest you should think that anything is spoken
by me also in an insulting manner, against which I desire to the utmost
of my power to be on guard. But He is righteous who hath said, “I am the
truth. <span id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560) When, therefore, any
true word has been uttered, though it may be somewhat rudely, by the
mouth of any man, we are corrected not by the speaker, who may perhaps
be not less a sinner than ourselves, but by the truth itself, that is to
say, by Christ who is righteous, lest the unction of smooth but
pernicious flattery, which is the oil of the sinner, should anoint our
head. Although, therefore, brother Evodius, through undue excitement in
defending the communion to which he belongs, may have said something too
vehemently through strong feeling, you ought to excuse him on the ground
of his age, and of the importance of the matter in his estimation.

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p12"></span>4. I beseech you, however, to
remember what you have been pleased to promise; namely, to investigate
amicably with me a matter of so great importance, and so closely
pertaining to the common salvation, in the presence of such spectators
as you may choose (provided only that our words are not uttered so as to
be lost, but are taken down with the pen; so that we may conduct the
discussion in a more calm and orderly manner, and anything spoken by us
which escapes the memory may be recalled by reading the notes taken).
Or, if you prefer it, we may discuss the matter without the interference
of any third party, by means of letters or conference and reading,
wherever you please, lest perchance some hearers, unwisely zealous,
should be more concerned with the expectation of a conflict between us,
than the thought of our mutual profit by the discussion. Let the people,
however, be afterwards informed through us of the debate, when it is
concluded; or, if you prefer to have the matter discussed by letters
exchanged, let these letters be read to the two congregations, in order
that they may yet come to be no longer divided, but one. In fact, I
willingly accede to whatever terms you wish, or prescribe, or prefer.
And as to the sentiments of my most blessed and venerable father
Valerius, who is at present from home, I undertake with fullest
confidence that he will hear of this with great joy; for I know how much
he loves peace, and how free he is from being influenced by any paltry
regard for vain parade of dignity.

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p13"></span>5. I ask you, what have we to do with
the dissensions of a past generation? Let it suffice that the wounds
which the bitterness of proud men inflicted on our members have remained
until now; for we have, through the lapse of time, ceased to feel the
pain to remove which the physician’s help is usually sought. You see how
great and miserable is the calamity by which the peace of Christian
homes and families is broken. Husbands and wives, agreeing together at
the family hearth, are divided at the altar of Christ. By Him they
pledge themselves to be at peace between themselves, yet in Him they
cannot be at peace. Children have the same home, but not the same house
of God, with their own parents. They desire to be secure of the earthly
inheritance of those with whom they wrangle concerning the inheritance
of Christ. Servants and masters divide their common Lord, who took on
Him the form of a servant that He might deliver all from bondage. Your
party honours us, and our party honours you. Your <span id="page_262">p.
262</span> <span id="vii.1.XXXIII-Page_262"></span>members appeal to us
by our episcopal insignia, <span id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561)
and our members show the same respect to you. We receive the words of
all, we desire to give offence to none. Why then, finding cause of
offence in none besides, do we find it in Christ, whose members we rend
asunder? When we may be serviceable to men that are desirous of
terminating through our help disputes concerning secular affairs, they
address us as saints and servants of God, in order that they may have
their questions as to property disposed of by us: let us at length,
unsolicited, take up a matter which concerns both our own salvation and
theirs. It is not about gold or silver, or land, or cattle, matters
concerning which we are daily saluted with lowly respect, in order that
we may bring disputes to a peaceful termination,—but it is concerning
our Head Himself that this dissension, so unworthy and pernicious,
exists between us. However low they bow their heads who salute us in the
hope that we may make them agree together in regard to the things of
this world, our Head stooped from heaven even to the cross, and yet we
do not agree together in Him.

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p15"></span>6. I beg and beseech you, if there be
in you that brotherly feeling for which some give you credit, let your
goodness be approved sincere, and not feigned with a view to passing
honours, by this, that your bowels of compassion be moved, so that you
consent to have this matter discussed; joining with me in persevering
prayer, and in peaceful discussion of every point. Let not the respect
paid by the unhappy people to our dignities be found, in the judgment of
God, aggravating our condemnation; rather let them be recalled along
with us, through our unfeigned love, from errors and dissensions, and
guided into the ways of truth and peace.

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p16"></span>My lord, honourable and most beloved,
I pray that you may be blessed in the sight of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[261:1557](1010340.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p6"></span> [John
14.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[261:1558](1010340.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p8"></span> [Ps.
141.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[261:1559](1010340.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p9"></span> [Isa.
3.12](../../../bib/sep/isa003.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p9.1"></span>, according to the LXX. version.

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[261:1560](1010340.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p10"></span> *Crevit caput*.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[261:1561](1010340.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p11"></span> [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[262:1562](1010340.htm#fr_1561) <span
id="vii.1.XXXIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXIII-p14"></span> *Corona.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXXIV](1010341)
