[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010166)  [Next](1010168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.X"></span>

<span id="vi.X.X-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.X-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—Literature is Not Introduced to the
Memory Through the Senses, But is Brought Forth from Its More Secret
Places.</span>

<span id="vi.X.X-p2"></span>17. But truly when I hear that there are
three kinds of questions, “Whether a thing is?—what it is?—of what kind
it is?” I do indeed hold fast the images of the sounds of which these
words are composed, and I know that those sounds passed through the air
with a noise, and now are not. But the things themselves which are
signified by these sounds I never arrived at by any sense of the body,
nor ever perceived them otherwise than by my mind; and in my memory have
I laid up not their images, but themselves, which, how they entered into
me, let them tell if they are able. For I examine all the gates of my
flesh, but find not by which of them they entered. For the eyes say, “If
they were coloured, we announced them.” The ears say, “If they sounded,
we gave notice of them.” The nos<span id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span
id="vi.X.X-Page_147"></span>trils say, “If they smell, they passed in by
us.” The sense of taste says, “If they have no flavour, ask not me.” The
touch says, “If it have not body, I handled it not, and if I never
handled it, I gave no notice of it.” Whence and how did these things
enter into my memory? I know not how. For when I learned them, I gave
not credit to the heart of another man, but perceived them in my own;
and I approved them as true, and committed them to it, laying them up,
as it were, whence I might fetch them when I willed. There, then, they
were, even before I learned them, but were not in my memory. Where were
they, then, or wherefore, when they were spoken, did I acknowledge them,
and say, “So it is, it is true,” unless as being already in the memory,
though so put back and concealed, as it were, in more secret caverns,
that had they not been drawn forth by the advice of another I would not,
perchance, have been able to conceive of them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](1010168)
