[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010173)  [Next](1010175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.XVII"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.XVII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—God Cannot Be Attained Unto by
the Power of Memory, Which Beasts and Birds Possess.</span>

<span id="vi.X.XVII-p2"></span>26. Great is the power of memory; very
wonderful is it, O my God, a profound and infinite manifoldness; and
this thing is the mind, and this I myself am. What then am I, O my God?
Of what nature am I? A life various and manifold, and exceeding vast.
Behold, in the numberless fields, and caves, and caverns of my memory,
full without number of numberless kinds of things, either through
images, as all bodies are; or by the presence of the things themselves,
as are the arts; or by some notion or observation, as the affections of
the mind are, which, even though the mind doth not suffer, the memory
retains, while whatsoever is in the memory is also in the mind: through
all these do I run to and fro, and fly; I penetrate on this side and
that, as far as I am able, and nowhere is there an end. So great is the
power of memory, so great the power of life in man, whose life is
mortal. What then shall I do, O Thou my true life, my God? I will pass
even beyond this power of mine which is called memory—I will pass beyond
it, that I may proceed to Thee, O Thou sweet Light. What sayest Thou to
me? Behold, I am soaring by my mind towards Thee who remainest above me.
I will also pass beyond this power of mine which is called memory,
wishful to reach Thee whence Thou canst be reached, and to cleave unto
Thee whence it is possible to cleave unto Thee. For even beasts and
birds possess memory, else could they never find their lairs and nests
again, nor many other things to which they are used; neither indeed
could they become used to anything, but by their memory. I will pass,
then, beyond memory also, that I may reach Him who has separated me from
the four-footed beasts and the fowls of the air, making me wiser than
they. I will pass beyond memory also, but where shall I find Thee, O
Thou truly good and assured sweetness? But where shall I find Thee? If I
find Thee without memory, then am I unmindful of Thee. And how now shall
I find Thee, if I do not remember Thee?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](1010175)
