[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010428)  [Next](1010430) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXIX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p3.1"></span>To Marcellinus, My Lord Justly
Distinguished, My Son Very Much Beloved and Longed for, Augustin Sends
Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p4"></span>1. The Acts <span
id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557) which your Excellency promised to
send I am eagerly expecting, and I am longing to have them read as soon
as possible in the church at Hippo, and also, if it can be done, in all
the churches established within the diocese, that all may hear and
become thoroughly familiar with the men who have confessed their crimes,
not because the fear of God subdued them to repentance, but because the
rigour of their judges broke through the hardness of their most cruel
hearts,—some of them confessing to the murder of one presbyter
\[Restitutus\], and the blinding and maiming of another \[Innocentius\];
others not daring to deny that they might have known of these outrages,
although they say that they disapproved of them, and persisting in the
impiety of schism in fellowship with such a multitude of atrocious
villains, while deserting the peace of the Catholic Church on the
pretext of unwillingness to be polluted by other men’s crimes; others
declaring that they will not forsake the schismatics, even though the
certainty of Catholic truth and the perversity of the Donatists have
been demonstrated to them. The work, which it has pleased God to entrust
to your diligence, is of great importance. My heart’s desire is, that
many similar Donatist cases may be tried and decided by you as these
have been, and that in this way the crimes and the insane obstinacy of
these men may be often brought to light; and that the Acts recording
these proceedings may be published, and brought to the knowledge of all
men.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p6"></span>As to the statement in your
Excellency’s letter, that you are uncertain whether you ought to command
the said Acts to be published in Theoprepia, <span
id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558) my reply is, Let this be done, if a
large multitude of hearers can be gathered there; if this be not the
case, some other place of more general resort must be provided; it must
not, however, be omitted on any account.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p8"></span>2. As to the punishment of these men,
I beseech you to make it something less severe than sentence of death,
although they have, by their own confession, been guilty of such
grievous crimes. I ask this out of a regard both for our own consciences
and for the testimony thereby given to Catholic clemency. For this is
the special advantage secured to us by their confession, that the
Catholic Church has found an opportunity of maintaining and exhibiting
forbearance towards her most violent enemies; since in a case where such
cruelty was practised, any punishment short of death will be seen by all
men to proceed from great leniency. And although such treatment appears
to some of our communion, whose minds are agitated by these atrocities,
to be less than the crimes deserve, and to have somewhat the aspect of
weakness and dereliction of duty, nevertheless, when the feelings, which
are wont to be immoderately ex<span id="page_489">p. 489</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-Page_489"></span>cited while such events are recent,
have subsided after a time, the kindness shown to the guilty will shine
with most conspicuous brightness, and men will take much more pleasure
in reading these Acts and showing them to others, my lord justly
distinguished, and son very much beloved and longed for.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p9"></span>My holy brother and co-bishop Boniface
is on the spot, and I have forwarded by the deacon Peregrinus, who
travelled along with him, a letter of instructions; accept these as
representing me. And whatever may seem in your joint opinion to be for
the Church’s interest, let it be done with the help of the Lord, who is
able in the midst of so great evils graciously to succour you. One of
their bishops, Macrobius, is at present going round in all directions,
followed by bands of wretched men and women, and has opened for himself
the \[Donatist\] churches which fear, however slight, had moved their
owners to close for a time. By the presence, however, of one whom I have
commended and again heartily commend to your love, namely, Spondeus, the
deputy of the illustrious Celer, their presumption was indeed somewhat
checked; but now, since his departure to Carthage, Macrobius has opened
the Donatist churches even within his property, and is gathering
congregations for worship in them. In his company, moreover, is Donatus,
a deacon, rebaptized by them even when he was a tenant of lands
belonging to the Church, who was implicated as a ringleader in the
outrage \[on Innocentius\]. When this man is his associate, who can tell
what kind of followers may be in his retinue? If the sentence on these
men is to be pronounced by the Proconsul, <span
id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559) or by both of you together, and if
he perchance insist upon inflicting capital punishment, although he is a
Christian and, so far as we have had opportunity of observing, not
disposed to such severity—if, I say, his determination make it
necessary, order those letters of mine, which I deemed it my duty to
address to you severally on this subject, <span
id="fr_2560"></span>[2561](#fn_2560) to be brought before you while the
trial is still going on; for I am accustomed to hear that it is in the
power of the judge to mitigate the sentence, and inflict a milder
penalty than the law prescribes. If, however, notwithstanding these
letters from me, he refuse to grant this request, let him at least allow
that the men be remanded for a time; and we will endeavour to obtain
this concession from the clemency of the Emperors, so that the
sufferings of the martyrs, which ought to shed bright glory on the
Church, may not be tarnished by the blood of their enemies; for I know
that in the case of the clergy in the valley of Anaunia, <span
id="fr_2561"></span>[2562](#fn_2561) who were slain by the Pagans, and
are now honoured as martyrs, the Emperor granted readily a petition that
the murderers, who had been discovered and imprisoned, might not be
visited with a capital punishment.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p13"></span>3. As to the books concerning the
baptism of infants, of which I had sent the original manuscript to your
Excellency, I have forgotten for what reason I received them again from
you; unless, perhaps, it was that, after examining them, I found them
faulty, and wished to make some corrections, which, by reason of
extraordinary hindrances, I have not yet been able to overtake. I must
also confess that the letter intended to be addressed to you and added
to these books, and which I had begun to dictate when I was with you, is
still unfinished, little having been added to it since that time. If,
however, I could set before you a statement of the toil which it is
absolutely necessary for me to devote, both by day and by night, to
other duties, you would deeply sympathize with me, and would be
astonished at the amount of business not admitting of delay which
distracts my mind and hinders me from accomplishing those things to
which you urge me in entreaties and admonitions, addressed to one most
willing to oblige you, and inexpressibly grieved that it is beyond his
power; for when I obtain a little leisure from the urgent necessary
business of those men, who so press me into their service <span
id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562) that I am neither able to escape
them nor at liberty to neglect them, there are always subjects to which
I must, in dictating to my amanuenses, give the first place, because
they are so connected with the present hour as not to admit of being
postponed. Of such things one instance was the abridgement of the
proceedings at our Conference, <span
id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563) a work involving much labour, but
necessary, because I saw that no one would attempt the perusal of such a
mass of writing; another was a letter to the Donatist laity <span
id="fr_2564"></span>[2565](#fn_2564) concerning the said Conference, a
document which I have just completed, after labouring at it for several
nights; another was the composition of two long letters, <span
id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565) one addressed to yourself, my
beloved friend, the other to the illustrious Volusianus, which I suppose
you both have received; another is a book, with which I am occupied at
present, addressed to our friend Honoratus, <span
id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566) in regard to five questions
proposed by him in a letter to me, and you see that to him I was
unquestionably in duty bound to send a prompt <span id="page_490">p.
490</span> <span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-Page_490"></span>reply. For love deals
with her sons as a nurse does with children, devoting her attention to
them not in the order of the love felt for each, but according to the
urgency of each case; she gives a preference to the weaker, because she
desires to impart to them such strength as is possessed by the stronger,
whom she passes by meanwhile not because of her slighting them, but
because her mind is at rest in regard to them. Emergencies of this kind,
compelling me to employ my amanuenses in writing on subjects which
prevent me from using their pens in work much more congenial to the
ardent desires of my heart, can never fail to occur, because I have
difficulty in obtaining even a very little leisure, amidst the
accumulation of business into which, in spite of my own inclinations, I
am dragged by other men’s wishes or necessities; and what I am to do, I
really do not know.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p19"></span>4. You have heard the burdens, for my
deliverance from which I wish you to join your prayers with mine; but at
the same time I do not wish you to desist from admonishing me, as you
do, with such importunity and frequency; your words are not without some
effect. I commend at the same time to your Excellency a church planted
in Numidia, on behalf of which, in its present necessities, my holy
brother and co-bishop Delphinus has been sent by my brethren and
co-bishops who share the toils and the dangers of their work in that
region. I write no more on this matter, because you will hear all from
his own lips when he comes to you. All other necessary particulars you
will find in the letters of instruction, which are sent by me to the
presbyter either now or by the deacon Peregrinus, so that I need not
again repeat them.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p20"></span>May your heart be ever strong in
Christ, my lord justly distinguished, and son very much beloved and
longed for!

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p21"></span>I commend to your Excellency our son
Ruffinus, the Provost <span id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567) of
Cirta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[488:2558](1010429.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p5"></span> *Gesta*—records of judicial
procedure.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[488:2559](1010429.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p7"></span> This is supposed to be the name of a
Donatist church in Carthage.

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[489:2560](1010429.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p10"></span> Apringius. See note, p. 471.

<span id="fn_2560"></span>[489:2561](1010429.htm#fr_2560) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p11"></span> Letters CXXXIII. and CXXXIV.

<span id="fn_2561"></span>[489:2562](1010429.htm#fr_2561) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p12"></span> Anaunia, a valley not far from
Trent, destined to be so famous for the Council held there. In the month
of May, 397 <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p12.1"></span>A.D.</span>, Martyrius, Sisinnius, and
Alexander were killed there by the heathen.

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[489:2563](1010429.htm#fr_2562) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p14"></span> *Angariant*. See [Matt. v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#041)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[489:2564](1010429.htm#fr_2563) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p15"></span> The Conference presided over by this
Marcellinus at Carthage, in the preceding year.

<span id="fn_2564"></span>[489:2565](1010429.htm#fr_2564) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p16"></span> Letter CXLI.

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[489:2566](1010429.htm#fr_2565) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p17"></span> Letters CXXXVII. and CXXXVIII.

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[489:2567](1010429.htm#fr_2566) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p18"></span> Letter CXL.

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[490:2568](1010429.htm#fr_2567) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXIX-p22"></span> *Principalis.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXLIII](1010430)
