[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010140)  [Next](1010142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VIII.XI"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.XI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VIII.XI-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—In What Manner the Spirit
Struggled with the Flesh, that It Might Be Freed from the Bondage of
Vanity.</span>

<span id="vi.VIII.XI-p2"></span>25. Thus was I sick and tormented,
accusing myself far more severely than was my wont, tossing and turning
me in my chain till that was utterly broken, whereby I now was but
slightly, but still was held. And Thou, O Lord, pressedst upon me in my
inward parts by a severe mercy, redoubling the lashes of fear and shame,
lest I should again give way, and that same slender remaining tie not
being broken off, it should recover strength, and enchain me the faster.
For I said mentally, “Lo, let it be done now, let it be done now.” And
as I spoke, I all but came to a resolve. I all but did it, yet I did it
not. Yet fell I not back to my old condition, but took up my position
hard by, and drew breath. And I tried again, and wanted but very little
of reaching it, and somewhat less, and then all but touched and grasped
it; and yet came not at it, nor touched, nor grasped it, hesitating to
die unto death, and to live unto life; and the worse, whereto I had been
habituated, prevailed more with me than the better, which I had not
tried. And the very moment in which I was to become another man, the
nearer it approached me, the greater horror did it strike into me; but
it did not strike me back, nor turn me aside, but kept me in suspense.

<span id="vi.VIII.XI-p3"></span>26. The very toys of toys, and vanities
of vanities, my old mistresses, still enthralled me; they shook my
fleshly garment, and whispered softly, “Dost thou part with us? And from
that moment shall we no more be with thee for ever? And from that moment
shall not this or that be lawful for thee for ever?” And what did they
suggest to me in the words “this or that?” What is it that they
suggested, O my God? Let Thy mercy avert it from the soul of Thy
servant. What impurities did they suggest! What shame! And now I far
less than half heard them, not openly showing themselves and
contradicting me, but muttering, as it were, behind my back, and
furtively plucking me as I was departing, to make me look back upon
them. Yet they did delay me, so that I hesitated to burst and shake
myself free from them, and to leap over whither I was called,—an unruly
habit saying to me, “Dost thou think thou canst live without them?”

<span id="vi.VIII.XI-p4"></span>27. But now it said this very faintly;
for on that side towards which I had set my face, and whither I trembled
to go, did the chaste dignity of Continence appear unto me, cheerful,
but not dissolutely gay, honestly alluring me to come and doubt nothing,
and extending her holy hands, full of a multiplicity of good examples,
to receive and embrace me. There <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span
id="vi.VIII.XI-Page_127"></span>were there so many young men and
maidens, a multitude of youth and every age, grave widows and ancient
virgins, and Continence herself in all, not barren, but a fruitful
mother of children of joys, by Thee, O Lord, her Husband. And she smiled
on me with an encouraging mockery, as if to say, “Canst not thou do what
these youths and maidens can? Or can one or other do it of themselves,
and not rather in the Lord their God? The Lord their God gave me unto
them. Why standest thou in thine own strength, and so standest not? Cast
thyself upon Him; fear not, He will not withdraw that thou shouldest
fall; cast thyself upon Him without fear, He will receive thee, and heal
thee.” And I blushed beyond measure, for I still heard the muttering of
those toys, and hung in suspense. And she again seemed to say, “Shut up
thine ears against those unclean members of thine upon the earth, that
they may be mortified. <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673) They tell
thee of delights, but not as doth the law of the Lord thy God.” <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674) This controversy in my heart was
naught but self against self. But Alypius, sitting close by my side,
awaited in silence <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675) the result of
my unwonted emotion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_673"></span>[127:674](1010141.htm#fr_673) <span
id="vi.VIII.XI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.XI-p5"></span> [Col.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="vi.VIII.XI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[127:675](1010141.htm#fr_674) <span
id="vi.VIII.XI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.XI-p6"></span> [Ps.
119.85](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#085)<span
id="vi.VIII.XI-p6.1"></span>, *Old ver.*

<span id="fn_675"></span>[127:676](1010141.htm#fr_675) <span
id="vi.VIII.XI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.XI-p7"></span> As in nature, the men of science tell
us, no two atoms touch, but that, while an inner magnetism draws them
together, a secret repulsion keeps them apart, so it is with human
souls. Into our deepest feelings our dearest friends cannot enter. In
the throes of conversion, for example, God’s ministering servants may
assist, but He alone can bring the soul to the birth. So it was here in
the case of Augustin. He felt that now even the presence of his dear
friend would be a burden,—God alone could come near, so as to heal the
sore wound of his spirit—and Alypius was a friend who knew how to *keep
silence*, and to await the issue of his friend’s profound emotion. How
comfortable a thing to find in those who would give consolation the
spirit that animated the friends of Job, when “they sat down with him
upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and *none spake a word unto
him*; for they saw that his grief was very great” ([Job
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#013)<span
id="vi.VIII.XI-p7.1"></span>). Well has Rousseau said: “<span
id="vi.VIII.XI-p7.2"></span>Les consolations indiscrètes ne font qu’
aigrir les violentes afflictions. L’ indifference et la froideur
trouvent aisément des paroles, mais la tristesse et *le silence* sont
alors le vrai langage de l’amitié.” A beautiful exemplification of this
is found in Victor Hugo’s portrait of Bishop Myriel, in *Les Misérables*
(c. iv.), from which we have quoted a few pages back:—“<span
id="vi.VIII.XI-p7.3"></span>Il savait s’asseoir et *se taire de longues
heures* auprès de l’homme que avait perdu la femme qu’ii aimait, de la
mére qui avait perdu son enfant. Comme il savait le moment de *se
taire*, il savait aussi le moment de parler. O admirable consolateur! il
ne cherchait pas à effacer la douleur par l’oubli, mais à l’agrandir et
à la dignifier par l’ésperance.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](1010142)
