[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010369)  [Next](1010371) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXIV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p1.1"></span>Letter LXIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 401.)

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p3.1"></span>To My Lord Quintianus, My Most Beloved
Brother and Fellow-Presbyter, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p4"></span>1. We do not disdain to look upon bodies
which are defective in beauty, especially seeing that our souls
themselves are not yet so beautiful as we hope that they shall be when
He who is of ineffable beauty shall have appeared, in whom, though now
we see Him not, we believe; for then “we shall be like Him,” when “we
shall see Him as He is.” <span id="fr_1864"></span>[1865](#fn_1864) If
you receive my counsel in a kindly and brotherly spirit, I exhort you to
think thus of your soul, as we do of our own, and not presumptuously
imagine that it is already perfect in beauty; but, as the apostle
enjoins, “rejoice in hope,” and obey the precept which he annexes to
this, when he says, “Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation:” <span
id="fr_1865"></span>[1866](#fn_1865) “for we are saved by hope,” as he
says again; “but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth,
why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we
with patience wait for it.” <span id="fr_1866"></span>[1867](#fn_1866)
Let not this patience be wanting in thee, but with a good conscience
“wait on the Lord; be of good courage, and He shall strengthen thine
heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1867"></span>[1868](#fn_1867)

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p9"></span>2. It is, of course, obvious that if you
come to us while debarred from communion with the venerable bishop
Aurelius, you cannot be admitted to communion with us; but we would act
towards you with that same charity which we are assured shall guide his
conduct. Your coming to us, however, should not on this account be
embarrassing to us, because the duty of submission to this, out of
regard to the discipline of the Church, ought to be felt by yourself,
especially if you have the approval of your own conscience, which is
known to yourself and to God. For if Aurelius has deferred the
examination of your case, he has done this not from dislike to you, but
from the pressure of other engagements; and if you knew his
circumstances as well as you know your own, the delay would cause you
neither surprise nor sorrow. That it is the same with myself, I entreat
you to believe on my word, as you are equally unable to know how I am
occupied. But there are other bishops older than I am, and both in
authority more worthy and in place more convenient, by whose help you
may more easily expedite the affairs now pending in the Church committed
to your charge. I have not, however, failed to make mention of your
distress, and of the complaint in your letter to my venerable brother
and colleague the aged Aurelius, whom I esteem with the respect due to
his worth; I took care to acquaint him with your innocence of the things
laid to your charge, by sending him a copy of your letter. It was not
until a day, or at the most two, before Christmas, <span
id="fr_1868"></span>[1869](#fn_1868) that I received the letter in which
you informed me of his intention to visit the Church at Badesile, by
which you fear lest the people be disturbed and influenced against you.
I do not therefore presume to address by letter your people; for I could
write a reply to any who had written to me, but how could I put myself
forward unasked to write to a people not committed to my care?

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p11"></span>3. Nevertheless, what I now say to you,
who alone have written to me, may, through you, reach others who should
hear it. I charge you then, in the first place, not to bring the Church
into reproach by reading in the public assemblies those writings which
the Canon of the Church has not acknowledged; for by these, heretics,
and especially the Manichæans (of whom I hear that some are lurking, not
without encouragement, in your district), are accustomed to subvert the
minds of the inexperienced. I am amazed that a man of your wisdom should
admonish me to forbid the reception into the monastery of those who have
come from you to us, in order that a decree of the Council may be
obeyed, and at the same time should forget another decree <span
id="fr_1869"></span>[1870](#fn_1869) of the same Council, declaring what
are the canonical Scriptures which ought to be read to the people. Read
again the proceedings of the Council, and commit them to memory: you
will there find that the Canon which you refer to <span
id="fr_1870"></span>[1871](#fn_1870) as prohibiting the indiscriminate
reception of applicants for admission to a monastery, was not framed in
regard to laymen, but applies to the clergy alone. It is true there is
no mention of monasteries in the canon; but it is laid down in general,
that no one may receive a clergyman belonging to another diocese
\[except in such a way as upholds the discipline of the Church\].
Moreover, it has been enacted in a recent Council, <span
id="fr_1871"></span>[1872](#fn_1871) that any who desert a monastery, or
are expelled from one, shall not be else<span id="page_322">p.
322</span> <span id="vii.1.LXIV-Page_322"></span>where admitted either
to clerical office or to the charge of a monastery. If, therefore, you
are in any measure disturbed regarding Privatio, let me inform you that
he has not yet been received by us into the monastery; but that I have
submitted his case to the aged Aurelius, and will act according to his
decision. For it seems strange to me, if a man can be reckoned a Reader
who has read only once in public, and on that occasion read writings
which are not canonical. If for this reason he is regarded as an
ecclesiastical reader, it follows that the writing which he read must be
esteemed as sanctioned by the Church. But if the writing be not
sanctioned by the Church as canonical, it follows that, although a man
may have read it to a congregation, he is not thereby made an
ecclesiastical reader, \[but is, as before, a layman\]. Nevertheless I
must, in regard to the young man in question, abide by the decision of
the arbiter whom I have named.

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p15"></span>4. As to the people of Vigesile, who
are to us as well as to you beloved in the bowels of Christ, if they
have refused to accept a bishop who has been deposed by a plenary
Council in Africa, <span id="fr_1872"></span>[1873](#fn_1872) they act
wisely, and cannot be compelled to yield, nor ought to be. And whoever
shall attempt to compel them by violence to receive him, will show
plainly what is his character, and will make men well understand what
his real character was at an earlier time, when he would have had them
believe no evil of him. For no one more effectually discovers the
worthlessness of his cause, than the man who, employing the secular
power, or any other kind of violent means, endeavours by agitating and
complaining to recover the ecclesiastical rank which he has forfeited.
For his desire is not to yield to Christ service which He claims, but to
usurp over Christians an authority which they disown. Brethren, be
cautious; great is the craft of the devil, but Christ is the wisdom of
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[321:1865](1010370.htm#fr_1864) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p5"></span> [1 John
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1865"></span>[321:1866](1010370.htm#fr_1865) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p6"></span> [Rom.
12.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[321:1867](1010370.htm#fr_1866) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p7"></span> [Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[321:1868](1010370.htm#fr_1867) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p8"></span> [Ps.
27.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1868"></span>[321:1869](1010370.htm#fr_1868) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p10"></span> *Pridie Natalis Domini.*

<span id="fn_1869"></span>[321:1870](1010370.htm#fr_1869) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p12"></span> See Council of Hippo, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.LXIV-p12.1"></span>A.D.</span> 393, Can. 38,
and the third Council of Carthage, <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p12.2"></span> A.D.</span> 397, Can. 47.

<span id="fn_1870"></span>[321:1871](1010370.htm#fr_1870) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p13"></span> *Ibid.* Can. 21.

<span id="fn_1871"></span>[321:1872](1010370.htm#fr_1871) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p14"></span> Council of Carthage, 13th Sept. 401.

<span id="fn_1872"></span>[322:1873](1010370.htm#fr_1872) <span
id="vii.1.LXIV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIV-p16"></span> Council of Carthage, 13th Sept. 401.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXV](1010371)
