[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010172)  [Next](1010174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.XVI"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XVI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.XVI-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—The Privation of Memory is
Forgetfulness.</span>

<span id="vi.X.XVI-p2"></span>24. When I name forgetfulness, and know,
too, what I name, whence should I know it if I did not remember it? I do
not say the sound of the name, but the thing which it signifies which,
had I forgotten, I could not know what that sound signified. When,
therefore, I remember memory, then is memory present with itself,
through itself. But when I remember forgetfulness, there are present
both memory and forgetfulness,—memory, whereby I remember,
forgetfulness, which I remember. But what is forgetfulness but the
privation of memory? How, then, is that present for me to remember,
since, when it is so, I cannot remember? But if what we remember we
retain in memory, yet, unless we remembered forgetfulness, we could
never at the hearing of the name know the thing meant by it, then is
forgetfulness retained by memory. Present, therefore, it is, lest we
should forget it; and being so, we do forget. Is it to be inferred from
this that forgetfulness, when we remember it, is not present to the
memory through itself, but through its image; because, were
forgetfulness present through itself, it would not lead us to remember,
but to forget? Who will now investigate this? Who shall understand how
it is?

<span id="vi.X.XVI-p3"></span><span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="vi.X.XVI-Page_149"></span>25. Truly, O Lord, I labour therein, and
labour in myself. I am become a troublesome soil that requires overmuch
labour. For we are not now searching out the tracts of heaven, or
measuring the distances of the stars, or inquiring about the weight of
the earth. It is I myself—I, the mind—who remember. It is not much to be
wondered at, if what I myself am not be far from me. But what is nearer
to me than myself? And, behold, I am not able to comprehend the force of
my own memory, though I cannot name myself without it. For what shall I
say when it is plain to me that I remember forgetfulness? Shall I affirm
that which I remember is not in my memory? Or shall I say that
forgetfulness is in my memory with the view of my not forgetting? Both
of these are most absurd. What third view is there? How can I assert
that the image of forgetfulness is retained by my memory, and not
forgetfulness itself, when I remember it? And how can I assert this,
seeing that when the image of anything is imprinted on the memory, the
thing itself must of necessity be present first by which that image may
be imprinted? For thus do I remember Carthage; thus, all the places to
which I have been; thus, the faces of men whom I have seen, and things
reported by the other senses; thus, the health or sickness of the body.
For when these objects were present, my memory received images from
them, which, when they were present, I might gaze on and reconsider in
my mind, as I remembered them when they were absent. If, therefore,
forgetfulness is retained in the memory through its image, and not
through itself, then itself was once present, that its image might be
taken. But when it was present, how did it write its image on the
memory, seeing that forgetfulness by its presence blots out even what it
finds already noted? And yet, in whatever way, though it be
incomprehensible and inexplicable, yet most certain I am that I remember
also forgetfulness itself, whereby what we do remember is blotted out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](1010174)
