[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010101)  [Next](1010103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.XI"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.XI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.XI-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—Being Troubled by His Grievous
Errors, He Meditates Entering on a New Life.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.XI-p2"></span>18. And I, puzzling over and reviewing
these things, most marvelled at the length of time from that my
nineteenth year, wherein I began to be inflamed with the desire of
wisdom, resolving, when I had found her, to forsake all the empty hopes
and lying insanities of vain desires. And behold, I was now getting on
to my thirtieth year, sticking in the same mire, eager for the enjoyment
of things present, which fly away and destroy me, whilst I say,
“Tomorrow I shall discover it; behold, it will appear plainly, and I
shall seize it; behold, Faustus will come and explain everything! O ye
great men, ye Academicians, it is then true that nothing certain for the
ordering of life can be attained! Nay, let us search the more
diligently, and let us not despair. Lo, the things in the ecclesiastical
books, which appeared to us absurd aforetime, do not appear so now, and
may be otherwise and honestly interpreted. I will set my feet upon that
step, where, as a child, my parents placed me, until the clear truth be
discovered. But where and when shall it be sought? Ambrose has no
leisure,—we have no leisure to read. Where are we to find the books?
Whence or when procure them? From whom borrow them? Let set times be
appointed, and certain hours be set apart for the health of the soul.
Great hope has risen upon us, the Catholic faith doth not teach what we
conceived, and vainly accused it of. Her learned ones hold it as an
abomination to believe that God is limited by the form of a human body.
And do we doubt to ‘knock,’ in order that the rest may be
‘opened’? <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) The mornings are taken
up by our scholars; how do we employ the rest of the day? Why do we not
set about this? But when, then, pay our respects to our great friends,
of whose favours we stand in need? When prepare what our scholars buy
from us? When recreate ourselves, relaxing our minds from the pressure
of care?”

<span id="vi.VI.XI-p4"></span>19. “Perish everything, and let us dismiss
these empty vanities, and betake ourselves solely to the search after
truth! Life is miserable, death uncertain. If it creeps upon us
suddenly, in what state shall we depart hence, and where shall we learn
what we have neglected here? Or rather shall we not suffer the
punishment of this negligence? What if death itself should cut off and
put an end to all care and feeling? This also, then, must be inquired
into. But God forbid that it should be so. It is not without reason, it
is no empty thing, that the so eminent height of the authority of the
Christian faith is diffused throughout the entire world. Never would
such and so great things be wrought for us, if, by the death of the
body, the life of the soul were destroyed. Why, therefore, do we delay
to abandon our hopes of this world, and give ourselves wholly to seek
after God and the blessed life? But stay! Even those things are
enjoyable; and they possess some and no little sweetness. We must not
abandon them lightly, for it would be a shame to return to them again.
Behold, now is it a great matter to obtain some post of honour! And what
more could we desire? We have crowds of influential friends, though we
have nothing else, and if we make haste a presidentship may be offered
us; and a wife with some money, that she increase not our expenses; and
this shall be the height of desire. Many men, who are great and worthy
of imitation, have applied themselves to the study of wisdom in the
marriage state.”

<span id="vi.VI.XI-p5"></span>20. Whilst I talked of these things, and
these winds veered about and tossed my heart hither and thither, the
time passed on; but I was slow to turn to the Lord, and from day to day
deferred to live in Thee, and deferred not daily to die in myself. Being
enamoured of a happy life, I yet feared it in its own abode, and,
fleeing from it, sought after it. I conceived that I should be too
unhappy were I deprived of the embracements of a woman; <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) and of Thy merciful medicine to cure
that infirmity I thought not, not having tried it. As regards
continency, I imagined it to be under the control of our own strength
(though in myself I found it not), being so foolish as not to know what
is written, that none can be continent unless Thou give it; <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) and that Thou wouldst give it, if with
heartfelt groaning I should knock at Thine ears, and should with firm
faith cast my care upon Thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_467"></span>[98:468](1010102.htm#fr_467) <span
id="vi.VI.XI-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.XI-p3"></span> [Matt.
7.7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="vi.VI.XI-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[98:469](1010102.htm#fr_468) <span
id="vi.VI.XI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.XI-p6"></span> “I was entangled in the life of this
world, clinging to dull hopes of a beauteous wife, the pomp of riches,
the emptiness of honours, and the other hurtful and destructive
pleasures” (Aug. *De Util. Credendi*, sec. 3). “After I had shaken off
the Manichæans and escaped, especially when I had crossed the sea, the
Academics long detained me tossing in the waves, winds from all quarters
beating against my helm. And so I came to this shore, and there found a
pole-star to whom to entrust myself. For I often observed in the
discourses of our priest \[Ambrose\], and sometimes in yours
\[Theodorus\], that you had no corporeal notions when you thought of
God, or even of the soul, which of all things is next to God. But I was
withheld, I own, from casting myself speedily into the bosom of true
wisdom by the alluring hopes of marriage and honours; meaning, when I
had obtained these, to press (as few singularly happy, had before me)
with oar and sail into that haven, and there rest” (Aug. *De Vita
Beata*, sec. 4).—E. B. P.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[98:470](1010102.htm#fr_469) <span
id="vi.VI.XI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.XI-p7"></span> [Wisd.
8.2](../../../bib/vul/wis008.htm#002)<span id="vi.VI.XI-p7.1"></span>,
*Vulg*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](1010103)
