[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010367)  [Next](1010369) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXII-p1.1"></span>Letter LXII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 401)

<span id="vii.1.LXII-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXII-p3.1"></span>Alypius, Augustin, and Samsucius, and the
Brethren Who are with Them, Send Greeting in the Lord to
Severus,</span>* <span id="fr_1861"></span>[1862](#fn_1861) <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.LXII-p4.1"></span>*Their Lord Most Blessed,
and with All Reverence Most Beloved, Their Brother in Truth, and Partner
in the Priestly Office, and to All the Brethren Who are with
Him.*</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXII-p5"></span>1. When we came to Subsana, and inquired
into the things which had been done there in our absence and against our
will, we found some things exactly as we had heard reported, and some
things otherwise, but all things calling for lamentation and
forbearance; and we endeavoured, in so far as the Lord gave His help, to
put them right by reproof, admonition, and prayer. What distressed us
most, since your departure from the place, was that the brethren who
went thence to you were allowed to go without a guide, which we beg you
to excuse, as having taken place not from malice, but from an excessive
caution. For, believing as they did that these men were sent by our son
Timotheus in order to move you to be displeased with us, and being
anxious to reserve the whole matter untouched until we should come (when
they hoped to see you along with us), they thought that the departure of
these men would be prevented if they were not furnished with a guide.
That they did wrong in thus attempting to detain the brethren we
admit,—nay, who could doubt it? Hence also arose the story which was
told to Fossor, <span id="fr_1862"></span>[1863](#fn_1862) that
Timotheus had already gone to you with these same brethren. This was
wholly false, but the statement was not made by the presbyter; and that
Carcedonius our brother was wholly unaware of all these things, was most
clearly proved to us by all the ways in which such things are
susceptible of proof.

<span id="vii.1.LXII-p7"></span>2. But why spend more time on these
circumstances! Our son Timotheus, being greatly disturbed because he
found himself, altogether in spite of his own wish, in such unlooked for
perplexity, informed us that, when you were urging him to serve God at
Subsana, he broke forth vehemently, and swore that he would never on any
account leave you. And when we questioned him as to his present wish, he
replied that by this oath he was precluded from going to the place which
we had previously wished him to occupy, even though his mind were set at
rest by the evidence given as to his freedom from restraint. When we
showed him that he would not be guilty of violating his oath if a bar
was put in the way of his being with you, not by him, but by you, in
order to avoid a scandal; seeing that he could by his oath bind only his
own will, not yours, and he admitted that you had not bound yourself
reciprocally by your oath; at last he said, as it became a servant of
God and a son of the Church to say, that he would without hesitation
agree to whatever should seem good to us, along with your Holiness, to
appoint concerning him. We therefore ask, and by the love of Christ
implore you, in the exercise of your sagacity, to remember all that we
spoke to each other in this matter, and to make us glad by your reply to
this letter. For “we that are strong” (if, indeed, amid so great and
perilous temptations, we may presume to claim this title) are bound, as
the apostle says, to “bear the infirmities of the weak.” <span
id="fr_1863"></span>[1864](#fn_1863) Our brother Timotheus has not
written to your Holiness, because your venerable brother has reported to
all you. May you be joyful in the Lord, and remember us, our lord most
blessed, and with all reverence most beloved, our brother in sincerity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1861"></span>[319:1862](1010368.htm#fr_1861) <span
id="vii.1.LXII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXII-p4"></span> Severus, bishop of Milevi in Numidia,
had at one time been an inmate of the monastery of Augustin, and was
held by him in the highest esteem.

<span id="fn_1862"></span>[319:1863](1010368.htm#fr_1862) <span
id="vii.1.LXII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXII-p6"></span> Tillemont suggests that this may be
“the sexton,” and not a proper name.

<span id="fn_1863"></span>[319:1864](1010368.htm#fr_1863) <span
id="vii.1.LXII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXII-p8"></span> [Rom.
15.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.LXII-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXIII](1010369)
