[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010471)  [Next](1010473) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCXLVI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXLVI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCXLVI-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXLVI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXLVI-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXLVI-p2.1"></span>To Lampadius, Augustin Sends
Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXLVI-p3"></span>1. On the subject of Fate and Fortune,
by which, as I perceived when I was with you, and as I now know in a
more gratifying and more reliable way by your own letter, your mind is
seriously disturbed, I ought to write you a considerable volume; the
Lord will enable me to explain it in the manner which He knows to be
best fitted to preserve your faith. For it is no small evil that when
men embrace perverse opinions they are not only drawn by the allurement
of pleasure to commit sin, but are also turned aside to vindicate their
sin rather than seek to have it healed by acknowledging that they have
done wrong.

<span id="vii.1.CCXLVI-p4"></span>2. Let me, therefore, briefly remind
you of one thing bearing on the question which you certainly know, that
all laws and all means of discipline, commendations, censures,
exhortations, threatenings, rewards, punishments, and all other things
by which mankind are managed and ruled, are utterly subverted and
overthrown, and found to be absolutely devoid of justice, unless the
will is the cause of the sins which a man commits. How much more
legitimate and right, therefore, is it for us to reject the absurdities
of astrologers \[*mathematici*\], than to submit to the alternative
necessity of condemning and rejecting the laws proceeding from divine
authority, or even the means needful for governing our own families. In
this the astrologers themselves ignore their own doctrine as to Fate and
Fortune, for when any one of them, after selling to moneyed simpletons
his silly prognostications of Fate, calls back his thoughts from the
ivory tablets to the management and care of his own house, he reproves
his wife, not with words only, but with blows, if he finds her, I do not
say jesting rather forwardly, but even looking too much out of the
window. Nevertheless, if she were to expostulate in such a case, saying:
“Why beat *me*? beat Venus, rather, if you can, since it is under that
planet’s influence that I am compelled to do what you complain of,”—he
would certainly apply his energies not to invent some of the absurd
jargon by which he cajoles the public, but to inflict some of the just
correction by which he maintains his authority at home.

<span id="vii.1.CCXLVI-p5"></span>3. When, therefore, any one, upon
being reproved, affirms that Fate is the cause of the action, and
insists that therefore he is not to be blamed, because he says that
under the compulsion of Fate he did the action which is censured, let
him come back to apply this to his own case, let him observe this
principle in managing his own affairs: let him not chastise a dishonest
servant; let him not complain of a disrespectful son; let him not utter
threats against <span id="page_589">p. 589</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXLVI-Page_589"></span>a mischievous neighbour. For in doing
which of these things would he act justly, if all from whom he suffers
such wrong are impelled to commit it by Fate, not by any fault of their
own? If, however, from the fight inherent in himself, and the duty
incumbent on him as the head of a family towards all whom for the time
he has under his control, he exhorts them to do good, deters them from
doing evil, commands them to obey his will, honours those who yield
implicit obedience, inflicts punishment on those who set him at naught,
gives thanks to those who do him good, and hates those who are
ungrateful,—shall I wait to prove the absurdity of the astrologers
calculations of Fate, when I find him proclaiming, not by words but by
deeds, things so conclusive against his pretensions that he seems to
destroy almost with his own hands every hair on the heads of the
astrologers?

<span id="vii.1.CCXLVI-p6"></span>If your eager desire is not satisfied
with these few sentences, and demands a book which will take longer time
to read on this subject, you must wait patiently until I get some
respite from other duties; and you must pray to God that He may be
pleased to allow both leisure and capacity to write, so as to set your
mind at rest on this matter. I will, however, do this with more willing
readiness, if your Charity does not grudge to remind me of it by
frequent letters, and to show me in your reply what you think of this
letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCL](1010473)
