[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010446)  [Next](1010448) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXXX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 416.)

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p3.1"></span>To Oceanus, His Deservedly Beloved Lord and
Brother, Honoured Among the Members of Christ, Augustin Sends
Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p4"></span>1. I received two letters from you at
the same time, in one of which you mention a third, and state that you
had sent it before the others. This letter I do not remember having
received, or, rather, I think I may say the testimony of my memory is,
that I did not receive it; but in regard to those which I have received,
I return you many thanks for your kindness to me. To these I would have
returned an immediate answer, had I not been hurried away by a constant
succession of other matters urgently demanding attention. Having now
found a moment’s leisure from these, I have chosen rather to send some
reply, however imperfect, than continue towards a friend so true and
kind a protracted silence, and become more annoying to you by saying
nothing than by saying too much.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p5"></span>2. I already knew the opinion of the
holy Jerome as to the origin of souls, and had read the words which in
your letter you have quoted from his book. The difficulty which
perplexes some in regard to this question, “How God can justly bestow
souls on the offspring of persons guilty of adultery?” does not
embarrass me, seeing that not even their own sins, much less the sins of
their parents, can prove prejudicial to persons of virtuous lives,
converted to God, and living in faith and piety. The really difficult
question is, if it be true that a new soul created out of nothing is
imparted to each child at its birth, how can it be that the innumerable
souls of those little ones, in regard to whom God knew with certainty
that before attaining the age of reason, and before being able to know
or understand what is right or wrong, they were to leave the body
without being baptized, are justly given over to eternal death by Him
with whom “there is no unrighteousness!” <span
id="fr_2822"></span>[2823](#fn_2822) It is unnecessary to say more on
this subject, since you know what I intend, or rather what I do not at
present intend to say. I think what I have said is enough for a wise
man. If, however, you have either read, or heard from the lips of
Jerome, or received from the Lord when meditating on this difficult
question, anything by which it can be solved, impart it to me, I beseech
you, that I may acknowledge myself under yet greater obligation to you.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p7"></span>3. As to the question whether lying is
in any case justifiable and expedient, it has appeared to you that it
ought to be solved by the example of our Lord’s saying, concerning the
day and hour of the end of the world, “Neither doth the Son know
it.” <span id="fr_2823"></span>[2824](#fn_2823) When I read this, I was
charmed with it as an effort of your ingenuity; but I am by no means of
opinion that a figurative mode of expression can be rightly termed a
falsehood. For it is no falsehood to call a day joyous because it
renders men joyous, or a lupine harsh because by its bitter flavour it
imparts harshness <span id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-Page_548"></span>to the countenance of him who tastes
it, or to say that God knows something when He makes man know it (an
instance quoted by yourself in these words of God to Abraham, “Now I
know that thou fearest God”). <span id="fr_2824"></span>[2825](#fn_2824)
These are by no means false statements, as you yourself readily see.
Accordingly, when the blessed Hilary explained this obscure statement of
the Lord, by means of this obscure kind of figurative language, saying
that we ought to understand Christ to affirm in these words that He knew
not that day with no other meaning than that He, by concealing it,
caused others not to know it, he did not by this explanation of the
statement apologize for it as an excusable falsehood, but he showed that
it was not a falsehood, as is proved by comparing it not only with these
common figures of speech, but also with the metaphor, a mode of
expression very familiar to all in daily conversation. For who will
charge the man who says that harvest fields *wave* and children *bloom*
with speaking falsely, because he sees not in these things the waves and
the flowers to which these words are literally applied?

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p10"></span>4. Moreover, a man of your talent and
learning easily perceives how different from these metaphorical
expressions is the statement of the apostle, “When I saw that they
walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto
Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of
the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles
to live as do the Jews?” <span id="fr_2825"></span>[2826](#fn_2825) Here
there is no obscurity of figurative language; these are literal words of
a plain statement. Surely, in addressing persons “of whom he travailed
in birth till Christ should be formed in them,” <span
id="fr_2826"></span>[2827](#fn_2826) and to whom, in solemnly calling
God to confirm his words, he said: “The things which I write unto you,
behold, before God, I lie not,” <span
id="fr_2827"></span>[2828](#fn_2827) the great teacher of the Gentiles
affirmed in the words above quoted either what was true or what was
false; if he said what was false, which God forbid, you see the
consequences which would follow; and Paul’s own assertion of his
veracity, together with the example of wondrous humility in the Apostle
Peter, may warn you to recoil from such thoughts. <span
id="fr_2828"></span>[2829](#fn_2828)

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p15"></span>5. But why say more? This question the
venerable Father Jerome and I have discussed fully in letters <span
id="fr_2829"></span>[2830](#fn_2829) which we exchanged, and in his
latest work, published under the name of *Critobulus*, against
Pelagius, <span id="fr_2830"></span>[2831](#fn_2830) he has maintained
the same opinion concerning that transaction and the words of the
apostle which, in accordance with the views of the blessed
Cyprian, <span id="fr_2831"></span>[2832](#fn_2831) I myself have held.
In regard to the question as to the origin of souls, I think there is
reasonable ground for inquiry, not as to the giving of souls to the
offspring of adulterous parents, but as to the condemnation (which God
forbid) of those who are innocent. If you have learned anything from a
man of such character and eminence as Jerome which might form a
satisfactory answer to those in perplexity on this subject, I pray you
not to refuse to communicate it to me. In your correspondence, you have
approved yourself so learned and so affable that it is a rivilege to
hold intercourse with you by letter. I ask you not to delay to send a
certain book by the same man of God, which the presbyter Orosius brought
and gave to you to copy, in which the resurrection of the body is
treated of by him in a manner said to merit distinguished praise. We
have not asked it earlier, because we knew that you had both to copy and
to revise it; but for both of these we think we have now given you ample
time. Live to God, and be mindful of us.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p19"></span>\[For translation of Letter CLXXXV. to
Count Boniface, containing an exhaustive history of the Donatist schism,
see *Anti-Donatist Writings*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2822"></span>[547:2823](1010447.htm#fr_2822) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p6"></span> [Rom.
9.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2823"></span>[547:2824](1010447.htm#fr_2823) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p8"></span> [Mark
13.32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2824"></span>[548:2825](1010447.htm#fr_2824) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p9"></span> [Gen.
22.12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2825"></span>[548:2826](1010447.htm#fr_2825) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p11"></span> [Gal.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2826"></span>[548:2827](1010447.htm#fr_2826) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p12"></span> [Gal.
4.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2827"></span>[548:2828](1010447.htm#fr_2827) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p13"></span> [Gal.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2828"></span>[548:2829](1010447.htm#fr_2828) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p14"></span> We have left the word *ambo* in “ambo
ista exhorrescas” untranslated. Critics are agreed that a few words of
the original are probably wanting here, only one alternative of the
dilemma being stated by St. Augustin in the text.

<span id="fn_2829"></span>[548:2830](1010447.htm#fr_2829) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p16"></span> In Letters XXVIII., XL., LXXV., and
LXXXII., translated in *Letters*, pp. 251, 272, 333, 349.

<span id="fn_2830"></span>[548:2831](1010447.htm#fr_2830) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p17"></span> *Adversus Pelagium*, book i.

<span id="fn_2831"></span>[548:2832](1010447.htm#fr_2831) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXX-p18"></span> *Letters* of Cyprian, LXXI.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXXXVIII](1010448)
