[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010333)  [Next](1010335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXVII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p1.1"></span>Letter XXVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 395.)

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p3.1"></span>To My Lord, Holy and Venerable, and Worthy
of Highest Praise in Christ, My Brother Paulinus, Augustin Sends
Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p4"></span>1. O excellent man and excellent
brother, there was a time when you were unknown to my mind; and I charge
my mind to bear patiently your being still unknown to my eyes, but it
almost—nay, altogether—refuses to obey. Does it indeed bear this
patiently? If so, why then does a longing for your presence rack my
inmost soul? For if I were suffering bodily infirmities, and these did
not interrupt the serenity of my mind, I might be justly said to bear
them patiently; but when I cannot bear with equanimity the privation of
not seeing you, it would be intolerable were I to call my state of mind
patience. Nevertheless, it would perhaps be still more intolerable if I
were to be found patient while absent from you, seeing that you are such
an one as you are. It is well, therefore, that I am unsatisfied under a
privation which is such that, if I were satisfied under it, every one
would justly be dissatisfied with me. What has befallen me is strange,
yet true: I grieve because I do not see you, and my grief itself
comforts me; for I neither admire nor covet a fortitude easily consoled
under the absence of good men such as you are. For do we not long for
the heavenly Jerusalem? and the more impatiently we long for it, do we
not the more patiently submit to all things for its sake? Who can so
withhold himself from joy in seeing you, as to feel no pain when you are
no longer seen? I at least can do neither; and seeing that if I could,
it could only be by trampling on right and natural feeling, I rejoice
that I cannot, and in this rejoicing I find some consolation. It is
therefore not the removal, but the contemplation, of this sorrow that
consoles me. Blame me not, I beseech you, with that devout seriousness
of spirit which so eminently distinguishes you; say not that I do wrong
to grieve because of my not yet knowing you, when you have disclosed to
my sight your mind, which is the inner man. For if, when sojourning in
any place, or in the city to which you belong, I had come to know you as
my brother and friend, and as one so eminent as a Christian, so noble as
a man, how could you think that it would be no disappoint<span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span id="vii.1.XXVII-Page_249"></span>ment
to me if I were not permitted to know your dwelling? How, then, can I
but mourn because I have not yet seen your face and form, the
dwelling-place of that mind which I have come to know as if it were my
own?

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p5"></span>2. For I have read your letter, which
flows with milk and honey, which exhibits the simplicity of heart
wherewith, under the guidance of piety, you seek the Lord, and which
brings glory and honour to Him. The brethren have read it also, and find
unwearied and ineffable satisfaction in those abundant and excellent
gifts with which God has endowed you. As many as have read it carry it
away with them, because, while they read, it carries them away. Words
cannot express how sweet is the savour of Christ which your letter
breathes. How strong is the wish to be more fully acquainted with you
which that letter awakens by presenting you to our sight! for it at once
permits us to discern and prompts us to desire you. For the more
effectually that it makes us in a certain sense realize your presence,
the more does it render us impatient under your absence. All love you as
seen therein, and wish to be loved by you. Praise and thanksgiving are
offered to God, by whose grace you are what you are. In your letter,
Christ is awakened that He may be pleased to calm the winds and the
waves for you, directing your steps towards His perfect
stedfastness. <span id="fr_1508"></span>[1509](#fn_1508) In it the
reader beholds a wife <span id="fr_1509"></span>[1510](#fn_1509) who
does not bring her husband to effeminacy, but by union to him is brought
herself to share the strength of his nature; and unto her in you, as
completely one with you, and bound to you by spiritual ties which owe
their strength to their purity, we desire to return our salutations with
the respect due to your Holiness. In it, the cedars of Lebanon, levelled
to the ground, and fashioned by the skilful craft of love into the form
of the Ark, cleave the waves of this world, fearless of decay. In it,
glory is scorned that it may be secured, and the world given up that it
may be gained. In it, the little ones, yea, the mightier sons of
Babylon, the sins of turbulence and pride, are dashed against the rock.

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p8"></span>3. These and other such most delightful
and hallowed spectacles are presented to the readers of your
letter,—that letter which exhibits a true faith, a good hope, a pure
love. How it breathes to us your thirst, your longing and fainting for
the courts of the Lord! With what holy love it is inspired! How it
overflows with the abundant treasure of a true heart! What thanksgivings
it renders to God! What blessings it procures from Him! Is it elegance
or fervour, light or life-giving power, which shines most in your
letter? For how can it at once soothe us and animate us? how can it
combine fertilizing rains with the brightness of a cloudless sky? How is
this? I ask; or how shall I repay you, except by giving myself to be
wholly yours in Him whose you wholly are? If this be little, it is at
least all I have to give. But you have made me think it not little, by
your deigning to honour me in that letter with such praises, that when I
requite you by giving myself to you, I would be chargeable if I counted
the gift a small one, with refusing to believe your testimony. I am
ashamed, indeed, to believe so much good spoken of myself, but I am yet
more unwilling to refuse to believe you. I have one way of escape from
the dilemma: I shall not credit your estimate of my character, because I
do not recognise myself in the portrait you have drawn; but I shall
believe myself to be beloved by you, because I perceive and feel this
beyond all doubt. Thus I shall be found neither rash in judging of
myself, nor ungrateful for your esteem. Moreover, when I offer myself to
you, it is not a small offering; for I offer one whom you very warmly
love, and one who, though he is not what you suppose him to be, is
nevertheless one for whom you are praying that he may become such. And
your prayers I now beg the more earnestly, lest, thinking me to be
already what I am not, you should be less solicitous for the supply of
that which I lack.

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p9"></span>4. The bearer of this letter <span
id="fr_1510"></span>[1511](#fn_1510) to your Excellency and most eminent
Charity is one of my dearest friends, and most intimately known to me
from early years. His name is mentioned in the treatise *De Religione*,
which your Holiness, as you indicate in your letter, has read with very
great pleasure, doubtless because it was made more acceptable to you by
the recommendation of so good a man as he who sent it to you. <span
id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511) I would not wish you, however, to
give credence to the statements which, perchance, one who is so
intimately my friend may have made in praise of me. For I have often
observed, that, without intending to say what was untrue, he was, by the
bias of friendship, mistaken in his opinion concerning me, and that he
thought me to be already possessed of many things, for the gift of which
my heart earnestly waited on the Lord. And if he did such things in my
presence, who may not conjecture that out of the fulness of his heart he
may utter many things more excellent than true concerning me when
absent? He will submit to your esteemed attention, and review all my
treatises; for I am not aware of having written anything, either
addressed to those who are beyond the pale of the Church, or to the
brethren, which is not in his possession. But when you are reading
these, <span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-Page_250"></span>my holy Paulinus, let not those things
which Truth has spoken by my weak instrumentality, so carry you away as
to prevent your carefully observing what I myself have spoken, lest,
while you drink in with eagerness the things good and true which have
been given to me as a servant, you should forget to pray for the pardon
of my errors and mistakes. For in all that shall, if observed, justly
displease you, I myself am seen; but in all which in my books is justly
approved by you, through the gift of the Holy Spirit bestowed on you, He
is to be loved, He is to be praised, with whom is the fountain of life,
and in whose light we shall see light, <span
id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512) not darkly as we do here, but face
to face. <span id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513) When, in reading
over my writings, I discover in them anything which is due to the
working of the old leaven in me, I blame myself for it with true sorrow;
but if anything which I have spoken is, by God’s gift, from the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, I rejoice therein with
trembling. For what have we that we have not received? Yet it may be
said, his portion is better whom God has endowed with larger and more
numerous gifts, than his on whom smaller and fewer have been conferred.
True; but, on the other hand, it is better to have a small gift, and to
render to Him due thanks for it, than, having a large gift, to wish to
claim the merit of it as our own. Pray for me, my brother, that I may
make such acknowledgments sincerely, and that my heart may not be at
variance with my tongue. Pray, I beseech you, that, not coveting praise
to myself, but rendering praise to the Lord, I may worship Him; and I
shall be safe from mine enemies.

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p14"></span>5. There is yet another thing which
may move you to love more warmly the brother who bears my letter; for he
is a kinsman of the venerable and truly blessed bishop Alypius, whom you
love with your whole heart, and justly: for whoever thinks highly of
that man, thinks highly of the great mercy and wonderful gifts which God
has bestowed on him. Accordingly, when he had read your request,
desiring him to write for you a sketch of his history, and, while
willing to do it because of your kindness, was yet unwilling to do it
because of his humility, I, seeing him unable to decide between the
respective claims of love and humility, transferred the burden from his
shoulders to my own, for he enjoined me by letter to do so. I shall
therefore, with God’s help, soon place in your heart Alypius just as he
is: for this I chiefly feared, that he would be afraid to declare all
that God has conferred on him, lest (since what he writes would be read
by others besides you) he should seem to any who are less competent to
discriminate to be commending not God’s goodness bestowed on men, but
his own merits; and that thus you, who know what construction to put on
such statements, would, through his regard for the infirmity of others,
be deprived of that which to you as a brother ought to be imparted. This
I would have done already, and you would already be reading my
description of him, had not my brother suddenly resolved to set out
earlier than we expected. For him I bespeak a welcome from your heart
and from your lips as kindly as if your acquaintance with him was not
beginning now, but of as long standing as my own. For if he does not
shrink from laying himself open to your heart, he will be in great
measure, if not completely, healed by your lips; for I desire him to be
often made to hear the words of those who cherish for their friends a
higher love than that which is of this world.

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p15"></span>6. Even if Romanianus had not been
going to visit your Charity, I had resolved to recommend to you by
letter his son \[Licentius\], dear to me as my own (whose name you will
find also in some of my books), in order that he may be encouraged,
exhorted, and instructed, not so much by the sound of your voice, as by
the example of your spiritual strength. I desire earnestly, that while
his life is yet in the green blade, the tares may be turned into wheat,
and he may believe those who know by experience the dangers to which he
is eager to expose himself. From the poem of my young friend, and my
letter to him, your most benevolent and considerate wisdom may perceive
my grief, fear, and care on his account. I am not without hope that, by
the Lord’s favour, I may through your means be set free from such
disquietude regarding him.

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p16"></span>As you are now about to read much that
I have written, your love will be much more gratefully esteemed by me,
if, moved by compassion, and judging impartially, you correct and
reprove whatever displeases you. For you are not one whose oil anointing
my head would make me afraid. <span id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514)

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p18"></span>The brethren, not those only who dwell
with us, and those who, dwelling elsewhere, serve God in the same way as
we do, but almost all who are in Christ our warm friends, send you
salutations, along with the expression of their veneration and
affectionate longing for you as a brother, as a saint, and as a
man. <span id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515) I dare not ask; but if
you have any leisure from ecclesiastical duties, you may see for what
favour all Africa, with myself, is thirsting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[249:1509](1010334.htm#fr_1508) <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p6"></span> Compare end of sec. 3 in Letter XXV.
p. 246.

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[249:1510](1010334.htm#fr_1509) <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p7"></span> Therasia.

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[249:1511](1010334.htm#fr_1510) <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p10"></span> Romanianus. See *De Religione*, ch.
vii. n. 12.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[249:1512](1010334.htm#fr_1511) <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p11"></span> Alypius.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[250:1513](1010334.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p12"></span> [Ps.
36.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[250:1514](1010334.htm#fr_1513) <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[250:1515](1010334.htm#fr_1514) <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p17"></span> The reference is to [Ps.
141.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p17.1"></span>, the words of which translated from the
LXX. version, are given in full in the succeeding letter.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[250:1516](1010334.htm#fr_1515) <span
id="vii.1.XXVII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXVII-p19"></span> This may approximate to a translation
of the three titles in the original, “Germanitas, Beatitudo, Humanitas
tua.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXVIII](1010335)
