[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010289)  [Next](1010291) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—Why God Has Blessed Men,
Fishes, Flying Creatures, and Not Herbs and the Other Animals (Ver.
28).</span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p2"></span>35. But what is this, and what kind of
mystery is it? Behold, Thou blessest men, O Lord, that they may “be
fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth;” <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) in this dost Thou not make a sign
unto us that we may understand something? Why hast Thou not also blessed
the light, which Thou calledst day, nor the firmament of heaven, nor the
lights, nor the stars, nor the earth, nor the sea? I might say, O our
God, that Thou, who hast created us after Thine Image,—I might say, that
Thou hast willed to bestow this gift of blessing especially upon man,
hadst Thou not in like manner blessed the fishes and the whales, that
they should be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the waters of the
sea, and that the fowls should be multiplied upon the earth. Likewise
might I say, that this blessing belonged properly unto such creatures as
are propagated from their own kind, if I had found it in the shrubs, and
the fruit trees, and beasts of the earth. But now is it not said either
unto the herbs, or trees, or beasts, or serpents, “Be fruitful and
multiply;” since all these also, as well as fishes, and fowls, and men,
do by propagation increase and preserve their kind.

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p4"></span>36. What, then, shall I say, O Thou
Truth, my Light,—“that it was idly and vainly said?” Not so, O Father of
piety; far be it from a minister of Thy word to say this. But if I
understand not what Thou meanest by that phrase, let my betters—that is,
those more intelligent than I—use it better, in proportion as Thou, O my
God, hast given to each to understand. But let my confession be also
pleasing before Thine eyes, in which I confess to Thee that I believe, O
Lord, that Thou hast not thus spoken in vain; nor will I be silent as to
what this lesson suggests to me. For it is true, nor do I see what
should prevent me from thus understanding the figurative sayings <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389) of Thy books. For I know a thing
may be manifoldly signified by bodily expression which is understood in
one manner by the mind; and that that may be manifoldly understood in
the mind which is in one manner signified by bodily expression. Behold,
the single love of God and of our neighbour, by what manifold sacraments
and innumerable languages, and in each several language in how
innumerable modes of speaking, it is bodily expressed. Thus do the young
of the waters increase and multiply. Observe again, whosoever thou art
who readest; behold what Scripture delivers, and the voice pronounces in
one only way, “In the beginning God created heaven and earth;” is it not
manifoldly understood, not by any deceit of error, but by divers kinds
of true senses? <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) Thus are the
offspring of men “fruitful” and do “multiply.”

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p7"></span>37. If, therefore, we conceive of the
natures of things, not allegorically, but properly, then does the
phrase, “be fruitful and multiply,” correspond to all things which are
begotten of seed. But if we treat those words as taken figuratively (the
which I rather suppose the Scripture intended, which doth not, verily,
superfluously attribute this benediction to the offspring of marine
animals and man only), then do we find that “multitude” belongs also to
creatures both spiritual and corporeal, as in heaven and in earth; and
to souls both righteous and unrighteous, as in light and darkness; and
to holy authors, through whom the law has been furnished unto us, as in
the firmament <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391) which has been
firmly placed betwixt waters and waters; and to the society of people
yet endued with bitterness, as in the sea; and to the desire of holy
souls, as in the dry land; and to works of mercy pertaining to this
present life, as in the seed-bearing herbs and fruit-bearing trees; and
to spiritual gifts shining forth for edification, as in the lights of
heaven; and to affections formed unto temperance, as in the living soul.
In all these cases we meet with multitudes, abundance, and increase; but
what shall thus “be fruitful and multiply,” <span id="page_203">p.
203</span> <span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-Page_203"></span>that one thing may be
expressed in many ways, and one expression understood in many ways, we
discover not, unless in signs corporeally expressed, and in things
mentally conceived. We understand the signs corporeally pronounced as
the generations of the waters, necessarily occasioned by carnal depth;
but things mentally conceived we understand as human generations, on
account of the fruitfulness of reason. And therefore do we believe that
to each kind of these it has been said by Thee, O Lord, “Be fruitful and
multiply.” For in this blessing I acknowledge that power and faculty has
been granted unto us, by Thee, both to express in many ways what we
understand but in one, and to understand in many ways what we read as
obscurely delivered but in one. Thus are the waters of the sea
replenished, which are not moved but by various significations; thus
even with the human offspring is the earth also replenished, the
dryness <span id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392) whereof appeareth in
its desire, and reason ruleth over it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[202:1389](1010290.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p3"></span> [Gen.
1.28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span
id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[202:1390](1010290.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p5"></span> See p. 92, note 1, above.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[202:1391](1010290.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p6"></span> See p. 189, note 2, above.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[202:1392](1010290.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p8"></span> See p. 199, note 3, above.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[203:1393](1010290.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XIII.XXIV-p9"></span> See sec. 21, and note, above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](1010291)
