[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010336)  [Next](1010338) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXX-p1.1"></span>Letter XXX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 396.)

<span id="vii.1.XXX-p3"></span>This letter of Paulinus was written
before receiving a reply to his former letter, No. 27, p. 248.

<span id="vii.1.XXX-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXX-p4.1"></span>To Augustin, Our Lord and Holy and Beloved
Brother, Paulinus and Therasia, Sinners, Send Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXX-p5"></span>1. My beloved brother in Christ the Lord,
having through your holy and pious works come to know you without your
knowledge, and to see you though absent long ago, my mind embraced you
with unreserved affection, and I hastened to secure the gratification of
hearing you through familiar brotherly exchange of letters. I believe
also that by the Lord’s hand and favour my letter has reached you; but
as the youth whom, before winter, we had sent to salute you and others
equally loved in God’s name, has not returned, we could no longer either
put off what we feel to be our duty, or restrain the vehemence of our
desire to hear from you. If, then, my former letter has been found
worthy to reach you, this is the second; if, however, it was not so
fortunate as to come to your hand, accept this as the first.

<span id="vii.1.XXX-p6"></span>2. But, my brother, judging all things as
a spiritual man, do not estimate our love to you by the duty which we
render, or the frequency of our letters. For the Lord, who everywhere,
as one and the same, worketh His love in His own, is witness that, from
the time when, by the kindness of the venerable bishops Aurelius and
Alypius, we came to know you through your writings against the
Manichæans, love for you has taken such a place in us, that we seemed
not so much to be acquiring a new friendship as reviving an old
affection. Now at length we address you in writing; and though we are
novices in expressing, we are not novices in feeling love to you; and by
communion of the spirit, which is the inner man, we are as it were
acquainted with you. Nor is it strange that though distant we are near,
though unknown we are well known to each other; for we are members of
one body, having one Head, enjoying the effusion of the same grace,
living by the same bread, walking in the same way, and dwelling in the
same home. In short, in all that makes up our being,—in the whole faith
and hope by which we stand in the present life, or labour for that which
is to come,—we are both in the spirit and in the body of Christ so
united, that if we fell from this union we would cease to be.

<span id="vii.1.XXX-p7"></span>3. How small a thing, therefore, is that
which our bodily separation denies to us!—for it is nothing more than
one of those fruits that gratify the eyes, which are occupied only with
the things of time. And yet, perhaps, we should not number this pleasure
which in the body we enjoy among the blessings which are only in time
the portion of spiritual men, to whose bodies the resurrection will
impart immortality; as we, though in ourselves unworthy, are bold to
expect, through the merit of Christ and the mercy of God the Father.
Wherefore I pray that the grace of God by our Lord Jesus Christ may
grant unto us this favour too, that we may yet see your face. Not only
would this bring great gratification to our desires; but by it
illumination would be brought to our minds, and our poverty would be
enriched by your abundance. This indeed you may grant to us even while
we are absent from you, especially on the present occasion, through our
sons Romanus and Agilis, beloved and most dear to us in the Lord (whom
as our second selves we commend to you), when they return to us in the
Lord’s name, after fulfilling the labour of love in which they are
engaged; in which work we beg that they may especially enjoy the
goodwill of your Charity. For you know what high rewards the Most High
promises to the brother who gives his brother help. If you are pleased
to impart to me any gift of the grace that has been bestowed on you, you
may safely do it through them; for, believe me, they are of one heart
and of one mind with us in the Lord. May the grace of God always abide
as it is with you, O brother beloved, venerable, most dear, and longed
for in Christ the Lord! Salute on our behalf all the saints in Christ
who are with you, for doubtless such attach themselves to your
fellowship; commend us to them all, that they may, along with yourself,
remember us in prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXXI](1010338)
