[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010324)  [Next](1010326) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter XVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 390.)

<span id="vii.1.XVIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XVIII-p3.1"></span>To Cœlestinus Augustin Sends
Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XVIII-p4"></span>1. Oh how I wish that I could
continually say one thing to you! It is this: Let us shake off the
burden of unprofitable cares, and bear only those which are useful. For
I do not know whether anything like complete exemption from care is to
be hoped for in this world. I wrote to you, but have received no reply.
I sent you as many of my books against the Manichæans as I could send in
a finished and revised condition, and as yet nothing has been
communicated to me as to the impression they have made on your <span
id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477) judgment and feelings. It is now a
fitting opportunity for me to ask them back, and for you to return them.
I beg you therefore not to lose time in sending them, along with a
letter from yourself, by which I eagerly long to know what you are doing
with them, or with what further help you think that you require still to
be furnished in order to assail that error with success.

<span id="vii.1.XVIII-p6"></span><span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span
id="vii.1.XVIII-Page_236"></span>2. As I know you well, I ask you to
accept and ponder the following brief sentences on a great theme. There
is a nature which is susceptible of change with respect to both place
and time, namely, the corporeal. There is another nature which is in no
way susceptible of change with respect to place, but only with respect
to time, namely, the spiritual. And there is a third Nature which can be
changed neither in respect to place nor in respect to time: that is,
God. Those natures of which I have said that they are mutable in some
respect are called creatures; the Nature which is immutable is called
Creator. Seeing, however, that we affirm the existence of anything only
in so far as it continues and is one (in consequence of which, unity is
the condition essential to beauty in every form), you cannot fail to
distinguish, in this classification of natures, which exists in the
highest possible manner; and which occupies the lowest place, yet is
within the range of existence; and which occupies the middle place,
greater than the lowest, but coming short of the highest. That highest
is essential blessedness; the lowest, that which cannot be either
blessed or wretched; and the intermediate nature lives in wretchedness
when it stoops towards that which is lowest, and in blessedness when it
turns towards that which is highest. He who believes in Christ does not
sink his affections in that which is lowest, is not proudly
self-sufficient in that which is intermediate, and thus he is qualified
for union and fellowship with that which is highest; and this is the sum
of the active life to which we are commanded, admonished, and by holy
zeal impelled to aspire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[235:1478](1010325.htm#fr_1477) <span
id="vii.1.XVIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XVIII-p5"></span> The sense here obviously requires
“*vestri*” instead of “ *nostri,*” which is in the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XIX](1010326)
