[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010029)  [Next](1010031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.I_1.XIV"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIV-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIV-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.I_1.XIV-p2.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Why He Despised Greek
Literature, and Easily Learned Latin.</span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIV-p3"></span>23. But why, then, did I dislike Greek
learn<span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="vi.I_1.XIV-Page_52"></span>ing which was full of like tales? <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) For Homer also was skilled in
inventing similar stories, and is most sweetly vain, yet was he
disagreeable to me as a boy. I believe Virgil, indeed, would be the same
to Grecian children, if compelled to learn him, as I was Homer. The
difficulty, in truth, the difficulty of learning a foreign language
mingled as it were with gall all the sweetness of those fabulous Grecian
stories. For not a single word of it did I understand, and to make me do
so, they vehemently urged me with cruel threatenings and punishments.
There was a time also when (as an infant) I knew no Latin; but this I
acquired without any fear or tormenting, by merely taking notice, amid
the blandishments of my nurses, the jests of those who smiled on me, and
the sportiveness of those who toyed with me. I learnt all this, indeed,
without being urged by any pressure of punishment, for my own heart
urged me to bring forth its own conceptions, which I could not do unless
by learning words, not of those who taught me, but of those who talked
to me; into whose ears, also, I brought forth whatever I discerned. From
this it is sufficiently clear that a free curiosity hath more influence
in our learning these things than a necessity full of fear. But this
last restrains the overflowings of that freedom, through Thy laws, O
God,—Thy laws, from the ferule of the schoolmaster to the trials of the
martyr, being effective to mingle for us a salutary bitter, calling us
back to Thyself from the pernicious delights which allure us from Thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[52:171](1010030.htm#fr_170) <span
id="vi.I_1.XIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.I_1.XIV-p4"></span> Exaggerated statements have been made
as to Augustin’s deficiency in the knowledge of Greek. In this place it
is clear that he simply alludes to a repugnance to learn a foreign
language that has often been seen in boys since his day. It would seem
equally clear from Bk. vii. sec. 13 (see also *De Trin.* iii. sec. 1),
that when he could get a translation of a Greek book, he preferred it to
one in the original language. Perhaps in this, again, he is not
altogether singular. It is difficult to decide the exact extent of his
knowledge, but those familiar with his writings can scarcely fail to be
satisfied that he had a sufficient acquaintance with the language to
correct his Italic version by the Greek Testament and the LXX., and that
he was quite alive to the importance of such knowledge in an interpreter
of Scripture. See also *Con. Faust*, xi. 2–4; and *De Doctr. Christ.*
ii. 11–15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](1010031)
