[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010460)  [Next](1010462) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-p2.1"></span>September</span> 26TH, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> 426.)

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-p3.1"></span>Record, Prepared by St. Augustin, of the
Proceedings on the Occasion of His Designating Eraclius to Succeed Him
in the Episcopal Chair, and to Relieve Him Meanwhile in His Old Age of a
Part of His Responsibilities.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p4"></span>*In the Church of Peace in the
district of Hippo Regius, on the 26th day of September in the year of
the twelfth consulship of the most renowned Theodosius, and of the
second consulship of Valentinian Augustus:* <span
id="fr_2934"></span>[2935](#fn_2934) <span id="page_569">p. 569</span>
<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-Page_569"></span>*—Bishop Augustin having taken
his seat along with his fellow bishops Religianus and Martinianus, there
being present Saturninus, Leporius, Barnabas, Fortunatianus, Rusticus,
Lazarus, and Eraclius,—presbyters,—while the clergy and a large
congregation of laymen stood by,—Bishop Augustin said:—*

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p6"></span>“The business which I brought before
you yesterday, my beloved, as one in connection with which I wished you
to attend, as I see you have done in greater numbers than usual, must be
at once disposed of. For while your minds are anxiously preoccupied with
it, you would scarcely listen to me if I were to speak of any other
subject. We all are mortal, and the day which shall be the last of life
on earth is to every man at all times uncertain; but in infancy there is
hope of entering on boyhood, and so our hope goes on, looking forward
from boyhood to youth, from youth to manhood, and from manhood to old
age: whether these hopes may be realized or not is uncertain, but there
is in each case something which may be hoped for. But old age has no
other period of this life to look forward to with expectation: how long
old age may in any case be prolonged is uncertain, but it is certain
that no other age destined to take its place lies beyond. I came to this
town—for such was the will of God—when I was in the prime of life. I was
young then, but now I am old. I know that churches are wont to be
disturbed after the decease of their bishops by ambitious or contentious
parties, and I feel it to be my duty to take measures to prevent this
community from suffering, in connection with my decease, that which I
have often observed and lamented elsewhere. You are aware, my beloved,
that I recently visited the Church of Milevi; for certain brethren, and
especially the servants of God there, requested me to come, because some
disturbance was apprehended after the death of my brother and fellow
bishop Severus, of blessed memory. I went accordingly, and the Lord was
in mercy pleased so to help us that they harmoniously accepted as bishop
the person designated by their former bishop his lifetime; for when this
designation had become known to them, they willingly acquiesced in the
choice which he had made. An omission, however, had occurred by which
some were dissatisfied; for brother Severus, believing that it might be
sufficient for him to mention to the clergy the name of his successor,
did not speak of the matter to the people, which gave rise to
dissatisfaction in the minds of some. But why should I say more? By the
good pleasure of God, the dissatisfaction was removed, joy took its
place in the minds of all, and he was ordained as bishop whom Severus
had proposed. To obviate all such occasion of complaint in this case, I
now intimate to all here my desire, which I believe to be also the will
of God: I wish to have for my successor the presbyter Eraclius.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p7"></span>The people shouted, “To God be thanks!
To Christ be praise” (this was repeated twenty-three times). “O Christ,
hear us; may Augustin live long!” (repeated sixteen times). “We will
have thee as our father, thee as our bishop” (repeated eight times).

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p8"></span>2. *Silence having been obtained,
Bishop Augustin said:—*

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p9"></span>“It is unnecessary for me to say
anything in praise of Eraclius; I esteem his wisdom and spare his
modesty; it is enough that you know him: and I declare that I desire in
regard to him what I know you also to desire, and if I had not known it
before, I would have had proof of it today. This, therefore, I desire;
this I ask from the Lord our God in prayers, the warmth of which is not
abated by the chill of age; this I exhort, admonish, and entreat you
also to pray for along with me,—that God may confirm that, which He has
wrought in us <span id="fr_2935"></span>[2936](#fn_2935) by blending and
fusing together the minds of all in the peace of Christ. May He who has
sent him to me preserve him! preserve him safe, preserve him blameless,
that as he gives me joy while I live, he may fill my place when I die.

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p11"></span>“The notaries of the church are, as
you observe, recording what I say, and recording what you say; both my
address and your acclamations are not allowed to fall to the ground. To
speak more plainly, we are making up an ecclesiastical record of this
day’s proceedings; for I wish them to be in this way confirmed so far as
pertains to men.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p12"></span>The people shouted thirty-six times,
“To God be thanks! To Christ be praise!” O Christ, hear us; may Augustin
live long!” was said thirteen times. “Thee, our father! thee, our
bishop!” was said eight times. “He is worthy and just,” was said twenty
times. “Well deserving, well worthy!” was said five times. “He is worthy
and just!” was said six times.

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p13"></span>3. *Silence having been obtained,
Bishop Augustin said:—*

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p14"></span>“It is my wish, as I was just now
saying, that my desire and your desire be confirmed, so far as pertains
to men, by being placed on an ecclesiastical record; but so far as
pertains to the will of the Almighty, let us all pray, as I said <span
id="page_570">p. 570</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-Page_570"></span>before, that God would confirm that
which He has wrought in us.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p15"></span>The people shouted, saying sixteen
times, “We give thanks for your decision:” then twelve times, “Agreed!
Agreed!” and then six times, “Thee, our father! Eraclius, our bishop!”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p16"></span>4. *Silence having been obtained,
Bishop Augustin said:—*

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p17"></span>“I approve of that of which you also
express your approval; <span id="fr_2936"></span>[2937](#fn_2936) but I
do not wish that to be done in regard to him which was done in my own
case. What was done many of you know; in fact, all of you, excepting
only those who at that time were not born, or had not attained to the
years of understanding. When my father and bishop, the aged Valerius, of
blessed memory, was still living, I was ordained bishop and occupied the
episcopal see along with him which I did not know to have been forbidden
by the Council of Nice; and he was equally ignorant of the prohibition.
I do not wish to have my son here exposed to the same censure as was
incurred in my own case.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p19"></span>The people shouted, saying thirteen
times, “To God be thanks! To Christ be praise!”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p20"></span>5. *Silence having been obtained,
Bishop Augustin said:—*

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p21"></span>“He shall be as he now is, a
presbyter, meanwhile; but afterwards, at such time as may please God,
your bishop. But now I will assuredly begin to do, as the compassion of
Christ may enable me, what I have not hitherto done. You know what for
several years I would have done, had you permitted me. It was agreed
between you and me that no one should intrude on me for five days of
each week, that I might discharge the duty in the study of Scripture
which my brethren and fathers the co-bishops were pleased to assign to
me in the two councils of Numidia and Carthage. The agreement was duly
recorded, you gave your consent, you signified it by acclamations. The
record of your consent and of your acclamations, was read aloud to you.
For a short time the agreement was observed by you; afterwards, it was
violated without consideration, and I am not permitted to have leisure
for the work which I wish to do: forenoon and afternoon alike, I am
involved in the affairs of other people demanding my attention. I now
beseech you, and solemnly engage you, for Christ’s sake, to suffer me to
devolve the burden of this part of my labours on this young man, I mean
on Eraclius, the presbyter, whom today I designate in the name of Christ
as my successor in the office of bishop.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p22"></span>The people shouted, saying twenty-six
times, “We give thanks for your decision.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p23"></span>6. *Silence having been obtained,
Bishop Augustin said:—*

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p24"></span>“I give thanks before the Lord our
God for your love and your goodwill; yes, I give thanks to God for
these. Wherefore, henceforth, my brethren, let everything which was wont
to be brought by you to me be brought to him. In any case in which he
may think my advice necessary, I will not refuse it; far be it from me
to withdraw this: nevertheless, let everything be brought to him which
used to be brought to me. Let Eraclius himself, if in any case,
perchance, he be at a loss as to what should be done, either consult me,
or claim an assistant in me, whom he has known as a father. By this
arrangement you will, on the one hand, suffer no disadvantage, and I
will at length, for the brief space during which God may prolong my
life, devote the remainder of my days, be they few or many, not to
idleness nor to the indulgence of a love of ease, but, so far as
Eraclius kindly gives me leave, to the study of the sacred Scriptures:
this also will be of service to him, and through him to you likewise.
Let no one therefore grudge me this leisure, for I claim it only in
order to do important work.

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p25"></span>“I see that I have now transacted
with you all the business necessary in the matter for which I called you
together. The last thing I have to ask is, that as many of you as are
able be pleased to subscribe your names to this record. At this point I
require a response from you. Let me have it: show your assent by some
acclamations.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p26"></span>The people shouted, saying
twenty-five times, “Agreed! agreed!” then twenty-eight times, “It is
worthy, it is just!” then fourteen times, “Agreed! agreed!” then
twenty-five times, “He has long been worthy, he has long been
deserving!” then thirteen times, “We give thanks for your decision!”
then eighteen times, “O Christ, hear us; preserve Eraclius!”

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p27"></span>7. *Silence having been obtained,
Bishop Augustin said:—*

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p28"></span>“It is well that we are able to
transact around His sacrifice those things which belong to God; and in
this hour appointed for our supplications, I especially exhort you,
beloved, to suspend all your occupations and business, and pour out
before the Lord your petitions for this church, and for me, and for the
presbyter Eraclius.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2934"></span>[568:2935](1010461.htm#fr_2934) <span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p5"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-p5.1"></span>A.D.</span> 426.

<span id="fn_2935"></span>[569:2936](1010461.htm#fr_2935) <span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p10"></span> [Ps.
68.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028)<span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2936"></span>[570:2937](1010461.htm#fr_2936) <span
id="vii.1.CCXIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXIII-p18"></span> Referring to their last words,
giving to Eraclius the title of bishop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCXVIII](1010462)
