[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010403)  [Next](1010405) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter XCVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408.)

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p3.1"></span>To Boniface, His Colleague in the
Episcopal Office, Augustin Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p4"></span>1. You ask me to state “whether
parents do harm to their baptized infant children, when they attempt to
heal them in time of sickness by sacrifices to the false gods of the
heathen.” Also, “if they do thereby no harm to their children, how can
any advantage come to these children at their baptism, through the faith
of parents whose departure from the faith does them no harm?” To which I
reply, that in the holy union of the parts of the body of Christ, so
great is the virtue of that sacrament, namely, of baptism, which brings
salvation, that so soon as he who owed his first birth to others, acting
under the impulse of natural instincts, has been made partaker of the
second birth by others, acting under the impulse of spiritual desires,
he cannot be thenceforward held under the bond of that sin in another to
which he does not with his own will consent. “Both the soul of the
father is mine,” saith the Lord, “and the soul of the son is mine: the
soul that sinneth, it shall die;” <span
id="fr_2305"></span>[2306](#fn_2305) but he does not sin on whose behalf
his parents or any other one resort, without his knowledge, to the
impiety of worshipping heathen deities. That bond of guilt which was to
be <span id="page_407">p. 407</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-Page_407"></span>cancelled by the grace of this
sacrament he derived from Adam, for this reason, that at the time of
Adam’s sin he was not yet a soul having a separate life, *i.e.* another
soul regarding which it could be said, “both the soul of the father is
mine, and the soul of the son is mine.” Therefore now, when the man has
a personal, separate existence, being thereby made distinct from his
parents, he is not held responsible for that sin in another which is
performed without his consent. In the former case, he derived guilt from
another, because, at the time when the guilt which he has derived was
incurred, he was one with the person from whom he derived it, and was in
him. But one man does not derive guilt from another, when, through the
fact that each has a separate life belonging to himself, the word may
apply equally to both—“The soul that sinneth, it shall die.”

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p6"></span>2. But the possibility of regeneration
through the office rendered by the will of another, when the child is
presented to receive the sacred rite, is the work exclusively of the
Spirit by whom the child thus presented is regenerated. For it is not
written, “Except a man be born again by the will of his parents, or by
the faith of those presenting the child, or of those administering the
ordinance,” but, “Except a man be born again of water and of the
Spirit.” <span id="fr_2306"></span>[2307](#fn_2306) By the water,
therefore, which holds forth the sacrament of grace in its outward form,
and by the Spirit who bestows the benefit of grace in its inward power,
cancelling the bond of guilt, and restoring natural goodness
\[reconcilians bonum naturæ\], the man deriving his first birth
originally from Adam alone, is regenerated in Christ alone. Now the
regenerating Spirit is possessed in common both by the parents who
present the child, and by the infant that is presented and is born
again; wherefore, in virtue of this participation in the same Spirit,
the will of those who present the infant is useful to the child. But
when the parents sin against the child by presenting him to the false
gods of the heathen, and attempting to bring him under impious bonds
unto these false gods, there is not such community of souls subsisting
between the parents and the child, that the guilt of one party can be
common to both alike. For we are not made partakers of guilt along with
others through their will, in the same way as we are made partakers of
grace along with others through the unity of the Holy Spirit; because
the one Holy Spirit can be in two different persons without their
knowing in respect to each other that by Him grace is the common
possession of both, but the human spirit cannot so belong to two
individuals as to make the blame common to both in a case in which one
of the two sins, and the other does not sin. Therefore a child, having
once received natural birth through his parents, can be made partaker of
the second (or spiritual) birth by the Spirit of God, so that the bond
of guilt which he inherited from his parents is cancelled; but he that
has once received this second birth by the Spirit of God cannot be made
again partaker of natural birth through his parents, so that the bond
once cancelled should again bind him. And thus, when the grace of Christ
has been once received, the child does not lose it otherwise than by his
own impiety, if, when he becomes older, he turn out so ill. For by that
time he will begin to have sins of his own, which cannot be removed by
regeneration, but must be healed by other remedial measures.

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p8"></span>3. Nevertheless, persons of more
advanced fears, whether they be parents bringing their children, or
others bringing any little ones, who attempt to place those who have
been baptized under obligation to profane worship of heathen gods, are
guilty of spiritual homicide. True, they do not actually kill the
children’s souls, but they go as far towards killing them as is in their
power. The warning, “Do not kill your little ones,” may be with all
propriety addressed to them; for the apostle says, “Quench not the
Spirit;” <span id="fr_2307"></span>[2308](#fn_2307) not that He can be
quenched, but that those who so act as if they wished to have Him
quenched are deservedly spoken of as quenchers of the Spirit. In this
sense also may be rightly understood the words which most blessed
Cyprian wrote in his letter concerning the lapsed, when, rebuking those
who in the time of persecution had sacrificed to idols, he says, “And
that nothing might be wanting to fill up the measure of their crime,
their infant children, carried in arms, or led thither by the hands of
their parents, lost, while yet in their infancy, that which they had
received as soon as life began.” <span
id="fr_2308"></span>[2309](#fn_2308) They lost it, he meant, so far at
least as pertained to the guilt of the crime of those by whom they were
compelled to incur the loss: they lost it, that is to say, in the
purpose and wish of those who perpetrated on them such a wrong. For had
they actually in their own persons lost it, they must have remained
under the divine sentence of condemnation without any plea; but if holy
Cyprian had been of this opinion, he would not have added in the
immediate context a plea in their defence, saying, “Shall not these say,
when the judgment-day has come: ‘We have done nothing; we have not of
our own accord hastened to participate in profane rites, forsaking the
bread and <span id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-Page_408"></span>the cup of the Lord; the apostasy of
others caused our destruction; we found our parents murderers, for they
deprived us of our Mother the Church and of our Father the Lord, so
that, through the wrong done by others, we were ensnared, because, while
yet young and unable to think for ourselves, we were by the deed of
others, and while wholly ignorant of such a crime, made partners in
their sin’?” This plea in their defence he would not have subjoined had
he not believed it to be perfectly just, and one which would be of
service to these infants at the bar of divine judgment. For if it is
said by them with truth, “We have done nothing,” then “the soul that
sinneth, it shall die;” and in the just dispensation of judgment by God,
those shall not be doomed to perish whose souls their parents did, so
far at least as concerns their own guilt in the transaction, bring to
ruin.

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p11"></span>4. As to the incident mentioned in
the same letter, that a girl who was left as an infant in charge of her
nurse, when her parents had escaped by sudden flight, and was made by
that nurse to take part in the profane rites of idolatrous worship, had
afterwards in the Church expelled from her mouth, by wonderful motions,
the Eucharist when it was given to her, this seems to me to have been
caused by divine interposition, in order that persons of riper years
might not imagine that in this sin they do no wrong to the children, but
rather might understand, by means of a bodily action of obvious
significance on the part of those who were unable to speak, that a
miraculous warning was given to themselves as to the course which would
have been becoming in persons who, after so great a crime, rushed
heedlessly to those sacraments from which they ought by all means, in
proof of penitence, to have abstained. When Divine Providence does
anything of this kind by means of infant children, we must not believe
that they are acting under the guidance of knowledge and reason; just as
we are not called upon to admire the wisdom of asses, because once God
was pleased to rebuke the madness of a prophet by the voice of an
ass. <span id="fr_2309"></span>[2310](#fn_2309) If, therefore, a sound
exactly like the human voice was uttered by an irrational animal, and
this was to be ascribed to a divine miracle, not to faculties belonging
to the ass, the Almighty could, in like manner, through the spirit of an
infant (in which reason was not absent, but only slumbering
undeveloped), make manifest by a motion of its body something to which
those who had sinned against both their own souls and their children
behoved to give heed. But since a child cannot return to become again a
part of the author of his natural life, so as to be one with him and in
him, but is a wholly distinct individual, having a body and a soul of
his own, “the soul that sinneth, it shall die.”

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p13"></span>5. Some, indeed, bring their little
ones for baptism, not in the believing expectation that they shall be
regenerated unto life eternal by spiritual grace, but because they think
that by this as a remedy the children may recover or retain bodily
health; but let not this disquiet your mind, because their regeneration
is not prevented by the fact that this blessing has no place in the
intention of those by whom they are presented for baptism. For by these
persons the ministerial actions which are necessary are performed, and
the sacramental words are pronounced, without which the infant cannot be
consecrated to God. But the Holy Spirit who dwells in the saints, in
those, namely, whom the glowing flame of love has fused together into
the one Dove whose wings are covered with silver, <span
id="fr_2310"></span>[2311](#fn_2310) accomplishes His work even by the
ministry of bond-servants, of persons who are sometimes not only
ignorant through simplicity, but even culpably unworthy to be employed
by Him. The presentation of the little ones to receive the spiritual
grace is the act not so much of those by whose hands they are borne up
(although it is theirs also in part, if they themselves are good
believers) as of the whole society of saints and believers. For it is
proper to regard the infants as presented by all who take pleasure in
their baptism, and through whose holy and perfectly-united love they are
assisted in receiving the communion of the Holy Spirit. Therefore this
is done by the whole mother Church, which is in the saints, because the
whole Church is the parent of all the saints, and the whole Church is
the parent of each one of them. For if the sacrament of Christian
baptism, being always one and the same, is of value even when
administered by heretics, and though not in that case sufficing to
secure to the baptized person participation in eternal life, does
suffice to seal his consecration to God; and if this consecration makes
him who, having the mark of the Lord, remains outside of the Lord’s
flock, guilty as a heretic, but reminds us at the same time that he is
to be corrected by sound doctrine, but not to be a second time
consecrated by repetition of the ordinance;—if this be the case even in
the baptism of heretics, how much more credible is it that within the
Catholic Church that which is only straw should be of service in bearing
the grain to the floor in which it is to be winnowed, and by means of
which it is to be prepared for being added to the heap of good grain!

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p15"></span>6. I would, moreover, wish you not to
remain under the mistake of supposing that the bond <span
id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span id="vii.1.XCVIII-Page_409"></span>of
guilt which is inherited from Adam cannot be cancelled in any other way
than by the parents themselves presenting their little ones to receive
the grace of Christ; for you write: “As the parents have been the
authors of the life which makes them liable to condemnation, the
children should receive justification through the same channel, through
the faith of the same parents;” whereas you see that many are not
presented by parents, but also by any strangers whatever, as sometimes
the infant children of slaves are presented by their masters. Sometimes
also, when their parents are deceased, little orphans are baptized,
being presented by those who had it in their power to manifest their
compassion in this way. Again, sometimes foundlings which heartless
parents have exposed in order to their being cared for by any passer-by,
are picked up by holy virgins, and are presented for baptism by these
persons, who neither have nor desire to have children of their own: and
in this you behold precisely what was done in the case mentioned in the
Gospel of the man wounded by thieves, and left half dead on the way,
regarding whom the Lord asked who was neighbour to him, and received for
answer: “He that showed mercy on him.” <span
id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311)

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p17"></span>7. That which you have placed at the
end of your series of questions you have judged to be the most
difficult, because of the jealous care with which you are wont to avoid
whatever is false. You state it thus: “If I place before you an infant,
and ask, ‘Will this child when he grows up be chaste?’ or ‘Will he not
be a thief?’ you will reply, ‘I know not.’ If I ask, ‘Is he in his
present infantile condition thinking what is good or thinking what is
evil?’ you will reply, ‘I know not.’ If, therefore, you do not venture
to take the responsibility of making any positive statement concerning
either his conduct in after life or his thoughts at the time, what is
that which parents do, when, in presenting their children for baptism,
they as sureties (or sponsors) answer for the children, and say that
they do that which at that age they are incapable even of understanding,
or, at least, in regard to which their thoughts (if they can think) are
hidden from us? For we ask those by whom the child is presented, ‘Does
he believe in God?’ and though at that age the child does not so much as
know that there is a God, the sponsors reply, ‘He believes;’ and in like
manner answer is returned by them to each of the other questions. Now I
am surprised that parents can in these things answer so confidently on
the child’s behalf as to say, at the time when they are answering the
questions of the persons administering baptism, that the infant is doing
what is so remarkable and so excellent; and yet if at the same hour I
were to add such questions as, ‘Will the child who is now being baptized
be chaste when he grows up? Will he not be a thief?’ probably no one
would presume to answer, ‘He will’ or ‘He will not,’ although there is
no hesitation in giving the answer that the child believes in God, and
turns himself to God.” Thereafter you add this sentence in conclusion:
“To these questions I pray you to condescend to give me a short reply,
not silencing me by the traditional authority of custom, but satisfying
me by arguments addressed to my reason.”

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p18"></span>8. While reading this letter of yours
over and over again, and pondering its contents so far as my limited
time permitted, memory recalled to me my friend Nebridius, who, while he
was a most diligent and eager student of difficult problems, especially
in the department of Christian doctrine, had an extreme aversion to the
giving of a short answer to a great question. If any one insisted upon
this, he was exceedingly displeased; and if he was not prevented by
respect for the age or rank of the person, he indignantly rebuked such a
questioner by stern looks and words; for he considered him unworthy to
be investigating matters such as these, who did not know how much both
might be said and behoved to be said on a subject of great importance.
But I do not lose patience with you, as he was wont to do when one asked
a brief reply; for you are, as I am, a bishop engrossed with many cares,
and therefore have not leisure for reading any more than I have leisure
for writing any prolix communication. He was then a young man, who was
not satisfied with short statements on subjects of this kind, and being
then himself at leisure, addressed his questions concerning the many
topics discussed in our conversations to one who was also at leisure;
whereas you, having regard to the circumstances both of yourself the
questioner, and of me from whom you demand the reply, insist upon my
giving you a short answer to the weighty question which you propound.
Well, I shall do my best to satisfy you; the Lord help me to accomplish
what you require.

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p19"></span>9. You know that in ordinary parlance
we often say, when Easter is approaching, “Tomorrow or the day after is
the Lord’s Passion,” although He suffered so many years ago, and His
passion was endured once for all time. In like manner, on Easter Sunday,
we say, “This day the Lord rose from the dead,” although so many years
have passed since His resurrection. But no one is so foolish as to
accuse us of falsehood when we use these phrases, for this reason, that
we give such names to these days on the ground of a likeness between
them and the days on which the events referred to actually tran<span
id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-Page_410"></span>spired, the day being called the day
of that event, although it is not the very day on which the event took
place, but one corresponding to it by the revolution of the same time of
the year, and the event itself being said to take place on that day,
because, although it really took place long before, it is on that day
sacramentally celebrated. Was not Christ once for all offered up in His
own person as a sacrifice? and yet, is He not likewise offered up in the
sacrament as a sacrifice, not only in the special solemnities of Easter,
but also daily among our congregations; so that the man who, being
questioned, answers that He is offered as a sacrifice in that ordinance,
declares what is strictly true? For if sacraments had not some points of
real resemblance to the things of which they are the sacraments, they
would not be sacraments at all. In most cases, moreover, they do in
virtue of this likeness bear the names of the realities which they
resemble. As, therefore, in a certain manner the sacrament of Christ’s
body is Christ’s body, and the sacrament of Christ’s blood is Christ’s
blood, <span id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312) in the same manner the
sacrament of faith is faith. Now believing is nothing else than having
faith; and accordingly, when, on behalf of an infant as yet incapable of
exercising faith, the answer is given that he believes, this answer
means that he has faith because of the sacrament of faith, and in like
manner the answer is made that he turns himself to God because of the
sacrament of conversion, since the answer itself belongs to the
celebration of the sacrament. Thus the apostle says, in regard to this
sacrament of Baptism: “We are buried with Christ by baptism into
death.” <span id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313) He does not say, “We
have signified our being buried with Him,” but “We have been buried with
Him.” He has therefore given to the sacrament pertaining to so great a
transaction no other name than the word describing the transaction
itself.

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p22"></span>10. Therefore an infant, although he
is not yet a believer in the sense of having that faith which includes
the consenting will of those who exercise it, nevertheless becomes a
believer through the sacrament of that faith. For as it is answered that
he believes, so also he is called a believer, not because he assents to
the truth by an act of his own judgment, but because he receives the
sacrament of that truth. When, however, he begins to have the discretion
of manhood, he will not repeat the sacrament, but understand its
meaning, and become conformed to the truth which it contains, with his
will also consenting. During the time in which he is by reason of youth
unable to do this, the sacrament will avail for his protection against
adverse powers, and will avail so much on his behalf, that if before he
arrives at the use of reason he depart from this life, he is delivered
by Christian help, namely, by the love of the Church commending him
through this sacrament unto God, from that condemnation which by one man
entered into the world. <span id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314) He
who does not believe this, and thinks that it is impossible, is
assuredly an unbeliever, although he may have received the sacrament of
faith; and far before him in merit is the infant which, though not yet
possessing a faith helped by the understanding, is not obstructing faith
by any antagonism of the understanding, and therefore receives with
profit the sacrament of faith.

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p24"></span>I have answered your questions, as it
seems to me, in a manner which, if I were dealing with persons of weaker
capacity and disposed to gainsaying, would be inadequate, but which is
perhaps more than sufficient to satisfy peaceable and sensible persons.
Moreover, I have not urged in my defence the mere fact that the custom
is thoroughly established, but have to the best of my ability advanced
reasons in support of it as fraught with very abundant blessing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2305"></span>[406:2306](1010404.htm#fr_2305) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p5"></span> [Ezek.
18.4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2306"></span>[407:2307](1010404.htm#fr_2306) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p7"></span> [John
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2307"></span>[407:2308](1010404.htm#fr_2307) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p9"></span> [1 Thess.
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2308"></span>[407:2309](1010404.htm#fr_2308) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p10"></span> Cyprian, *de Lapsis.* See
*Ante-Nicene Fathers*, Am. ed. vol. v. p. 439.

<span id="fn_2309"></span>[408:2310](1010404.htm#fr_2309) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p12"></span> [Num.
22.28](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#028)<span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2310"></span>[408:2311](1010404.htm#fr_2310) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p14"></span> [Ps.
68.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[409:2312](1010404.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p16"></span> [Luke
10.37](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#037)<span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[410:2313](1010404.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p20"></span> As this is an importance, we give
the original words: *Sicut ergo secundum quemdam modum sacramentum
corporis Christi corpus Christi est, sacramentum sanguinis Christi
sangis Christi est, ita sacramentum fidei fides est.*

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[410:2314](1010404.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p21"></span> [Rom.
6.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[410:2315](1010404.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCVIII-p23"></span> [Rom.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XCVIII-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XCIX](1010405)
