[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010051)  [Next](1010053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.III.VI"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.III.VI-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Deceived by His Own Fault, He
Falls into the Errors of the Manichæans, Who Gloried in the True
Knowledge of God and in a Thorough Examination of Things.</span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p2"></span>10. Therefore I fell among men proudly
raving, very carnal, and voluble, in whose mouths were the snares of the
devil—the birdlime being composed of a mixture of the syllables of Thy
name, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Paraclete, the Holy
Ghost, the Comforter. <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) These
names departed not out of their mouths, but so far forth as the sound
only and the clatter of the tongue, for the heart was empty of truth.
Still they cried, “Truth, Truth,” and spoke much about it to me, “yet
was it not in them;” <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) but they
spake falsely not of Thee only—who, verily, art the Truth—but also of
these elements of this world, Thy <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="vi.III.VI-Page_63"></span>creatures. And I, in truth, should have
passed by philosophers, even when speaking truth concerning them, for
love of Thee, my Father, supremely good, beauty of all things beautiful.
O Truth, Truth! how inwardly even then did the marrow of my soul pant
after Thee, when they frequently, and in a multiplicity of ways, and in
numerous and huge books, sounded out Thy name to me, though it was but a
voice! <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) And these were the dishes
in which to me, hungering for Thee, they, instead of Thee, served up the
sun and moon, Thy beauteous works—but yet Thy works, not Thyself, nay,
nor Thy first works. For before these corporeal works are Thy spiritual
ones, celestial and shining though they be. But I hungered and thirsted
not even after those first works of Thine, but after Thee Thyself, the
Truth, “with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning;” <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) yet they still served up to me in
those dishes glowing phantasies, than which better were it to love this
very sun (which, at least, is true to our sight), than those illusions
which deceive the mind through the eye. And yet, because I supposed them
to be Thee, I fed upon them; not with avidity, for Thou didst not taste
to my mouth as Thou art, for Thou wast not these empty fictions; neither
was I nourished by them, but the rather exhausted. Food in our sleep
appears like our food awake; yet the sleepers are not nourished by it,
for they are asleep. But those things were not in any way like unto Thee
as Thou hast now spoken unto me, in that those were corporeal
phantasies, false bodies, than which these true bodies, whether
celestial or terrestrial, which we perceive with our fleshly sight, are
much more certain. These things the very beasts and birds perceive as
well as we, and they are more certain than when we imagine them. And
again, we do with more certainty imagine them, than by them conceive of
other greater and infinite bodies which have no existence. With such
empty husks was I then fed, and was not fed. But Thou, my Love, in
looking for whom I fail <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) that I
may be strong, art neither those bodies that we see, although in heaven,
nor art Thou those which we see not there; for Thou hast created them,
nor dost Thou reckon them amongst Thy greatest works. How far, then, art
Thou from those phantasies of mine, phantasies of bodies which are not
at all, than which the images of those bodies which are, are more
certain, and still more certain the bodies themselves, which yet Thou
art not; nay, nor yet the soul, which is the life of the bodies. Better,
then, and more certain is the life of bodies than the bodies themselves.
But Thou art the life of souls, the life of lives, having life in
Thyself; and Thou changest not, O Life of my soul.

<span id="vi.III.VI-p8"></span>11. Where, then, wert Thou then to me,
and how far from me? Far, indeed, was I wandering away from Thee, being
even shut out from the very husks of the swine, whom with husks I
fed. <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) For how much better, then,
are the fables of the grammarians and poets than these snares! For
verses, and poems, and Medea flying, are more profitable truly than
these men’s five elements, variously painted, to answer to the five
caves of darkness, <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) none of which
exist, and which slay the believer. For verses and poems I can turn
into <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) true food, but the “Medea
flying,” though I sang, I maintained it not; though I heard it sung, I
believed it not; but those things I did believe. Woe, woe, by what steps
was I dragged down “to the depths of hell!” <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) —toiling and turmoiling through want
of Truth, when I sought after Thee, my God,—to Thee I confess it, who
hadst mercy on me when I had not yet confessed,—sought after Thee not
according to the understanding of the mind, in which Thou desiredst that
I should excel the beasts, but according to the sense of the flesh! Thou
wert more inward to me than my most inward part; and higher than my
highest. I came upon that bold woman, who “is simple, and knoweth
nothing,” <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) the enigma of Solomon,
sitting “at the door of the house on a seat,” and saying, “Stolen waters
are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.” <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) This woman seduced me, because she
found my soul beyond its portals, dwelling in the eye of my flesh, and
thinking on such food as through it I had devoured.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_229"></span>[62:230](1010052.htm#fr_229) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p3"></span> So, in Book xxii. sec. 13 of his reply
to Faustus, he charges them with “professing to believe the New
Testament in order to entrap the unwary;” and again, in sec. 15, he
says: “ They claim the impious liberty of holding and teaching, that
whatever they deem favourable to their heresy was said by Christ and the
apostles; while they have the profane boldness to say, that whatever in
the same writings is unfavourable to them is a spurious interpolation.”
They professed to believe in the doctrine of the Trinity, but affirmed
(*ibid.* xx. 6) “that the Father dwells in a secret light, the power of
the Son in the sun, and His wisdom in the moon, and the Holy Spirit in
the air.” It was this employment of the phraseology of Scripture to
convey doctrines utterly unscriptural that rendered their teaching such
a snare to the unwary. See also below, v. 12, note.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[62:231](1010052.htm#fr_230) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p4"></span> [1 John
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#004)<span id="vi.III.VI-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[63:232](1010052.htm#fr_231) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p5"></span> There was something peculiarly
enthralling to an ardent mind like Augustin’s in the Manichæan system.
That system was kindred in many ways to modern Rationalism. Reason was
exalted at the expense of faith. Nothing was received on mere authority,
and the disciple’s inner consciousness was the touchstone of truth. The
result of this is well pointed out by Augustin (*Con. Faust*, xxxii.
sec. 19): “Your design, clearly, is to deprive Scripture of all
authority, and to make every man’s mind the judge what passage of
Scripture he is to approve of, and what to disapprove of. This is not to
be subject to Scripture in matters of faith, but to make Scripture
subject to you. Instead of making the high authority of Scripture the
reason of approval, every man makes his approval the reason for thinking
a passage correct.” Compare also *Con. Faust*, xi. sec. 2, and xxxii.
sec. 16.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[63:233](1010052.htm#fr_232) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p6"></span> [Jas.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="vi.III.VI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[63:234](1010052.htm#fr_233) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p7"></span> [Ps.
69.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003)<span id="vi.III.VI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[63:235](1010052.htm#fr_234) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p9"></span> [Luke
15.16](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#016)<span
id="vi.III.VI-p9.1"></span>; and see below, vi. sec. 3, note.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[63:236](1010052.htm#fr_235) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p10"></span> See below, xii. sec. 6, note.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[63:237](1010052.htm#fr_236) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p11"></span> “Of this passage St. Augustin is
probably speaking when he says, ‘Praises bestowed on bread in simplicity
of heart, let him (Petilian) defame, if he will, by the ludicrous title
of poisoning and corrupting frenzy.’ Augustin meant in mockery, that by
verses he could get his bread; his calumniator seems to have twisted the
word to signify a love-potion.—*Con. Lit. Petiliani*, iii. 16.”—E. B. P.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[63:238](1010052.htm#fr_237) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p12"></span> [Prov.
9.18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018)<span
id="vi.III.VI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[63:239](1010052.htm#fr_238) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p13"></span> [Prov.
9.13](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#013)<span
id="vi.III.VI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[63:240](1010052.htm#fr_239) <span
id="vi.III.VI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.III.VI-p14"></span> [Prov.
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#014),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#017)<span id="vi.III.VI-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](1010053)
