[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010371)  [Next](1010373) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXVI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXVI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXVI-p1.1"></span>Letter LXVI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXVI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXVI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 402.)

<span id="vii.1.LXVI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXVI-p3.1"></span>Addressed, Without Salutation, to Crispinus,
the Donatist Bishop of Calama.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXVI-p4"></span>1. You ought to have been influenced by
the fear of God; but since, in your work of rebaptizing the
Mappalians, <span id="fr_1876"></span>[1877](#fn_1876) you have chosen
to take advantage of the fear with which as man you could inspire them,
let me ask you what hinders the order of the sovereign from being
carried out in the province, when the order of the governor of the
province has been so fully enforced in a village? If you compare the
persons concerned, you are but a vassal in possession; he is the
Emperor. If you compare the positions of both, you are in a property, he
is on a throne; if you compare the causes maintained by both, his aim is
to heal division, and yours is to rend unity in twain. But we do not bid
you stand in awe of man: though we might take steps to compel you to
pay, according to the imperial decree, ten pounds of gold as the penalty
of your outrage. Perhaps you might be unable to pay the fine imposed
upon those who rebaptize members of the Church, having been involved in
so much expense in buying people whom you might compel to submit to the
rite. But, as I have said, we do not bid you be afraid of man: rather
let Christ fill you with fear. I should like to know what answer you
could give Him, if He said to you: “Crispinus, was it a great price
which you paid in order to buy the fear of the Mappalian peasantry; and
does My death, the price paid by Me to purchase the love of all nations,
seem little in your eyes? Was the money which was counted out from your
purse in acquiring these serfs in order to their being rebaptized, a
more costly sacrifice than the blood which flowed from My side in
redeeming the nations in order to their being baptized?” I know that, if
you would listen to Christ, you might hear many more such appeals, and
might, even by the possession which you have obtained, be warned how
impious are the things which you have spoken against Christ. For if you
think that your title to hold what you have bought with money is sure by
human law, how much more sure, by divine law, is Christ’s title to that
which He hath bought with His own blood! And it is true that He of whom
it is written, “He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the ends of the earth,” shall hold with invincible might all
which He has purchased; but how can you expect with any assurance to
retain that which you think you have made your own by purchase in
Africa, when you affirm that Christ has lost the whole world, and been
left with Africa alone as His portion?

<span id="vii.1.LXVI-p6"></span>2. But why multiply words? If these
Mappalians have passed of their own free will into your communion, let
them hear both you and me on the question which divides us,—the words of
each of us being written down, and translated into the Punic tongue
after having been attested by our signatures; and then, all pressure
through fear of their superior being removed, let these vassals choose
what they please. For by the things which we shall say it will be made
manifest whether they remain in error under coercion, or hold what they
believe to be truth with their own consent. They either understand these
matters, or they do not: if they do not, how could you dare to transfer
them in their ignorance to your communion? and if they do, let them, as
I have said, hear both sides, and act freely for themselves. If there be
any communities that have passed over from you to us, which you believe
to have yielded to the pressure of their superiors, let the same be done
in their case; let them hear both sides, and choose for themselves. Now,
if you reject this proposal, who can fail to be convinced that your
reliance is not upon the force of truth? But you ought to beware of the
<span id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXVI-Page_324"></span>wrath of God both here and hereafter. I
adjure you by Christ to give a reply to what I have written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1876"></span>[323:1877](1010372.htm#fr_1876) <span
id="vii.1.LXVI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXVI-p5"></span> About eighty persons, on a property
which he had acquired, were compelled by Crispinus to undergo
submersion, notwithstanding their groaning and protesting against this
tyrannical act of their new landlord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXVII](1010373)
