[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010320)  [Next](1010322) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XIV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XIV-p2.1"></span>Letter XIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p3"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XIV-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389.)

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XIV-p4.1"></span>To Nebridius Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p5"></span>1. I have preferred to reply to your last
letter, not because I undervalued your earlier questions, or enjoyed
them less, but because in answering you I undertake a greater task than
you think. For although you enjoined me to send you a superlatively
long <span id="fr_1464"></span>[1465](#fn_1464) letter, I have not so
much leisure as you imagine, and as you know I have always wished to
have, and do still wish. Ask not why it is so: for I could more easily
enumerate the things by which I am hindered, than explain why I am
hindered by them.

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p7"></span>2. You ask why it is that you and I,
though separate individuals, do many things which are the same, but the
sun does not the same as the other heavenly bodies. Of this thing I must
attempt to explain the cause. Now, if you and I do the same things, the
sun also does many things which the other heavenly bodies do: if in some
things it does not the same as the others, this is equally true of you
and me. I walk, and you walk; it is moved, and they are moved: I keep
awake, and you keep awake; it shines, and they shine: I discuss, and you
discuss; it goes its round, and they go their rounds. And yet there is
no fitness of comparison between mental acts and things visible. If,
however, as is reasonable, you compare mind with mind, the heavenly
bodies, if they have any mind, must be regarded as even more uniform
than men in their thoughts or contemplations, or whatever term may more
conveniently express such activity in them. Moreover, as to the
movements of the body, you will find, if you reflect on this with your
wonted attention, that it is impossible for precisely the same thing to
be done by two persons. When we walk together, do you think that we both
necessarily do the same thing? Far be such thought from one of your
wisdom! For the one of us who walks on the side towards the north, must
either, in taking the same step as the other, get in advance of him, or
walk more slowly than he does. Neither of these things is perceptible by
the senses; but you, if I am not mistaken, look to what we know by the
understanding rather than to what we learn by the senses. If, however,
we move from the pole towards the south, joined and clinging to each
other as closely as possible, and treading on a sheet of marble or even
ivory smooth and level, a perfect identity is as unattainable in our
motions as in the throbbings of our pulses, or in our figures and faces.
Put us aside, and place in our stead the sons of Glaucus, and you gain
<span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="vii.1.XIV-Page_232"></span>nothing by this substitution: for even in
these twins so perfectly resembling each other, the necessity for the
motions of each being peculiarly his own, is as great as the necessity
for their birth as separate individuals.

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p8"></span>3. You will perhaps say: “The difference
in this case is one which only reason can discover; but the difference
between the sun and the other heavenly bodies is to the senses also
patent.” If you insist upon my looking to their difference in magnitude,
you know how many things may be said as to the distances by which they
are removed from us, and into how great uncertainty that which you speak
of as obvious may thus be brought back. I may, however, concede that the
actual size corresponds with the apparent size of the heavenly bodies,
for I myself believe this; and I ask you to show me any one whose senses
were incapable of remarking the prodigious stature of Nævius, exceeding
by a foot that of the tallest man. <span
id="fr_1465"></span>[1466](#fn_1465) By the way, I think you have been
just too eager to discover some man to match him; and when you did not
succeed in the search, have resolved to make me stretch out my letter so
as to rival his dimensions. <span id="fr_1466"></span>[1467](#fn_1466)
If therefore even on earth such variety in size may be seen, I think
that it need not surprise us to find the like in the heavens. If,
however, the thing which moves your surprise is that the light of no
other heavenly body than the sun fills the day, who, I ask you, has ever
been manifested to men so great as that Man whom God took into union
with Himself, in another way entirely than He has taken all other holy
and wise men who ever lived? for if you compare Him with other men who
were wise, He is separated from them by superiority greater far than
that which the sun has above the other heavenly bodies. This comparison
let me charge you by all means attentively to study; for it is not
impossible that to your singularly gifted mind I may have suggested, by
this cursory remark, the solution of a question which you once proposed
to me concerning the humanity of Christ.

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p11"></span>4. You also ask me whether that highest
Truth and highest Wisdom and Form (or Archetype) of things, by whom all
things were made, and whom our creeds confess to be the only-begotten
Son of God, contains the idea <span id="fr_1467"></span>[1468](#fn_1467)
of mankind in general, or also of each individual of our race. A great
question. My opinion is, that in the creation of man there was in Him
the idea only of man generally, and not of you or me as individuals; but
that in the cycle of time the idea of each individual, with all the
varieties distinguishing men from each other, lives in that pure Truth.
This I grant is very obscure; yet I know not by what kind of
illustration light may be shed upon it, unless perhaps we betake
ourselves to those sciences which lie wholly within our minds. In
geometry, the idea of an angle is one thing, the idea of a square is
another. As often, therefore, as I please to describe an angle, the idea
of the angle, and that alone, is present to my mind; but I can never
describe a square unless I fix my attention upon the idea of four angles
at the same time. In like manner, every man, considered as an individual
man, has been made according to one idea proper to himself; but in the
making of a nation, although the idea according to which it is made be
also one, it is the idea not of one, but of many men collectively. If,
therefore, Nebridius is a part of this universe, as he is, and the whole
universe is made up of parts, the God who made the universe could not
but have in His plan the idea of all the parts. Wherefore, since there
is in this idea of a very great number of men, it does not belong to man
himself as such; although, on the other hand, all the individuals are in
wonderful ways reduced to one. But you will consider this at your
convenience. I beg you meanwhile to be content with what I have written,
although I have already outdone Nævius himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1464"></span>[231:1465](1010321.htm#fr_1464) <span
id="vii.1.XIV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p6"></span> The phrase used by Nebridius had been
“*longior quam longissima,*” which Augustin here quotes, and afterwards
playfully alludes to in sec. 3.

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[232:1466](1010321.htm#fr_1465) <span
id="vii.1.XIV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p9"></span> The text contains the word “sex” here,
which is omitted in the translation. The reading is uncertain.

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[232:1467](1010321.htm#fr_1466) <span
id="vii.1.XIV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p10"></span> See note on sec. 1.

<span id="fn_1467"></span>[232:1468](1010321.htm#fr_1467) <span
id="vii.1.XIV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIV-p12"></span> *Ratio.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XV](1010322)
