[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010252)  [Next](1010254) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XII.XX"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XII.XX-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX.—Of the Words, “In the Beginning,”
Variously Understood.</span>

<span id="vi.XII.XX-p2"></span>29. From all these truths, of which they
doubt not whose inner eye Thou hast granted to see such things, and who
immoveably believe Moses, Thy servant, to have spoken in the spirit of
truth; from all these, then, he taketh one who saith, “In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth,”—that is, “In His Word, co-eternal
with Himself, God made the intelligible and the sensible, or the
spiritual and corporeal creature.” He taketh another, who saith, “In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth,”—that is, “In His Word,
co-eternal with Himself, God made the universal mass of this corporeal
world, with all those manifest and known natures which it containeth.”
He, another, who saith, “In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth,” that is, “In His Word, co-eternal with Himself, God made the
formless matter of the spiritual <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138) and corporeal creature.” He,
another, who saith, “In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth,”—that is, “In His Word, co-eternal with Himself, God made the
formless matter of the corporeal creature, wherein heaven and earth lay
as yet confused, which being now distinguished and formed, we, at this
day, see in the mass of this world.” He, another, who saith, “In the
beginning God created heaven and earth,”—that is, “In the very beginning
of creating and working, God made that formless matter confusedly
containing heaven and earth, out of which, being formed, they now stand
out, and are manifest, with all the things that are in them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[183:1139](1010253.htm#fr_1138) <span
id="vi.XII.XX-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XX-p3"></span> Augustin, in his letter to Jerome (*Ep.*
clxvi. 4) on “The origin of the human soul,” says: “The soul, whether it
be termed material or immaterial, has a certain nature of its own,
created from a substance superior to the elements of this world.” And in
his *De Gen. ad Lit.* vii. 10, he speaks of the soul being formed from a
certain “spiritual matter,” even as flesh was formed from the earth. It
should be observed that at one time Augustin held to the theory that the
souls of infants were created by God out of nothing at each fresh birth,
and only rejected this view for that of its being generated by the
parents with the body under the pressure of the Pelagian controversy.
The first doctrine was generally held by the Schoolmen; and William of
Conches maintained this belief on the authority of Augustin,—apparently
being unaware of any modification in his opinion: “Cum Augustino,” he
says (Victor Cousin, *Ouvrages ined. d’Abelard*, p. 673), “credo et
sentio quotidie novas animas *nom ex traduce* non ex aliqua substantia,
sed *ex nihilo, solo jussu creatoris* creari.” Those who held the
first-named belief were called *Creatiani*; those who held the second,
*Truduciani*. It may be noted as to the word “Traduciani,” that
Tertullian, in his *De Anima*, chaps. 24–27, etc., frequently uses the
word *tradux* in this connection. Augustin, in his *Retractations*, ii.
45, refers to his letter to Jerome, and urges that if so obscure a
matter is to be discussed at all, that solution only should be received:
“Quæ contraria non sit apertissimis rebus quas de originati peccato
fides catholica novit in parvulis, nisi regenerentur in Christo, sine
dubitatione damnandis.” On Tertullian’s views, see Bishop Kays, p. 178,
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](1010254)
