[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010349)  [Next](1010351) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XLIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p1.1"></span>Letter XLIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397.)

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p3.1"></span>To Glorius, Eleusius, the Two Felixes,
Grammaticus, and All Others to Whom This May Be Acceptable, My Lords
Most Beloved and Worthy of Praise, Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p5"></span>1. The Apostle Paul hath said: “A man
that is an heretic after the first and second admonition reject, knowing
that he that is such is subverted and sinneth, being condemned of
himself.” <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625) But though the
doctrine which men hold be false and perverse, if they do not maintain
it with passionate obstinacy, especially when they have not devised it
by the rashness of their own presumption, but have accepted it from
parents who had been misguided and had fallen into error, and if they
are with anxiety seeking the truth, and are prepared to be set right
when they have found it, such men are not to be counted heretics. Were
it not that I believe you to be such, perhaps I would not write to you.
And yet even in the case of a heretic, however puffed up with odious
conceit, and insane through the obstinacy of his wicked resistance to
truth, although we warn others to avoid him, so that he may not deceive
the weak and inexperienced, we do not refuse to strive by every means in
our power for his correction. On this ground I wrote even to some of the
chief of the Donatists, not indeed letters of communion, which on
account of their perversity they have long ceased to receive from the
undivided Catholic Church which is spread throughout the world, but
letters of a private kind, such as we may send even to pagans. These
letters, however, though they have sometimes read them, they have not
been willing, or perhaps it is more probable, have not been able, to
answer. In these cases, it seems to me that I have discharged the
obligation laid on me by that love which the Holy Spirit teaches us to
render, not only to our own, but to all, saying by the apostle: “The
Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and
toward all men.” <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626) In another
place we are warned that those who are of a different opinion from us
must be corrected with meekness, “if God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.” <span id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627)

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p9"></span>2. I have said these things by way of
preface, lest any one should think, because you are not of our
communion, that I have been influenced by forwardness rather than
consideration in sending this letter, and in desiring thus to confer
with you regarding the welfare of the soul; though I believe that, if I
were writing to you about an affair of property, or the settlement of
some dispute about money, no one would find fault with me. So precious
is this world in the esteem of men, and so small is the value which they
set upon themselves! This letter, therefore, shall be a witness in my
vindication at the bar of God, who knows the spirit in which I write,
and who has said: “Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called
the sons of God.” <span id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628)

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p11"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p11.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p12"></span>3. I beg you, therefore, to call to
mind that, when I was in your town, <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629) and was discussing with you a
little concerning the communion of Christian unity, certain Acts were
brought forward by you, from which a statement was read aloud that about
seventy bishops condemned Cæcilianus, formerly our Bishop of Carthage,
along with his colleagues, and those by whom he was ordained. In the
same Acts was given a full account of the case of Felix of Aptunga, as
one singularly odious and criminal. When all these had been read, I
answered that it was not to be wondered at if the men who then caused
that schism, and who did not scruple to tamper with Acts, thought that
it was right to condemn those against whom they had been instigated by
envious and wicked men, although the sentence was passed without
deliberation, in the absence of the parties condemned, and without
acquainting them with the matter laid to their charge. I added that we
have other ecclesiastical Acts, according to which Secundus of Tigisis,
who was for the time <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_277"></span>Primate of Numidia, left those who,
being there present, confessed themselves traditors to the judgment of
God, and permitted them to remain in the episcopal sees which they then
occupied; and I stated that the names of these men are in the list of
those who condemned Cæcilianus, and that this Secundus himself was
president of the Council in which he secured the condemnation of those
who, being absent, were accused as traditors, by the votes of those whom
he pardoned when, being present, they confessed the same crime.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p14"></span>4. I then said that some time after
the ordination of Majorinus, whom they with impious wickedness set up
against Cæcilianus, raising one altar against another, and rending with
infatuated contentiousness the unity of Christ, they applied to
Constantine, who was then emperor, to appoint bishops to act as judges
and arbiters concerning the questions which, having arisen in Africa,
disturbed the peace of the Church. <span
id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630) This having been done, Cæcilianus
and those who had sailed from Africa to accuse him being present, and
the case tried by Melchiades, who was then Bishop of Rome, along with
the assessors whom at the request of the Donatists the Emperor had sent,
nothing could be proved against Cæcilianus; and thus, while he was
confirmed in his episcopal see, Donatus, who was present as his
opponent, was condemned. After all this, when they all still persevered
in the obstinacy of their most sinful schism, the Emperor being appealed
to, took pains to have the matter again more carefully examined and
settled at Arles. They, however, declining an ecclesiastical decision,
appealed to Constantine himself to hear their cause. When this trial
came on, both parties being present, Cæcilianus was pronounced innocent,
and they retired vanquished; but they still persisted in the same
perversity. At the same time the case of Felix of Aptunga was not
forgotten, and he too was acquitted of the crimes laid to his charge,
after an investigation by the proconsul at the order of the same prince.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p16"></span>5. Since, however, I was only saying
these things, not reading from the record, I seemed to you to be doing
less than my earnestness had led you to expect. Perceiving this, I sent
at once for that which I had promised to read. While I went on to visit
the Church at Gelizi, intending to return thence to you, all these Acts
were brought to you before two days had passed, and were read to you, as
you know, so far as time permitted, in one day. We read first how
Secundus of Tigisis did not dare to depose his colleagues in office who
confessed themselves to be traditors; but afterwards, by the help of
these very men, dared to condemn, without their confessing the crime,
and in their absence, Cæcilianus and others who were his colleagues. And
we next read the proconsular Acts in which Felix was, after a most
thorough investigation, proved innocent. These, as you will remember,
were read in the forenoon. In the afternoon I read to you their petition
to Constantine, and the ecclesiastical record of the proceedings in Rome
of the judges whom he appointed, by which the Donatists were condemned,
and Cæcilianus confirmed in his episcopal dignity. In conclusion, I read
the letters of the Emperor Constantine, in which the evidence of all
these things was established beyond all possibility of dispute.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p17"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p17.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p18"></span>6. What more do you ask, sirs? what
more do you ask? The matter in question here is not your gold and
silver; it is not your land, nor property, nor bodily health that is at
stake. I appeal to your souls concerning their obtaining eternal life,
and escaping eternal death. At length awake! I am not handling an
obscure question, nor searching into some hidden mystery, for the
investigation of which capacity is found in no human intellect, or at
least in only a few: the thing is clear as day. Is anything more
obvious? could anything be more quickly seen? I affirm that parties
innocent and absent were condemned by a Council, very numerous indeed,
but hasty in their decisions. I prove this by the proconsular Acts, in
which that man was wholly cleared from the charge of being a traditor,
whom the Acts of the Council which your party brought forward proclaimed
as most specially guilty. I affirm further, that the sentence against
those who were said to be traditors was passed by men who had confessed
themselves guilty of that very crime. I prove this by the ecclesiastical
Acts in which the names of those men are set forth, to whom Secundus of
Tigisis, professing a desire to preserve peace, granted pardon of a
crime which he knew them to have committed, and by whose help he
afterwards, notwithstanding the destruction of peace, passed sentence
upon others of whose crime he had no evidence; whereby he made it
manifest that in the former decision he had been moved, not by a regard
for peace, but by fear for himself. For Purpurius, Bishop of Limata, had
alleged against him that he himself, when he had been put in custody by
a curator and his soldiers, in order to compel him to give up the
Scriptures, was let go, doubtless not without paying a price, in either
giving up something, or ordering others to do so for him. He, fearing
that this suspicion might be easily enough confirmed, having <span
id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_278"></span>obtained the advice of Secundus the
younger, his own kinsman, and having consulted all his colleagues in the
episcopal office, remitted crimes which required no proof to be judged
by God, and in so doing appeared to be protecting the peace of the
Church: which was false, for he was only protecting himself.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p19"></span>7. For if, in truth, regard for peace
had any place in his heart, he would not afterwards at Carthage have
joined those traditors whom he had left to the judgment of God when they
were present, and confessed their fault, in passing sentence for the
same crime upon others who were absent, and against whom no one had
proved the charge. He was bound, moreover, to be the more afraid on that
occasion of disturbing the peace, inasmuch as Carthage was a great and
famous city, from which any evil originating there might extend, as from
the head of the body, throughout all Africa. Carthage was also near to
the countries beyond the sea, and distinguished by illustrious renown,
so that it had a bishop of more than ordinary influence, who could
afford to disregard even a number of enemies conspiring against him,
because he saw himself united by letters of communion both to the Roman
Church, in which the supremacy of an apostolic chair has always
flourished, <span id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631) and to all other
lands from which Africa itself received the gospel, and was prepared to
defend himself before these Churches if his adversaries attempted to
cause an alienation of them from him. Seeing, therefore, that Cæcilianus
declined to come before his colleagues, whom he perceived or suspected
(or, as they affirm, pretended to suspect) to be biassed by his enemies
against the real merits of his case, it was all the more the duty of
Secundus, if he wished to be the guardian of true peace, to prevent the
condemnation in their absence of those who had wholly declined to
compear at their bar. For it was not a matter concerning presbyters or
deacons or clergy of inferior order, but concerning colleagues who might
refer their case wholly to the judgment of other bishops, especially of
apostolical churches, in which the sentence passed against them in their
absence would have no weight, since they had not deserted their tribunal
after having compeared before it, but had always declined compearance
because of the suspicions which they entertained.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p21"></span>8. This consideration ought to have
weighed much with Secundus, who was at that time Primate, if his desire,
as president of the Council, was to promote peace; for he might perhaps
have quieted or restrained the mouths of those who were raging against
men who were absent, if he had spoken thus: “Ye see, brethren, how after
so great havoc of persecution peace has been given to us, through God’s
mercy, by the princes of this world; surely we, being Christians and
bishops, ought not to break up the Christian unity which even pagan
enemies have ceased to assail. Either, therefore, let us leave to God,
as Judge, all those cases which the calamity of a most troublous time
has brought upon the Church; or if there be some among you who have such
certain knowledge of the guilt of other parties, that they are able to
bring against them a definite indictment, and prove it if they plead not
guilty, and who also shrink from having communion with such persons, let
them hasten to our brethren and peers, the bishops of the churches
beyond the sea, and present to them in the first place a complaint
concerning the conduct and contumacy of the accused, as having through
consciousness of guilt declined the jurisdiction of their peers in
Africa, so that by these foreign bishops they may be summoned to compear
and answer before them regarding the things laid to their charge. If
they disobey this summons, their criminality and obduracy will become
known to those other bishops; and by a synodical letter sent in their
name to all parts of the world throughout which the Church of Christ is
now extended, the parties accused will be excluded from communion with
all churches, in order to prevent the springing up of error in the see
of the Church at Carthage. When that has been done, and these men have
been separated from the whole Church, we shall without fear ordain
another bishop over the community in Carthage; whereas, if now another
bishop be ordained by us, communion will most probably be withheld from
him by the Church beyond the sea, because they will not recognise the
validity of the deposition of the bishop, whose ordination was
everywhere acknowledged, and with whom letters of communion had been
exchanged; and thus, through our undue eagerness to pronounce without
deliberation a final sentence, the great scandal of schism within the
Church, when it has rest from without, may arise, and we may be found
presuming to set up another altar, not against Cæcilianus, but against
the universal Church, which, uninformed of our procedure, would still
hold communion with him.”

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p22"></span>9. If any one had been disposed to
reject sound and equitable counsels such as these, what could he have
done? or how could he have procured the condemnation of any one of his
absent peers, when he could not have any decisions with the authority of
the Council, seeing that the Primate was opposed to him? And if such a
serious revolt against the authority of <span id="page_279">p.
279</span> <span id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_279"></span>the Primate himself
arose, that some were resolved to condemn at once those whose case he
desired to postpone, how much better would it have been for him to
separate himself by dissent from such quarrelsome and factious men, than
from the communion of the whole world! But because there were no charges
which could be proved at the bar of foreign bishops against Cæcilianus
and those who took part in his ordination, those who condemned them were
not willing to delay passing sentence; and when they had pronounced it,
were not at any pains to intimate to the Church beyond the sea the names
of those in Africa with whom, as condemned traditors, she should avoid
communion. For if they had attempted this, Cæcilianus and the others
would have defended themselves, and would have vindicated their
innocence against their false accusers by a most thorough trial before
the ecclesiastical tribunal of bishops beyond the sea.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p23"></span>10. Our belief concerning that
perverse and unjust Council is, that it was composed chiefly of
traditors whom Secundus of Tigisis had pardoned on their confession of
guilt; and who, when a rumour had gone abroad that some had been guilty
of delivering up the sacred books, sought to turn aside suspicion from
themselves by bringing a calumny upon others, and to escape the
detection of their crime, through surrounding themselves with a cloud of
lying rumours, when men throughout all Africa, believing their bishops,
said what was false concerning innocent men, that they had been
condemned at Carthage as traditors. Whence you perceive, my beloved
friends, how that which some of your party affirmed to be improbable
could indeed happen, viz. that the very men who had confessed their own
guilt as traditors, and had obtained the remission of their case to the
divine tribunal, afterwards took part in judging and condemning others
who, not being present to defend themselves, were accused of the same
crime. For their own guilt made them more eagerly embrace an opportunity
by which they might overwhelm others with a groundless accusation, and
by thus finding occupation for the tongues of men, which screen their
own misdeeds from investigation. Moreover, if it were inconceivable that
a man should condemn in another the wrong which he had himself done, the
Apostle Paul would not have had occasion to say: “Therefore thou art
inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou
judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest
the same things.” <span id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632) This is
exactly what these men did, so that the words of the apostle may be
fully and appropriately applied to them.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p25"></span>11. Secundus, therefore, was not
acting in the interests of peace and unity when he remitted to the
divine tribunal the crimes which these men confessed: for, if so, he
would have been much more careful to prevent a schism at Carthage, when
there were none present to whom he might be constrained to grant pardon
of a crime which they confessed; when, on the contrary, all that the
preservation of peace demanded was a refusal to condemn those who were
absent. They would have acted unjustly to these innocent men, had they
even resolved to *pardon* them, when they were not proved guilty, and
had not confessed the guilt, but were actually not present at all. For
the guilt of a man is established beyond question when he accepts a
pardon. How much more outrageous and blind were they who thought that
they had power to condemn for crimes which, as unknown, they could not
even have forgiven! In the former case, crimes that were known were
remitted to the divine arbitration, lest others should be inquired into;
in the latter case, crimes that were not known were made ground of
condemnation, that those which were known might be concealed. But it
will be said, the crime of Cæcilianus and the others was known. Even if
I were to admit this, the fact of their absence ought to have protected
them from such a sentence. For they were not chargeable with deserting a
tribunal before which they had never stood; nor was the Church so
exclusively represented in these African bishops, that in refusing to
appear before them they could be supposed to decline all ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. For there remained thousands of bishops in countries
beyond the sea, before whom it was manifest that those who seemed to
distrust their peers in Africa and Numidia could be tried. Have you
forgotten what Scripture commands: “Blame no one before you have
examined him; and when you have examined him, let your correction be
just”? <span id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633) If, then, the Holy
Spirit has forbidden us to blame or correct any one before we have
questioned him, how much greater is the crime of not merely blaming or
correcting, but actually condemning men who, being absent, could not be
examined as to the charges brought against them!

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p27"></span>12. Moreover, as to the assertion of
these judges, that though the parties accused were absent, having not
fled from trial, but always avowed their distrust of that faction, and
declined to appear before them, the crimes for which they condemned them
were well known; I ask, my brethren, how did they know them? You reply,
We cannot tell, since the evidence is not stated in the public Acts. But
I will tell you how they knew them. Observe carefully the <span
id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_280"></span>case
of Felix of Aptunga, and first read how much more vehement they were
against him; for they had just the same grounds for their knowledge in
the case of the others as in his, who was afterwards proved most
completely innocent by a thorough and severe investigation. How much
greater the justice and safety and readiness with which we are warranted
in believing the innocence of the others whose indictment was less
serious, and their condemnation less severe, seeing that the man against
whom they raged much more furiously has been proved innocent!

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p28"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p28.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p29"></span>13. Some one may perhaps make an
objection which, though it was disapproved by you when it was brought
forward, I must not pass over, for it has been made by others, viz.: It
was not meet that a bishop should be acquitted by trial before a
proconsul: as if the bishop had himself procured this trial, and it had
not been done by order of the Emperor, to whose care this matter, as one
concerning which he was responsible to God, especially belonged. For
they themselves had constituted the Emperor the arbiter and judge in
this question regarding the surrender of the sacred books, and regarding
the schism, by their sending petitions to him, and afterwards appealing
to him; and nevertheless they refuse to acquiesce in his decision. If,
therefore, he is to be blamed whom the magistrate absolved, though he
had not himself applied to that tribunal, how much more worthy of blame
are those who desired an earthly king to be the judge of their cause!
For if it be not wrong to appeal to the Emperor, it is not wrong to be
tried by the Emperor, and consequently not wrong to be tried by him to
whom the Emperor refers the case. One of your friends was anxious to
make out a ground of complaint on the fact that, in the case of the
bishop Felix, one witness was suspended on the rack, and another
tortured with pincers. <span id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634) But
was it in the power of Felix to prevent the prosecution of the inquiry
with diligence, and even severity, when the case regarding which the
advocate was labouring to discover the truth was his own? For what else
would such a resistance to investigation have been construed to signify,
than a confession of his crime? And yet this proconsul, surrounded with
the awe-inspiring voices of heralds, and the blood-stained hands of
executioners at his service, would not have condemned one of his peers
in absence, who declined to come before his tribunal, if there was any
other place where his cause could be disposed of. Or if he had in such
circumstances pronounced sentence, he would himself assuredly have
suffered the due and just award prescribed by civil law.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p31"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p31.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p32"></span>14. If, however, you repudiate the
Acts of a proconsul, submit yourselves to the Acts of the Church. These
have all been read over to you in their order. Perhaps you will say that
Melchiades, bishop of the Roman Church, along with the other bishops
beyond the sea who acted as his colleagues, had no right to usurp the
place of judge in a matter which had been already settled by seventy
African bishops, over whom the bishop of Tigisis as Primate presided.
But what will you say if he in fact did not usurp this place? For the
Emperor, being appealed to, sent bishops to sit with him as judges, with
authority to decide the whole matter in the way which seemed to them
just. This we prove, both by the petitions of the Donatists and the
words of the Emperor himself, both of which were, as you remember, read
to you, and are now accessible to be studied or transcribed by you. Read
and ponder all these. See with what scrupulous care for the preservation
or restoration of peace and unity everything was discussed; how the
legal standing of the accusers was inquired into, and what defects were
proved in this matter against some of them; and how it was clearly
proved by the testimony of those present that they had nothing to say
against Cæcilianus, but wished to transfer the whole matter to the
people belonging to the party of Majorinus, <span
id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635) that is, to the seditious multitude
who were opposed to the peace of the Church, in order, forsooth, that
Cæcilianus might be accused by that crowd which they believed to be
powerful enough to bend aside to their views the minds of the judges by
mere turbulent clamour, without any documentary evidence or examination
as to the truth; unless it was likely that true accusations should be
brought against Cæcilianus by a multitude infuriated and infatuated by
the cup of error and wickedness, in a place where seventy bishops had
with insane precipitancy condemned, in their absence, men who were their
peers, and who were innocent, as was proved in the case of Felix of
Aptunga. They wished to have Cæcilianus accused by a mob such as that to
which they had given way themselves, when they pronounced sentence upon
parties who were absent, and who had not been examined. But assuredly
they had not come to judges who could be persuaded to such madness.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p34"></span>15. Your own prudence may enable you
to remark here both the obstinacy of these men, and the wisdom of the
judges, who to the last persisted in refusing to admit accusations
against Cæcilianus from the populace who were of the faction of
Majorinus, who had no legal standing in the case. You will also remark
how they <span id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_281"></span>were required to bring forward the men
who had come with them from Africa as accusers or witnesses, or in some
other connection with the case, and how it was said that they had been
present, but had been withdrawn by Donatus. The said Donatus promised
that he would produce them, and this promise he made repeatedly; yet,
after all, declined to appear again in presence of that tribunal before
which he had already confessed so much, that it seemed as if by his
refusal to return he desired only to avoid being present to hear himself
condemned; but the things for which he was to be condemned had been
proved against him in his own presence, and after examination. Besides
this, a libel bringing charges against Cæcilianus was handed in by some
parties. How the inquiry was thereupon opened anew, what persons brought
up the libel, and how nothing after all could be proved against
Cæcilianus, I need not state, seeing that you have heard it all, and can
read it as often as you please.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p35"></span>16. As to the fact that there were
seventy bishops in the Council \[which condemned Cæcilianus\], you
remember what was said in the way of pleading against him the venerable
authority of so great a number. Nevertheless these most venerable men
resolved to keep their judgment unembarrassed by endless questions of
hopeless intricacy, and did not care to inquire either what was the
number of those bishops, or whence they had been collected, when they
saw them to be blinded with such reckless presumption as to pronounce
rash sentence upon their peers in their absence, and without having
examined them. And yet what a decision was finally pronounced by the
blessed Melchiades himself; how equitable, how complete, how prudent,
and how fitted to make peace! For he did not presume to depose from his
own rank those peers against whom nothing had been proved; and, laying
blame chiefly upon Donatus, whom he had found the cause of the whole
disturbance, he gave to all the others restoration if they chose to
accept it, and was prepared to send letters of communion even to those
who were known to have been ordained by Majorinus; so that wherever
there were two bishops, through this dissension doubling their number,
he decided that the one who was prior in the date of ordination should
be confirmed in his see, and a new congregation found for the other. O
excellent man! O son of Christian peace, father of the Christian people!
Compare now this handful, with that multitude of bishops, not counting,
but weighing them: on the one side you have moderation and
circumspection; on the other, precipitancy and blindness. On the one
side, clemency has not wronged justice, nor has justice been at variance
with clemency; on the other side, fear was hiding itself under passion,
and passion was goaded to excess by fear. In the one case, they
assembled to clear the innocent from false accusations by discovering
where the guilt really lay; in the other, they had met to screen the
guilty from true accusations by bringing false charges against the
innocent.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p36"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p36.1"></span>Chap. VI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p37"></span>17. Could Cæcilianus leave himself to
be tried and judged by these men, when he had such others before whom,
if his case were argued, he could most easily prove his innocence? He
could not have left himself in their hands even had he been a stranger
recently ordained over the Church at Carthage, and consequently not
aware of the power in perverting the minds of men, either worthless or
unwise, which was then possessed by a certain Lucilla, a very wealthy
woman, whom he had offended when he was a deacon, by rebuking her in the
exercise of church discipline; for this evil influence was also at work
to bring about that iniquitous transaction. For in that Council, in
which men absent and innocent were condemned by persons who had
confessed themselves to be traditors, there were a few who wished, by
defaming others, to hide their own crimes, that men, led astray by
unfounded rumours, might be turned aside from inquiring into the truth.
The number of those who were especially interested in this was not
great, although the preponderating authority was on their side; because
they had with them Secundus himself, who, yielding to fear, had pardoned
them. But the rest are said to have been bribed and instigated specially
against Cæcilianus by the money of Lucilla. There are Acts in the
possession of Zenophilus, a man of consular rank, according to which one
Nundinarius, a deacon who had been (as we learn from the same Acts)
deposed by Sylvanus, bishop of Cirta, having failed in an attempt to
recommend himself to that party by the letters of other bishops, in the
heat of passion revealed many secrets, and brought them forward in open
court; amongst which we read this on the record, that the rearing of
rival altars in the Church of Carthage, the chief city of Africa, was
due to the bishops being bribed by the money of Lucilla. I am aware that
I did not read these Acts to you, but you remember that there was not
time. Besides these influences, there was also some bitterness arising
from mortified pride, because they had not themselves ordained
Cæcilianus bishop of Carthage.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p38"></span>18. When Cæcilianus knew that these
men had assembled, not as impartial judges, but hostile and perverted
through all these things, was it possible that either he should consent,
or the people over whom he presided should allow him, to leave the
church and go into a private dwelling, where he was not to be tried
fairly by his <span id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_282"></span>peers, but to be slain by a small
faction, urged on by a woman’s spite, especially when he saw that his
case might have an unbiassed and equitable hearing before the Church
beyond the sea, which was uninfluenced by private enmities on either
side in the dispute? If his adversaries declined pleading before that
tribunal, they would thereby cut themselves off from that communion with
the whole world which innocence enjoys. And if they attempted there to
bring a charge against him, then he would compear for himself, and
defend his innocence against all their plots, as you have learned that
he afterwards did, when they, already guilty of schism, and stained with
the atrocious crime of having actually reared their rival altar,
applied—but too late—for the decision of the Church beyond the sea. For
this they would have done at first, if their cause had been supported by
truth; but their policy was to come to the trial after false rumours had
gained strength by lapse of time, and public report of old standing, so
to speak, had prejudged the case; or, which seems more likely, having
first condemned Cæcilianus as they pleased, they relied for safety upon
their number, and did not dare to open the discussion of so bad a case
before other judges, by whom, as they were not influenced by bribery,
the truth might be discovered.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p39"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p39.1"></span>Chap. VII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p40"></span>19. But when they actually found that
the communion of the whole world with Cæcilianus continued as before,
and that letters of communion from churches beyond the sea were sent to
him, and not to the man whom they had flagitiously ordained, they became
ashamed of being always silent; for it might be objected to them: Why
did they suffer the Church in so many countries to go on in ignorance,
communicating with men that were condemned; and especially why did they
cut themselves off from communion with the whole world, against which
they had no charge to make, by their bearing in silence the exclusion
from that communion of the bishop whom they had ordained in Carthage?
They chose, therefore, as it is reported, to bring their dispute with
Cæcilianus before the foreign churches, in order to secure one of two
things, either of which they were prepared to accept: if, on the one
hand, by any amount of craft, they succeeded in making good the false
accusation, they would abundantly satisfy their lust of revenge; if,
however, they failed, they might remain as stubborn as before, but would
now have, as it were, some excuse for it, in alleging that they had
suffered at the hands of an unjust tribunal,—the common outcry of all
worthless litigants, though they have been defeated by the clearest
light of truth,—as if it might not have been said, and most justly said,
to them: “Well, let us suppose that those bishops who decided the case
at Rome were not good judges; there still remained a plenary Council of
the universal Church, in which these judges themselves might be put on
their defence; so that, if they were convicted of mistake, their
decisions might be reversed.” Whether they have done this or not, let
them prove: for we easily prove that it was not done, by the fact that
the whole world does not communicate with them; or if it was done, they
were defeated there also, of which their state of separation from the
Church is a proof.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p41"></span>20. What they actually did afterwards,
however, is sufficiently shown in the letter of the Emperor. For it was
not before other bishops, but at the bar of the Emperor, that they dared
to bring the charge of wrong judgment against ecclesiastical judges of
so high authority as the bishops by whose sentence the innocence of
Cæcilianus and their own guilt had been declared. He granted them the
second trial at Aries, before other bishops; not because this was due to
them, but only as a concession to their stubbornness, and from a desire
by all means to restrain so great effrontery. For this Christian Emperor
did not presume so to grant their unruly and groundless complaints as to
make himself the judge of the decision pronounced by the bishops who had
sat at Rome; but he appointed, as I have said, other bishops, from whom,
however, they preferred again to appeal to the Emperor himself; and you
have heard the terms in which he disapproved of this. Would that even
then they had desisted from their most insane contentions, and had
yielded at last to the truth, as he yielded to them when (intending
afterwards to apologize for this course to the reverend prelates) he
consented to try their case after the bishops, on condition that, if
they did not submit to his decision, for which they had themselves
appealed, they should thenceforward be silent! For he ordered that both
parties should meet him at Rome to argue the case. When Cæcilianus, for
some reason, failed to compear there, he, at their request, ordered all
to follow him to Milan. Then some of their party began to withdraw,
perhaps offended that Constantine did not follow their example, and
condemn Cæcilianus in his absence at once and summarily. When the
prudent Emperor was aware of this, he compelled the rest to come to
Milan in charge of his guards. Cæcilianus having come thither, he
brought him forward in person, as he has written; and having examined
the matter with the diligence, caution, and prudence which his letters
on the subject indicate, he pronounced Cæcilianus perfectly innocent,
and them most criminal.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p42"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p42.1"></span>Chap. VIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p43"></span>21. And to this day they administer
baptism outside of the communion of the Church, and, if they can, they
rebaptize the <span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_283"></span>members of the Church: they offer
sacrifice in discord and schism, and salute in the name of peace
communities which they pronounce beyond the bounds of the peace of
salvation. The unity of Christ is rent asunder, the heritage of Christ
is reproached, the baptism of Christ is treated with contempt; and they
refuse to have these errors corrected by constituted human authorities,
applying penalties of a temporal kind in order to prevent them from
being doomed to eternal punishment for such sacrilege. We blame them for
the rage which has driven them to schism, the madness which makes them
rebaptize, and for the sin of separation from the heritage of Christ,
which has been spread abroad through all lands. In using manuscripts
which are in their hands as well as in ours, we mention churches, the
names of which are now read by them also, but with which they have now
no communion; and when these are pronounced in their conventicles, they
say to the reader, “Peace be with thee;” and yet they have no peace with
those to whom these letters were written. They, on the other hand, blame
us for crimes of men now dead, making charges which either are false,
or, if true, do not concern us; not perceiving that in the things which
we lay to their charge they are all involved, but in the things which
they lay to our charge the blame is due to the chaff or the tares in the
Lord’s harvest, and the crime does not belong to the good grain; not
considering, moreover, that within our unity those only have fellowship
with the wicked who take pleasure in their being such, whereas those who
are displeased with their wickedness yet cannot correct them,—as they do
not presume to root out the tares before the harvest, lest they root out
the wheat also, <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636) —have
fellowship with them, not in their deeds, but in the altar of Christ; so
that not only do they avoid being defiled by them, but they deserve
commendation and praise according to the word of God, because, in order
to prevent the name of Christ from being reproached by odious schisms,
they tolerate in the interest of unity that which in the interest of
righteousness they hate.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p45"></span>22. If they have ears, let them hear
what the Spirit saith to the churches. For in the Apocalypse of John we
read: “Unto the angel of the Church of Ephesus write: These things saith
He that holdeth the seven stars in His right hand, who walketh in the
midst of the seven golden candlesticks; I know thy works, and thy
labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are
evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not,
and hast found them liars: and hast borne, and hast patience, and for My
name’s sake hast tolerated them, <span
id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637) and hast not fainted.” <span
id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638) Now, if He wished this to be
understood as addressed to a celestial angel, and not to those invested
with authority in the Church, He would not go on to say: “Nevertheless I
have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.” <span
id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639) This could not be said to the
heavenly angels, who retain their love unchanged, as the only beings of
their order that have departed and fallen from their love are the devil
and his angels. The first love here alluded to is that which was proved
in their tolerating for Christ’s name’s sake the false apostles. To this
He commands them to return, and to do “their first works.” Now we are
reproached with the crimes of bad men, not done by us, but by others;
and some of them, moreover, not known to us. Nevertheless, even if they
were actually committed, and that under our own eyes, and we bore with
them for the sake of unity, letting the tares alone on account of the
wheat, whosoever with open heart receives the Holy Scriptures would
pronounce us not only free from blame, but worthy of no small praise.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p49"></span>23. Aaron bears with the multitude
demanding, fashioning, and worshipping an idol. Moses bears with
thousands murmuring against God, and so often offending His holy name.
David bears with Saul his persecutor, even when forsaking the things
that are above by his wicked life, and following after the things that
are beneath by magical arts, avenges his death, and calls him the Lord’s
anointed, <span id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640) because of the
venerable right by which he had been consecrated. Samuel bears with the
reprobate sons of Eli, and his own perverse sons, whom the people
refused to tolerate, and were therefore rebuked by the warning and
punished by the severity of God. Lastly, he bears with the nation
itself, though proud and despising God. Isaiah bears with those against
whom he hurls so many merited denunciations. Jeremiah bears with those
at whose hands he suffers so many things. Zechariah bears with the
scribes and Pharisees, as to whose character in those days Scripture
informs us. I know that I have omitted many examples: let those who are
willing and able read the divine records for themselves: they will find
that all the holy servants and friends of God have always had to bear
with some among their <span id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_284"></span>own people, with whom, nevertheless,
they partook in the sacraments of that dispensation, and in so doing not
only were not defiled by them, but were to be commended for their
tolerant spirit, “endeavouring to keep,” as the apostle says, “the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” <span
id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641) Let them also observe what has
occurred since the Lord’s coming, in which time we would find many more
examples of this toleration in all parts of the world, if they could all
be written down and authenticated: but attend to those which are on
record. The Lord Himself bears with Judas, a devil, a thief, His own
betrayer; He permits him, along with the innocent disciples, to receive
that which believers know as our ransom. <span
id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642) The apostles bear with false
apostles; and in the midst of men who sought their own things, and not
the things of Jesus Christ, Paul, not seeking his own, but the things of
Christ, lives in the practice of a most noble toleration. In fine, as I
mentioned a little while ago, the person presiding under the title of
Angel over a Church, is commended, because, though he hated those that
were evil, he yet bore with them for the Lord’s name’s sake, even when
they were tried and discovered.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p53"></span>24. In conclusion, let them ask
themselves: Do they not bear with the murders and devastations by fire
which are perpetrated by the Circumcelliones, who treat with honour the
dead bodies of those who cast themselves down from dangerous heights? Do
they not bear with the misery which has made all Africa groan for years
beneath the incredible outrages of one man, Optatus \[bishop of
Thamugada\]? I forbear from specifying the tyrannical acts of violence
and public depredations in districts, towns, and properties throughout
Africa; for it is better to leave you to speak of these to each other,
whether in whispers or openly, as you please. For wherever you turn your
eyes, you will find the things of which I speak, or, more correctly,
refrain from speaking. Nor do we on this ground accuse those whom, when
they do such things, you love. What we dislike in that party is not
their bearing with those who are wicked, but their intolerable
wickedness in the matter of schism, of raising altar against altar, and
of separation from the heritage of Christ now spread, as was so long ago
promised, throughout the world. We behold with grief and lamentation
peace broken, unity rent asunder, baptism administered a second time,
and contempt poured on the sacraments, which are holy even when
ministered and received by the wicked. If they regard these things as
trifles, let them observe those examples by which it has been proved how
they are esteemed by God. The men who made an idol perished by a common
death, being slain with the sword: <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643) but when the men endeavoured to
make a schism in Israel, the leaders were swallowed up by the opening
earth, and the crowd of their accomplices was consumed by fire. <span
id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644) In the difference between the
punishments, the different degrees of demerit may be discerned.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p56"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p56.1"></span>Chap. IX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p57"></span>25. These, then, are the facts: In
time of persecution, the sacred books are surrendered to the
persecutors. Those who were guilty of this surrender confess it, and are
remitted to the divine tribunal; those who were innocent are not
examined, but condemned at once by rash men. The integrity of that one
who, of all the men thus condemned in their absence, was the most
vehemently accused, is afterwards vindicated before unimpeachable
judges. From the decision of bishops an appeal is made to the Emperor;
the Emperor is chosen judge; and the sentence of the Emperor, when
pronounced, is set at naught. What was then done you have read; what is
now being done you have before your eyes. If, after all that you have
read, you are still in doubt, be convinced by what you see. By all means
let us give up arguing from ancient manuscripts, public archives, or the
acts of courts, civil or ecclesiastical. We have a greater book—the
world itself. In it I read the accomplishment of that of which I read
the promise in the Book of God: “The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten Thee: ask of Me, and I shall give Thee the
heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
Thy possession.” <span id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645) He that has
not communion with this inheritance may know himself to be disinherited,
whatever books he may plead to the contrary. He that assails this
inheritance is plainly enough declared to be an outcast from the family
of God. The question is raised as to the parties guilty of surrendering
the divine books in which that inheritance is promised. Let him be
believed to have delivered the testament to the flames, who is resisting
the intentions of the testator. O faction of Donatus, what has the
Corinthian Church done against you? In speaking of this one Church, I
wish to be understood as asking the same question in regard to all
similar churches remote from you. What have these churches done against
you, which could not know even what you had done, or the names of the
men whom you branded with condemnation? Or is it so, that because
Cæcilianus gave offence to Lucilla in Africa, the light of Christ is
lost to the whole world? <span id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646)

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-Page_285"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p60"></span>26. Let them at last become sensible
of what they have done; for in the lapse of years, by a just
retribution, their work has recoiled upon themselves. Ask by what
woman’s instigation Maximianus <span
id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647) (said to be a kinsman of Donatus)
withdrew himself from the communion of Primianus, and how, having
gathered a faction of bishops, he pronounced sentence against Primianus
in his absence, and had himself ordained as a rival bishop in his
place,—precisely as Majorinus, under the influence of Lucilla, assembled
a faction of bishops, and, having condemned Cæcilianus in his absence,
was ordained bishop in opposition to him. Do you admit, as I suppose you
do, that when Primianus was delivered by the other bishops of his
communion in Africa from the sentence pronounced by the faction of
Maximianus, this decision was valid and sufficient? And will you refuse
to admit the same in the case of Cæcilianus, when he was released by the
bishops of the same one Church beyond the sea from the sentence
pronounced by the faction of Majorinus? Pray, my brethren, what great
thing do I ask of you? What difficulty is there in comprehending what I
bring before you? The African Church, if it be compared with the
churches in other parts of the world, is very different from them, and
is left far behind both in numbers and in influence; and even if it had
retained its unity, is far smaller when compared with the universal
Church in other nations, than was the faction of Maximianus when
compared with that of Primianus. I ask, however, only this—and I believe
it to be just—that you give no more weight to the Council of Secundus of
Tigisis, which Lucilla stirred up against Cæcilianus when absent, and
against an apostolic see and the whole world in communion with
Cæcilianus, than you give to the Council of Maximianus, which in like
manner some other woman stirred up against Primianus when absent, and
against the rest of the multitude throughout Africa which was in
communion with him. What case could be more transparent? what demand
more just?

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p62"></span>27. You see and know all these things,
and you groan over them; and yet God at the same time sees that nothing
compels you to remain in such fatal and impious schism, if you would but
subdue the lust of the flesh in order to win the spiritual kingdom; and
in order to escape from eternal punishment, have courage to forfeit the
friendship of men, whose favour will not avail at the bar of God. Go
now, and take counsel together: find what you can say in reply to that
which I have written. If you bring forward manuscripts on your side, we
do the same; if your party say that our documents are not to be trusted,
let them not take it amiss if we retort the charge. No one can erase
from heaven the divine decree, no one can efface from earth the Church
of God. His decree has promised the whole world, and the Church has
filled it; and it includes both bad and good. On earth it loses none but
the bad, and into heaven it admits none but the good.

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p63"></span>In writing this discourse, God is my
witness with what sincere love to peace and to you I have taken and used
that which He has given. It shall be to you a means of correction if you
be willing, and a testimony against you whether you will or not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[276:1626](1010350.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p6"></span> [Titus
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[276:1627](1010350.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p7"></span> [1 Thess.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[276:1628](1010350.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p8"></span> [2 Tim.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#026)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[276:1629](1010350.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p10"></span> [Matt.
5.9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[276:1630](1010350.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p13"></span> Tubursi, a town recently identified,
half-way between Calama and Madaura.

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[277:1631](1010350.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p15"></span> They asked judges from Gaul, as a
country in which none had been guilty of surrendering the sacred books
under pressure of persecution. The bishops appointed were Maternus of
Agrippina, Rheticius of Augustodunum, and Marinus of Arles. They were
sent to Rome with fifteen Italian bishops; Melchiades, Bishop of Rome,
presided in their meeting in <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p15.1"></span>A.D.</span> 313, and acquitted Cæcilianus.

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[278:1632](1010350.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p20"></span> “In qua semper apostolicæ cathedræ
viguit principatus.” The use in the translalion of the indefinite
article, “*an* apostolic chair,” is vindicated by the language of
Augustin in sec. 26 of this letter regarding Carthage, and by the words
in Letter CCXXXII. sec. 3: “Christianæ societatis quæ per sedes
apostolorum et successiones episcoporum certa per orbem propagatione
diffunditur.”

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[279:1633](1010350.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p24"></span> [Rom.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[279:1634](1010350.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p26"></span> [Ecclus.
11.7](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[280:1635](1010350.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p30"></span> *Ungulæ*, mentioned in Codex
Justinianus. ix. 18. 7.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[280:1636](1010350.htm#fr_1635) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p33"></span> Ordained by the Donatists bishop of
Carthage in room of Cæcilianus.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[283:1637](1010350.htm#fr_1636) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p44"></span> [Matt.
13.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[283:1638](1010350.htm#fr_1637) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p46"></span> Augustin translates <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.1.XLIII-p46.1"></span> ἐβάστασας</span> (E.
V. “hast laboured”) by “sustinuisti eos”—“hast tolerated *them*;” and
upon this his argument turns.

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[283:1639](1010350.htm#fr_1638) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p47"></span> [Rev.
2.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[283:1640](1010350.htm#fr_1639) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p48"></span> [Rev.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[283:1641](1010350.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p50"></span> *Christum Domini.*

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[284:1642](1010350.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p51"></span> [Eph.
4.3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[284:1643](1010350.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p52"></span> Augustin holds that Judas was present
at the institution of the Lord’s Supper. See Letter XLIV. sec. 10, p.
288.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[284:1644](1010350.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p54"></span> [Exod.
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#028)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[284:1645](1010350.htm#fr_1644) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p55"></span> [Num.
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[284:1646](1010350.htm#fr_1645) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p58"></span> [Ps.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[284:1647](1010350.htm#fr_1646) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p59"></span> The original has a play on the words
Lucillam and Lucem.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[285:1648](1010350.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIII-p61"></span> A deacon in the Donatist communion at
Carthage. This matter is more fully gone into by Augustin in his second
sermon on [Ps. 36](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#000)<span
id="vii.1.XLIII-p61.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLIV](1010351)
