[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010458)  [Next](1010460) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCXI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 423.)

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p3.1"></span>In This Letter Augustin Rebukes the Nuns of
the Monastery in Which His Sister Had Been Prioress, for Certain
Turbulent Manifestations of Dissatisfaction with Her Successor, and Lays
Down General Rules for Their Guidance</span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p3.2"></span>. <span id="fr_2921"></span>[2922](#fn_2921)
</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p5"></span>1. As severity is ready to punish the
faults which it may discover, so charity is reluctant to discover the
faults which it must punish. This was the reason of my not acceding to
your request for a visit from me, at a time when, if I had come, I must
have come not to rejoice in your harmony, but to add more vehemence to
your strife. For how could I have treated your behaviour with
indifference, or have allowed it to pass unpunished, if so great a
tumult had arisen among you in my presence, as that which, when I was
absent, assailed my ears with the din of your voices, although my eyes
did not witness your disorder? For perhaps your rising against authority
would have been even more violent in my presence, since I must have
refused the concessions which you demanded,—concessions involving, to
your own disadvantage, some most dangerous precedents, subversive of
sound discipline; and I must thus have found you such as I did not
desire, and must have myself been found by you such as you did not
desire.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p6"></span>2. The apostle, writing to the
Corinthians, says: “Moreover, I call God for a record upon my soul, that
to spare you I came not as yet to Corinth. Not for that we have dominion
over your faith, but are helpers of your joy.” <span
id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922) I also say the same to you; to
spare you I have not come to you. I have also spared myself, that I
might not have sorrow upon sorrow, and have chosen not to see you face
to face, but to pour out my heart to God on your behalf, and to plead
the cause of your great danger not in words before you, but in tears
before God; entreating Him that He may not turn into grief the joy
wherewith I am wont to rejoice in you, and that amid the great offences
with which this world everywhere abounds, I may be comforted at times by
thinking of your number, your pure affection, your holy conversation,
and the abundant grace of God which is given to you, so that you not
only have renounced matrimony, but have chosen to dwell with one accord
in fellowship under the same roof, that you may have one soul and one
heart in God.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p8"></span>3. When I reflect on these good things,
these gifts of God in you, my heart, amid the many storms by which it is
agitated through evils elsewhere, is wont to find perfect rest. “Ye did
run well; who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the truth? This
persuasion cometh not of Him that calleth you.” <span
id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923) “A little leaven ”— <span
id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924) <span id="page_564">p. 564</span>
<span id="vii.1.CCXI-Page_564"></span>I am unwilling to complete the
sentence, for I rather desire, entreat, and exhort that the leaven
itself be transformed into something better, lest it change the whole
lump for the worse, as it has already almost done. If, therefore, you
have begun to put forth again the buddings of a sound discernment as to
your duty, pray that you enter not into temptation, nor fall again into
strifes, emulations, animosities, divisions, evil speaking, seditions,
whisperings. For we have not laboured as we have done in planting and
watering the garden of the Lord among you, that we may reap these thorns
from you. If, however, your weakness be still disturbed by turbulence,
pray that you may be delivered from this temptation. As for the
troublers of your peace, if such there be still among you, they shall,
unless they amend their conduct, bear their judgment, whoever they be.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p11"></span>4. Consider how evil a thing it is,
that at the very time when we rejoice in the return of the Donatists to
our unity, we have to lament internal discord within our monastery. Be
stedfast in observing your good vows, and you will not desire to change
for another the prioress whose care of the monastery has been for so
many years unwearied, under whom also you have both increased in numbers
and advanced in age, and who has given you the place in her heart which
a mother gives to her own children. All of you when you came to the
monastery found her there, either discharging satisfactorily the duties
of assistant to the late holy prioress, my sister, or, after her own
accession to that office, giving you a welcome to the sisterhood. Under
her you spent your noviciate, under her you took the veil, under her
your number has been multiplied, and yet you are riotously demanding
that she should be replaced by another, whereas, if the proposal to put
another in her place had come from us, it would have been seemly for you
to have mourned over such a proposal. For she is one whom you know well;
to her you came at first, and under her you have for so many years
advanced in age and in numbers. No official previously unknown to you
has been appointed, excepting the prior; if it be on his account that
you seek a change, and if through aversion to him you thus rebel against
your mother, why do you not rather petition for his removal? If,
however, you recoil from this suggestion, for I know how you reverence
and love him in Christ, why do you not all the more for his sake
reverence and love her? For the first measures of the recently appointed
prior in presiding over you are so hindered by your disorderly
behaviour, that he is himself disposed to leave you, rather than be
subjected on your account to the dishonour and odium which must arise
from the report going abroad, that you would not have sought another
prioress unless you had begun to have him as your prior. May God
therefore calm and compose your minds: let not the work of the devil
prevail in you, but may the peace of Christ gain the victory in your
hearts; and do not rush headlong to death, either through vexation of
spirit, because what you desire is refused, or through shame, because of
having desired what you ought not to have desired, but rather by
repentance resume the conscientious discharge of duty; and imitate not
the repentance of Judas the traitor, but the tears of Peter the
shepherd.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p12"></span>5. The rules which we lay down to be
observed by you as persons settled in a monastery are these:—First of
all, in order to fulfil the end for which you have been gathered into
one community, dwell in the house with oneness of spirit, and let your
hearts and minds be one in God. Also call not anything the property of
any one, but let all things be common property, and let distribution of
food and raiment be made to each of you by the prioress,—not equally to
all, because you are not all equally strong, but to every one according
to her need. For you read in the Acts of the Apostles: “They had all
things common: and distribution was made to every man according as he
had need.” <span id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925) Let those who had
any worldly goods when they entered the monastery cheerfully desire that
these become common property. Let those who had no worldly goods not ask
within the monastery for luxuries which they could not have while they
were outside of its walls; nevertheless, let the comforts which the
infirmity of any of them may require be given to such, though their
poverty before coming in to the monastery may have been such that they
could not have procured for themselves the bare necessaries of life; and
let them in such case be careful not to reckon it the chief happiness of
their present lot that they have found within the monastery food and
raiment, such as was elsewhere beyond their reach.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p14"></span>6. Let them, moreover, not hold their
heads high because they are associated on terms of equality with persons
whom they durst not have approached in the outer world; but let them
rather lift their hearts on high, and not seek after earthly
possessions, lest, if the rich be made lowly but the poor puffed up with
vanity in our monasteries, these institutions become useful only to the
rich, and hurtful to the poor. On the other hand, however, let not those
who seemed to hold some position in the world regard with contempt their
sisters, who in coming into this sacred fellowship have left a condition
of poverty; let them be careful to glory rather in <span
id="page_565">p. 565</span> <span id="vii.1.CCXI-Page_565"></span>the
fellowship of their poor sisters, than in the rank of their wealthy
parents. And let them not lift themselves up above the rest because of
their having, perchance, contributed something from their own resources
to the maintenance of the community, lest they find in their riches more
occasion for pride, because they divide them with others in a monastery,
than they might have found if they had spent them in their own enjoyment
in the world. For every other kind of sin finds scope in evil works, so
that by it they are done, but pride lurks even in good works, so that by
it they are undone; and what avails it to lavish money on the poor, and
become poor oneself, if the unhappy soul is rendered more proud by
despising riches than it had been by possessing them? Live, then, all of
you, in unanimity and concord, and in each other give honour to that God
whose temples you have been made.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p15"></span>7. Be regular (*instate*) in prayers at
the appointed hours and times. In the oratory let no one do anything
else than the duty for which the place was made, and from which it has
received its name; so that if any of you, having leisure, wish to pray
at other hours than those appointed, they may not be hindered by others
using the place for any other purpose. In the psalms and hymns used in
your prayers to God, let that be pondered in the heart which is uttered
by the voice; chant nothing but what you find prescribed to be chanted;
whatever is not so prescribed is not to be chanted.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p16"></span>8. Keep the flesh under by fastings and
by abstinence from meat and drink, so far as health allows. When any one
is not able to fast, let her not, unless she be ill, take any
nourishment except at the customary hour of repast. From the time of
your coming to table until you rise from it, listen without noise and
wrangling to whatever may be in course read to you; let not your mouths
alone be exercised in receiving food, let your ears be also occupied in
receiving the word of God.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p17"></span>9. If those who are weak in consequence
of their early training are treated somewhat differently in regard to
food, this ought not to be vexatious or seem unjust to others whom a
different training has made more robust. And let them not esteem these
weaker ones more favoured than themselves, because they receive a fare
somewhat less frugal than their own, but rather congratulate themselves
on enjoying a vigour of constitution which the others do not possess.
And if to those who have entered the monastery after a more delicate
upbringing at home, there be given any food, clothing, couch, or
covering which to others who are stronger, and in that respect more
favourably circumstanced, is not given, the sisters to whom these
indulgences are not given ought to consider how great a descent the
others have made from their style of living in the world to that which
they now have, although they may not have been able to come altogether
down to the severe simplicity of others who have a more hardy
constitution. And when those who were originally more wealthy see others
receiving—not as mark of higher honour, but out of consideration for
infirmity—more largely than they do themselves, they ought not to be
disturbed by fear of any such detestable perversion of monastic
discipline as this, that the poor are to be trained to luxury in a
monastery in which the wealthy are, so far as they can bear it, trained
to hardships. For, of course, as those who are ill must take less food,
otherwise they would increase their disease, so after illness, those who
are convalescent must, in order to their more rapid recovery, be so
nursed—even though they may have come from the lowest poverty to the
monastery—as if their recent illness had conferred on them the same
claim for special treatment as their former style of living confers upon
those who, before entering the monastery, were rich. So soon, however,
as they regain their wonted health, let them return to their own happier
mode of living, which, as involving fewer wants, is more suitable for
those who are servants of God; and let not inclination detain them when
they are strong in that amount of ease to which necessity had raised
them when they were weak. Let those regard themselves as truly richer
who are endowed with greater strength to bear hardships. For it is
better to have fewer wants than to have larger resources.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p18"></span>10. Let your apparel be in no wise
conspicuous; and aspire to please others by your behaviour rather than
by your attire. Let your head-dresses not be so thin as to let the nets
below them be seen. Let your hair be worn wholly covered, and let it
neither be carelessly dishevelled nor too scrupulously arranged when you
go beyond the monastery. When you go anywhere, walk together; when you
come to the place to which you were going, stand together. In walking,
in standing, in deportment, and in all your movements let nothing be
done which might attract the improper desires of any one, but rather let
all be in keeping with your sacred character. Though a passing glance be
directed towards any man, let your eyes look fixedly at none; for when
you are walking you are not forbidden to see men, but you must neither
let your desires go out to them, nor wish to be the objects of desire on
their part. For it is not only by touch that a woman awakens in any man
or cherishes towards him such desire, this may be done by inward
feelings and by looks. And say not that you have chaste minds though you
may have wanton eyes, for a wanton eye is the <span id="page_566">p.
566</span> <span id="vii.1.CCXI-Page_566"></span>index of a wanton
heart. And when wanton hearts exchange signals with each other in looks,
though the tongue is silent, and are, by the force of sensual passion,
pleased by the reciprocation of inflamed desire, their purity of
character is gone, though their bodies are not defiled by any act of
uncleanness. Nor let her who fixes her eyes upon one of the other sex,
and takes pleasure in his eye being fixed on her, imagine that the act
is not observed by others; she is seen assuredly by those by whom she
supposes herself not to be remarked. But even though she should elude
notice, and be seen by no human eye, what shall she do with that Witness
above us from whom nothing can be concealed? Is He to be regarded as not
seeing because His eye rests on all things with a long-suffering
proportioned to His wisdom? Let every holy woman guard herself from
desiring sinfully to please man by cherishing a fear of displeasing God;
let her check the desire of sinfully looking upon man by remembering
that God’s eye is looking upon all things. For in this very matter we
are exhorted to cherish fear of God by the words of Scripture:—“He that
looks with a fixed eye is an abomination to the Lord.” <span
id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926) When, therefore, you are together
in the church, or in any other place where men also are present, guard
your chastity by watching over one another, and God, who dwelleth in
you, will thus guard you by means of yourselves.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p20"></span>11. And if you perceive in any one of
your number this frowardness of eye, warn her at once, so that the evil
which has begun may not go on, but be checked immediately. But if, after
this admonition, you see her repeat the offence, or do the same thing on
any other subsequent day, whoever may have had the opportunity of seeing
this must now report her as one who has been wounded and requires to be
healed, but not without pointing her out to another, and perhaps a third
sister, so that she may be convicted by the testimony of two or three
witnesses, <span id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927) and may be
reprimanded with necessary severity. And do not think that in thus
informing upon one another you are guilty of malevolence. For the truth
rather is, that you are not guiltless if by keeping silence you allow
sisters to perish, whom you may correct by giving information of their
faults. For if your sister had a wound on her person which she wished to
conceal through fear of the surgeon’s lance, would it not be cruel if
you kept silence about it, and true compassion if you made it known? How
much more, then, are you bound to make known her sin, that she may not
suffer more fatally from a neglected spiritual wound. But before she is
pointed out to others as witnesses by whom she may be convicted if she
deny the charge, the offender ought to be brought before the prioress,
if after admonition she has refused to be corrected, so that by her
being in this way more privately rebuked, the fault which she has
committed may not become known to all the others. If, however, she then
deny the charge, then others must be employed to observe her conduct
after the denial, so that now before the whole sisterhood she may not be
accused by one witness, but convicted by two or three. When convicted of
the fault, it is her duty to submit to the corrective discipline which
may be appointed by the prioress or the prior. If she refuse to submit
to this, and does not go away from you of her own accord, let her be
expelled from your society. For this is not done cruelly but mercifully,
to protect very many from perishing through infection of the plague with
which one has been stricken. Moreover, what I have now said in regard to
abstaining from wanton looks should be carefully observed, with due love
for the persons and hatred of the sin, in observing, forbidding,
reporting, proving, and punishing of all other faults. But if any one
among you has gone on into so great sin as to receive secretly from any
man letters or gifts of any description, let her be pardoned and prayed
for if she confess this of her own accord. If, however, she is found out
and is convicted of such conduct, let her be more severely punished,
according to the sentence of the prioress, or of the prior, or even of
the bishop.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p22"></span>12. Keep your clothes in one place,
under the care of one or two, or as many as may be required to shake
them so as to keep them from being injured by moths; and as your food is
supplied from one storeroom, let your clothes be provided from one
wardrobe. And whatever may be brought out to you as wearing apparel
suitable for the season, regard it, if possible, as a matter of no
importance whether each of you receives the very same article of
clothing which she had formerly laid aside, or one receive what another
formerly wore, provided only that what is necessary be denied to no one.
But if contentions and murmurings are occasioned among you by this, and
some one of you complains that she has received some article of dress
inferior to that which she formerly wore, and thinks it beneath her to
be so clothed as her other sister was, by this prove your own selves,
and judge how far deficient you must be in the inner holy dress of the
heart, when you quarrel with each other about the clothing of the body.
Nevertheless, if your infirmity is indulged by the concession that you
are to receive again the identical article which you had laid aside, let
whatever you put past be nevertheless, kept in one place, and in charge
of the ordinary keep<span id="page_567">p. 567</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-Page_567"></span>ers of the wardrobe; it being, of
course, understood that no one is to work in making any article of
clothing or for the couch, or any girdle, veil, or head-dress, for her
own private comfort, but that all your works be done for the common good
of all, with greater zeal and more cheerful perseverance than if you
were each working for your individual interest. For the love concerning
which it is written, “Charity seeketh not her own,” <span
id="fr_2928"></span>[2929](#fn_2928) is to be understood as that which
prefers the common good to personal advantage, not personal advantage to
the common good. Therefore the more fully that you give to the common
good a preference above your personal and private interests, the more
fully will you be sensible of progress in securing that, in regard to
all those things which supply wants destined soon to pass away, the
charity which abides may hold a conspicuous and influential place. An
obvious corollary from these rules is, that when persons of either sex
bring to their own daughters in the monastery, or to inmates belonging
to them by any other relationship, presents of clothing or of other
articles which are to be regarded as necessary, such gifts are not to be
received privately, but must be under the control of the prioress, that,
being added to the common stock, they may be placed at the service of
any inmate to whom they may be necessary. If any one conceal any gift
bestowed on her, let sentence be passed on her as guilty of theft.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p24"></span>13. Let your clothes be washed, whether
by yourselves or by washerwomen, at such intervals as are approved by
the prioress, lest the indulgence of undue solicitude about spotless
raiment produce inward stains upon your souls. Let the washing of the
body and the use of baths be not constant, but at the usual interval
assigned to it, *i.e.* once in a month. In the case, however, of illness
rendering necessary the washing of the person, let it not be unduly
delayed; let it be done on the physician’s recommendation without
complaint; and even though the patient be reluctant, she must do at the
order of the prioress what health demands. If, however, a patient
desires the bath, and it happen to be not for her good, her desire must
not be yielded to, for sometimes it is supposed to be beneficial because
it gives pleasure, although in reality it may be doing harm. Finally, if
a handmaid of God suffers from any hidden pain of body, let her
statement as to her suffering be believed without hesitation; but if
there be any uncertainty whether that which she finds agreeable be
really of use in curing her pain, let the physician be consulted. To the
baths, or to any place whither it may be necessary to go, let no fewer
than three go at any time. Moreover, the sister requiring to go anywhere
is not to go with those whom she may choose herself, but with those whom
the prioress may order. The care of the sick, and of those who require
attention as convalescents, and of those who, without any feverish
symptoms, are labouring under debility, ought to be committed to some
one of your number, who shall procure for them from the storeroom what
she shall see to be necessary for each. Moreover, let those who have
charge, whether in the storeroom, or in the wardrobe, or in the library,
render service to their sisters without murmuring. Let manuscripts be
applied for at a fixed hour every day, and let none who ask them at
other hours receive them. But at whatever time clothes and shoes may be
required by one in need of these, let not those in charge of this
department delay supplying the want.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p25"></span>14. Quarrels should be unknown among
you, or at least, if they arise, they should as quickly as possible be
ended, lest anger grow into hatred, and convert “a mote into a
beam,” <span id="fr_2929"></span>[2930](#fn_2929) and make the soul
chargeable with murder. For the saying of Scripture: “He that hateth his
brother is a murderer,” <span id="fr_2930"></span>[2931](#fn_2930) does
not concern men only, but women also are bound by this law through its
being enjoined on the other sex, which was prior in the order of
creation. Let her, whoever she be, that shall have injured another by
taunt or abusive language, or false accusation, remember to remedy the
wrong by apology as promptly as possible, and let her who was injured
grant forgiveness without further disputation. If the injury has been
mutual, the duty of both parties will be mutual forgiveness, because of
your prayers, which, as they are more frequent, ought to be all the more
sacred in your esteem. But the sister who is prompt in asking another
whom she confesses that she has wronged to grant her forgiveness is,
though she may be more frequently betrayed by a hasty temper, better
than another who, though less irascible, is with more difficulty
persuaded to ask forgiveness. Let not her who refuses to forgive her
sister expect to receive answers to prayer: as for any sister who never
will ask forgiveness, or does not do it from the heart, it is no
advantage to such an one to be in a monastery, even though, perchance,
she may not be expelled. Wherefore abstain from hard words; but if they
have escaped your lips, be not slow to bring words of healing from the
same lips by which the wounds were inflicted. When, however, the
necessity of discipline compels you to use hard words in restraining the
younger inmates, even though you feel that in these you have gone too
far, it is not imperative on you to ask their forgiveness, lest <span
id="page_568">p. 568</span> <span id="vii.1.CCXI-Page_568"></span>while
undue humility is observed by you towards those who ought to be subject
to you, the authority necessary for governing them be impaired; but
pardon must nevertheless be sought from the Lord of all, who knows with
what goodwill you love even those whom you reprove it may be with undue
severity. The love which you bear to each other must be not carnal, but
spiritual: for those things which are practised by immodest women in
shameful frolic and sporting with one another ought not even to be done
by those of your sex who are married, or are intending to marry, and
much more ought not to be done by widows or chaste virgins dedicated to
be hand-maids of Christ by a holy vow.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p28"></span>15. Obey the prioress as a mother,
giving her all due honour, that God may not be offended by your
forgetting what you owe to her: still more is it incumbent on you to
obey the presbyter who has charge of you all. To the prioress most
specially belongs the responsibility of seeing that all these rules be
observed, and that if any rule has been neglected, the offence be not
passed over, but carefully corrected and punished; it being, of course,
open to her to refer to the presbyter any matter that goes beyond her
province or power. But let her count herself happy not in exercising the
power which rules, but in practising the love which serves. In honour in
the sight of men let her be raised above you, but in fear in the sight
of God let her be as it were beneath your feet. Let her show herself
before all a “pattern of good works.” <span
id="fr_2931"></span>[2932](#fn_2931) Let her “warn the unruly, comfort
the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all.” <span
id="fr_2932"></span>[2933](#fn_2932) Let her cheerfully observe and
cautiously impose rules. And, though both are necessary, let her be more
anxious to be loved than to be feared by you; always reflecting that for
you she must give account to God. For this reason yield obedience to her
out of compassion not for yourselves only but also for her, because, as
she occupies a higher position among you, her danger is proportionately
greater than your own.

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p31"></span>16. The Lord grant that you may yield
loving submission to all these rules, as persons enamoured of spiritual
beauty, and diffusing a sweet savour of Christ by means of a good
conversation, not as bondwomen under the law, but as established in
freedom under grace. That you may, however, examine yourselves by this
treatise as by a mirror, and may not through forgetfulness neglect
anything, let it be read over by you once a week; and in so far as you
find yourselves practising the things written here, give thanks for this
to God, the Giver of all good; in so far, however, as any of you finds
herself to be in some particular defective, let her lament the past and
be on her guard in the time to come, praying both that her debt may be
forgiven, and that she may not be led into temptation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2921"></span>[563:2922](1010459.htm#fr_2921) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p4"></span> This letter is of historical value, as
embodying the rules of nunneries belonging to the Augustinian orders. In
the end of the first volume of the Benedictine edition of his writings,
this rule of monastic life is given, adapted by some later writer to
convents of monks.

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[563:2923](1010459.htm#fr_2922) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p7"></span> [2 Cor.
1.23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[563:2924](1010459.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p9"></span> [Gal.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#008)<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[563:2925](1010459.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[564:2926](1010459.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p13"></span> [Acts
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[566:2927](1010459.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p19"></span> [Prov.
27.20](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p19.1"></span>, LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p19.2"></span>βδελυγμα κυριῳ στηρίζων ὀφθαλμὸν</span>.

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[566:2928](1010459.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p21"></span> [Matt.
18.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2928"></span>[567:2929](1010459.htm#fr_2928) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p23"></span> [1 Cor.
13.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2929"></span>[567:2930](1010459.htm#fr_2929) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p26"></span> [Matt.
7.3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2930"></span>[567:2931](1010459.htm#fr_2930) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p27"></span> [1 John
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2931"></span>[568:2932](1010459.htm#fr_2931) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p29"></span> [Titus
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2932"></span>[568:2933](1010459.htm#fr_2932) <span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXI-p30"></span> [1 Thess.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.CCXI-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCXII](1010460)
