[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010150)  [Next](1010152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.IX.VIII"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Of the Conversion of Evodius,
and the Death of His Mother When Returning with Him to Africa; And Whose
Education He Tenderly Relates.</span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p2"></span>17. Thou, who makest men to dwell of one
mind in a house, <span id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761) didst associate
with us Evodius also, a young man of our city, who, when serving as an
agent for Public Affairs, <span id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762) was
converted unto Thee and baptized prior to us; and relinquishing his
secular service, prepared himself for Thine. We were together, <span
id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763) and together were we about to dwell
with a holy purpose. We sought for some place where we might be most
useful in our service to Thee, and were going back together to Africa.
And when we were at the Tiberine Ostia my mother died. Much I omit,
having much to hasten. Receive my confessions and thanksgivings, O my
God, for innumerable things concerning which I am silent. But I will not
omit aught that my soul has brought forth as to that Thy handmaid who
brought me forth,—in her flesh, that I might be born to this temporal
light, and in her heart, that I might be born to life eternal. <span
id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764) I will speak not of her gifts, but
Thine in her; for she neither made herself nor educated herself. Thou
createdst her, nor did her father nor her mother know what a being was
to proceed from them. And it was the rod of Thy Christ, the discipline
of Thine only Son, that trained her in Thy fear, in the house of one of
Thy faithful ones, who was a sound member of Thy Church. Yet this good
discipline did she not so much attribute to the diligence of her mother,
as that of a certain decrepid maid-servant, who had carried about her
father when an infant, as little ones are wont to be carried on the
backs of elder girls. For which reason, and on account of her extreme
age and very good character, was she much respected by the heads of that
Christian house. Whence also was committed to her the care of her
master’s daughters, which she with diligence performed, and was earnest
in restraining them when necessary, with a holy severity, and
instructing them with a sober sagacity. For, excepting at the hours in
which they were very temperately fed at their parents’ table, she used
not to permit them, though parched with thirst, to drink even water;
thereby taking precautions against an evil custom, and adding the
wholesome advice, “You drink water only because you have not control of
wine; but when you have come to be married, and made mistresses of
storeroom and cellar, you will despise water, but the habit of drinking
will remain.” By this method of instruction, and power of command, she
restrained the longing of their tender age, and regulated the very
thirst of the girls to such a becoming limit, as that what was not
seemly they did not long for.

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p7"></span>18. And yet—as Thine handmaid related to
me, her son—there had stolen upon her a love of wine. For when she, as
being a sober maiden, was as usual bidden by her parents to draw wine
from the cask, the vessel being held under the opening, before she
poured the wine into the bottle, she would wet the tips of her lips with
a little, for more than that her inclination refused. For this she did
not from any craving for drink, but out of the overflowing buoyancy of
her time of life, which bubbles up with sportiveness, and is, in
youthful spirits, wont to be repressed by the gravity of elders. And so
unto that little, adding daily littles (for “he that contemneth small
things shall fall by little and little”), <span
id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765) she contracted such a habit as, to
drink off eagerly her little cup nearly full of wine. Where, then, was
the sagacious old woman with her earnest restraint? Could anything
prevail against a secret disease if Thy medicine, O Lord, did not watch
over us? Father, mother, and nurturers absent, Thou present, who hast
created, who callest, who also by those who are set over us workest some
good for the salvation of our souls, what didst Thou at that time, O my
God? How didst Thou <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span
id="vi.IX.VIII-Page_136"></span>heal her? How didst Thou make her whole?
Didst Thou not out of another woman’s soul evoke a hard and bitter
insult, as a surgeon’s knife from Thy secret store, and with one thrust
remove all that putrefaction? <span id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766)
For the maidservant who used to accompany her to the cellar, falling
out, as it happens, with her little mistress, when she was alone with
her, cast in her teeth this vice, with very bitter insult, calling her a
“wine-bibber.” Stung by this taunt, she perceived her foulness, and
immediately condemned and renounced it. Even as friends by their
flattery pervert, so do enemies by their taunts often correct us. Yet
Thou renderest not unto them what Thou dost by them, but what was
proposed by them. For she, being angry, desired to irritate her young
mistress, not to cure her; and did it in secret, either because the time
and place of the dispute found them thus, or perhaps lest she herself
should be exposed to danger for disclosing it so late. But Thou, Lord,
Governor of heavenly and earthly things, who convertest to Thy purposes
the deepest torrents, and disposest the turbulent current of the
ages, <span id="fr_767"></span>[768](#fn_767) healest one soul by the
unsoundness of another; lest any man, when he remarks this, should
attribute it unto his own power if another, whom he wishes to be
reformed, is so through a word of his.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_761"></span>[135:762](1010151.htm#fr_761) <span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p3"></span> [Ps.
68.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)<span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[135:763](1010151.htm#fr_762) <span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p4"></span> See viii. sec. 15, note, above.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[135:764](1010151.htm#fr_763) <span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p5"></span> We find from his *Retractations* (i. 7,
sec. 1), that at this time he wrote his *De Moribus Ecclesiæ Catholicæ*
and his *De Moribus Manichæorum*. He also wrote (*ibid.* 8, sec. I) his
*De Animæ Quantitate*, and (*ibid.* 9, sec. I) his three books *De
Libero Arbitrio.*

<span id="fn_764"></span>[135:765](1010151.htm#fr_764) <span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p6"></span> In his *De Vita Beata* and in his *De
Dono Persev.* he attributes all that he was to his mother’s tears and
prayers.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[135:766](1010151.htm#fr_765) <span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p8"></span> [Ecclus.
19.1](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#001)<span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p8.1"></span>. Augustin frequently alludes to the subtle
power of little things. As when he says,—illustrating (*Serm.*
cclxxviii.) by the plagues of Egypt,—tiny insects, if they be numerous
enough, will be as harmful as the bite of great beasts; and (*Serm.*
lvi.) a hill of sand, though composed of tiny grains, will crush a man
as surely as the same weight of lead. Little drops (*Serm.* lviii.) make
the river, and little leaks sink the ship; wherefore, he urges, little
things must not be despised. “Men have usually,” says Sedgwick in his
*Anatomy of Secret Sins*, “been first wading in lesser sins who are now
swimming in great transgressions.” It is in the little things of evil
that temptation has its greatest strength. The snowflake is little and
not to be accounted of, but from its multitudinous accumulation results
the dread power of the avalanche. Satan often seems to act as it is said
Pompey did, when he could not gain entrance to a city. He persuaded the
citizens to admit a few of his weak and wounded soldiers, who, when they
had become strong, opened the gates to his whole army. But if little
things have such subtlety in temptation, they have likewise higher
ministries. The Jews, in their Talmudical writings, have many parables
illustrating how God by little things tries and proves men to see if
they are fitted for greater things. They say, for example, that He tried
David when keeping sheep in the wilderness, to see whether he would be
worthy to rule over Israel, the sheep of his inheritance. See Ch.
Schoettgen, *Hor. Heb. et Talmud*, i. 300.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[136:767](1010151.htm#fr_766) <span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p9"></span> “‘Animam oportet assiduis saliri
tentationibus,’ says St. Ambrose. Some errors and offences do rub salt
upon a good man’s integrity, that it may not putrefy with
presumption.”—Bishop Hacket’s *Sermons*, p 210.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[136:768](1010151.htm#fr_767) <span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IX.VIII-p10"></span> Not only is this true in private, but
in public concerns. Even in the crucifixion of our Lord, the wicked
rulers did ([Acts 4.26](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#026)<span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p10.1"></span>) what God’s hand and God’s counsel had
before determined to be done. Perhaps by reason of His infinite
knowledge it is that God, who knows our thoughts long before ([Ps.
139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#004)<span
id="vi.IX.VIII-p10.2"></span>), weaves man’s self-willed purposes into
the pattern which His inscrutable providence has before ordained. Or, to
use Augustin’s own words (*De Civ. Dei*, xxii. 2), “It is true that
wicked men do many things contrary to God’s will; but so great is His
wisdom and power, that all things which seem adverse to His purpose do
still tend towards those just and good ends and issues which He Himself
has foreknown.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](1010152)
