[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010134)  [Next](1010136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VIII.V"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VIII.V-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—Of the Causes Which Alienate Us
from God.</span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p2"></span>10. But when that man of Thine,
Simplicianus, related this to me about Victorinus, I burned to imitate
him; and it was for this end he had related it. But when he had added
this also, that in the time of the Emperor Julian, there was a law made
by which Christians were forbidden to teach grammar and oratory, <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) and he, in obedience to this law,
chose rather to abandon the wordy school than Thy word, by which Thou
makest eloquent the tongues of the dumb, <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) —he appeared to me not more brave than
happy, in having thus discovered an opportunity of waiting on Thee only,
which thing I was sighing for, thus bound, not with the irons of
another, but my own iron will. My will was the enemy master of, and
thence had made a chain for me and bound me. Because of a perverse will
was lust made; and lust indulged in became custom; and custom not
resisted became necessity. By which links, as it were, joined together
(whence I term it a “chain”), did a hard bondage hold me
enthralled. <span id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) But that <span
id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span id="vi.VIII.V-Page_121"></span>new
will which had begun to develope in me, freely to worship Thee, and to
wish to enjoy Thee, O God, the only sure enjoyment, was not able as yet
to overcome my former wilfulness, made strong by long indulgence. Thus
did my two wills, one old and the other new, one carnal, the other
spiritual, contend within me; and by their discord they unstrung my
soul.

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p6"></span>11. Thus came I to understand, from my
own experience, what I had read, how that “the flesh lusteth against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh.” <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) I verily lusted both ways; <span
id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) yet more in that which I approved in
myself, than in that which I disapproved in myself. For in this last it
was now rather not “I,” <span id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645) because
in much I rather suffered against my will than did it willingly. And yet
it was through me that custom became more combative against me, because
I had come willingly whither I willed not. And who, then, can with any
justice speak against it, when just punishment follows the sinner? <span
id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646) Nor had I now any longer my wonted
excuse, that as yet I hesitated to be above the world and serve Thee,
because my perception of the truth was uncertain; for now it was
certain. But I, still bound to the earth, refused to be Thy soldier; and
was as much afraid of being freed from all embarrassments, as we ought
to fear to be embarrassed.

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p11"></span>12. Thus with the baggage of the world
was I sweetly burdened, as when in slumber; and the thoughts wherein I
meditated upon Thee were like unto the efforts of those desiring to
awake, who, still overpowered with a heavy drowsiness, are again steeped
therein. And as no one desires to sleep always, and in the sober
judgment of all waking is better, yet does a man generally defer to
shake off drowsiness, when there is a heavy lethargy in all his limbs,
and, though displeased, yet even after it is time to rise with pleasure
yields to it, so was I assured that it were much better for me to give
up myself to Thy charity, than to yield myself to my own cupidity; but
the former course satisfied and vanquished me, the latter pleased me and
fettered me. <span id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647) Nor had I aught to
answer Thee calling to me, “Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.” <span
id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648) And to Thee showing me on every side,
that what Thou saidst was true, I, convicted by the truth, had nothing
at all to reply, but the drawling and drowsy words: “Presently, lo,
presently;” “Leave me a little while.” But “presently, presently,” had
no present; and my “leave me a little while” went on for a long
while. <span id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649) In vain did I “delight in
Thy law after the inner man,” when “another law in my members warred
against the law of my mind, and brought me into captivity to the law of
sin which is in my members.” For the law of sin is the violence of
custom, whereby the mind is drawn and held, even against its will;
deserving to be so held in that it so willingly falls into it. “O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death” but Thy grace only, through Jesus Christ our Lord? <span
id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_640"></span>[120:641](1010135.htm#fr_640) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p3"></span> During the reign of Constantius, laws of
a persecuting character were enacted against Paganism, which led
multitudes *nominally* to adopt the Christian faith. When Julian the
Apostate came to the throne, he took steps immediately to reinstate
Paganism in all its ancient splendour. His court was filled with
Platonic philosophers and diviners, and he sacrificed daily to the gods.
But, instead of imitating the example of his predecessor, and enacting
laws against the Christians, he endeavoured by *subtlety* to destroy
their faith. In addition to the measures mentioned by Augustin above, he
endeavoured to foment divisions in the Church by recalling the banished
Donatists, and stimulating them to disseminate their doctrines, and he
himself wrote treatises against it. In order, if possible, to counteract
the influence of Christianity, he instructed his priests to imitate the
Christians in their relief of the poor and care for the sick. But while
in every way enacting measures of disability against the Christians, he
showed great favour to the Jews, and with the view of confuting the
predictions of Christ, went so far as to encourage them to rebuild the
Temple.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[120:642](1010135.htm#fr_641) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p4"></span> [Wisd.
10.21](../../../bib/apo/wis010.htm#021)<span
id="vi.VIII.V-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[120:643](1010135.htm#fr_642) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p5"></span> There would appear to be a law at work
in the moral and spiritual worlds similar to that of gravitation in the
natural, which “acts inversely as the square of the distance.” As we are
more affected, for example, by events that have taken place near us
either in time or place, than by those which are more remote, so in
spiritual things, the monitions of conscience would seem to become
feeble with far greater rapidity than the continuance of our resistance
would lead us to expect, while the power of sin, in like proportion,
becomes strong. When tempted, men see not the end from the beginning.
The allurement, however, which at first is but as a gossamer thread, is
soon felt to have the strength of a cable. “Evil men and seducers wax
worse and worse” ([2 Tim. 3.13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013)<span
id="vi.VIII.V-p5.1"></span>), and when it is too late they learn that
the embrace of the siren is but the prelude to destruction. “Thus,”as
Gurnall has it (*The Christian in Complete Armour*, vol. i. part 2),
“Satan leads poor creatures down into the depths of sin by winding
stairs, that let them not see the bottom whither they are going.…Many
who at this day lie in open profaneness, never thought they should have
rolled so far from their modest beginnings. O Christians, give not place
to Satan, no, not an inch, in his first motions. He that is a beggar and
a modest one without doors, will command the house if let in. Yield at
first, and thou givest away thy strength to resist him in the rest; when
the hem is worn, the whole garment will ravel out, if it be not mended
by timely repentance.” See Müller, *Lehre von der Sünde*, book v., where
the beginnings and alarming progress of evil in the soul are graphically
described. See ix. sec. 18, note, below.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[121:644](1010135.htm#fr_643) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p7"></span> [Gal.
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="vi.VIII.V-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[121:645](1010135.htm#fr_644) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p8"></span> See iv. sec. 26, note, and v. sec. 18,
above.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[121:646](1010135.htm#fr_645) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p9"></span> [Rom
7.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#020)<span id="vi.VIII.V-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[121:647](1010135.htm#fr_646) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p10"></span> See v. sec. 2, note 6, above.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[121:648](1010135.htm#fr_647) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p12"></span> *Illud placebat et vincebat; hoc
libebat et vinciebat.* Watts renders freely, “But notwithstanding that
former course pleased and overcame my reason, yet did this latter tickle
and enthrall my senses.”

<span id="fn_648"></span>[121:649](1010135.htm#fr_648) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p13"></span> [Eph.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span
id="vi.VIII.V-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[121:650](1010135.htm#fr_649) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p14"></span> As Bishop Wilberforce, eloquently
describing this condition of mind, says, in his sermon on *The Almost
Christian*, “New, strange wishes were rising in his heart. The Mighty
One was brooding over its currents, was stirring up its tides, was fain
to overrule their troubled flow—to arise in open splendour on his eyes;
to glorify his life with His own blessed presence. And he himself was
evidently conscious of the struggle; he was almost won; he was drawn
towards that mysterious birth, and he well-nigh yielded. He even knew
what was passing within his soul; he could appreciate something of its
importance, of the living value of that moment. If that conflict was
indeed visible to higher powers around him; if they who longed to keep
him in the kingdom of darkness, and they who were ready to rejoice at
his repentance—if they could see the inner waters of that troubled
heart, as they surged and eddied underneath these mighty influences, how
must they have waited for the doubtful choice! how would they strain
their observation to see if that <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.VIII.V-p14.1"></span>Almost</span> should turn into an <span
class="c9"><span id="vi.VIII.V-p14.2"></span> Altogether</span>, or die
away again, and leave his heart harder than it had been before!”

<span id="fn_650"></span>[121:651](1010135.htm#fr_650) <span
id="vi.VIII.V-p14.3"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.V-p15"></span> [Rom.
7.22-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022)<span
id="vi.VIII.V-p15.1"></span>. This *difficilis et periculosus locus*
(*Serm.* cliv. 1) he interprets differently at different periods of his
life. In this place, as elsewhere in his writings, he makes the passage
refer (according to the general interpretation in the Church up to that
time) to man convinced of sin under the influence of the law, but not
under grace. In his *Retractations*, however (i. 23, sec. 1), he points
out that he had found reason to interpret the passage not of man
convinced of sin, but of man renewed and regenerated in Christ Jesus.
This is the view constantly taken in his anti-Pelagian writings, which
were published subsequently to the date of his *Confessions*; and indeed
this change in interpretation probably arose from the pressure of the
Pelagian controversy (see *Con. Duas Ep. Pel.* i. 10, secs. 18 and 22),
and the fear lest the old view should too much favour the heretics, and
their exaltation of the powers of the natural man to the disparagement
of the influence of the grace of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](1010136)
