[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010083)  [Next](1010085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.V.VIII"></span><span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span
id="vi.V.VIII-Page_84"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.V.VIII-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—He Sets Out for Rome, His
Mother in Vain Lamenting It.</span>

<span id="vi.V.VIII-p2"></span>14. Thou dealedst with me, therefore,
that I should be persuaded to go to Rome, and teach there rather what I
was then teaching at Carthage. And how I was persuaded to do this, I
will not fail to confess unto Thee; for in this also the profoundest
workings of Thy wisdom, and Thy ever present mercy to usward, must be
pondered and avowed. It was not my desire to go to Rome because greater
advantages and dignities were guaranteed me by the friends who persuaded
me into this,—although even at this period I was influenced by these
considerations,—but my principal and almost sole motive was, that I had
been informed that the youths studied more quietly there, and were kept
under by the control of more rigid discipline, so that they did not
capriciously and impudently rush into the school of a master not their
own, into whose presence they were forbidden to enter unless with his
consent. At Carthage, on the contrary, there was amongst the scholars a
shameful and intemperate license. They burst in rudely, and, with almost
furious gesticulations, interrupt the system which any one may have
instituted for the good of his pupils. Many outrages they perpetrate
with astounding phlegm, which would be punishable by law were they not
sustained by custom; that custom showing them to be the more worthless,
in that they now do, as according to law, what by Thy unchangeable law
will never be lawful. And they fancy they do it with impunity, whereas
the very blindness whereby they do it is their punishment, and they
suffer far greater things than they do. The manners, then, which as a
student I would not adopt, <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) I was
compelled as a teacher to submit to from others; and so I was too glad
to go where all who knew anything about it assured me that similar
things were not done. But Thou, “my refuge and my portion in the land of
the living,” <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) didst while at
Carthage goad me, so that I might thereby be withdrawn from it, and
exchange my worldly habitation for the preservation of my soul; whilst
at Rome Thou didst offer me enticements by which to attract me there, by
men enchanted with this dying life,—the one doing insane actions, and
the other making assurances of vain things; and, in order to correct my
footsteps, didst secretly employ their and my perversity. For both they
who disturbed my tranquillity were blinded by a shameful madness, and
they who allured me elsewhere smacked of the earth. And I, who hated
real misery here, sought fictitious happiness there.

<span id="vi.V.VIII-p5"></span>15. But the cause of my going thence and
going thither, Thou, O God, knewest, yet revealedst it not, either to me
or to my mother, who grievously lamented my journey, and went with me as
far as the sea. But I deceived her, when she violently restrained me
either that she might retain me or accompany me, and I pretended that I
had a friend whom I could not quit until he had a favourable wind to set
sail. And I lied to my mother—and such a mother!—and got away. For this
also Thou hast in mercy pardoned me, saving me, thus replete with
abominable pollutions, from the waters of the sea, for the water of Thy
grace, whereby, when I was purified, the fountains of my mother’s eyes
should be dried, from which for me she day by day watered the ground
under her face. And yet, refusing to go back without me, it was with
difficulty I persuaded her to remain that night in a place quite close
to our ship, where there was an oratory <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) in memory of the blessed Cyprian. That
night I secretly left, but she was not backward in prayers and weeping.
And what was it, O Lord, that she, with such an abundance of tears, was
asking of Thee, but that Thou wouldest not permit me to sail? But Thou,
mysteriously counselling and hearing the real purpose of her desire,
granted not what she then asked, in order to make me what she was ever
asking. The wind blew and filled our sails, and withdrew the shore from
our sight; and she, wild with grief, was there on the morrow, and filled
Thine ears with complaints and groans, which Thou didst disregard;
whilst, by the means of my longings, Thou wert hastening me on to the
cessation of all longing, and the gross part of her love to me was
whipped out by the just lash of sorrow. But, like all mothers,—though
even more than others,—she loved to have me with her, and knew not what
joy Thou wert preparing for her by my absence. Being ignorant of this,
she did weep and mourn, and in her agony was seen the inheritance of
Eve,—seeking in sorrow what in sorrow she had brought forth. And yet,
after accusing my perfidy and cruelty, she again continued her
intercessions for me with Thee, returned to her accustomed place, and I
to Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_394"></span>[84:395](1010084.htm#fr_394) <span
id="vi.V.VIII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VIII-p3"></span> See iii. sec. 6, note, above.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[84:396](1010084.htm#fr_395) <span
id="vi.V.VIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VIII-p4"></span> [Ps.
142.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#005)<span
id="vi.V.VIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[84:397](1010084.htm#fr_396) <span
id="vi.V.VIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VIII-p6"></span> See vi. sec. 2, note, below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](1010085)
