[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010131)  [Next](1010133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VIII.II"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VIII.II-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—The Pious Old Man Rejoices that
He Read Plato and the Scriptures, and Tells Him of the Rhetorician
Victorinus Having Been Converted to the Faith Through the Reading of the
Sacred Books.</span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p2"></span>3. To Simplicianus then I went,—the
father of Ambrose <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) (at that time
a bishop) in receiving Thy grace, and whom he truly loved as a father.
To him I narrated the windings of my error. But when I mentioned to him
that I had read certain books of the Platonists, which Victorinus,
sometime Professor of Rhetoric at Rome (who died a Christian, as I had
been told), had translated into Latin, he congratulated me that I had
not fallen upon the writings of other philosophers, which were full of
fallacies and deceit, “after the rudiments of the world,” <span
id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) whereas they, <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) in many ways, led to the belief in God
and His word. <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) Then, to exhort me
to the humility of Christ, <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611)
hidden from the wise, and revealed to little ones, <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) he spoke of Victorinus himself, <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) whom, whilst he was at Rome, he had
known very intimately; and of him he related that about which I will not
be silent. For it contains great praise of Thy grace, which ought to be
confessed unto Thee, how that most learned old man, highly skilled in
all the liberal sciences, who had read, criticised, and explained so
many works of the philosophers; the teacher of so many noble senators;
who also, as a mark of his excellent discharge of his duties, had (which
men of this world esteem a great honour) both merited and obtained a
statue in the Roman Forum, he,—even to that age a worshipper of idols,
and a participator in the sacrilegious rites to which almost all the
nobility of Rome were wedded, and had inspired the people with the love
of

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p10"></span>“The dog Anubis, and a medley crew

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p11"></span>Of monster gods \[who\] ’gainst Neptune
stand in arms,

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p12"></span>’Gainst Venus and Minerva, steel-clad
Mars,” <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614)

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p14"></span>whom Rome once conquered, now
worshipped, all which old Victorinus had with thundering eloquence
defended so many years,—he now blushed not to be the child of Thy
Christ, and an infant at Thy fountain, submitting his neck to the yoke
of humility, and subduing his forehead to the reproach of the Cross.

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p15"></span>4. O Lord, Lord, who hast bowed the
heavens and come down, touched the mountains and they did smoke, <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) by what means didst Thou convey
Thyself into that bosom? He used to read, as Simplicianus said, the Holy
Scripture, most studiously sought after and searched into all the
Christian writings, and said to Simplicianus,—not openly, but secretly,
and as a friend,—“Know thou that I am a Christian.” To which he replied,
“I will not believe it, nor will I rank you among the Christians unless
I see you in the Church of Christ.” Whereupon he replied derisively, “Is
it then the walls that make Christians?” And this he <span
id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span id="vi.VIII.II-Page_118"></span>often
said, that he already was a Christian; and Simplidanus making the same
answer, the conceit of the “walls” was by the other as often renewed.
For he was fearful of offending his friends, proud demon-worshippers,
from the height of whose Babylonian dignity, as from cedars of Lebanon
which had not yet been broken by the Lord, <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) he thought a storm of enmity would
descend upon him. But after that, from reading and inquiry, he had
derived strength, and feared lest he should be denied by Christ before
the holy angels if he now was afraid to confess Him before men, <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) and appeared to himself guilty of a
great fault in being ashamed of the sacraments <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) of the humility of Thy word, and not
being ashamed of the sacrilegious rites of those proud demons, whose
pride he had imitated and their rites adopted, he became bold-faced
against vanity, and shame-faced toward the truth, and suddenly and
unexpectedly said to Simplicianus,—as he himself informed me,—“Let us go
to the church; I wish to be made a Christian.” But he, not containing
himself for joy, accompanied him. And having been admitted to the first
sacraments of instruction, <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) he
not long after gave in his name, that he might be regenerated by
baptism,—Rome marvelling, and the Church rejoicing. The proud saw, and
were enraged; they gnashed with their teeth, and melted away! <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) But the Lord God was the hope of Thy
servant, and He regarded not vanities and lying madness. <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621)

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p23"></span>5. Finally, when the hour arrived for
him to make profession of his faith (which at Rome they who are about to
approach Thy grace are wont to deliver <span
id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) from an elevated place, in view of the
faithful people, in a set form of words learnt by heart), <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) the presbyters, he said, offered <span
id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="vi.VIII.II-Page_119"></span>Victorinus to make his profession more
privately, as the custom was to do to those who were likely, through
bashfulness, to be afraid; but he chose rather to profess his salvation
in the presence of the holy assembly. For it was not salvation that he
taught in rhetoric, and yet he had publicly professed that. How much
less, therefore, ought he, when pronouncing Thy word, to dread Thy meek
flock, who, in the delivery of his own words, had not feared the mad
multitudes! So, then, when he ascended to make his profession, all, as
they recognised him, whispered his name one to the other, with a voice
of congratulation. And who was there amongst them that did not know him?
And there ran a low murmur through the mouths of all the rejoicing
multitude, “Victorinus! Victorinus!” Sudden was the burst of exultation
at the sight of him; and suddenly were they hushed, that they might hear
him. He pronounced the true faith with an excellent boldness, and all
desired to take him to their very heart—yea, by their love and joy they
took him thither; such were the hands with which they took him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_607"></span>[117:608](1010132.htm#fr_607) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p3"></span> Simplicianus succeeded Ambrose, 397
<span class="c9"><span id="vi.VIII.II-p3.1"></span>A.D.</span> He has
already been referred to, in the extract from *De Civ. Dei*, in note 1,
p. 113, above as “the old saint Simplicianus, afterwards Bishop of
Milan.” In *Ep.* p. 37, Augustin addresses him as “his father, most
worthy of being cherished with respect and sincere affection.” When
Simplicianus is spoken of above as “the father of Ambrose in receiving
Thy grace,” reference is doubtless made to his having been instrumental
in his conversion—he having “begotten” him “through the gospel” ([1 Cor.
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span
id="vi.VIII.II-p3.2"></span>). Ambrose, when writing to him (*Ep.* 65),
concludes, “Vale, et nos parentis affectu dilige, ut facis.”

<span id="fn_608"></span>[117:609](1010132.htm#fr_608) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p4"></span> [Col.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="vi.VIII.II-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[117:610](1010132.htm#fr_609) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p5"></span> *i.e.* the Platonists.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[117:611](1010132.htm#fr_610) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p6"></span> In like manner Augustin, in his *De
Civ. Dei* (viii. 5), says: “No philosophers come nearer to us than the
Platonists;” and elsewhere, in the same book, he speaks, in exalted
terms, of their superiority to other philosophers. When he speaks of the
Platonists, he means the Neo-Platonists, from whom he conceived that he
could best derive a knowledge of Plato, who had, by pursuing the
Socratic method in concealing his opinions, rendered it difficult “to
discover clearly what he himself thought on various matters, any more
than it is to discover what were the real opinions of Socrates” (*ibid.*
sec 4). Whether Plato himself had or not knowledge of the revelation
contained in the Old Testament Scriptures, as Augustin supposed (*De
Civ. Dei*, viii. 11, 12), it is clear that the later Platonists were
considerably affected by Judaic ideas, even as the philosophizing Jews
were indebted to Platonism. This view has been embodied in the proverb
frequently found in the Fathers, Latin as well as Greek, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.VIII.II-p6.1"></span>Ἤ Πλάτων φιλονίζει ἤ
Φίλων πλατωνίζει</span>. Archer Butler, in the fourth of his *Lectures
on Ancient Philosophy*, treats of the vitality of Plato’s teaching and
the causes of its influence, and shows how in certain points there is a
harmony between his ideas and the precepts of the gospel. On the
difficulty of unravelling the subtleties of the Platonic philosophy, see
Burton’s *Bampton Lectures* (lect. 3).

<span id="fn_611"></span>[117:612](1010132.htm#fr_611) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p7"></span> See iv. sec. 19, above.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[117:613](1010132.htm#fr_612) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p8"></span> [Matt.
11.25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span
id="vi.VIII.II-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[117:614](1010132.htm#fr_613) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p9"></span> “Victorinus, by birth an African,
taught rhetoric at Rome under Constantius, and in extreme old age,
giving himself up to the faith of Christ, wrote some books against
Arius, dialectically \[and so\] very obscure, which are not understood
but by the learned, and a commentary on the Apostle” \[Paul\] (Jerome,
*De Viris Ill.* c. 101). It is of the same, probably, that Gennadius
speaks (*De Viris Ill.* c. 60), “that he commented in a Christian and
pious strain, but inasmuch as he was a man taken up with secular
literature, and not trained in the Divine Scriptures by any teacher, he
produced what was comparatively of little weight.” Comp. Jerome, *Præf.
in Comm. in Gal.*, and see Tillemont, 1. c. p. 179, *sq*. Some of his
works are extant.—E. B. P.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[117:615](1010132.htm#fr_614) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p13"></span> *Æneid*, viii. 736–8. The Kennedys.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[117:616](1010132.htm#fr_615) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p16"></span> [Ps.
144.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#005)<span
id="vi.VIII.II-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[118:617](1010132.htm#fr_616) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p17"></span> [Ps.
29.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#005)<span
id="vi.VIII.II-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[118:618](1010132.htm#fr_617) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p18"></span> [Luke
9.26](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#026)<span
id="vi.VIII.II-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[118:619](1010132.htm#fr_618) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p19"></span> “The Fathers gave the name of
*sacrament*, or *mystery*, to everything which conveyed one
signification or property to unassisted reason, and another to faith.
Hence Cyprian speaks of the ‘sacraments’ of the Lord’s Prayer, meaning
the hidden meaning conveyed therein, which could only be appreciated by
a Christian. The Fathers sometimes speak of confirmation as a sacrament,
because the chrism signified the grace of the Holy Ghost; and the
imposition of hands was not merely a bare sign, but the form by which it
was conveyed. See Bingham, book xii. c. 1, sec. 4. Yet at the same time
they continually speak of *two* great sacraments of the Christian
Church” (Palmer’s *Origines Liturgicæ*, vol. ii. c. 6, sec. 1, p. 201).

<span id="fn_619"></span>[118:620](1010132.htm#fr_619) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p20"></span> That is, he became a *catechumen*. In
addition to the information on this subject, already given in the note
to book vi. sec. 2, above, the following references to it may prove
instructive. (1) Justin Martyr, describing the manner of receiving
converts into the Church in his day, says (*Apol.* i. 61): “As many as
are persuaded and believe that what we teach and say is true and
undertake to be able to live accordingly, are instructed to pray, and to
entreat God with fasting for the remission of their sins that are past,
we praying and fasting with them. Then they are brought by us where
there is water, and are regenerated in the same manner in which we were
ourselves regenerated. And this washing is called illumination, because
they who learn these things are illuminated in their understandings.”
And again (*ibid.* 65): “We, after we have thus washed him who has been
convinced and has assented to our teaching, bring him to the place where
those who are called brethren are assembled, in order that we may offer
hearty prayers, in common for ourselves and for the baptized
\[illuminated\] person, and for all others in every place.…Having ended
the prayers, we salute one another with a kiss. There is then brought to
the president of the brethren bread, and a cup of wine mixed with water;
and he, taking them, gives praise and glory to the Father of the
universe, through the name of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.…And when
the president has given thanks, and all the people have expressed their
assent, those who are called by us deacons give to each of those
present, to partake of, the bread and wine mixed with water over which
the thanksgiving was pronounced, and to those who are absent they carry
away a portion.” And once more (*ibid.* 66): “This food is called among
us <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.VIII.II-p20.1"></span>Εὐχαριστία</span> \[the Eucharist\], of
which no one is allowed to partake but the man who believes that the
things which we teach are true, and who has been washed with the washing
that is for the remission of sins, and unto regeneration, and who is so
living as Christ has enjoined.” (2) In Watts’ translation, we have the
following note on this episode in our text: “Here be divers particulars
of the primitive fashion, in this story of Victorinus. First, being
converted, he was to take some well-known Christian (who was to be his
godfather) to go with him to the bishop, who, upon notice of it,
admitted him a *catechumenus*, and gave him those six points of
catechistical doctrine mentioned Heb. vi, 1, 2. When the time of baptism
drew near, the young Christian came to give in his heathen name, which
was presently registered, submitting himself to examination. On the eve,
was he, in a set form, first, to renounce the devil, and to pronounce, I
confess to Thee, O Christ, repeating the Creed with it, in the form here
recorded. The time for giving in their names must be within the two
first weeks in Lent; and the solemn day to renounce upon was Maundy
Thursday. So bids the Council of Laodicea (Can. 45 and 46).” The
*renunciation* adverted to by Watts in the above passage may be traced
to an early period in the writings of the Fathers. It is mentioned by
Tertullian, Ambrose, and Jerome, and “in the fourth century,” says
Palmer (*Origines Liturgicæ*, c. 5, sec. 2, where the authorities will
be found), “the renunciation was made with great solemnity. Cyril of
Jerusalem, speaking to those who had been recently baptized, said,
‘First, you have entered into the vestibule of the baptistry, and,
standing towards the west, you have heard, and been commanded, and
stretch forth your hands, and renounce Satan as if he were present.’
This rite of turning to the west at the renunciation of Satan is also
spoken of by Jerome, Gregory, Nazianzen, and Ambrose; and it was
sometimes performed with exsufflations and other external signs of
enmity to Satan, and rejection of him and his works. To the present day
these customs remain in the patriarchate of Constantinople, where the
candidates for baptism turn to the west to renounce Satan, stretching
forth their hands and using an exsufflation as a sign of enmity against
him. And the Monophysites of Antioch and Jerusalem, Alexandria and
Armenia, also retain the custom of renouncing Satan with faces turned to
the west.”

<span id="fn_620"></span>[118:621](1010132.htm#fr_620) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p21"></span> [Ps.
112.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#010)<span
id="vi.VIII.II-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[118:622](1010132.htm#fr_621) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p22"></span> [Ps.
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#018)<span
id="vi.VIII.II-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[118:623](1010132.htm#fr_622) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p24"></span> Literally, “give back,” *reddere*.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[118:624](1010132.htm#fr_623) <span
id="vi.VIII.II-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VIII.II-p25"></span> Anciently, as Palmer has noted in the
introduction to his *Origines Liturgicæ*, the liturgies of the various
churches were learnt by heart. They probably began to be committed to
writing about Augustin’s day. The reference, however, in this place, is
to the Apostles’ Creed, which, Dr. Pusey in a note remarks, was
delivered orally to the catechumens to commit it to memory, and by them
*delivered back, i.e.* publicly repeated before they were baptized. “The
symbol \[creed\] bearing hallowed testimony, which ye have together
received, and are this day severally to give back \[*reddidistis*\], are
the words in which the faith of our mother the Church is solidly
constructed on a stable foundation, which is Christ the Lord. ‘For other
foundation can no man lay,’ etc. Ye have received them, and given back
\[*reddidistis*\] what ye ought to retain in heart and mind, what ye
should repeat in your beds, think on in the streets, and forget not in
your meals, and while sleeping in body, in heart watch therein. For this
is the faith, and the rule of salvation, that ‘We believe in God, the
Father Almighty,’” etc. (Aug. *Serm.* 215, *in Redditione Symboli*). “On
the Sabbath day \[Saturday\], when we shall keep a vigil through the
mercy of God, ye will give back \[*reddituri*\] not the \[Lord’s\]
Prayer, but the Creed” (*Serm.* 58, sec. ult.). “What ye have briefly
heard, ye ought not only to believe, but to commit to memory in so many
words, and utter with your mouth” (*Serm.* 214, in *Tradit. Symb.* 3,
sec. 2). “Nor, in order to retain the very words of the Creed, ought ye
any wise to write it, but *to learn it thoroughly by hearing*, nor, when
ye have learnt it, ought ye to write it, but always to keep and refresh
it in your memories.—‘This is my covenant, which I will make with them
after those days,’ saith the Lord; ‘I will place my law in their minds,
and in their hearts will I write it.’ To convey this, *the Creed is
learnt by hearing, and not written* on tables or any other substance,
but on the heart” (*Serm.* 212, sec. 2). See the Roman Liturgy (*Assem,
Cod. Liturg*. t. i. p. 11 *sq*., 16), and the Gothic and Gallican (pp.
30 *sq*., 38 *sq*., 40 *sq*., etc.). “The renunciation of Satan,” to
quote once more from Palmer’s *Origines* (c. 5, sec. 3), “was always
followed by a profession of faith in Christ, as it is now in the English
ritual.…The promise of obedience and faith in Christ was made by the
catechumens and sponsors, with their faces turned towards the east, as
we learn from Cyril of Jerusalem and many other writers. Tertullian
speaks of the profession of faith made at baptism, in the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, and in the Church. Cyprian mentions the interrogation,
‘Dost thou believe in eternal life, and remission of sins through the
Holy Church?’ Eusebius and many other Fathers also speak of the
profession of faith made at this time; and it is especially noted in the
Apostolical Constitutions, which were written in the East at the end of
the third or beginning of the fourth century. The profession of faith in
the Eastern churches has generally been made by the sponsor, or the
person to be baptized, not in the form of answers to questions, but by
repeating the Creed after the priest. In the Western churches, the
immemorial custom has been, for the priest to interrogate the candidate
for baptism, or his sponsor, on the principal articles of the Christian
faith.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](1010133)
