<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wta05)  [Next](wta07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892540761/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians*, by Franz
Hartmann \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### IV

### THE REFECTORY

WE stepped out into the corridor and entered the garden. The palm trees
and exotic plants, by which we were surrounded, formed a strong contrast
to the weird and desolate scenery, with its fields of ice and
scrub-pines, which I had seen before entering this enchanted valley.
High bushes of fuchsias alternated with rose-bushes, and all were
covered with the most beautiful flowers; the air was perfumed with the
odour of many varieties of hyacinths, heliotropes, and other plants
whose names I do not remember. Nevertheless the place was not a
hot-house, for there was no other roof over it than the clear blue sky.
I wondered whether perhaps the garden was heated from below the surface,
and the thought came into my mind that so much luxury seemed not to
agree with the view, expressed by the Adept, that those who live within
the paradise of their own souls do not care for external sensual
gratification. But again the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Imperator seemed
to know my thought even before it had taken a definite form in my mind,
and said:

"We have created these illusions to make your visit to this place an
agreeable one in every respect. All these trees and plants which you see
require no gardener, and are inexpensive; they cost us nothing but an
effort of our imagination."

I went up to one of the rose-bushes and broke one of the roses. It was a
real rose, as real as I had ever seen before; its odour was sweet, and
it had just unfolded its leaves in the rays of the midday sun.

"Surely," I said, "this rose which I hold in my hand cannot be an
illusion, or an effect of my imagination?"

"No," answered the Adept, "it is not produced by your own imagination,
but it is a product of the imagination of nature, whose processes can be
guided by the spiritual will of the Adept. The whole world, with its
solid planets, its mountains of granite, its oceans and rivers, the
whole earth with all its multifarious forms, is nothing else but a
product of the imagination of the *Universal Mind*, which is the
*creator* of forms. Forms are nothing real, they are merely illusions or
shapes of substance; a form without substance is unthinkable

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

and cannot exist. But the only substance of which we know is the
universal primordial element of matter, constituting the substance of
Universal Mind, the *A’kâsa*. This element of matter is invisibly
present everywhere; but only when it assumes a certain state of density,
sufficient to resist the penetrating influence of the terrestrial light,
does it come within the reach of your sensual perception, and assume for
you an objective shape. The universal power of will penetrates all
things. Guided by the spiritual intelligence of the Adept, whose
consciousness pervades all his surroundings, it creates in the Universal
Mind those shapes which the Adept imagines; for the sphere of the
Universal Mind is his own. By an occult process, which cannot be at
present explained to you, but which exists principally in a motion of
will, the shapes thus created in the mind-substance of the Adept are
rendered dense, and thereby become objective and visible to you."

"I acknowledge," I said, "that this is still incomprehensible to me. Can
an image formed in your head come out of your head and assume a material
form?"

The Adept seemed to be amused at my ignorance, and smilingly answered:
"Do you believe that the sphere of mind in which man

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

lives exists only within the circumference of his skull? I should be
sorry for such a man; for he would not be able to see or experience
anything whatever beyond the processes going on in that part of his mind
contained within his skull. The whole world would be to him nothing but
impenetrable and incomprehensible darkness. He would not be able to see
the sun or any external object; for man can perceive nothing except that
which exists within his own mind. Fortunately for man, the sphere of the
mind of each individual man reaches as far as the stars. It reaches as
far as his power of perception reaches. His mind comes in contact with
all things, however distant they may be from his physical body. Thus his
mind--not his brain--receives the impressions, and these impressions
come to his consciousness within his physical brain, which is merely the
centre in which the messages of the mind are received."

After giving this explanation, the Adept, evidently still seeing some
doubts in my mind, directed me to look at a magnolia tree which stood,
at a short distance. It was a tree of perhaps sixty feet in height, and
covered with great, white, beautiful flowers. While I looked, the tree
began to appear less and less dense. The green foliage faded into gray,
so that the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

white blossoms could hardly be distinguished from the leaves; it became
more and more shadowy and transparent; it seemed to be merely the ghost
of a tree, and finally it disappeared entirely from view.

"Thus," continued the Adept, "you see that tree stood in the sphere of
my mind as it stood in yours. We are all living within the sphere of
each other's mind, and he in whom the power of spiritual perception has
been developed may at all times see the images created in the mind of
another. The Adept creates his own images; the ordinary mortal lives in
the products of the imagination of others, either in those of the
imagination of nature, or in those which have been created by other
minds. We live in the paradise of our own consciousness, and the objects
which you behold exist in the realm of our consciousness; but these
spheres are not narrow. They may be expanded far beyond the limits of
the visible objects around us, and continue to expand until they become
one with the whole Universe.

"The power of the imagination is yet too little known to mankind, else
they would better beware of what they think. If a man thinks a good or
an evil thought, that thought calls into existence a corresponding form
or power within

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the sphere of his mind, which may assume density and become living, and
continue to live long after the physical body of the man who created it
has died. It will accompany his soul after death, because the creations
are attracted to their creator."

"Does, then," I asked, "every evil thought, or the imagination of
something evil, create that evil and cause it to exist as a living
entity?"

"Not so," answered the Imperator. "Every thought calls into existence
the form or power of which we think; but these things have no life until
life is infused into them by the Will. If they do not receive life from
the Will, they are like shadows and soon fade away. If this were not the
case, men could never read of a crime without mentally committing it,
and thereby creating most vicious Elementals. You may imagine evil deeds
of all kinds; but, unless you have a desire to perform them, the
creations of your imagination obtain no life. But if you desire to
perform them, if your will is so evil that you would be willing to
perform them if you had the external means to do so, then it may perhaps
be as bad for you as if you had actually committed them, and you create
thereby a living although invisible power of evil. It is the Will which
endows the creations

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

of imagination with life, because *Will* and *Life* are fundamentally
identical."

Seeing a doubt arise in my mind, he continued: "If I speak of the Will
as a life-giving power, I am speaking of the spiritual will-power which
resides in the heart. A willpower merely exercised by the brain is like
the cold light of the moon, which has no power to warm the forms upon
which it falls. The life-giving will-power comes from the heart, and
acts like the rays of the sun which call life into action in minerals,
plants, and animals. It is that which man desires with his heart, not
that which he merely imagines with his brain, which has real power.
Fortunately for mankind in general, this spiritual power which calls the
creations of the imagination into objective visible existence is in the
possession of very few, else the world would be filled with living
materialised monsters, which would devour mankind; for there are in our
present state of civilisation more people who harbour evil desires than
such as desire the good. But their will is not spiritual enough to be
powerful; it comes more from the brain than from the heart; it is
usually only strong enough to harm him who created the evil thought, and
to leave others unaffected. Thus you see how important it is that men

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

should not come into possession of spiritual powers until they become
virtuous and good. These are mysteries which in former times were kept
very secret, and which ought not to be revealed to the vulgar."

We entered through a Gothic portal into a hall. The light fell through
four high windows into the room, which was of an octagonal form. In the
midst of this room stood a round table surrounded by chairs, and the
corners formed by the sides of the octagon were provided with furniture
of various kinds. There were quite a number of the Brothers assembled,
some of whom I recognised from having seen their pictures in historical
representations; but what astonished me above all was that there were
two ladies present--one appearing very tall and dignified, the other one
of smaller stature and of a more delicate, but not less noble,
appearance, and exceedingly beautiful. To find *ladies* in the monastery
of the Brothers of the Golden and Rosy Cross was a fact which surprised
and staggered me, and my confusion was evidently observed by all
present; but after I had been introduced to all the persons present--or,
to express it more correctly, after they had all been introduced to me,
for they all seemed to know me and not to need my introduction--the

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

tall lady took my hand and led me to the table, while she smilingly
spoke the following words:

"Why should you be so surprised, my friend, to see Adepts inhabiting
female forms in company of those whose forms appear to be of a male
character? What has intelligence to do with the sex of the body? Where
the sexual instincts end, there ends the influence of sex. Come, now,
and take this chair by my side, and have some of this delicious fruit."

The table was covered with a variety of excellent fruits, some of which
I had never seen before, and which do not grow in this country. The
illustrious company took their seats, and a conversation ensued in which
all took part. I only too deeply felt my own inferiority while in this
place, but every one seemed to exert his powers to reassure me and to
make me imagine that I was their equal. The Brothers and Sisters hardly
tasted the food, but they seemed to be pleased to see me enjoy it, and
in fact my morning walk and the pure air of the mountain had given me a
very good appetite. The noble lady next to whom I was seated soon
succeeded in making my embarrassment vanish, answered my questions in
regard to the causes of certain occult phenomena, and made a few
practical experiments

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

to illustrate her doctrines. The following may serve as an example of
the powers she possessed to create illusions.

We came to speak of the intrepidity and undaunted courage which he must
possess who desires to enter the realm of occult research: "For," she
said, "the whole elemental world, with all its monstrosities and animal
elements, is opposed to man's spiritual progress. The animals
(Elementals) in the animal principle of man's constitution live on his
life and on the substance of his animal elements. If the divine spirit
awakens within the heart of man and sends its light into those animal
elements, the substance on which these parasites live becomes destroyed,
and they begin to rage like other famished beasts. They fight for their
lives and for their food, and they are therefore the greatest
impediments and opponents to the spiritual progress of man. They live in
the lower regions of the soul of man, and are, under normal conditions,
invisible to the external senses, although under certain conditions they
may even become visible and objective. They live in families, and
reproduce their species like our terrestrial animals; they fight with
each other and eat each other up. If a man's selfish desires, such as
are of a minor type, are all swallowed up by some

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

great master-passion, it merely shows that a *monster elemental* has
grown in his soul and devoured all the minor elementals."

I answered that it was impossible for me to believe that man was such a
living and walking menagerie, and said I wished I could see one of these
elementals, so as to realise what it was.

"Would you not be afraid," she asked, "if such a vicious thing were to
appear?"

I began to boast of my bravery, and said that I was never afraid of
anything which I could see with my eyes and reach with my hands; that
fear was the outcome of ignorance, and that knowledge dispelled all
fear.

"You are right," she answered; "but will you be so kind as to hand me
that basket with pears."

I stretched forth my hand after the basket with pears, which stood in
the midst of the table, and as I was about to grasp it, a horrible
rattlesnake rose up between the fruit; rearing its head and making a
noise with its rattles as if in great anger. Horror-struck, I withdrew
my hand, barely escaping its venomous bite; but while I stared at it,
the serpent coiled itself up again among the pears, its glistening
scales disappeared in the basket, and it was gone.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

"If you had dared to grasp the snake," said one of the Brothers, who had
witnessed the scene, "you would have found it to be merely a shadow."

"The Will," remarked the Imperator, "is not merely a life-giving power;
it is also a destroyer. It causes the atoms of primordial matter to
collect around a centre; it holds them together, or it may disperse them
again into space. It is Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva in one; the creator,
maintainer, and destroyer of form."

"These Elementals," said the beautiful lady, "master us if we do not
master them. If we attack them without fear, they can do us no harm; our
thought is destructive to them; because they are the creations of our
own thoughts."

The conversation during our breakfast turned to occultism and kindred
subjects. "Occultism and alchemy," said one of the Brothers, "are at
once the most difficult and the easiest things to grasp. They are indeed
easy to comprehend, if we only look at the mysteries of nature by the
light of wisdom, with which each human being, except an idiot, has been
endowed by nature at the time of his birth. But if in the place of the
sun of divine wisdom, the artificial candlelight of false logic,
sophistry, and

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

speculation has been lit by irrational education, man steps out of his
natural state and becomes unnatural. The images of the eternal
truths--which were mirrored in his mind while he was a child and
innocent, and not sufficiently intellectually developed to understand
them--become, by the time that his intellect is developed, so distorted
and perverted by prejudices and misconceptions that their original forms
are no more recognisable, and, instead of seeing the real, man only sees
the hallucinations which his fancy has created."

"Do you mean to say," I asked, "that man can possibly know anything
about the nature of things, besides that which has been taught to him by
his books?"

"Does the child," asked the Adept, in answer to my question, "need an
instructor to explain to it the use of its mother's breasts? Do the
cattle require books on botany to know which herbs are poisonous and
which are wholesome? Those artificial systems which have been created by
man, and which are therefore unnatural, cannot be found in the book of
nature; to know the name of a thing which has been invented for it by
man, the child needs man's instructions; but the essential attributes of
a thing are independent of the name given to it.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shakespeare says
that a rose would have an agreeable odour, even if it were called by
some other name. At the present stage of education, natural philosophers
know all about the artificial names and classifications of things, but
very little about their interior qualities. What does a modern botanist
know about the *signatures* of plants, by which the Occultist recognises
the medicinal and occult properties of plants as soon as he sees them?
The animals have remained natural, while man became unnatural. The sheep
does not need to be instructed by a zoölogist to seek to escape if a
tiger approaches; it knows by his signature, and without argumentation,
that he is his enemy. Is it not much more important for the sheep to
know the ferocious character of the tiger, than to be informed that the
latter belongs to genus *Felis?* If by some miracle a sheep should
become intellectual, it might learn so much about the external form,
anatomy, physiology, and genealogy of the tiger, that it would lose
sight of its internal character and be devoured by it. Absurd as this
example may appear, it is nevertheless the true representation of what
is done in your schools every day. There the rising generation receive
what they call a scientific education. They are taught all about the
external form of man, and how that

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

form may be comfortably fed, lodged, and housed, but the sight of the
real man who occupies that form is entirely lost, his needs are
neglected, he is starved, ill-treated, and crucified, and some of your
'great lights of science' have become so short-sighted that they even
deny that he is."

"But," I objected, "is it not a great prerogative which intellectual man
enjoys over the animal creation, that he possesses an intellect by which
he is able to understand the attributes of things which the animal
merely instinctively feels?"

"True," said the Brother; "but man should use his intellect in
accordance with reason, and not oppose his intellect to the same.
Instinct in animals is the activity in the animal organism of that
principle whose action in human beings is called reason. It is the
faculty of the soul to feel the truth; while the function of the
intellect is to understand that which is instinctively or intuitively
felt by the soul, or perceived by the exterior senses. If the intellect
were to act only in harmony with reason, all intellectual human beings
would not only be intellectual, but would also be wise; but we know from
our daily experience that intellectuality is not necessarily accompanied
by wisdom, that often those who are most cunning are also

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

most vicious, and the most learned often the most unreasonable."

"The first and most important step," continued the Brother, "which man
must take, if he desires to obtain spiritual power, is to become
natural. Only when he has thrown off all his unnatural qualities can he
hope to become spiritually strong. If he were to become spiritual before
he becomes natural, he would be an unnatural spiritual monster. Such
monsters have existed and still exist. They are the spiritual powers of
evil acting through human forms; they are the Adepts of Black Magic,
sorcerers and villains of various grades."

"Then," I said, "I presume that great criminals are to a certain extent
black magicians."

"Not necessarily so," answered the Brother. "The majority of evil-doers
do evil, not for the love of evil, but for the purpose of attaining some
selfish purpose. The villains who are on the road to Black Magic do evil
because they love it, in the same sense as those who are on the road to
true adeptship perform good merely because they love good. But whether
man performs good or evil acts, a constant or frequent repetition of
such acts causes him finally to perform them instinctively, and thus his
own nature becomes gradually either identified with

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

good or with evil. He who merely tortures a fly for the sake of
torturing it, and because he is pleased to do so, is farther progressed
on the road to villainy and absolute evil with consequent destruction,
than he who murders a man because he imagines it to be necessary for his
own protection that he should murder him."

Here the conversation began to turn about White Magic and the wonderful
powers of certain Tibetan Adepts. The Imperator, who had recently
visited them, gave a detailed account of his visit. But, strange as it
may appear, while all the details of the other part of our conversation
remained deeply engraven in my memory, the account given by the
Imperator about that visit is entirely effaced from my recollection, and
I cannot remember anything whatever about it. It is as if its
recollection had been purposely eradicated from my mind.

After our breakfast was over, the Imperator recommended me to the care
of the two Lady-Adepts, and told me that he would soon rejoin us to show
me his alchemical laboratory. I then accompanied my two protectors into
the beautiful garden.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Recollections of Past Lives](wta07.md)

</div>
