<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wta03)  [Next](wta05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892540761/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians*, by Franz
Hartmann \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### II

### THE MONASTERY

I FOLLOWED my weird companion, and soon we regained the path running
along the bed of the creek, which flowed tranquilly over a bottom
covered with white pebbles, and the shallowness of the water seemed to
indicate that we were not far from its source. As we approached the
mysterious mountain the stone walls appeared to rise perpendicularly
before us, and there was no place visible where any other being but a
bird could have ascended; but as we came still nearer, I noticed a rent
or break in the side of the wall, opening like a cave or a tunnel. This
tunnel we entered, and, as we proceeded, I saw that it penetrated the
giant wall and led into another valley beyond. We arrived at the other
end of the tunnel, and an exclamation of joy and surprise escaped my
lips as I beheld the beautiful sight which presented itself to my view.

Before me was a valley surrounded by mountains of evidently inaccessible
height, and this

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

valley nature and art seemed to have combined to endow with an almost
superterrestrial beauty. Like a vast ocean bay it opened before my
sight, closing in the distance with a kind of natural amphitheatre. It
was covered with short grass and planted with maple trees, and on all
sides there were forests and groves, small lakes and lovely creeks.
Immediately in front of me, but still at a considerable distance, rose
the vault of a sublime mountain peak high into the blue ether of space,
presenting a cavity with overhanging rocks, looking like the hollow
space under a gigantic wave, which had been petrified by some magic
spell. The sides of the mountain sank sheer towards a lower declivity,
and then again rose abruptly to an imposing height.

In the presence of so much sublimity I became dumfounded. My companion
seemed to comprehend my feeling; for he, too, stood still and laughed,
as if he were pleased to see how full of admiration I was. The stillness
which surrounded us would have been complete if it had not been for the
noise of a cataract, at a distance to the left, falling over a steep
precipice and appearing like a string of fluid silver backed by the dark
gray rock. The monotonous rush of that fall in contradistinction to the
surrounding stillness seemed to me like the rush of the river

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of time in the realm of eternity; another world than the one to which I
had been accustomed seemed to have descended upon me; the air seemed
more pure, the light more ethereal, the grass more green than on the
other side of the tunnel; here seemed to be the valley of peace, the
paradise of happiness and content.

Looking towards the high peak in the distance, I noticed what seemed to
be a palace, a fortress, or a monastery of some kind, and as I came
nearer, I saw it was a massive building of stone. Its high walls rose
above the tops of the surrounding trees, and a dome, as if of a temple,
crowned the top of the building. Its exterior appearance indicated the
solidity of the walls. It was built in rectangular form, but its
architecture was not of a regular style; it presented many projecting
windows, turrets, balconies, and verandas.

On the other side of the valley nature was not less sublime and
inspiring. Gray giant cliffs, standing out prominently against the
steel-blue background of the sky, rose up to an extraordinary height.
Below the highest peaks long strips of white clouds had settled around
the mountain, and seemed to separate the top of the latter from its main
body. The part below the cloud was partly covered by the shadow and
partly illuminated by a pale ghostly light,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

producing a glamour. There, where the masses of clouds rested against
the bulk of the mountain, it seemed to me that I was looking into a
world of destruction. It was as if the entrails of the mountain had been
torn up, and the uniformity of the desolate jumble of rocks was only
interrupted by a few remnants of snow situated in the caverns and on the
crags of the mountain.

As we advanced we came into a broad avenue leading to the building, and
I beheld a man of noble and imposing appearance approaching. He was clad
in a yellow robe, his head covered with black flowing hair, and he
walked with an elastic step. When the cretin saw this man he hurried
towards him, prostrated himself before him, and suddenly vanished, like
an image of a dream.

I was struck with astonishment by this extraordinary occurrence, but I
had no time to reflect, for the stranger approached me and bid me
welcome. He appeared to be a man of about thirty-five years of age, of
tall and commanding stature; and his mild and benevolent look, full of
spiritual energy, seemed to penetrate my whole being and to read my
innermost thoughts. "Surely," I thought, "this man is an Adept!"

"Yes," answered the stranger, as if he had been reading my thought, "you
have fallen

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

into the hands of the Adepts, of whom you have thought so much and whose
acquaintance you often desired to make, and I will introduce you into
our temple and make you acquainted with some of our *Brothers of the
Golden and Rosy Cross*."

I scanned his face, and now it seemed to me as if this man were not a
stranger to me. There was something so familiar about him, as if I had
known him for years, and yet I could not find a place for him in my
memory. In vain I tortured my brain to find out when or where I had met
this man, or at least some other one resembling him in appearance. But
again the Imperator of this "Rosicrucian Society," for such he proved to
be, answered my unspoken thought by saying: "You are right; we are not
strangers, for I have often been in your presence and stood by your
side, although you did not see me. I have directed the flow of ideas
which streamed into your brain, while you elaborated them and put them
down in writing. Moreover, this place has often been visited by you
while your animal body was sleeping, and you have conversed with me and
with the brothers; but when your soul returned to its house of flesh and
blood, it could not impress the memory of the brain with the
recollection of the events through which you had

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

passed, and you could remember none of your transcendental experiences
when you awoke. The memory of the animal form retains only the
impressions which are made upon it by the avenues of the external
senses; the memory of the spirit awakens when we are in the spiritual
state."

I told the Imperator that I considered this day the happiest one in my
life, and only regretted that I should not be permitted to remain here
for ever, as I felt that I was not yet worthy to remain in the society
of beings so far exalted above my own state.

"We shall not permit you to go away very soon," answered the Master.
"You will have ample time to see how we live. But as to your permanently
remaining here, this is at present an impossibility. You have other
duties to perform, and, moreover, there are still too many of the lower
and animal elements adhering to your constitution and forming a part of
yourself. They could not resist long the destructive influence of the
pure and spiritual air of this place; and as you have not yet a
sufficient amount of truly spiritual elements in your organism to render
it firm and strong, you would, by remaining here, soon become weak and
waste away like a person in a state of consumption; you would

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

become miserable instead of being happy. You would die."

"Master," I said, "then I can at least hope to learn, while I am here,
the mystery of those great spiritual powers which you possess; by which
you are said to be able to transform one thing into another, and
transmute base metals into gold?"

"There is nothing mysterious or wonderful about it, my friend," said the
Imperator. "Such things are not more wonderful than the ordinary
phenomena of nature which we see every day. They are only mysterious to
those whose own prejudices and misconceptions hinder them from seeing
the truth and knowing the power the spirit possesses to subjugate matter
by means of the soul. We need not be surprised about them any more than
about seeing the moon revolve around the earth, or watching the growth
of a tree. It is all merely the effect of that one primordial power
which is called the Will, and which called the world into existence. It
manifests itself in various ways as mechanical force or as a spiritual
power; but it is always the same divine power of Will, acting through
the instrumentality of the organism of man, who directs it by his
intelligence."

"Then," I said, "the principal requirement

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

would be to learn how to strengthen the Will?"

"Not so," said the Imperator. "The Will is the law, the universal power
holding together the worlds in space and causing the revolutions of
planets; it pervades and penetrates everything, and does not require
your strengthening it, for it is already strong enough to accomplish
everything. You are only an instrument through which this spiritual
power may act and manifest itself, if you do not attempt to oppose it."

"Then," I said, "how can we accomplish anything at all? If we can do
nothing through the power of our own will, we may as well never attempt
to do anything."

"We can accomplish nothing useful," answered the Master, "by attempting
to employ any separate will of our own; but we may employ our Reason and
Intelligence to guide and conduct the already existing universal
Will-power in Nature which constitutes the life of all things, and thus
we may accomplish in a few moments certain things which it would require
unconscious nature much longer periods of time to accomplish without our
aid. The miller who employs the water of a river to set his mill in
motion does not create water, nor does he attempt to make the river run
upwards towards

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

its source; he merely leads the stream into certain channels and uses
the already existing current in an intelligent manner to accomplish his
purpose. He knows the law of nature and acts in accordance with it.
Being obedient to that law he is able to employ it. Nature obeys those
who act in obedience to her laws. In the same manner acts the Adept. He
guides the existing spiritual power by his intelligence, and thereby
causes it to accomplish certain things in accordance with the law of
nature."

"Do you see yonder cloud which has settled below the top of the
mountain?" continued the Adept. "It will remain there until some current
of air blows it away, or until a change of temperature causes it to rise
or to fall. If we disperse it by causing the universal forces of nature
to act upon the dense masses, we do not act against the law of nature,
but guide it by our intelligence."

While the Master spoke these words, he extended his hands toward the
mountain, below whose top the clouds had collected, and immediately it
seemed as if life had been infused into the dense mass. It began to
whirl and to dance, and finally it rose like a column of smoke up to the
top of the mountain, ascending from there high up into the air, giving
the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

mountain the appearance of a volcano. At last it collected again far
above the top, in the air, forming a little silvery cloud, through which
the sunshine was streaming.

I wondered at this manifestation of life in a cloud; but the Adept,
reading my thoughts, said: "Life is universal and everywhere; it is
identical with the Will."

During our conversation we had slowly approached the building, and I had
now an opportunity to examine its exterior in all its details. It was
only two stories high, but the rooms seemed to be lofty. It was built in
a quadrangular form, and surrounded by oaks and maple trees, and a large
garden or park. Seven steps of white marble led up to the main portal,
which was protected by two massive pillars of granite, and over the door
appeared in golden letters an inscription, saying: *You, who enter here,
leave all evil thoughts behind*.

We entered through the portal into a large vestibule paved with
flagstones. In the midst of this room was a statue of Gautama Buddha on
a pedestal, and the walls were ornamented with golden inscriptions
representing some of the most important doctrines of the ancient sages.
To the right and left, doors opened into long corridors leading to the
various apartments of the Brothers; but the door opposite the entrance

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

led into a beautiful garden, where I beheld many plants and trees such
as are usually only to be found in tropical climes. The back of this
garden was formed by a building of white marble, surrounded by the dome
which I had seen from the distance, after entering through the tunnel,
and on the top of the dome was a silver dragon resting on a golden
globe.

"This," said the Imperator, "is the sanctuary of our temple; in this you
cannot enter. If you were to attempt it, the immediate death of your
personality would be the consequence; nor would it serve you even if you
were able to enter and live, for in that sanctuary everything is dark to
all who do not bring with them their own spiritual light, the
inextinguishable lamp of divine intelligence, to illuminate the
darkness."

We walked into one of the corridors. On our left there were numerous
doors leading into the cells or apartments of the Brothers, but to the
right was a wall, occasionally opening into the tropical garden, and the
interstices between these openings were filled out with beautifully
painted landscapes. One of these landscapes represented Indian scenery,
with the white snow-covered Himalaya Mountains in the background, while
the fore-part of the picture represented what appeared to be a Chinese
pagoda, with a small lake and wooded hills at a distance.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

"These pictures," the Master explained, "represent the various
monasteries or lamaseries of our order. The one before you is situated
near a lake in the interior of *Tibet*, and is occupied by some of the
highest Adepts of our order. Each of these pictures shows also a part of
the country in which the monastery is placed, so as to give a correct
idea of the general character of the locality. But these pictures have
an occult quality which will become apparent to you if you concentrate
your mind upon some part of the picture."

I did as directed, and concentrated my attention upon the grand portal
of the lamasery, and to my astonishment the door opened, and the tall
form of an Indian, dressed in shining white robes, with a turban of pale
yellow silk upon his head, stepped out of the door. I immediately
recognised him to be one of the Tibetan Adepts whom I had seen in my
waking dreams. He, too, seemed to recognise me, and smilingly nodded his
head, while I bowed reverentially before him. A fine-looking horse was
brought forward by some attendant, and he mounted and rode away.

I was speechless from astonishment, but the Imperator smiled and drew me
away, quoting a passage of Shakespeare, with a little modification; for
he said, "There are many things in

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Heaven and Earth
which are not understood by your philosophers."

We passed on to another picture, representing Egyptian scenery, with a
convent in the foreground and pyramids at a distance; it was of a more
gloomy character than the former, probably on account of the desert
places by which it seemed to be surrounded. The next picture represented
a similar building, situated in a tropical and mountainous country, and
the Adept told me it was one situated somewhere in the Cordilleras of
South America. Another one showed a Mohammedan temple, with minarets and
the *half-moon* upon their tops. I expressed my surprise to see all the
various religious systems in the world represented in these Rosicrucian
orders; for I had always believed that the Rosicrucians were an
eminently Christian order.

The Imperator, again reading my thought, corrected my mistake. "The name
'Rosicrucian Order,' or the 'Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross,'" he
said, "is a comparatively modern invention, and was first used by Johann
Valentin Andreæ, who invented the story of the knight Christian
Rosencreuz for the same purpose as Cervantes invented his 'Don Quichote
de la Mancha,' namely, for the purpose of ridiculing the would-be
Adepts, reformers, and gold-makers

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

of his age, when he wrote his celebrated 'Fama Fraternitatis.' Before
his pamphlet appeared, the name Rosicrucian did not mean a person
belonging to a certain organised society of that name, but it was a
generic name, applied to occultists, adepts, alchemists of a higher
order, in possession of some occult knowledge and acquainted with the
secret signification of the *Rose* and the *Cross;* symbols which have
been adopted by the Christian Church, which were, however, not invented
by her, but used by occultists thousands of years before Christianity
was known. These symbols do not belong exclusively to the Christian
Church. They are as free as the air for any one who can grasp their
meaning, but unfortunately very few of your Christians know that
meaning; they only worship the external forms, and know nothing about
the principles which those forms represent."

"Then," I said, "a spiritually enlightened man may become a member of
your order, even if he did not believe in any of the so-called
*Christian* dogmas?"

To this the Imperator answered: "No man can become a member of our
exalted order whose knowledge is merely based upon dogmas, beliefs,
creeds, or opinions which have been taught to him by somebody, or which
he has

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

accepted from hearsay or from the reading of books. Such imaginary
knowledge is no *real* knowledge; we can know nothing real except that
which we realise within ourselves. That which is usually called
knowledge is merely a matter of memory. We may store our memory with
innumerable things, and they may be true or false; but even if they are
true, opinions do not convey real knowledge. Real knowledge cannot be
imparted by one man to another; a man can only be guided to the place
where he may obtain it; but he must himself grasp the truth, not merely
intellectually with his brain, but also intuitionally with his heart.

"To obtain real knowledge we must feel the truth of a thing, and
understand its true nature. To believe in the truth of anything without
having real knowledge is merely a superstition. Many of your scientific,
philosophical, and theological speculations are based upon superstition
and not upon real knowledge or self-consciousness. The science and
knowledge of your modern philosophers and theologians rest upon
opinions, and are continually in danger of being overthrown by some new
discovery which will not amalgamate with their artificial systems. The
truth cannot be overthrown; it needs no argumentation, and if it is once
perceived by the *spiritual* power of perception and understood

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

by the *spiritual* intelligence of man, it conveys real knowledge and
cannot be disputed away.

"Our order has, therefore, nothing to do with beliefs in creeds or
opinions of any kind. We care nothing for them. If we were all
sufficiently perfect to recognise all truths by direct perception, we
should not need any books or instruments; we should not need to use
logic or make any experiments. As it is, we are still men, although far
above the intellectual animal which is usually called man. We still use
our books and have a library, and study the opinions of thinkers; but we
never accept such books or opinions--even if they came from Buddha
himself--as our infallible guides, unless they receive the seal from our
reason and understanding. We venerate them and make use of them; they
serve us, but we do not serve them."

During this conversation we walked into the library, where thousands of
books were standing upon a great number of shelves. I noticed many
ancient books of which I had heard, but which I had never seen. There
were the sybilline books, which are said to have been destroyed by fire;
the books of Hermes Trismegistus, of which only one is believed to be in
existence; and many others of priceless value for the antiquary or the
student of hermetic philosophy. While I wondered how these Brothers came
into

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

possession of such treasures, the Imperator said:

"Well may you be surprised how we came into possession of books which
are supposed to exist no more; but the secret of this is, that
everything, and consequently every book which ever existed, leaves its
imperishable impression in the *Astral Light*, and that by certain
occult means these impressions may be reproduced from that universal
storehouse, the memory of nature, and be put in a visible, tangible, and
material shape. Some of our Brothers are to a great extent engaged in
making such reproductions, and thus we have without any financial outlay
obtained these treasures, which no amount of money could have procured."

I rejoiced to hear these words, because they confirmed my opinion that
life in a solitude was not necessarily a life of uselessness, and that
ideas are real things, which may be seen and grasped far more easily in
a tranquil place than while we are surrounded by the turmoil and the
petty cares of life in "society."

In answer to this thought, the Imperator said: "Our monastery has been
founded by spiritually enlightened people who had the same thought which
I read in your mind. They therefore selected this spot in a secluded
valley, whose existence is known only to a few, and by

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

making use of certain elementary forces of nature, which are as yet
unknown to you, they created an illusion which renders this place safe
against all unwelcome intruders. Here those in whom the germ of
divinity, being latent or dormant in the heart of mortal man, has
awakened into life and activity, may find the conditions required for
its further development. Here we live in peace, separated from the outer
world by a barrier which none can surmount; for even if the existence of
our retreat were known, it would be an easy matter for us to create
other illusions which would prevent the intrusion of those who attempted
to enter it. We are, however, not excluded from that outer world,
although we seldom enter it with our physical forms. By the exercise of
our clairvoyant and clairaudient powers, we may at any moment know what
is going on in that world; and, if we desire to come into personal
contact with it, we leave our physical forms and go out in our *astral
bodies*. We visit whomsoever we wish, and witness everything without our
presence being perceived. We visit the statesman, the minister, the
philosopher, the inventor; we infuse thoughts in their minds which are
useful, and they do not know from whence those thoughts come. If their
prejudices and predilections are very

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

strong, they may reject those thoughts; but, if they are reasonable
people and know how to discriminate, they will follow the silent advice
and profit by it."

"In that case," I said, "your order can exercise a tremendous influence
in the politics of the world; but why, then, did you not try to abolish
some of the greatest evils that afflicted the world in the history of
the past? Why did you permit such monsters as Nero and Caligula to
exist? Why did you permit the horrors of the Inquisition? Why did you
allow the terrors of the French Revolution to take place? Why did you
not destroy such villains as Louis XI of France, and others of that
class?"

"Alas!" answered the Adept, "there is a certain law of justice, whose
action causes evils for individuals, which we are not permitted to
oppose, because its working is necessary for the evolution of the race.
As the surgeon sometimes has to inflict pain for the purpose of removing
a cancerous growth and saving the life of the patient, so it is often
necessary to purge the organism of a nation for the purpose of restoring
its health. It is said that evils are blessings in disguise, and God may
execute His purpose even through instruments full of wickedness and
depravity."

"Nevertheless," I interposed, "it seems to

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

me that you might interfere in individual cases to protect people from
committing acts of imprudence which will cause them to suffer."

To this he replied: "It is true that we might handle mankind as if they
were merely automata, and we could cause them to do what we please,
while they would still imagine that they were following their own
inclination. But to do so would be against the rules of our order and
against the great Law, for the latter decides that each man shall be the
creator of his own *Karma*. We are permitted to advise our followers,
but we are not permitted to interfere with their mental freedom."

"Still," I persisted, "there are innocent people who have to suffer for
actions not done by themselves; there were martyrs who underwent torture
and death for the sake of some great cause. Why did you not save them?
Why did you permit Hypatia to be torn to pieces by a fanatical mob, or
Jeanne d’Arc to die an ignominious death upon the stake?"

"Such people will have their reward. From the blood of a martyr springs
fruit in abundance. Their bodily sufferings are as nothing in comparison
with the joy they earn. Nothing is useless, although you narrow-sighted
mortals cannot always see the use of a thing. Moreover,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

it often happens that worthy people are saved in a manner appearing to
you miraculous."

A strong desire to become a member of the Rosicrucian Society entered my
mind; but I did not dare to express it. The Master, however, reading my
mind, continued to say:

"We accept in our circle every one who has the necessary qualifications
to enter it, but you will perceive that these qualifications are not in
everybody's possession; they cannot be conferred by favour, and it is a
well-known saying, even among the lowest grades of occultists, that the
Adept cannot be made, but that he must grow to become one."

"Master," I said, "would it not be well for those who desire to develop
spiritually, and to become Adepts, to imitate your example and to select
some secluded places where they could reside undisturbed and give their
time to interior meditation and concentration of thought? I know that
there are at present a great many people in various parts of the world,
belonging to various nationalities and having various creeds, who have
become convinced of the fact that the conditions, under which the
majority of men and women of our present civilisation exist and live,
are not conducive to the quick attainment of a higher spiritual state.
They believe that the objects which people usually strive to

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

attain during their comparatively short life upon this globe, such as
the gratification of pride and ambition, the hoarding of money, the
enjoyment of sexual love, the obtaining of bodily comfort and pleasure,
&c., cannot be the true objects of life; but that our present life is
only one of the many phases of our eternal existence, and that
terrestrial life is only a means to an end, namely, to afford the
conditions by which the divine element, germinally contained in every
man, may grow and develop, whereby man may attain a higher life like
yours, which is not subject to transformation and death, and is
therefore of permanent value."

The Adept, who had patiently listened to my outburst of enthusiasm,
smiled and said: "If those people are ripe enough to be able to bear a
life of seclusion, let them enter it; but to do so it is above all
necessary that they possess real knowledge. As long as men move merely
on the plane of beliefs and opinion, each man's opinions and tastes will
differ from those of the others to a certain extent, and I am afraid
that your proposed harmonial society would prove in the end to be a very
inharmonious one.

"I have, however, no doubt that even under such unfavourable auspices
considerable advantage might be derived from the establishment of
*theosophical* academies in secluded places. If you

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

had any colleges, seminaries, schools, or societies where the truth
could be taught without all the accompanying rubbish of scientific and
theological misconceptions and superstitions, which have accumulated
through the ages, great progress would undoubtedly be made. As the
present civilisation now stands, there are two methods adopted for the
education of the people. One is by means of what is called *Science*,
the other by means of what is called *Religion*. As far as science is
concerned, her deductions and speculations are based upon observation
and logic. Her logic may be good enough; but her powers of observation,
upon which the fundamentals of her logic rest, are restricted to her
very imperfect faculties of sensual perception, and therefore your
science is based entirely upon external illusions, and is consequently a
superficial and illusive science. Knowledge of the inner life of nature
is far more important than the study of external phenomena.

"You must not misunderstand me," he continued, seeing that I did not
fully grasp the meaning of his words. "I do not mean to say that your
modern science knows nothing about natural laws. She knows what she sees
and understands, but knows little or nothing about the invisible
spiritual causes which are the fundamental causes of visible effects.
She

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

knows a great deal about the little details of existence which are the
ultimate effects of the action of universal Life; but she knows nothing
about the Tree of Life, the eternal source from which all these
transient phenomena spring.

"As far as your modern theology is concerned, it is based upon an entire
misconception of terms which were originally intended to signify certain
spiritual powers, of which your priests and laymen can have no correct
conception because they have not the spiritual powers necessary to
conceive of such things. Being narrowminded, the universal principles
and powers which are active within the great workshop of nature have, in
their conceptions, become narrowed down to personal and limited beings;
the divine universal and infinite power which men call God, has been
reduced in the minds of the ignorant to an extra-cosmic deity of some
kind, who can be persuaded by mortals to change His will, and who needs
substitutes and deputies upon this earth to execute His divine laws.
Your religion is not the religion of the living God who executes His own
will; it is the religion of a dead and impotent god, who died long ago
and left an army of clergymen to rule in his stead.

"Your theology should above all be based

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

upon the power spiritually to perceive the truth. But where can you find
a clergyman who has any spiritual perceptions, and who dares to trust to
his intuition more than to the dogmas prescribed by his Church? If he
dared to have an opinion of his own, and to assert it, he would cease to
be a minister of his Church and be considered a heretic. In your
"intellectual" age everything is left to intellectual investigation
alone; little is done to develop the intuitive power of the heart. The
consequence is, that your present generation is like people looking at
everything by means of a telescope; they may see, but they do not *feel*
and grasp the truth, and the consequence is an entirely false conception
of nature and man."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Unexpected Revelations](wta05.md)

</div>
