<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wta04)  [Next](wta06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892540761/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians*, by Franz
Hartmann \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### III

### UNEXPECTED REVELATIONS

THE Adept paused, and my mind was invaded by a multitude of questions to
which I could find no answer: "What is nature, and what is man? Why am I
in this world? Did I exist before, and, if so, where did I come from?
What is the object of my existence, and how will it end?"

Again the Adept, reading my thoughts, answered: "Mortal man, as you know
him, is an intellectual animal, living a sort of dream-life among
dream-pictures which he mistakes for realities. Real man is a celestial
being, a soul dwelling temporarily within a material body. Within this
organism the spiritual, divine spark finds the proper soil to generate
and develop the immortal man, as has been described by Saint Paul, who
speaks of that spark of divine consciousness as being sown in corruption
and raised in incorruption. This spiritual man is in each person his or
her personal God and Redeemer. While a man is

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

unacquainted with the processes going on in his invisible organism, he
will have little power to guide and control these processes; he will
resemble a plant, which is dependent for its growth on the elements
which are unconsciously brought to it by the winds and the rains, or
which may accidentally be found in its surroundings; it has neither the
power to prevent nor to promote its own growth. But when man obtains a
knowledge of the constitution of his own soul, when he becomes conscious
of the processes going on in its organism and learns to guide and
control them, he will be able to command his own growth. He will become
free to select or to reject the psychic influences which come within his
sphere, he will become his own master and attain--so to say--psychic
locomotion. He will then be as much superior to a man without such
knowledge and power as an animal is superior to a plant; for while an
animal may go in search of its food and select or reject what it
pleases, the plant is chained to its place and depends entirely on the
conditions which that one place affords. The ignorant depends on the
conditions prepared for him; the wise can choose his conditions
himself."

"And what will be the end and object of this?" I asked.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

"The end of it," was the answer, "is that the soul of man enjoys supreme
bliss in realising that she herself is everything and that there is
nothing beyond her. The object is that mortal man shall become immortal,
and a perfect instrument for the manifestation of divine wisdom."

I heard the answer of the Master, but I could not grasp its meaning.
What could that "soul" be of which he spoke as being as big as the
universe, and could my soul possess any other vehicle or organism than
my visible material body?

While I was meditating, the Adept stepped with me to a window where the
inaccessible mountain was seen, and pointing it out to me, he said:
"Behold there the door by which you entered our stronghold; concentrate
your attention upon the way you came, and seek with the eye of your soul
to penetrate to the other side of the mountain."

I did so, and suddenly I found myself standing at that other side, upon
the place where I had lain down to rest. Before me, upon the ground, was
stretched out an apparently lifeless human figure, and to my horror I
recognised it as being my own bodily self. At first everything seemed a
dream, but then the thought came to me that I must have died.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There was my body;
and nevertheless I was myself, and saw myself such as I had always been,
with all my organs and limbs and even the same clothing which the corpse
before me wore. The hat of the corpse was drawn over its eyes, and I
attempted to lift it; but I might just as well have tried to lift the
inaccessible mountain. There was no physical strength within my arms. I
realised that my present body consisted of a state of matter differing
from that of the physical plane.

I thought I must have died, and a feeling of disgust came over me,
thinking that I had ever inhabited that now lifeless, grossly material
form; I was so glad to be free, and had no wish to re-enter it.

But an inner voice seemed to speak to me, saying that the time of my
labouring in the mundane sphere had not yet ended, and that I must
return. I even felt a sort of pity for that helpless body, and the
sympathy caused thereby created a strong attraction. I felt myself drawn
towards that body, and was about losing my consciousness when I was
called away by hearing the voice of the Master. I started as one who
awakes from a dream; the Adept stood by my side, and the vision was
gone.

"Know now, my friend!" he said, "the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

difference between your physical and your psychical or astral organism.
The divine soul has many vehicles through which it may act and manifest
its powers."

"But why," I asked, "are these things not recognised by academical
science?"

"On account of self-conceit," answered the Adept. "The scientists, up to
a very recent date, used to discard such questions as being unworthy of
their consideration, and they preferred annihilation rather than confess
that there was something in the wide expanse of nature which they did
not already know. The theories advanced by the theologians were not more
satisfactory than those of the scientists, for they believed--or
professed to believe--that man was a complete being, in a finished
state, with perfect freedom of will, and, as a punishment for his
subsequent bad behaviour, made a prisoner upon this planet. Furthermore,
they were of the opinion that, if a man were leading a pious life, or,
after leading a wicked life, obtained pardon for his sins and the favour
of God, he would after his death become a celestial being, be ushered
into a paradise, and live there for ever in a state of never-ending
enjoyment.

"It will be acknowledged now by every independent thinker, that these
theories were not

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

very satisfactory to those who desired to know the truth. But there was
nothing either to prove or to contradict such assumptions, and,
moreover, the multitude did not think; they paid their clergy to do
their thinking for them.

"Since the publication of 'The Secret Doctrine' the opinions of the
scientists and those of the theologians have been equally shaken to
their foundations. The old truth which was known to the ancients, but
which had been almost entirely forgotten during our modern age of
materialism, that man is not a finished being, incapable of any further
organic development, but that his body and his mind are continually
subject to transformation and change, and that no transformation can
take place where no substance exists, because force cannot exist without
substance, has become almost universally known. It was demonstrated to
the scientists that their science extended only to a very small portion
of that mysterious being called Man; that they only knew his outward
appearance, his shell, but nothing of the living power acting within
that mask which is called the physical body. It was demonstrated to the
presumptuous theologians who believed that man's eternal welfare or
damnation depended on their blessings or curses, that justice cannot

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

be separated from God, and that man's salvation depends upon his own
spiritual evolution. It was made logically comprehensible to the
intellect that God in man will continue to live after all the lower and
imperfect elements are dissolved, and that therefore a man in whom God
did not exist in a state of divinity could not, after the death of his
body, jump into a higher state for which lie was not fit, and which he
was not able to attain while alive.

"The exposition of the essential constitution of Man, known to the
Indian sages, described three hundred years ago by Theophrastus
Paracelsus, and again set forth more fully and clearly than ever before
by H. P. Blavatsky and other theosophical writers, is calculated to
humble the pride of the scientists and the vanity of the priests. When
it is once more known and digested, it will prove to the learned how
little they know, and it will draw the line for the legitimate activity
of the clergyman as an instructor in morals. It proves that man is not
already a god, as some had imagined themselves to be. It proves that he
may look like an intellectual giant, and still be, spiritually
considered, only a dwarf. It demonstrates that the law which governs the
growth of organisms on the physical plane is not reversed when it acts
upon the corresponding organisms on the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

psychical plane. It shows that out of nothing nothing can grow; but that
wherever there is the germ of something, even if that germ is invisible,
something may grow and develop.

"The growth of every germ and of every being, as far as we know it,
depends on certain conditions. These conditions may be established
either by means of the intellectual activity of the being itself, which
has the power to surround itself by such conditions, or they may have
been established by external causes, over which the being has no
control. A plant or an animal cannot grow unless it receives the food
and the stimulus which it requires; the intellect cannot expand unless
it is fed with ideas and stimulated by reason to assimilate them; the
soul cannot become strong unless she finds in the lower principles the
nutriment required for the acquisition of strength, and is stimulated by
the light of wisdom to select that which she requires."

Here again the thought occurred to me, how agreeable and profitable it
would be to live in such a Rosicrucian convent, where everything was
rendered comfortable, no disturbing elements being admitted. To this the
Master answered:

"One element necessary for the development of strength is resistance. If
we enter one of the vast pine forests of the Alps, or of the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rocky Mountains in
the United States, we find ourselves surrounded by towering trees, whose
main trunks have very few branches. Upwards they rise like the masts of
a ship, covered with a gray bark, naked, and without foliage. Only near
the tops, that reach out of the shadows which they throw upon each
other, the branches appear and spread up to the highest points, which
wave their heads in the sunlight. These trees are all top-heavy; their
chiefly or only well-developed parts are their heads, and all the life
which they extract from the ground and the air seems to mount to their
tops; while the trunks, although increasing in size as the tree grows,
are left undeveloped and bare of branches. Thus they may stand and grow
from year to year, and reach a mature age; but some day, sooner or
later, some dark clouds collect around the snowy peaks and assume a
threatening aspect; the gleam of lightnings appears among the swelling
masses, the sound of thunder is heard, bolts of liquid light dart from
the rents in the clouds, and suddenly the storm sweeps down from the
summit into the valley. Then the work of devastation begins. These
top-heavy trees, having but little strength in their feet, are mowed
down by the wind like so many stems of straw in a field of wheat; there
they lie rank after rank, having tumbled

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

over each other in their fall, and their corpses encumber the mountain
sides. But at the edge of the timber, and outside of the main body of
the forest, looking like outposts or sentinels near the lines of a
battle, there are still here and there some solitary pines to whom the
storm could do no harm. They have, on account of their isolated
positions, been exposed to winds all their lives; they have become used
to it and grown strong. They have not been protected and sheltered by
their neighbours. They are not top-heavy, for their great strong
branches grow out from the trunk a few feet above the soil, continuing
up to the tops, and their roots have grown through the crevices of the
rocks, holding on to them with an iron grasp. They have met with
resistance since the time of their youth, and, by resisting, have gained
their strength.

"Thus intellectual man, growing up protected by fashion and friends in a
school, college, university, or perhaps within the walls of the convent,
finds himself isolated from contrary influences and meets with but
little resistance. Crowded together with those who think like him, he
lives and thinks like the others. Over their heads waves the banner of
some accepted authority, and upon that banner are inscribed certain
dogmas in which they believe without

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

ever daring to doubt their veracity. There they grow, throwing upon each
other the shadow of their ignorance, and each prevents the others from
seeing the sunlight of truth. There they cram their brains with
authorised opinions, learning details of our illusory life which they
mistake for the real existence; they become top-heavy, for all the
energy which they receive from the universal fountain of life goes to
supply the brain; the soul is left without supply; the strength of
character, of which the heart is the seat, suffers; the intellect is
overfed and the spirit is starved. Thus they may grow up and become
proud of their knowledge; but perhaps some day new and strange ideas
appear on the mental horizon, a wind begins to blow, and down tumbles
the banner upon which their dogmas have been inscribed, and their pride
tumbles down with it.

"But not only on the physical and the intellectual plane; in the realm
of the emotions, too, the same law prevails. He who desires to develop
strength must not be afraid of resistance; he must obtain strength in
his feet. He must be prepared to meet the wind of the lower emotions,
and not be overthrown when the storms of passion arise. He should force
himself to remain in contact with that which is not according to his
taste, and even to harmonise

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

with that which appears inimical, for it is really his friend, because
it can supply him with strength. He should learn to bear calumny and
animosity, envy and opposition; he should learn to endure suffering, and
to estimate life at its true value. The contrary influences to which he
has been exposed may cause a tempest to rage through his heart; but when
he has gained the power to command the tempest to cease and to say to
the excited waves: be still! then will the first gleam of the rising sun
appear in his heart, and before its warm glow the cold moonlight thrown
out by the calculating and reflecting brain will grow pale; a new and
still larger world than the external one will appear before his interior
vision, in which he will be contented to live, and where he will find an
inexhaustible source of happiness, unknown to those who live a life of
the senses. Henceforth he will require no more to speculate reflectively
about the truth, for he will see it clear in his own heart. Henceforth
he will not be required to be exposed to storms, but may seek shelter in
a tranquil place; not because he is afraid of the storms, which can do
him no harm, but because he wants to employ his energies for the full
development of the newly awakened spiritual germ, instead of wasting
them uselessly on the outward plane.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

"What the disciple ought to seek is to strengthen his character, which
constitutes his real individuality; keeping it always in harmony with
the law of divine wisdom and love. A man without strength of character
is without true individuality, without self-reliance, moved only by the
emotions which arise in his mind and which belong to powers foreign to
his divine nature.

"Only after the attainment of a certain state of maturity, life in a
solitude, isolated from contrary influences, becomes desirable and
useful, and those who retire from the world as long as they need the
world are attempting to ascend to the kingdom of heaven by beginning at
the top of the ladder. Let him who needs the world remain in the world.
The greater the temptations are by which he is surrounded, the greater
will be his strength if he successfully resists. Only he who can control
his mind and within his own mental sphere create the conditions which
his spirit requires, is independent of all external conditions and free.
He who cannot evolve a world within his own soul needs the external
world to evolve his soul.

"*Unspiritual* men, therefore, who retire from the world because they
are afraid of the world, cannot be considered to be heroes who

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

have renounced the world; they deserve rather to be regarded as cowards
who have deserted their ranks at the beginning of the battle with life.
Such people sometimes retire into convents for the purpose of having a
comfortable life, and in addition to that a ticket to heaven. They
imagine they do a service to God by leading a harmless and useless life;
for which imaginary service they expect to obtain a reward at the end of
life. But the reward which they will receive will also exist merely in
their imagination. As the sensualist wastes his time in the prosecution
of useless pleasures, so the bigot wastes his time in useless ceremonies
and prayers. The actions of the former are instigated by a desire for
sensual pleasure in this life, those of the latter by the hope for
pleasure in another life; both are acting for the purpose of gratifying
their own selfish desires. I am unable to see any essential difference
between the motives and morals of the two.

"But with *spiritually developed* man the case is entirely different.
The divine spark in man exists independent of the conditions of relative
space and time; it is eternal and self-existent. It cannot be angered by
opposition, nor irritated by contradiction, nor be thrown into confusion
by sophistry. If it

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

has once become conscious of its own power, it will not require the
stimulus needed by the physical organism and afforded by the impressions
which come through the avenues of the senses from the outer world; for
it is itself that stimulus which creates worlds within its own
substance. It is the Lord over all the animal elemental forces in the
astral body of man, and their turmoil can neither educate nor degrade
it, for it is Divinity itself in its pure state, being eternal,
unchangeable, and free."

"Do you mean to say," I asked, "that all asceticism and self-denial is
useless?" And the Master answered:

"It all depends upon the motive. All that the egotist does for his own
selfish progress and aggrandisement is useless; it is done for an
illusion, and increases his self-conceit. But this you will understand
only when the consciousness of the divine state awakens within you, and
you begin to realise the difference between your true and your illusive
self.

"He in whom this divine principle has once awakened, he who has once
practically experienced the inner life, who has visited the kingdom of
heaven within his own soul, he who stands firm upon his feet, will no
more need the educating influences of the contending storms of the outer
world, to gain strength

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

by resistance; nor will he experience any desire to return to the
pleasures and tomfooleries of the world. He renounced nothing when he
retired into the solitude; for it cannot be looked upon as an act of
renunciation if we throw away a thing which is a burden to us. He cannot
be called an *ascetic;* for he does not undergo any discipline or
process of hardening; it is no act of self-denial to refuse things which
we do not want. The true ascetic is he who lives in the world,
surrounded by its temptations; he in whose soul the animal elements are
still active, craving for the gratification of their desires and
possessing the means for their gratification, but who by the superior
power of his will conquers his animal self. Having attained that state,
he may retire from the world and employ his energies for the employment
and the further expansion of the spiritual power which he possesses. He
will be perfectly happy, because that which he desires he can create in
his own interior world. He expects no future reward in heaven; for what
could heaven offer to him except happiness which he already possesses.
He desires no other good but to create good for the world.

"If you could establish theosophical academies where intellectual and
spiritual development

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

would go hand in hand, where a new science could be taught, based upon a
true knowledge of the fundamental laws of the universe, and where at the
same time man would be taught how to obtain mastery over himself, you
would confer the greatest possible benefit upon the world. Such a
convent would, moreover, afford immense advantages for the advancement
of intellectual research. The establishment of a number of such places
of learning would dot the mental horizon of the world with stars of the
first magnitude, from which rays of intellectual light would stream and
penetrate the world. Standing upon a far higher plane than the material
science of our times, a new and far greater field would be laid open for
investigation and research in these centres. Knowing all the different
opinions of the highest accepted authorities, and not being bound by an
orthodox scientific creed, having at their service all the results of
the investigations of the learned, but not being bound to their systems
by a belief in their infallibility, such people would be at liberty to
think freely. Their convents would become centres of intelligence,
illuminating the world; and if their power of self-control would grow in
equal proportion with the development of their intellect, they would
soon be able to enter adeptship."

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

The Adept had spoken these words with unusual warmth, as if he intended
to appeal to my sympathy and to induce me to use my efforts to establish
such convents; there was a look of pity in his eyes, as if he
exceedingly regretted the state of poor ignorant humanity, with whose
Karma he was not permitted to interfere forcibly, according to the
established rules of his order. I, too, regretted my own inability to
establish such academies, and for once I wished that I were rich, so as
to be able to make at least an attempt with one such establishment. But
immediately the Imperator saw my thought in my mind, and said:

"You mistake; it is not the want of money which prevents us from
executing this idea; it is the impossibility of finding at present the
proper kind of people to inhabit the convent after it is established.
Indeed, we would be poor alchemists if we could not produce gold in any
desirable quantity, if some real benefit for humanity could be effected
thereby, and of this I shall convince you, if you desire it. But gold is
a curse to mankind, and we do not wish to increase the curse from which
humanity suffers. Distribute gold among men, and you will only create a
craving for more; give them power, and you will transform them into
devils. No; it

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

is not gold that we need; it is men who thirst after true wisdom. There
are thousands who desire knowledge, but few who desire wisdom.
Intellectual development, sagacity, craftiness, cunning, are to-day
mistaken for spiritual development, but this conception is wrong; animal
cunning is not intelligence, craftiness is not wisdom, and most of your
learned men are the last ones who can bear the truth. Even many of your
would-be occultists and so-called Rosicrucians have taken up their
investigations merely for the purpose of gratifying their idle
curiosity, while others desire to pry into the secrets of nature to
obtain knowledge which they hope to employ for the attainment of selfish
ends. Give us men or women who desire nothing else but the truth, and we
will take care of their needs. How much money will it require to lodge a
person who cares nothing for comfort? What will it take to furnish the
kitchen for those who have no desire for dainties? What libraries will
be required for those who can read in the book of nature? What external
pictures will please those who wish to avoid a life of the senses and to
retire within their own selves? What terrestrial scenery shall be
selected for those who live within the paradise of their souls? What
company will please those who converse with their

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

own higher self? How can we amuse those who live in the presence of
God?"

Here the Adept paused for a moment, and then continued, saying: "Verily
the theosophical monastery of which I dream is even superior to ours. It
is located far away from this earth, and yet it can be reached without
trouble and without expense. Its monks and nuns have risen above the
sphere of self. They have a temple of infinite dimensions, pervaded by
the spirit of sanctity, which is the common possession of all. There the
differentiation of the Universal Soul ceases, and Unification takes
place. It is a convent where there exists no difference of sex, of
taste, opinion, and desire; where vice cannot enter; where none are
born, or marry, or die, but where they live like the angels; each one
constituting the centre of a power for good; each one immersed in an
infinite ocean of light; each one able to see all he desires to see, to
know all he wants to know, growing in strength and expanding in size,
until he embraces the All and is one with it."

For a moment it seemed as if the soul of the Adept had gone and visited
that blissful state of Nirvana, a state of which we mortals cannot
conceive; but soon the light returned into his eyes, and he smilingly
excused himself, saying that he had permitted himself to be carried

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

away by the sublimity of this idea. I ventured to say that probably
millions of ages would pass away before mankind would arrive at that
state.

"Alas!" he answered, "the conditions which our present state of
civilisation imposes upon its followers are now such as to force the
vast majority of humanity to employ nearly all their time and energy in
an outward direction, instead of employing them for their inward growth.
Each man has a certain amount of energy which he may call his own. If he
wastes his energy on the outward plane, either for the attainment of
sensual gratification or in intellectual pursuits, he will have nothing
left to nourish the divine germ in his heart. If he continually
concentrates his mind outwardly, there will be no inward concentration
of thought, which is absolutely necessary for the attainment of
self-knowledge. The labouring classes, men of commerce, scientists,
doctors, lawyers, and clergymen are all actively engaged in outward
affairs, and find little time for the inward concentration of their
powers. The majority are continually occupied in running after shadows
and illusions, which are at best only useful as long as they last, but
whose usefulness ceases when the heart ceases to beat. Their time and
energy are taken up in procuring what they call

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the 'necessaries of life,' and they excuse themselves by saying that it
is their misfortune to be so situated as to be forced to procure them.
Nature, however, cares nothing for our excuses; the law of cause and
effect is blind and inaccessible to argumentation. A man climbing over a
mountain top and falling over a precipice, is as much in danger of
breaking his neck as if he had jumped down voluntarily; a man who is not
able to progress will be left as far behind as one who does not desire
to progress. But nature is not so cruel as she appears to be to the
superficial observer. That which man requires for the purpose of living
is very little indeed, and can usually be easily obtained; for nature
has amply provided for all of her children, and if they cannot all
obtain their proper share then there must be something seriously wrong,
either with them individually or with the social organisation as a
whole. There is undoubtedly a great deal wrong in our social
organisation, and our philosophers and politicians are continually
trying to remedy it. They will succeed in their task when they succeed
in making the laws of the human world harmonise with the laws of nature,
and not before. That event may take place in the far distant future. We
have not the time to wait for it. Let each one attempt to restore
harmony in his own individual

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

organism and live according to natural laws, and the harmony of the
social organism as a whole will be restored."

The words of the Adept caused me some irritation, for I loved the
comforts of life. A spirit of contradiction arose within me and caused
me to say: "Would you, then, do away with all luxuries, which at our
present stage of civilisation have become necessities? Would you have us
return to the semi-animal state of our forefathers, living as savages in
the woods? I know there are certain cranks that harbour such views."

"Not so," answered the Adept. "The great bulk of those things which are
said to be the necessities of life are only artificially created
necessities, and millions of people lived and attained old age long
before many of the things which our modern civilisation considers as
absolutely necessary had been discovered or invented. The term
'necessity' has a relative meaning; and to a king a dozen of palaces, to
a nobleman a carriage and four, may appear as much a necessity as to a
beggar a bottle of whisky, or to a fashionable man a new swallowtail
coat. To get rid at once of all such fancied necessities and the trouble
which is imposed upon us to attain them, the shortest and surest way is
to rise above such necessities and to

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

consider them not to be necessary at all. Then a great amount of our
energy would become free, and might be employed for the acquisition of
that which is really necessary, because it is eternal and permanent,
while that which serves merely temporal purposes ends in time.

"There are thousands of people engaged in prying into the details of the
constitution of external objects and in learning the chemical and
physiological processes going on therein, and some are sacrificing their
soul and extinguishing the spark of divinity within themselves by
perpetrating the most inhuman cruelties upon their fellow-beings for the
purpose of gratifying their scientific curiosity and making useless
discoveries for the promotion of their ambition; but they do not
manifest the least desire to know their own real self, although it would
seem that such a knowledge is far more important. Modern science says
that she wants to know the laws of nature in all their minute
ramifications, and yet she pays no attention whatever to the universal
and fundamental law from which all these ramifications spring; and thus
she resembles an insect crawling over a fallen leaf and imagining
thereby to learn the qualities of the tree. It is surely the prerogative
of intellectual man to investigate intellectually all the departments

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

of nature; but the investigation of external things is only of secondary
importance to the attainment of knowledge of our own interior powers.
All primary powers act from within; effects are secondary to causes. He
who considers the knowledge of external things to be more important than
the knowledge of God, possesses very little wisdom indeed."

"God?" I exclaimed. "What can we know about God? How can you prove that
such a being exists?"

To this answered the Adept: "I am sorry for a man who is so far backward
in his course of spiritual evolution that he is not yet able to
recognise the presence of God in everything. The supreme spirit which
pervades, embraces, and penetrates everything, being the very essence,
soul, and life of all things in the universe, from the atom up to the
whole solar system, is beyond all mental conception. If He could be
grasped by the human intellect, that intellect would have to be greater
than God. There is nothing real but God. Nature itself is only a
manifestation of His power. Let no man expect that somebody will prove
to him the existence of God; but let every one seek to be himself a
living witness of His presence and power by becoming god-like and divine
by His divine grace. Man is destined

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

to restore within himself the divine image. When he realises the divine
ideal within his heart, his pilgrimage through manifold incarnations
will have ended and the object of his existence be accomplished. Peace
be with you!"

As the Adept finished this sentence, a sound as if produced by the
tinkling of small silver bells was heard in the air above our heads. I
looked up, but nothing was to be seen from which that sound could have
proceeded.

"This is the signal," said the Adept, "that the members of our order are
assembled in the Refectory. Let us go to join their company. Some
refreshment will undoubtedly be welcome to you."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Refectory](wta06.md)

</div>
