<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wta10)  [Next](wta12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892540761/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians*, by Franz
Hartmann \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

### IX

### THE END

I HAVE little more to add to my tale. I awoke, and opening my eyes, I
found myself stretched upon the moss, in the shadow of that mighty pine,
where I had evidently fallen asleep. The sun stood still high above the
western horizon, and far up in the sky two vultures described long drawn
spirals in the air; and in their cries I seemed to recognise the voice
of the queen of the nymphs. On the opposite side of the valley was still
the rushing waterfall with the foaming basin, and the spray still rose
in the air, and the water still sped over the moss-covered edge.

"Alas!" I exclaimed, "has all I have seen been nothing else than a
dream? Has that which seemed so beautiful and real been merely an
illusion of my brain, and have I now returned to real life? Why did I
not die in the arms of the queen, and thus save myself this horrid
awakening?"

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

I rose, and, as I rose, my eye fell upon the bud of a white lily
sticking in a buttonhole of my coat. 1 could not believe my eyes, and
suspected that I was again the victim of a hallucination. I grasped the
lily. It did not vanish in my grasp; it was as real as the earth upon
which I stood; it was of a kind which does not grow in these cold
mountainous regions; it only grows where the air is mild and warm. I
remembered the gold; I put my hand into my pocket, and there, among the
few remaining silver pieces, I found a solid lump of gold as bright as
the purest; but the little ruby pearls had dropped off from its surface
and were lost. I then recollected the precious book which the Adept had
promised to send to my room in the village inn; but somehow it seemed to
me that I had committed an indiscretion during the absence of Theodorus
by prying into the secrets of his laboratory and listening to the
temptations of the Nymphs. I felt as if I did not deserve the favour,
and was doubtful whether or not he would send me the book.

I flew rather than walked down the mountain, along the road leading
toward the village. Little did I now care for the scenery; neither for
the mountain tops, which were

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

gilded by the rays of the setting sun, nor for the murmuring river. It
grew dark; and the full moon arose over the hills, looking exactly like
the moon I had seen some hours before in the Indian Ocean. I calculated
about the difference of time between Germany and Ceylon, and I found
that indeed I might have seen the moon shine in the Bay of Bengal while
the sun was shining in the Alps.

I arrived at O., little heeding the astonished looks of the villagers,
who may have believed me insane as I hurried through the streets. I
entered the inn, rushed upstairs to my room, and, as I entered, I saw
upon the table the precious book, "The Secret Symbols of the
Rosicrucians of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries." On the
fly-leaf were written a few lines in pencil, saying:--

 

"Friend, I regret that you left our home so abruptly, and I cannot
invite you to visit us again for the present. He who desires to remain
in the peaceful valley must know how to resist all sensual attractions,
even those of the Water Queen. Study this book practically; bring the
circle into a square. Mortify the metals; calcinate and purify them of
all residua. When you have succeeded, we shall

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

meet again. I shall be with you when you need me.--Yours fraternally,

<span class="small">"THEODORUS."</span>

It may be imagined that, in spite of my fatigue, I did not go to sleep
very early. I walked up and down in my room, thinking over the events of
that memorable day. I tried to find the line between the visible and the
invisible, between the objective and subjective, between dreams and
reality, and I found that there was no line, but that all these terms
are merely relative, referring not merely to the conditions of things
which appear objective or subjective to ourselves, but to our own
conditions, and that while in one state of existence certain things may
appear real to us and others illusive, in another state the illusions
become real, and that which before seemed to be real is now merely a
dream. Perhaps our whole terrestrial life will seem to be at the end
nothing else than a hallucination.

As I walked about the room I observed a Bible belonging to my host lying
upon a cupboard. I felt an impulse to open it at random and to see what
it said. I did so, and my eye fell upon the twelfth chapter of

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

the second epistle of the Apostle Paul, written to the Corinthians,
where it said:--

"*I knew a man in Christ, above fourteen years ago (whether in the body
or whether out of the body I cannot tell; God knoweth); such a one was
caught up into paradise and heard unspeakable words, which it is not
lawful for a man to utter*."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix. A Rosicrucian Institution in Switzerland](wta12.md)

</div>
