<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wta09)  [Next](wta11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892540761/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians*, by Franz
Hartmann \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

### BLACK MAGIC

AT this moment I heard again the sound of the invisible silver bell in
the air, and the Adept, rising, said that he was called away for a few
minutes, and invited me to remain until he should return. He left the
laboratory, and I remained alone. I amused myself by looking over the
book containing the *Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians*, and my
attention was attracted by the sign of a *Pentagram* turned upside down,
so that the two points of the lower triangles pointed upwards. Suddenly
a voice sounding behind my chair said: "In this symbol is contained
eternity and time, god and man, angel and devil, heaven and hell, the
old and the new Jerusalem with all its inhabitants and creatures."

I turned, and I saw by my side a man with an extremely intelligent face,
dressed in the habit of a monk. He excused himself for causing an
interruption in my thoughts, and said that I seemed so deeply engaged in

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

meditating over those figures that I had not observed his entrance.

The open countenance, the pleasant looks, and the intelligent expression
of the face of my visitor at once gained my confidence; and I asked him
who he was with whom I had the honour to speak.

"I am," said the stranger, "the *Famulus*, or, as you well may call it,
the *Chela*, of Theodorus. They call me jocularly his intellectual
principle, because I have to do his work when the old gentleman is
asleep."

I found his remark very funny, and answered in a jocular way: "If you
are called his intellectual principle, you are perhaps only a creation
of his thought. I have seen so many strange things in this place, that I
would not be surprised at anything, not even if you were to vanish
before my eyes or turn into a snake or a devil."

To this the apparition replied: "As far as our external appearance is
concerned, we are all forms produced by thought, and it is the privilege
of men of a higher order to assume whatever form they find convenient
for their purpose. Thus it may sometimes happen that the very devil
appears in the shape of a saint for the purpose of deluding some
gullible fool, and I know of cases where some jolly spirits

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

of nature have assumed the shapes of Christ and the apostles for the
purpose of amusing themselves by misleading some ignoramus. They usually
succeed in such cases; but I am neither a devil nor an elemental spirit,
and you are neither an ignoramus nor a fool."

I found myself highly flattered by the favourable opinion expressed by
my visitor, and I did not wish to appear suspicious and thus to weaken
his faith regarding my power of judging the character of a person at
first sight. Moreover, he had such a look of benevolence that I did not
wish to distrust him. I therefore made him my bow, and said: "I have not
the least doubt about your honourable intentions, and am quite sure that
you are a reliable guide."

"One cannot be careful enough in selecting one's guides," continued the
stranger. "There are at present so many false prophets and guides. All
the world is at present crazy for poking their noses into the mysteries
of the astral world. Everybody wants to be taught witchcraft and
sorcery. Secrets, which for thousands of years have been wisely kept
hidden before the eyes of the unripe and profane, are now bawled out
from the housetops and sold at the market-place as objects of trade.
Hundreds of self-appointed "masters" and guides

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

speculate upon the selfishness and ambitions of their disciples, and,
the blind leading the blind, they both come to grief. If only all the
seekers for truth were like you, they would not be deluded by false
promises held out to them for attaining adeptship."

"I am really glad," I answered, "that you have discovered my purity and
unselfishness of purpose, and I hope that, in consideration of my
merits, you will be kind enough to show me some more of your occult
secrets. Theodorus has already been preaching long sermons to me, and I
listened to him with great patience; but now I want to see something
substantial, and if possible learn how to perform some occult feats."

"Most willingly," said my companion. "I will do all I can for you,
because you deserve by your unselfishness the patronage of all the
Adepts."

So saying, he began to show me some of the curiosities of the
laboratory, which contained many strange things. Of some of those I had
read in books on alchemy; others were entirely new to me. At last we
came to a closed shrine, and my curiosity led me to ask what it
contained.

"Oh!" answered the monk, "this shrine contains some powders for
fumigations, by the

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

aid of which a man may see the Elemental Spirits of Nature."

"Indeed!" I exclaimed. "Oh, how I should like to see these lovely
spirits! I have read a great deal about them in the books of Paracelsus;
but I never had an opportunity of seeing them."

"They are not all of them lovely," said the monk. "The Elementals of
earth have human forms. They are small, but they have the power to
elongate their bodies. These gnomes and pigmies are usually ill-humoured
and cross; and it is just as well to leave them alone, although
sometimes they become very good friends of man, and may even show him
hidden treasures and mines. The Elementals of air, the sylvans, are of a
more agreeable nature; still we cannot rely upon their friendship. The
salamanders, living in the element of fire, are ugly customers, and it
is better to have nothing to do with them. But the nymphs and undines
are lovely creatures, and they often associate with man."

"I wish I could see those beautiful water-sprites," I said; "but I am
inclined to believe that they belong to the realm of the fable. For many
years, accounts given by seafaring men spoke of mermen and mermaids,
which they insisted on having seen at a distance. They

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

said that those people were like human beings, of whom the upper part
resembled a man or a woman, while the lower part of their body was a
fish. They told great stories about their beauty, their waving hair, and
how finely they could sing; and they called them sirens, because it was
said they could sing so well that men who heard their voices would
become oblivious of everything else but their songs. At last, such a
siren was caught; and it proved to be nothing else than a curious fish
of the species called *Halicore catacca*, which at a distance may be
mistaken for a man, on account of its colour, and which barks somewhat
like a dog. Perhaps those undines and nymphs are also nothing but
fishes."

"This is a most erroneous opinion, my dear sir," answered the monk. "The
halicore is a fish; but the nymphs and undines are Elemental spirits of
nature, living in the element of water, being, under ordinary
circumstances, invisible to man, and not being able therefore to be
caught in this manner. 'They are almost like human beings, but far more
ethereal and beautiful; and under certain circumstances they may be seen
by man. They may even attain a permanent material form and remain on
land; and a case is even known in which a certain Count Stauffenberg
married such a nymph on

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

account of her beauty and lived with her for more than a year, until
some stupid theologian frightened him by telling him that his wife was a
devil. The count at that time had fallen in love with some good-looking
peasant-girl, and so the interference of the preacher was welcome, and
he took this as a pretext to drive his true wife away. But she revenged
herself; and on the third day after his second marriage the count was
found dead in his bed. These nymphs are very beautiful. They are strong
in love, and are constant; but they are also said to be very jealous."

The more the monk spoke about the water-nymphs, the stronger grew my
desire to see them. I asked him to put me in communication with those
beautiful spirits; but he made all sorts of excuses, which, however,
only served still more strongly to excite my curiosity.

"We are living here in this sinful world, and ought not to meddle with
the inhabitants of another. We are all sinners and liable to succumb to
temptations. These water-nymphs are continually seeking to be united
with men, and they have good reason for it, because they have no
immortal souls. Becoming united with man they form a link with his soul,
and thus partake of his immortality."

"Why, then," I exclaimed, "do you hesitate

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

to conjure these beings? I would only be too happy to convey the gift of
immortality to one of these beautiful spirits. Moreover, I would
consider this as an act of charity and duty, and if such a nymph should
insist upon marrying me, I can see no reason why I should object if she
were amiable. Besides, it would be quite an extraordinary thing to have
a water-nymph for a wife."

"They are not only very amiable," said the monk, "but they are also very
obedient to their husbands. Such a water-nymph has no will of her own;
she regards her husband as her saviour and god, never contradicts or
scolds him, but is always ready to obey his commands, fulfil his wishes,
and gratify his desires. She is very modest in her demands, needs no
luxuries, and requires nothing except occasionally a short excursion to
the seashore, which will cause you no expense whatever, because she has
her own method of travelling."

I could restrain myself no longer, and earnestly begged the monk to make
a fumigation with the mysterious powder. At last he consented. Putting a
few pieces of dry maple tree bark and some dried leaves of laurel into a
brazier, he added pieces of charcoal and lighted them. He then strewed
some of the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

mysterious powder, and a white smoke arose, filling the room like a mist
and with a very sweet odour. The objects in the laboratory could soon be
seen only dimly through that mist, and finally disappeared altogether.
The walls of the chamber were no more to be seen. The air seemed to take
on a vibratory motion and to become more dense; but, far from feeling
oppressed by this, I felt a great exhilaration and satisfaction. At last
I knew I was in the element of water, and was supported by it. I was
swimming, but my body was as light as a feather, and it required no
effort whatever to keep me from sinking; it seemed as if the water was
my own element, as if I were born in it. A light shone directly above my
head. I rose up to the surface and looked around. I was in the midst of
the ocean, dancing up and down with the waves. It was a bright moonlight
night. Right above me stood the full moon and threw her silvery rays
upon the water, causing the ripples and the foamy crests on the tops of
the waves to sparkle like liquid silver or diamonds. Far in the distance
appeared the coast with a mountain range, which seemed familiar to me.
At last I recognised it as the coast of the island of Ceylon, with the
range of mountains beyond Colombo and Galle;

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

surely I could not mistake, for I recognised the Adam's Peak.

Never shall I forget the agreeable sensation caused by that ethereal
bath in the moonlit sea in the Indian Ocean. It seemed to me that at
last my wish had been fulfilled, and that I was free of my mortal body
and its weight; and yet I was myself. I could see no difference between
the body I inhabited now and the one I inhabited before the fumigation
was made, only my present body was so light that it seemed as if it
would float in the air as easily as it did upon the water.

Listen! some faint sound is brought by the breeze; it seems to be a
human voice. It comes nearer, and now I hear it plainly; it is the
melodious song of a female voice. I look in the direction from which the
sound seems to come, and I see three forms floating upon the waves,
rising and sinking and coming nearer. They seem to play with each other,
and as they approach I behold three beautiful females with long, waving
hair; but the one in the middle surpasses the others in beauty. She
seems to be the queen, for she wears a wreath of water-plants upon her
head. Still nearer they come. Now they see me and stop. They consult
together, but curiosity conquers

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

their fear. They come quite close and speak to me. Their voices are full
and melodious; their language is foreign to me, and yet I understand
what they say. Having discovered that I am a mortal, they appear as
anxious to cultivate my acquaintance as I am anxious to be on friendly
terms with them.

They invite me to go with them to their home; they speak of their palace
constructed of beautiful shells among the coral-reefs in the depths of
the ocean; of the milk-white pearls with which they have ornamented the
walls; of the azure blue of the waves shining through the transparent
walls of their houses; and the curious things which no mortal had ever
seen. I object, and tell them that I am mortal and that I could not live
in their own element; but the beautiful queen, rising out of the water
up to her waist, smiles and shakes her charming head, and fluid diamonds
seem to stream from her waving locks. "Come," she whispers; "no harm
will befall you, for my love shall protect you." She extends her
beautifully shaped arms towards me and touches my shoulder, and at her
touch my consciousness fades away. A voluptuous sensation pervades my
whole being. I feel that I am dissolving in the element of

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

water; I only dimly hear the distant thunder of the breakers as they
roll upon the sandy beach. I feel that my desire has been fulfilled--a
moment, and I know nothing more.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. The End](wta11.md)

</div>
