[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](joe)  [Next](oba) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Amos

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Words of Amos -- who hath been among
herdsmen of Tekoa -- that he hath seen concerning Israel, in the days of
Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Joash king of
Israel, two years before the shaking;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and he saith: Jehovah from Zion doth roar,
And from Jerusalem giveth forth His voice, And mourned have pastures of
the shepherds, And withered hath the top of Carmel!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And thus said Jehovah: For three
transgressions of Damascus, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because
of their threshing Gilead with sharp-pointed irons,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And I have sent a fire against the house of
Hazael, And it hath consumed the palaces of Ben-Hadad.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And I have broken the bar of Damascus, And
cut off the inhabitant from Bikat-Aven, And a holder of a sceptre from
Beth-Eden, And removed have been the people of Aram to Kir, said
Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions
of Gaza, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of their removing a
complete captivity, To deliver up to Edom,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And I have sent a fire against the wall of
Gaza, And it hath consumed her palaces;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And I have cut off the inhabitant from
Ashdod, And a holder of a sceptre from Ashkelon, And have turned back My
hand against Ekron, And perished have the remnant of the Philistines,
Said the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions
of Tyre, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of their delivering
up a complete captivity to Edom, And they remembered not the brotherly
covenant,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And I have sent a fire against the wall
of Tyre, And it hath consumed her palaces.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Thus said Jehovah: For three
transgressions of Edom, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of
his pursuing with a sword his brother, And he hath destroyed his
mercies, And tear perpetually doth his anger, And his wrath -- he hath
kept it for ever,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And I have sent a fire against Teman, And
it hath consumed palaces of Bozrah.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Thus said Jehovah: For three
transgressions of the sons of Ammon, And for four, I do not reverse it,
Because of their ripping up the pregnant ones of Gilead, To enlarge
their border,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And I have kindled a fire against the
wall of Rabbah, And it hath consumed her palaces, With a shout in a day
of battle, With a whirlwind in a day of hurricane,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And gone hath their king in a removal, He
and his heads together, said Jehovah!

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions
of Moab, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of his burning the
bones of the king of Edom to lime,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And I have sent a fire against Moab, And it
hath consumed the palaces of Kerioth, And dying with noise is Moab, With
shouting, with voice of a trumpet.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I have cut off a judge from her midst,
And all its heads I slay with him, said Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions
of Judah, And for four, I do not reserve it, Because of their loathing
the law of Jehovah, And His statutes they have not kept, And their lies
do cause them to err, After which their fathers did walk,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And I have sent a fire against Judah, And
it hath consumed palaces of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions
of Israel, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of their selling
for silver the righteous, And the needy for a pair of sandals.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Who are panting for the dust of the earth
on the head of the poor, And the way of the humble they turn aside, And
a man and his father go unto the damsel, So as to pollute My holy name.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And on pledged garments they stretch
themselves near every altar, And the wine of fined ones they drink
\[in\] the house of their gods.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And I -- I have destroyed the Amorite from
before them, Whose height \[is\] as the height of cedars, And strong he
\[is\] as the oaks, And I destroy his fruit from above, And his roots
from beneath.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And I -- I have brought you up from the
land of Egypt, And cause you to go in a wilderness forty years, To
possess the land of the Amorite.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And I raise of your sons for prophets,
And of your choice ones for Nazarites, Is not this true, O sons of
Israel? An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And ye cause the Nazarites to drink wine,
And on the prophets ye have laid a charge, Saying, \`Do not prophecy!'

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Lo, I am pressing you under, As the full
cart doth press for itself a sheaf.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And perished hath refuge from the swift,
And the strong strengtheneth not his power, And the mighty delivereth
not his soul.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And the handler of the bow standeth not,
And the swift with his feet delivereth not \[himself\], And the rider of
the horse delivereth not his soul.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the courageous of heart among the
mighty, Naked doth flee in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah!

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Hear ye this word that Jehovah hath spoken
concerning you, O sons of Israel, concerning all the family that I
brought up from the land of Egypt, saying:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Only you I have known of all families of
the land, Therefore I charge on you all your iniquities.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Do two walk together if they have not met?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Roar doth a lion in a forest and prey he
hath none? Give out doth a young lion his voice from his habitation, If
he hath not caught?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Doth a bird fall into a snare of the earth,
And there is no gin for it? Doth a snare go up from the ground, And prey
it captureth not?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Is a trumpet blown in a city, And do people
not tremble? Is there affliction in a city, And Jehovah hath not done
\[it\]?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For the Lord Jehovah doth nothing, Except
He hath revealed His counsel unto His servants the prophets.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> A lion hath roared -- who doth not fear?
The Lord Jehovah hath spoken -- who doth not prophesy?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Sound ye unto palaces in Ashdod, And to
palaces in the land of Egypt, and say: Be ye gathered on mountains of
Samaria, And see many troubles within her, And oppressed ones in her
midst.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And they have not known to act
straightforwardly, An affirmation of Jehovah, Who are treasuring up
violence and spoil in their palaces.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: An
adversary -- and surrounding the land, And he hath brought down from
thee thy strength, And spoiled have been thy palaces.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Thus said Jehovah: As the shepherd
delivereth from the lion's mouth Two legs, or a piece of an ear, So
delivered are the sons of Israel, Who are sitting in Samaria on the
corner of a bed, And in Damascus \[on that of\] a couch.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Hear ye and testify to the house of
Jacob, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, God of Hosts.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For in the day of My charging the
transgressions of Israel on him, I have laid a charge on the altars of
Beth-El, And cut off have been the horns of the altar, And they have
fallen to the earth.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I have smitten the winter-house with
the summer-house, And perished have houses of ivory, And consumed have
been many houses, An affirmation of Jehovah!

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, Who
\[are\] in the mountain of Samaria, Who are oppressing the poor, Who are
bruising the needy, Who are saying to their lords: \`Bring in, and we do
drink.'

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Sworn hath the Lord Jehovah by His
holiness, That lo, days are coming upon you, And he hath taken you away
with hooks, And your posterity with fish-hooks.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And \[by\] breaches ye go forth, A woman
\[at that\] over-against her, And ye have cast down the high place, An
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Enter ye Beth-El, and transgress, At Gilgal
multiply transgression, And bring in every morning your sacrifices,
Every third year your tithes.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And perfume with leaven a thank-offering,
And proclaim willing gifts, sound ye! For so ye have loved, O sons of
Israel, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And I also -- I have given to you cleanness
of teeth in all your cities, And lack of bread in all your places, And
ye have not turned back unto Me, an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And I also -- I have withheld from you the
rain. While yet three months to harvest, And I have sent rain on one
city, And on another city I do not send rain, One portion is rained on,
And the portion on which it raineth not withereth.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And wandered have two or three cities, Unto
the same city to drink water, And they are not satisfied, And ye have
not turned back unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> I have smitten you with blasting and with
mildew, The abundance of your gardens and of your vineyards, And of your
figs, and of your olives, Eat doth the palmer-worm, And ye have not
turned back unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> I have sent among you pestilence by the
way of Egypt, I have slain by sword your choice ones, With your captive
horses, And I cause the stink of your camps to come up -- even into your
nostrils, And ye have not turned back unto Me, An affirmation of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I have overturned among you, Like the
overturn by God of Sodom and Gomorrah, And ye are as a brand delivered
from a burning, And ye have not turned back unto Me, An affirmation of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Therefore, thus I do to thee, O Israel,
at last, Because this I do to thee, Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For, lo, the former of mountains, and
creator of wind, And the declarer to man what \[is\] His thought, He is
making dawn obscurity, And is treading on high places of earth, Jehovah,
God of Hosts, \[is\] His name!

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Hear this word that I am bearing to you, A
lamentation, O house of Israel:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> \`Fallen, not again to rise, hath the
virgin of Israel, Left on her land -- she hath no raiser up.'

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For thus said the Lord Jehovah: The city
that is going out a thousand, Doth leave an hundred, And that which is
going out an hundred, Doth leave ten to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For thus said Jehovah to the house of
Israel: Seek ye Me, and live,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And seek not Beth-El, and Gilgal enter not,
And Beer-Sheba pass not through, For Gilgal doth utterly remove, And
Beth-El doth become vanity.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Seek ye Jehovah, and live, Lest He prosper
as fire \[against\] the house of Joseph, And it hath consumed, And there
is no quencher for Beth-El.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Ye who are turning to wormwood judgment,
And righteousness to the earth have put down,

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> The maker of Kimah and Kesil, And the
turner to morning of death-shade, And day \[as\] night He hath made
dark, Who is calling to the waters of the sea, And poureth them on the
face of the earth, Jehovah \[is\] His name;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Who is brightening up the spoiled against
the strong, And the spoiled against a fortress cometh.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> They have hated a reprover in the gate,
And a plain speaker they abominate.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Therefore, because of your trampling on
the poor, And the tribute of corn ye take from him, Houses of hewn work
ye have built, And ye do not dwell in them, Desirable vineyards ye have
planted, And ye do not drink their wine.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For I have known -- many \[are\] your
transgressions, And mighty your sins, Adversaries of the righteous,
taking ransoms, And the needy in the gate ye turned aside.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Therefore is the wise at that time
silent, For an evil time it \[is\].

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Seek good, and not evil, that ye may
live, And it is so; Jehovah, God of Hosts, \[is\] with you, as ye said.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Hate evil, and love good, And set up
judgment in the gate, It may be Jehovah, God of Hosts, doth pity the
remnant of Joseph.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah, God of
Hosts, the Lord, In all broad places \[is\] lamentation, And in all
out-places they say, \`Alas, alas,' And called the husbandman to
mourning, And to lamentation the skilful of wailing.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And in all vineyards \[is\] lamentation,
For I pass into thy midst, said Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Ho, ye who are desiring the day of
Jehovah, Why \[is\] this to you -- the day of Jehovah? It is darkness,
and not light,

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> As \[when\] one fleeth from the face of
the lion, And the bear hath met him, And he hath come in to the house,
And hath leant his hand on the wall, And the serpent hath bitten him.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Is not the day of Jehovah darkness and
not light, Even thick darkness that hath no brightness?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> I have hated -- I have loathed your
festivals, And I am not refreshed by your restraints.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> For though ye cause burnt-offerings and
your presents to ascend to Me, I am not pleased, And the peace-offering
of your fatlings I behold not.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Turn aside from Me the noise of thy
songs, Yea, the praise of thy psaltery I hear not.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And roll on as waters doth judgment, And
righteousness as a perennial stream.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Sacrifices and offering did ye bring nigh
to Me, In a wilderness forty years, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And ye bare Succoth your king, and Chiun
your images, The star of your god, that ye made for yourselves.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And I removed you beyond Damascus, Said
Jehovah, God of Hosts \[is\] His name.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Wo \[to\] those secure in Zion, And those
confident in the mount of Samaria, The marked of the chief of the
nations, And come to them have the house of Israel.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Pass ye over \[to\] Calneh and see, And go
thence \[to\] Hamath the great, And go down \[to\] Gath of the
Philistines, Are \[they\] better than these kingdoms? Greater \[is\]
their border than your border?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Who are putting away the day of evil, And
ye bring nigh the seat of violence,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Who are lying down on beds of ivory, And
are spread out on their couches, And are eating lambs from the flock,
And calves from the midst of the stall,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Who are taking part according to the
psaltery, Like David they invented for themselves instruments of music;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Who are drinking with bowls of wine, And
\[with\] chief perfumes anoint \[themselves\], And have not been pained
for the breach of Joseph.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Therefore now they remove at the head of
the captives, And turned aside is the mourning-feast of stretched-out
ones.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Sworn hath the Lord Jehovah by Himself, An
affirmation of Jehovah, God of Hosts: I am abominating the excellency of
Jacob, And his high places I have hated, And I have delivered up the
city and its fulness.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And if there are left ten persons in one
house, It hath come to pass -- that they have died.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And lifted him up hath his loved one,
even his burner, To bring forth the bones from the house, And he said to
him who \[is\] in the sides of the house, \`Is there yet with thee?' And
he said, \`None,' then he said, \`Hush! Save to make mention of the name
of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> For lo, Jehovah is commanding, And He
hath smitten the great house \[with\] breaches, And the little house
\[with\] clefts.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Do horses run on a rock? Doth one plough
\[it\] with oxen? For ye have turned to gall judgment, And the fruit of
righteousness to wormwood.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> O ye who are rejoicing at nothing, Who
are saying, \`Have we not by our strength taken to ourselves horns?'

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Surely, lo, I am raising against you a
nation, O house of Israel, An affirmation of Jehovah, God of Hosts, And
they have oppressed you from the coming in to Hamath, Unto the stream of
the desert.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Thus hath the Lord Jehovah shewed me, and
lo, He is forming locusts at the beginning of the ascending of the
latter growth, and lo, the latter growth \[is\] after the mowings of the
king;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and it hath come to pass, when it hath
finished to consume the herb of the land, that I say: \`Lord Jehovah,
forgive, I pray Thee, How doth Jacob arise -- for he \[is\] small?'

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Jehovah hath repented of this, \`It shall
not be,' said Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Thus hath the Lord Jehovah shewed me, and
lo, the Lord Jehovah is calling to contend by fire, and it consumeth the
great deep, yea, it hath consumed the portion, and I say:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> \`Lord Jehovah, cease, I pray Thee, How
doth Jacob arise -- for he \[is\] small?'

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Jehovah hath repented of this, \`It also
shall not be,' said the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Thus hath He shewed me, and lo, the Lord is
standing by a wall \[made according to\] a plumb-line, and in His hand a
plumb-line;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> and Jehovah saith unto me, \`What art thou
seeing, Amos?' And I say, \`A plumb-line;' and the Lord saith: \`Lo, I
am setting a plumb-line in the midst of My people Israel, I do not add
any more to pass over to it.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And desolated have been high places of
Isaac, And sanctuaries of Israel are wasted, And I have risen against
the house of Jeroboam with a sword.'

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And Amaziah priest of Beth-El sendeth
unto Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, \`Amos hath conspired against thee
in the midst of the house of Israel; the land is not able to bear all
his words,

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> for thus said Amos: By sword die doth
Jeroboam, And Israel certainly removeth from off its land.'

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And Amaziah saith unto Amos, \`Seer, go
flee for thee unto the land of Judah, and eat there bread, and there
thou dost prophesy;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and \[at\] Beth-El do not add to prophesy
any more, for it \[is\] the king's sanctuary, and it \[is\] the royal
house.'

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And Amos answereth and saith unto
Amaziah, \`I \[am\] no prophet, nor a prophet's son \[am\] I, but a
herdsman I \[am\], and a cultivator of sycamores,

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> and Jehovah taketh me from after the
flock, and Jehovah saith unto me, Go, prophesy unto My people Israel.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And now, hear a word of Jehovah: thou art
saying, Do not prophesy against Israel, nor drop \[any thing\] against
the house of Isaac,

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> therefore thus said Jehovah: Thy wife in
the city doth go a-whoring, And thy sons and thy daughters by sword do
fall, And thy land by line is apportioned, And thou on an unclean land
diest, And Israel certainly removeth from off its land.'

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Thus hath the Lord Jehovah shewed me, and,
lo, a basket of summer-fruit.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And He saith, \`What art thou seeing,
Amos?' and I say, \`A basket of summer-fruit.' And Jehovah saith unto
me: \`The end hath come unto My people Israel, I do not add any more to
pass over to it.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And howled have songstresses of a palace in
that day, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Many \[are\] the carcases,
into any place throw -- hush!

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Hear this, ye who are swallowing up the
needy, To cause to cease the poor of the land,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Saying, When doth the new moon pass, And we
sell ground corn? And the sabbath, and we open out pure corn? To make
little the ephah, And to make great the shekel, And to use perversely
balances of deceit.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> To purchase with money the poor, And the
needy for a pair of sandals, Yea, the refuse of the pure corn we sell.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Sworn hath Jehovah by the excellency of
Jacob: \`I forget not for ever any of their works.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For this doth not the land tremble, And
mourned hath every dweller in it? And come up as a flood hath all of it.
And it hath been cast out, and hath sunk, Like the flood of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And it hath come to pass in that day, An
affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, I have caused the sun to go in at noon,
And caused darkness on the land in a day of light,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And have turned your festivals to
mourning, And all your songs to lamentation, And caused sackcloth to
come up on all loins, And on every head -- baldness, And made it as a
mourning \[of\] an only one, And its latter end as a day of bitterness.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Lo, days are coming, An affirmation of
the Lord Jehovah, And I have sent a famine into the land, Not a famine
of bread, nor a thirst of water But of hearing the words of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And they have wandered from sea unto sea,
And from north even unto east, They go to and fro to seek the word of
Jehovah, And they do not find.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> In that day faint do the fair virgins,
And the young men, with thirst.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Those swearing by the guilt of Samaria,
And have said, Live doth thy god, O Dan, And, Live doth the way of
Beer-Sheba, And they have fallen -- and rise not again!'

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> I have seen the Lord standing by the altar,
and He saith: \`Smite the knob, and the thresholds shake, And cut them
off by the head -- all of them, And their posterity with a sword I do
slay, Not flee to them doth the fleer, Nor escape to them doth a
fugitive.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> If they dig through into sheol, From thence
doth My hand take them, And if they go up the heavens, From thence I
cause them to come down.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And if they be hid in the top of Carmel,
From thence I search out, and have taken them, And if they be hid from
Mine eyes in the bottom of the sea, From thence I command the serpent,
And it hath bitten them.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And if they go into captivity before their
enemies, From thence I command the sword, And it hath slain them, And I
have set Mine eye on them for evil, And not for good.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And \[it is\] the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts,
Who is striking against the land, and it melteth, And mourned have all
the inhabitants in it, And come up as a flood hath all of it, And it
hath sunk -- like the flood of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Who is building in the heavens His upper
chambers; As to His troop, Upon earth He hath founded it, Who is calling
for the waters of the sea, And poureth them out on the face of the land,
Jehovah \[is\] His name.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> As sons of Cushim are ye not to Me? O sons
of Israel -- an affirmation of Jehovah. Israel did I not bring up out of
the land of Egypt? And the Philistines from Caphtor, and Aram from Kir?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Lo, the eyes of the Lord Jehovah \[are\] on
the sinful kingdom, And I have destroyed it from off the face of the
ground, Only, I destroy not utterly the house of Jacob, An affirmation
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For lo, I am commanding, And I have shaken
among all the nations the house of Israel, As \[one\] doth shake with a
sieve, And there falleth not a grain \[to\] the earth.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> By sword die do all sinners of My people,
Who are saying, \`Not overtake, or go before, For our sakes, doth evil.'

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> In that day I raise the tabernacle of
David, that is fallen, And I have repaired their breaches, And its ruins
I do raise up, And I have built it up as in days of old.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> So that they possess the remnant of Edom,
And all the nations on whom My name is called, An affirmation of Jehovah
-- doer of this.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Lo, days are coming -- an affirmation of
Jehovah, And come nigh hath the ploughman to the reaper, And the treader
of grapes to the scatterer of seed, And the mountains have dropt juice,
And all the hills do melt.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And I have turned back \[to\] the
captivity of My people Israel, And they have built desolate cities, and
inhabited, And have planted vineyards, and drunk their wine, And made
gardens, and eaten their fruit.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And I have planted them on their own
ground, And they are not plucked up any more from off their own ground,
That I have given to them, said Jehovah thy God!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah](oba)
