[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co1)  [Next](gal) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 2 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, through
the will of God, and Timotheus the brother, to the assembly of God that
is in Corinth, with all the saints who are in all Achaia:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed \[is\] God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of the mercies, and God of all comfort,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who is comforting us in all our
tribulation, for our being able to comfort those in any tribulation
through the comfort with which we are comforted ourselves by God;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> because, as the sufferings of the Christ do
abound to us, so through the Christ doth abound also our comfort;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and whether we be in tribulation, \[it is\]
for your comfort and salvation, that is wrought in the enduring of the
same sufferings that we also suffer; whether we are comforted, \[it is\]
for your comfort and salvation;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and our hope \[is\] stedfast for you,
knowing that even as ye are partakers of the sufferings -- so also of
the comfort.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For we do not wish you to be ignorant,
brethren, of our tribulation that happened to us in Asia, that we were
exceedingly burdened above \[our\] power, so that we despaired even of
life;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> but we ourselves in ourselves the sentence
of the death have had, that we may not be trusting on ourselves, but on
God, who is raising the dead,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> who out of so great a death did deliver
us, and doth deliver, in whom we have hoped that even yet He will
deliver;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> ye working together also for us by your
supplication, that the gift through many persons to us, through many may
be thankfully acknowledged for us.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For our glorying is this: the testimony
of our conscience, that in simplicity and sincerity of God, not in
fleshly wisdom, but in the grace of God, we did conduct ourselves in the
world, and more abundantly toward you;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> for no other things do we write to you,
but what ye either do read or also acknowledge, and I hope that also
unto the end ye shall acknowledge,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> according as also ye did acknowledge us
in part, that your glory we are, even as also ye \[are\] ours, in the
day of the Lord Jesus;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and in this confidence I was purposing to
come unto you before, that a second favour ye might have,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and through you to pass to Macedonia, and
again from Macedonia to come unto you, and by you to be sent forward to
Judea.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> This, therefore, counselling, did I then
use the lightness; or the things that I counsel, according to the flesh
do I counsel, that it may be with me Yes, yes, and No, no?

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and God \[is\] faithful, that our word
unto you became not Yes and No,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> for the Son of God, Jesus Christ, among
you through us having been preached -- through me and Silvanus and
Timotheus -- did not become Yes and No, but in him it hath become Yes;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> for as many as \[are\] promises of God,
in him \[are\] the Yes, and in him the Amen, for glory to God through
us;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> and He who is confirming you with us into
Christ, and did anoint us, \[is\] God,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> who also sealed us, and gave the earnest
of the Spirit in our hearts.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And I for a witness on God do call upon
my soul, that sparing you, I came not yet to Corinth;

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> not that we are lords over your faith,
but we are workers together with your joy, for by the faith ye stand.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And I decided this to myself, not again to
come in sorrow unto you,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> for if I make you sorry, then who is he who
is making me glad, except he who is made sorry by me?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and I wrote to you this same thing, that
having come, I may not have sorrow from them of whom it behoved me to
have joy, having confidence in you all, that my joy is of you all,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> for out of much tribulation and pressure of
heart I wrote to you through many tears, not that ye might be made
sorry, but that ye might know the love that I have more abundantly
toward you.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And if any one hath caused sorrow, he hath
not caused sorrow to me, but in part, that I may not burden you all;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> sufficient to such a one is this
punishment, that \[is\] by the more part,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> so that, on the contrary, \[it is\] rather
for you to forgive and to comfort, lest by over abundant sorrow such a
one may be swallowed up;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> wherefore, I call upon you to confirm love
to him,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> for, for this also did I write, that I
might know the proof of you, whether in regard to all things ye are
obedient.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And to whom ye forgive anything -- I
also; for I also, if I have forgiven anything, to whom I have forgiven
\[it\], because of you -- in the person of Christ -- \[I forgive it,\]

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> that we may not be over-reached by the
Adversary, for of his devices we are not ignorant.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And having come to Troas for the good
news of the Christ, and a door to me having been opened in the Lord,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I have not had rest to my spirit, on my
not finding Titus my brother, but having taken leave of them, I went
forth to Macedonia;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and to God \[are\] thanks, who at all
times is leading us in triumph in the Christ, and the fragrance of His
knowledge He is manifesting through us in every place,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> because of Christ a sweet fragrance we
are to God, in those being saved, and in those being lost;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> to the one, indeed, a fragrance of death
to death, and to the other, a fragrance of life to life; and for these
things who is sufficient?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> for we are not as the many, adulterating
the word of God, but as of sincerity -- but as of God; in the presence
of God, in Christ we do speak.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Do we begin again to recommend ourselves,
except we need, as some, letters of recommendation unto you, or from
you?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> our letter ye are, having been written in
our hearts, known and read by all men,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> manifested that ye are a letter of Christ
ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God, not in the tablets of stone, but in fleshy tablets of the
heart,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and such trust we have through the Christ
toward God,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> not that we are sufficient of ourselves to
think anything, as of ourselves, but our sufficiency \[is\] of God,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> who also made us sufficient \[to be\]
ministrants of a new covenant, not of letter, but of spirit; for the
letter doth kill, and the spirit doth make alive.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> and if the ministration of the death, in
letters, engraved in stones, came in glory, so that the sons of Israel
were not able to look stedfastly to the face of Moses, because of the
glory of his face -- which was being made useless,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> how shall the ministration of the Spirit
not be more in glory?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> for if the ministration of the condemnation
\[is\] glory, much more doth the ministration of the righteousness
abound in glory;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> for also even that which hath been
glorious, hath not been glorious -- in this respect, because of the
superior glory;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> for if that which is being made useless
\[is\] through glory, much more that which is remaining \[is\] in glory.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Having, then, such hope, we use much
freedom of speech,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and \[are\] not as Moses, who was putting
a vail upon his own face, for the sons of Israel not stedfastly to look
to the end of that which is being made useless,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> but their minds were hardened, for unto
this day the same vail at the reading of the Old Covenant doth remain
unwithdrawn -- which in Christ is being made useless --

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> but till to-day, when Moses is read, a
vail upon their heart doth lie,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> and whenever they may turn unto the Lord,
the vail is taken away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And the Lord is the Spirit; and where the
Spirit of the Lord \[is\], there \[is\] liberty;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> and we all, with unvailed face, the glory
of the Lord beholding in a mirror, to the same image are being
transformed, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Because of this, having this ministration,
according as we did receive kindness, we do not faint,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> but did renounce for ourselves the hidden
things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor deceitfully using the
word of God, but by the manifestation of the truth recommending
ourselves unto every conscience of men, before God;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and if also our good news is vailed, in
those perishing it is vailed,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> in whom the god of this age did blind the
minds of the unbelieving, that there doth not shine forth to them the
enlightening of the good news of the glory of the Christ, who is the
image of God;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> for not ourselves do we preach, but Christ
Jesus -- Lord, and ourselves your servants because of Jesus;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> because \[it is\] God who said, Out of
darkness light \[is\] to shine, who did shine in our hearts, for the
enlightening of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> on every side being in tribulation, but not
straitened; perplexed, but not in despair;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down,
but not destroyed;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> at all times the dying of the Lord Jesus
bearing about in the body, that the life also of Jesus in our body may
be manifested,

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> for always are we who are living
delivered up to death because of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may
be manifested in our dying flesh,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> so that, the death indeed in us doth
work, and the life in you.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And having the same spirit of the faith,
according to that which hath been written, \`I believed, therefore I did
speak;' we also do believe, therefore also do we speak;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> knowing that He who did raise up the Lord
Jesus, us also through Jesus shall raise up, and shall present with you,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> for the all things \[are\] because of
you, that the grace having been multiplied, because of the thanksgiving
of the more, may abound to the glory of God;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> wherefore, we faint not, but if also our
outward man doth decay, yet the inward is renewed day by day;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> for the momentary light matter of our
tribulation, more and more exceedingly an age-during weight of glory
doth work out for us --

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> we not looking to the things seen, but to
the things not seen; for the things seen \[are\] temporary, but the
things not seen \[are\] age-during.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For we have known that if our earthly house
of the tabernacle may be thrown down, a building from God we have, an
house not made with hands -- age-during -- in the heavens,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> for also in this we groan, with our
dwelling that is from heaven earnestly desiring to clothe ourselves,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> if so be that, having clothed ourselves, we
shall not be found naked,

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> for we also who are in the tabernacle do
groan, being burdened, seeing we wish not to unclothe ourselves, but to
clothe ourselves, that the mortal may be swallowed up of the life.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And He who did work us to this self-same
thing \[is\] God, who also did give to us the earnest of the Spirit;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> having courage, then, at all times, and
knowing that being at home in the body, we are away from home from the
Lord, --

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> for through faith we walk, not through
sight --

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> we have courage, and are well pleased
rather to be away from the home of the body, and to be at home with the
Lord.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Wherefore also we are ambitious, whether at
home or away from home, to be well pleasing to him,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> for all of us it behoveth to be
manifested before the tribunal of the Christ, that each one may receive
the things \[done\] through the body, in reference to the things that he
did, whether good or evil;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> having known, therefore, the fear of the
Lord, we persuade men, and to God we are manifested, and I hope also in
your consciences to have been manifested;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> for not again ourselves do we recommend
to you, but we are giving occasion to you of glorifying in our behalf,
that ye may have \[something\] in reference to those glorifying in face
and not in heart;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> for whether we were beside ourselves,
\[it was\] to God; whether we be of sound mind -- \[it is\] to you,

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> for the love of the Christ doth constrain
us, having judged thus: that if one for all died, then the whole died,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and for all he died, that those living,
no more to themselves may live, but to him who died for them, and was
raised again.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> So that we henceforth have known no one
according to the flesh, and even if we have known Christ according to
the flesh, yet now we know him no more;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> so that if any one \[is\] in Christ --
\[he is\] a new creature; the old things did pass away, lo, become new
have the all things.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And the all things \[are\] of God, who
reconciled us to Himself through Jesus Christ, and did give to us the
ministration of the reconciliation,

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> how that God was in Christ -- a world
reconciling to Himself, not reckoning to them their trespasses; and
having put in us the word of the reconciliation,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> in behalf of Christ, then, we are
ambassadors, as if God were calling through us, we beseech, in behalf of
Christ, \`Be ye reconciled to God;'

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> for him who did not know sin, in our
behalf He did make sin, that we may become the righteousness of God in
him.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And working together also we call upon
\[you\] that ye receive not in vain the grace of God --

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> for He saith, \`In an acceptable time I did
hear thee, and in a day of salvation I did help thee, lo, now \[is\] a
well-accepted time; lo, now, a day of salvation,' --

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> in nothing giving any cause of offence,
that the ministration may be not blamed,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> but in everything recommending ourselves as
God's ministrants; in much patience, in tribulations, in necessities, in
distresses,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> in stripes, in imprisonments, in
insurrections, in labours, in watchings, in fastings,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> in pureness, in knowledge, in
long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love unfeigned,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> in the word of truth, in the power of God,
through the armour of the righteousness, on the right and on the left,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> through glory and dishonour, through evil
report and good report, as leading astray, and true;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> as unknown, and recognized; as dying, and
lo, we live; as chastened, and not put to death;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> as sorrowful, and always rejoicing; as
poor, and making many rich; as having nothing, and possessing all
things.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Our mouth hath been open unto you, O
Corinthians, our heart hath been enlarged!

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> ye are not straitened in us, and ye are
straitened in your \[own\] bowels,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> and \[as\] a recompense of the same kind,
(as to children I say \[it\],) be ye enlarged -- also ye!

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Become not yoked with others --
unbelievers, for what partaking \[is there\] to righteousness and
lawlessness?

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and what fellowship to light with
darkness? and what concord to Christ with Belial? or what part to a
believer with an unbeliever?

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> and what agreement to the sanctuary of
God with idols? for ye are a sanctuary of the living God, according as
God said -- \`I will dwell in them, and will walk among \[them\], and I
will be their God, and they shall be My people,

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> wherefore, come ye forth out of the midst
of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and an unclean thing do not
touch, and I -- I will receive you,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and I will be to you for a Father, and ye
-- ye shall be to Me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.'

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Having, then, these promises, beloved, may
we cleanse ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit,
perfecting sanctification in the fear of God;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> receive us; no one did we wrong; no one did
we waste; no one did we defraud;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> not to condemn you do I say \[it\], for I
have said before that in our hearts ye are to die with and to live with;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> great \[is\] my freedom of speech unto you,
great my glory on your behalf; I have been filled with the comfort, I
overabound with the joy on all our tribulation,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> for also we, having come to Macedonia, no
relaxation hath our flesh had, but on every side we are in tribulation,
without \[are\] fightings, within -- fears;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> but He who is comforting the cast-down --
God -- He did comfort us in the presence of Titus;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and not only in his presence, but also in
the comfort with which he was comforted over you, declaring to us your
longing desire, your lamentation, your zeal for me, so that the more I
did rejoice,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> because even if I made you sorry in the
letter, I do not repent -- if even I did repent -- for I perceive that
the letter, even if for an hour, did make you sorry.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I now do rejoice, not that ye were made
sorry, but that ye were made sorry to reformation, for ye were made
sorry toward God, that in nothing ye might receive damage from us;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> for the sorrow toward God reformation to
salvation not to be repented of doth work, and the sorrow of the world
doth work death,

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> for, lo, this same thing -- your being
made sorry toward God -- how much diligence it doth work in you! but
defence, but displeasure, but fear, but longing desire, but zeal, but
revenge; in every thing ye did approve yourselves to be pure in the
matter.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> If, then, I also wrote to you -- not for
his cause who did wrong, nor for his cause who did suffer wrong, but for
our diligence in your behalf being manifested unto you before God --

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> because of this we have been comforted in
your comfort, and more abundantly the more did we rejoice in the joy of
Titus, that his spirit hath been refreshed from you all;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> because if anything to him in your behalf
I have boasted, I was not put to shame; but as all things in truth we
did speak to you, so also our boasting before Titus became truth,

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> and his tender affection is more
abundantly toward you, remembering the obedience of you all, how with
fear and trembling ye did receive him;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I rejoice, therefore, that in everything
I have courage in you.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And we make known to you, brethren, the
grace of God, that hath been given in the assemblies of Macedonia,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> because in much trial of tribulation the
abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, did abound to the riches
of their liberality;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> because, according to \[their\] power, I
testify, and above \[their\] power, they were willing of themselves,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> with much entreaty calling on us to receive
the favour and the fellowship of the ministration to the saints,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> and not according as we expected, but
themselves they did give first to the Lord, and to us, through the will
of God,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> so that we exhorted Titus, that, according
as he did begin before, so also he may finish to you also this favour,

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> but even as in every thing ye do abound, in
faith, and word, and knowledge, and all diligence, and in your love to
us, that also in this grace ye may abound;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> not according to command do I speak, but
because of the diligence of others, and of your love proving the
genuineness,

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> for ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that because of you he became poor -- being rich, that ye by
that poverty may become rich.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> and an opinion in this do I give: for
this to you \[is\] expedient, who not only to do, but also to will, did
begin before -- a year ago,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and now also finish doing \[it\], that
even as \[there is\] the readiness of the will, so also the finishing,
out of that which ye have,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> for if the willing mind is present,
according to that which any one may have it is well-accepted, not
according to that which he hath not;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> for not that for others release, and ye
pressured, \[do I speak,\]

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> but by equality, at the present time your
abundance -- for their want, that also their abundance may be for your
want, that there may be equality,

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> according as it hath been written, \`He
who \[did gather\] much, had nothing over; and he who \[did gather\]
little, had no lack.'

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And thanks to God, who is putting the
same diligence for you in the heart of Titus,

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> because indeed the exhortation he
accepted, and being more diligent, of his own accord he went forth unto
you,

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> and we sent with him the brother, whose
praise in the good news \[is\] through all the assemblies,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> and not only so, but who was also
appointed by vote by the assemblies, our fellow-traveller, with this
favour that is ministered by us, unto the glory of the same Lord, and
your willing mind;

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> avoiding this, lest any one may blame us
in this abundance that is ministered by us,

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> providing right things, not only before
the Lord, but also before men;

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> and we sent with them our brother, whom
we proved in many things many times being diligent, and now much more
diligent, by the great confidence that is toward you,

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> whether -- about Titus -- my partner and
towards you fellow-worker, whether -- our brethren, apostles of
assemblies -- glory of Christ;

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> the shewing therefore of your love, and
of our boasting on your behalf, to them shew ye, even in the face of the
assemblies.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> For, indeed, concerning the ministration
that \[is\] for the saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> for I have known your readiness of mind,
which in your behalf I boast of to Macedonians, that Achaia hath been
prepared a year ago, and the zeal of you did stir up the more part,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and I sent the brethren, that our boasting
on your behalf may not be made vain in this respect; that, according as
I said, ye may be ready,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> lest if Macedonians may come with me, and
find you unprepared, we -- we may be put to shame (that we say not --
ye) in this same confidence of boasting.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Necessary, therefore, I thought \[it\] to
exhort the brethren, that they may go before to you, and may make up
before your formerly announced blessing, that this be ready, as a
blessing, and not as covetousness.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And this: He who is sowing sparingly,
sparingly also shall reap; and he who is sowing in blessings, in
blessings also shall reap;

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> each one, according as he doth purpose in
heart, not out of sorrow or out of necessity, for a cheerful giver doth
God love,

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> and God \[is\] able all grace to cause to
abound to you, that in every thing always all sufficiency having, ye may
abound to every good work,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> (according as it hath been written, \`He
dispersed abroad, he gave to the poor, his righteousness doth remain to
the age,')

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> and may He who is supplying seed to the
sower, and bread for food, supply and multiply your seed sown, and
increase the fruits of your righteousness,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> in every thing being enriched to all
liberality, which doth work through us thanksgiving to God,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> because the ministration of this service
not only is supplying the wants of the saints, but is also abounding
through many thanksgivings to God,

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> through the proof of this ministration
glorifying God for the subjection of your confession to the good news of
the Christ, and \[for\] the liberality of the fellowship to them and to
all,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> and by their supplication in your behalf,
longing after you because of the exceeding grace of God upon you;

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> thanks also to God for His unspeakable
gift!

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And I, Paul, myself, do call upon you --
through the meekness and gentleness of the Christ -- who in presence,
indeed \[am\] humble among you, and being absent, have courage toward
you,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> and I beseech \[you\], that, being
present, I may not have courage, with the confidence with which I reckon
to be bold against certain reckoning us as walking according to the
flesh;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> for walking in the flesh, not according
to the flesh do we war,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> for the weapons of our warfare \[are\]
not fleshly, but powerful to God for bringing down of strongholds,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> reasonings bringing down, and every high
thing lifted up against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of the Christ,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and being in readiness to avenge every
disobedience, whenever your obedience may be fulfilled.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> The things in presence do ye see? if any
one hath trusted in himself to be Christ's, this let him reckon again
from himself, that according as he is Christ's, so also we \[are\]
Christ's;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> for even if also anything more abundantly
I shall boast concerning our authority, that the Lord gave us for
building up, and not for casting you down, I shall not be ashamed;

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> that I may not seem as if I would terrify
you through the letters,

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> \`because the letters indeed -- saith
one -- \[are\] weighty and strong, and the bodily presence weak, and the
speech despicable.'

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> This one -- let him reckon thus: that
such as we are in word, through letters, being absent, such also, being
present, \[we are\] in deed.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For we do not make bold to rank or to
compare ourselves with certain of those commending themselves, but they,
among themselves measuring themselves, and comparing themselves with
themselves, are not wise,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> and we in regard to the unmeasured
things will not boast ourselves, but after the measure of the line that
the God of measure did appoint to us -- to reach even unto you;

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> for not as not reaching to you do we
stretch ourselves overmuch, for even unto you did we come in the good
news of the Christ,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> not boasting of the things not
measured, in other men's labours, and having hope -- your faith
increasing -- in you to be enlarged, according to our line -- into
abundance,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> in the \[places\] beyond you to
proclaim good news, not in another's line in regard to the things made
ready, to boast;

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> and he who is boasting -- in the Lord
let him boast;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> for not he who is commending himself is
approved, but he whom the Lord doth commend.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> O that ye were bearing with me a little
of the folly, but ye also do bear with me:

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> for I am zealous for you with zeal of
God, for I did betroth you to one husband, a pure virgin, to present to
Christ,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and I fear, lest, as the serpent did
beguile Eve in his subtilty, so your minds may be corrupted from the
simplicity that \[is\] in the Christ;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> for if, indeed, he who is coming doth
preach another Jesus whom we did not preach, or another Spirit ye
receive which ye did not receive, or other good news which ye did not
accept -- well were ye bearing \[it\],

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> for I reckon that I have been nothing
behind the very chiefest apostles,

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and even if unlearned in word -- yet not
in knowledge, but in every thing we were made manifest in all things to
you.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> The sin did I do -- myself humbling that
ye might be exalted, because freely the good news of God I did proclaim
to you?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> other assemblies I did rob, having taken
wages, for your ministration;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> and being present with you, and having
been in want, I was chargeable to no one, for my lack did the brethren
supply -- having come from Macedonia -- and in everything burdenless to
you I did keep myself, and will keep.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> The truth of Christ is in me, because
this boasting shall not be stopped in regard to me in the regions of
Achaia;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> wherefore? because I do not love you?
God hath known!

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and what I do, I also will do, that I
may cut off the occasion of those wishing an occasion, that in that
which they boast they may be found according as we also;

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> for those such \[are\] false apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> and no wonder -- for even the Adversary
doth transform himself into a messenger of light;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> no great thing, then, if also his
ministrants do transform themselves as ministrants of righteousness --
whose end shall be according to their works.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Again I say, may no one think me to be
a fool; and if otherwise, even as a fool receive me, that I also a
little may boast.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> That which I speak, I speak not
according to the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this the confidence of
boasting;

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> since many boast according to the
flesh, I also will boast:

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> for gladly do ye bear with the fools --
being wise,

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> for ye bear, if any one is bringing you
under bondage, if any one doth devour, if any one doth take away, if any
one doth exalt himself, if any one on the face doth smite you;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> in reference to dishonour I speak, how
that we were weak, and in whatever any one is bold -- in foolishness I
say \[it\] -- I also am bold.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Hebrews are they? I also! Israelites
are they? I also! seed of Abraham are they? I also!

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> ministrants of Christ are they? -- as
beside myself I speak -- I more; in labours more abundantly, in stripes
above measure, in prisons more frequently, in deaths many times;

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> from Jews five times forty \[stripes\]
save one I did receive;

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> thrice was I beaten with rods, once was
I stoned, thrice was I shipwrecked, a night and a day in the deep I have
passed;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> journeyings many times, perils of
rivers, perils of robbers, perils from kindred, perils from nations,
perils in city, perils in wilderness, perils in sea, perils among false
brethren;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> in laboriousness and painfulness, in
watchings many times, in hunger and thirst, in fastings many times, in
cold and nakedness;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> apart from the things without -- the
crowding upon me that is daily -- the care of all the assemblies.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Who is infirm, and I am not infirm? who
is stumbled, and I am not fired;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> if to boast it behoveth \[me\], of the
things of my infirmity I will boast;

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ -- who is blessed to the ages -- hath known that I do not lie! --

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> In Damascus the ethnarch of Aretas the
king was watching the city of the Damascenes, wishing to seize me,

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> and through a window in a rope basket I
was let down, through the wall, and fled out of his hands.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> To boast, really, is not profitable for
me, for I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> I have known a man in Christ, fourteen
years ago -- whether in the body I have not known, whether out of the
body I have not known, God hath known -- such an one being caught away
unto the third heaven;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and I have known such a man -- whether in
the body, whether out of the body, I have not known, God hath known, --

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> that he was caught away to the paradise,
and heard unutterable sayings, that it is not possible for man to speak.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Of such an one I will boast, and of
myself I will not boast, except in my infirmities,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> for if I may wish to boast, I shall not
be a fool, for truth I will say; but I forebear, lest any one in regard
to me may think anything above what he doth see me, or doth hear
anything of me;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and that by the exceeding greatness of
the revelations I might not be exalted overmuch, there was given to me a
thorn in the flesh, a messenger of the Adversary, that he might buffet
me, that I might not be exalted overmuch.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Concerning this thing thrice the Lord did
I call upon, that it might depart from me,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> and He said to me, \`Sufficient for thee
is My grace, for My power in infirmity is perfected;' most gladly,
therefore, will I rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of the
Christ may rest on me:

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> wherefore I am well pleased in
infirmities, in damages, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses
-- for Christ; for whenever I am infirm, then I am powerful;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> I have become a fool -- boasting; ye --
ye did compel me; for I ought by you to have been commended, for in
nothing was I behind the very chiefest apostles -- even if I am nothing.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The signs, indeed, of the apostle were
wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty
deeds,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> for what is there in which ye were
inferior to the rest of the assemblies, except that I myself was not a
burden to you? forgive me this injustice!

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Lo, a third time I am ready to come
unto you, and I will not be a burden to you, for I seek not yours, but
you, for the children ought not for the parents to lay up, but the
parents for the children,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> and I most gladly will spend and be
entirely spent for your souls, even if, more abundantly loving you, less
I am loved.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And be it \[so\], I -- I did not burden
you, but being crafty, with guile I did take you;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> any one of those whom I have sent unto
you -- by him did I take advantage of you?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> I entreated Titus, and did send with
\[him\] the brother; did Titus take advantage of you? in the same spirit
did we not walk? -- did we not in the same steps?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Again, think ye that to you we are
making defence? before God in Christ do we speak; and the all things,
beloved, \[are\] for your up-building,

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> for I fear lest, having come, not such
as I wish I may find you, and I -- I may be found by you such as ye do
not wish, lest there be strifes, envyings, wraths, revelries,
evil-speakings, whisperings, puffings up, insurrections,

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> lest again having come, my God may
humble me in regard to you, and I may bewail many of those having sinned
before, and not having reformed concerning the uncleanness, and
whoredom, and lasciviousness, that they did practise.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> This third time do I come unto you; on
the mouth of two witnesses or three shall every saying be established;

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> I have said before, and I say \[it\]
before, as being present, the second time, and being absent, now, do I
write to those having sinned before, and to all the rest, that if I come
again, I will not spare,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> since a proof ye seek of the Christ
speaking in me, who to you is not infirm, but is powerful in you,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> for even if he was crucified from
infirmity, yet he doth live from the power of God; for we also are weak
in him, but we shall live with him from the power of God toward you.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Your ownselves try ye, if ye are in the
faith; your ownselves prove ye; do ye not know your ownselves, that
Jesus Christ is in you, if ye be not in some respect disapproved of?

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> and I hope that ye shall know that we --
we are not disapproved of;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> and I pray before God that ye do no evil,
not that we may appear approved, but that ye may do that which is right,
and we may be as disapproved;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> for we are not able to do anything
against the truth, but for the truth;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> for we rejoice when we may be infirm, and
ye may be powerful; and this also we pray for -- your perfection!

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> because of this, these things -- being
absent -- I write, that being present, I may not treat \[any\] sharply,
according to the authority that the Lord did give me for building up,
and not for casting down.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Henceforth, brethren, rejoice; be made
perfect, be comforted, be of the same mind, be at peace, and the God of
the love and peace shall be with you;

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> salute one another in an holy kiss;

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> salute you do all the saints;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, \[is\] with you
all! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians](gal)
