[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gal)  [Next](phi) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Ephesians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through
the will of God, to the saints who are in Ephesus, and to the faithful
in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you, and peace from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed \[is\] the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who did bless us in every spiritual blessing in the
heavenly places in Christ,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> according as He did choose us in him before
the foundation of the world, for our being holy and unblemished before
Him, in love,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> having foreordained us to the adoption of
sons through Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good pleasure of
His will,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> to the praise of the glory of His grace, in
which He did make us accepted in the beloved,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> in whom we have the redemption through his
blood, the remission of the trespasses, according to the riches of His
grace,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> in which He did abound toward us in all
wisdom and prudence,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> having made known to us the secret of His
will, according to His good pleasure, that He purposed in Himself,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> in regard to the dispensation of the
fulness of the times, to bring into one the whole in the Christ, both
the things in the heavens, and the things upon the earth -- in him;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> in whom also we did obtain an
inheritance, being foreordained according to the purpose of Him who the
all things is working according to the counsel of His will,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> for our being to the praise of His glory,
\[even\] those who did first hope in the Christ,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> in whom ye also, having heard the word of
the truth -- the good news of your salvation -- in whom also having
believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of the promise,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> which is an earnest of our inheritance,
to the redemption of the acquired possession, to the praise of His
glory.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Because of this I also, having heard of
your faith in the Lord Jesus, and the love to all the saints,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> do not cease giving thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of the glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the recognition of him,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> the eyes of your understanding being
enlightened, for your knowing what is the hope of His calling, and what
the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and what the exceeding greatness of His
power to us who are believing, according to the working of the power of
His might,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> which He wrought in the Christ, having
raised him out of the dead, and did set \[him\] at His right hand in the
heavenly \[places\],

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> far above all principality, and
authority, and might, and lordship, and every name named, not only in
this age, but also in the coming one;

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> and all things He did put under his feet,
and did give him -- head over all things to the assembly,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> which is his body, the fulness of Him who
is filling the all in all,

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Also you -- being dead in the trespasses
and the sins,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> in which once ye did walk according to the
age of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air,
of the spirit that is now working in the sons of disobedience,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> among whom also we all did walk once in the
desires of our flesh, doing the wishes of the flesh and of the thoughts,
and were by nature children of wrath -- as also the others,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and God, being rich in kindness, because of
His great love with which He loved us,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> even being dead in the trespasses, did make
us to live together with the Christ, (by grace ye are having been
saved,)

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and did raise \[us\] up together, and did
seat \[us\] together in the heavenly \[places\] in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> that He might show, in the ages that are
coming, the exceeding riches of His grace in kindness toward us in
Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> for by grace ye are having been saved,
through faith, and this not of you -- of God the gift,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> not of works, that no one may boast;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> for of Him we are workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus to good works, which God did before prepare, that in them
we may walk.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Wherefore, remember, that ye \[were\]
once the nations in the flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that
called Circumcision in the flesh made by hands,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> that ye were at that time apart from
Christ, having been alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers to the covenants of the promise, having no hope, and without
God, in the world;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> and now, in Christ Jesus, ye being once
afar off became nigh in the blood of the Christ,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> for he is our peace, who did make both
one, and the middle wall of the enclosure did break down,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> the enmity in his flesh, the law of the
commands in ordinances having done away, that the two he might create in
himself into one new man, making peace,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and might reconcile both in one body to
God through the cross, having slain the enmity in it,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> and having come, he did proclaim good
news -- peace to you -- the far-off and the nigh,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> because through him we have the access --
we both -- in one Spirit unto the Father.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Then, therefore, ye are no more strangers
and foreigners, but fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household
of God,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> being built upon the foundation of the
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being chief
corner-\[stone\],

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> in whom all the building fitly framed
together doth increase to an holy sanctuary in the Lord,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> in whom also ye are builded together, for
a habitation of God in the Spirit.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For this cause, I Paul, the prisoner of
Christ Jesus for you the nations,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> if, indeed, ye did hear of the dispensation
of the grace of God that was given to me in regard to you,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> that by revelation He made known to me the
secret, according as I wrote before in few \[words\] --

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> in regard to which ye are able, reading
\[it\], to understand my knowledge in the secret of the Christ,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> which in other generations was not made
known to the sons of men, as it was now revealed to His holy apostles
and prophets in the Spirit --

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> that the nations be fellow-heirs, and of
the same body, and partakers of His promise in the Christ, through the
good news,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> of which I became a ministrant, according
to the gift of the grace of God that was given to me, according to the
working of His power;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> to me -- the less than the least of all the
saints -- was given this grace, among the nations to proclaim good news
-- the untraceable riches of the Christ,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and to cause all to see what \[is\] the
fellowship of the secret that hath been hid from the ages in God, who
the all things did create by Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> that there might be made known now to the
principalities and the authorities in the heavenly \[places\], through
the assembly, the manifold wisdom of God,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> according to a purpose of the ages, which
He made in Christ Jesus our Lord,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> in whom we have the freedom and the
access in confidence through the faith of him,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> wherefore, I ask \[you\] not to faint in
my tribulations for you, which is your glory.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For this cause I bow my knees unto the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> of whom the whole family in the heavens
and on earth is named,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> that He may give to you, according to the
riches of His glory, with might to be strengthened through His Spirit,
in regard to the inner man,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> that the Christ may dwell through the
faith in your hearts, in love having been rooted and founded,

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> that ye may be in strength to comprehend,
with all the saints, what \[is\] the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> to know also the love of the Christ that
is exceeding the knowledge, that ye may be filled -- to all the fulness
of God;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and to Him who is able above all things
to do exceeding abundantly what we ask or think, according to the power
that is working in us,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> to Him \[is\] the glory in the assembly
in Christ Jesus, to all the generations of the age of the ages. Amen.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Call upon you, then, do I -- the prisoner
of the Lord -- to walk worthily of the calling with which ye were
called,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> with all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> being diligent to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of the peace;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> one body and one Spirit, according as also
ye were called in one hope of your calling;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> one Lord, one faith, one baptism,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> one God and Father of all, who \[is\] over
all, and through all, and in you all,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> and to each one of you was given the grace,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ,

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> wherefore, he saith, \`Having gone up on
high he led captive captivity, and gave gifts to men,' --

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> and that, he went up, what is it except
that he also went down first to the lower parts of the earth?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> he who went down is the same also who
went up far above all the heavens, that He may fill all things --

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and He gave some \[as\] apostles, and
some \[as\] prophets, and some \[as\] proclaimers of good news, and some
\[as\] shepherds and teachers,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> unto the perfecting of the saints, for a
work of ministration, for a building up of the body of the Christ,

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> till we may all come to the unity of the
faith and of the recognition of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to a
measure of stature of the fulness of the Christ,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> that we may no more be babes, tossed and
borne about by every wind of the teaching, in the sleight of men, in
craftiness, unto the artifice of leading astray,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> and, being true in love, we may increase
to Him \[in\] all things, who is the head -- the Christ;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> from whom the whole body, being fitly
joined together and united, through the supply of every joint, according
to the working in the measure of each single part, the increase of the
body doth make for the building up of itself in love.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> This, then, I say, and I testify in the
Lord; ye are no more to walk, as also the other nations walk, in the
vanity of their mind,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> being darkened in the understanding,
being alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is
in them, because of the hardness of their heart,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> who, having ceased to feel, themselves
did give up to the lasciviousness, for the working of all uncleanness in
greediness;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and ye did not so learn the Christ,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> if so be ye did hear him, and in him were
taught, as truth is in Jesus;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> ye are to put off concerning the former
behaviour the old man, that is corrupt according to the desires of the
deceit,

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> and to be renewed in the spirit of your
mind,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> and to put on the new man, which,
according to God, was created in righteousness and kindness of the
truth.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Wherefore, putting away the lying, speak
truth each with his neighbour, because we are members one of another;

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> be angry and do not sin; let not the sun
go down upon your wrath,

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> neither give place to the devil;

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> whoso is stealing let him no more steal,
but rather let him labour, working the thing that is good with the
hands, that he may have to impart to him having need.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Let no corrupt word out of your mouth go
forth, but what is good unto the needful building up, that it may give
grace to the hearers;

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> and make not sorrowful the Holy Spirit of
God, in which ye were sealed to a day of redemption.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamour, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice,

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and become one to another kind,
tender-hearted, forgiving one another, according as also God in Christ
did forgive you.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Become, then, followers of God, as children
beloved,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and walk in love, as also the Christ did
love us, and did give himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God
for an odour of a sweet smell,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> and whoredom, and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not even be named among you, as becometh saints;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> also filthiness, and foolish talking, or
jesting, -- the things not fit -- but rather thanksgiving;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> for this ye know, that every whoremonger,
or unclean, or covetous person, who is an idolater, hath no inheritance
in the reign of the Christ and God.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Let no one deceive you with vain words, for
because of these things cometh the anger of God upon the sons of the
disobedience,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> become not, then, partakers with them,

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> for ye were once darkness, and now light in
the Lord; as children of light walk ye,

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> for the fruit of the Spirit \[is\] in all
goodness, and righteousness, and truth,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> proving what is well-pleasing to the
Lord,

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> and have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of the darkness and rather even convict,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> for the things in secret done by them it
is a shame even to speak of,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and all the things reproved by the light
are manifested, for everything that is manifested is light;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> wherefore he saith, \`Arouse thyself,
thou who art sleeping, and arise out of the dead, and the Christ shall
shine upon thee.'

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> See, then, how exactly ye walk, not as
unwise, but as wise,

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> redeeming the time, because the days are
evil;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> because of this become not fools, but --
understanding what \[is\] the will of the Lord,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> and be not drunk with wine, in which is
dissoluteness, but be filled in the Spirit,

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> speaking to yourselves in psalms and
hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to
the Lord,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> giving thanks always for all things, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the God and Father;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> subjecting yourselves to one another in
the fear of God.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> The wives! to your own husbands subject
yourselves, as to the Lord,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> because the husband is head of the wife,
as also the Christ \[is\] head of the assembly, and he is saviour of the
body,

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> but even as the assembly is subject to
Christ, so also \[are\] the wives to their own husbands in everything.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> The husbands! love your own wives, as
also the Christ did love the assembly, and did give himself for it,

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> that he might sanctify it, having
cleansed \[it\] with the bathing of the water in the saying,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> that he might present it to himself the
assembly in glory, not having spot or wrinkle, or any of such things,
but that it may be holy and unblemished;

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> so ought the husbands to love their own
wives as their own bodies: he who is loving his own wife -- himself he
doth love;

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> for no one ever his own flesh did hate,
but doth nourish and cherish it, as also the Lord -- the assembly,

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> because members we are of his body, of
his flesh, and of his bones;

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> \`for this cause shall a man leave his
father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they shall be --
the two -- for one flesh;'

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> this secret is great, and I speak in
regard to Christ and to the assembly;

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> but ye also, every one in particular --
let each his own wife so love as himself, and the wife -- that she may
reverence the husband.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> The children! obey your parents in the
Lord, for this is righteous;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> honour thy father and mother,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> which is the first command with a promise,
\`That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live a long time upon
the land.'

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And the fathers! provoke not your children,
but nourish them in the instruction and admonition of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> The servants! obey the masters according to
the flesh with fear and trembling, in the simplicity of your heart, as
to the Christ;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but
as servants of the Christ, doing the will of God out of soul,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> with good-will serving, as to the Lord, and
not to men,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> having known that whatever good thing each
one may do, this he shall receive from the Lord, whether servant or
freeman.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And the masters! the same things do ye unto
them, letting threatening alone, having known that also your Master is
in the heavens, and acceptance of persons is not with him.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> As to the rest, my brethren, be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> put on the whole armour of God, for your
being able to stand against the wiles of the devil,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> because we have not the wrestling with
blood and flesh, but with the principalities, with the authorities, with
the world-rulers of the darkness of this age, with the spiritual things
of the evil in the heavenly places;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> because of this take ye up the whole
armour of God, that ye may be able to resist in the day of the evil, and
all things having done -- to stand.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Stand, therefore, having your loins girt
about in truth, and having put on the breastplate of the righteousness,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and having the feet shod in the
preparation of the good-news of the peace;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> above all, having taken up the shield of
the faith, in which ye shall be able all the fiery darts of the evil one
to quench,

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and the helmet of the salvation receive,
and the sword of the Spirit, which is the saying of God,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> through all prayer and supplication
praying at all times in the Spirit, and in regard to this same, watching
in all perseverance and supplication for all the saints --

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> and in behalf of me, that to me may be
given a word in the opening of my mouth, in freedom, to make known the
secret of the good news,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for which I am an ambassador in a chain,
that in it I may speak freely -- as it behoveth me to speak.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And that ye may know -- ye also -- the
things concerning me -- what I do, all things make known to you shall
Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful ministrant in the Lord,

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> whom I did send unto you for this very
thing, that ye might know the things concerning us, and that he might
comfort your hearts.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Peace to the brethren, and love, with
faith, from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> The grace with all those loving our Lord
Jesus Christ -- undecayingly! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians](phi)
