[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dan)  [Next](joe) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Hosea

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> A word of Jehovah that hath been unto
Hosea, son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah,
kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Joash, king of
Israel:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The commencement of Jehovah's speaking by
Hosea. And Jehovah saith unto Hosea, \`Go, take to thee a woman of
whoredoms, and children of whoredoms, for utterly go a-whoring doth the
land from after Jehovah.'

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And he goeth and taketh Gomer daughter of
Diblaim, and she conceiveth and beareth to him a son;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and Jehovah saith unto him, \`Call his name
Jezreel, for yet a little, and I have charged the blood of Jezreel on
the house of Jehu, and have caused to cease the kingdom of the house of
Israel;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and it hath come to pass in that day that I
have broken the bow of Israel, in the valley of Jezreel.'

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And she conceiveth again, and beareth a
daughter, and He saith to him, \`Call her name Lo-Ruhamah, for I add no
more to pity the house of Israel, for I do utterly take them away;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and the house of Judah I pity, and have
saved them by Jehovah their God, and do not save them by bow, and by
sword, and by battle, by horses, and by horsemen.'

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And she weaneth Lo-Ruhamah, and conceiveth,
and beareth a son;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> and He saith, \`Call his name Lo-Ammi, for
ye \[are\] not My people, and I am not for you;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and the number of the sons of Israel hath
been as the sand of the sea, that is not measured nor numbered, and it
hath come to pass in the place where it is said to them, Ye \[are\] not
My people, it is said to them, Sons of the Living God;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> and gathered have been the sons of Judah
and the sons of Israel together, and they have appointed to themselves
one head, and have gone up from the land, for great \[is\] the day of
Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> \`Say ye to your brethren -- Ammi, And to
your sisters -- Ruhamah.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Plead ye with your mother -- plead, (For
she \[is\] not My wife, and I \[am\] not her husband,) And she turneth
her whoredoms from before her, And her adulteries from between her
breasts,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Lest I strip her naked. And have set her up
as \[in\] the day of her birth, And have made her as a wilderness, And
have set her as a dry land, And have put her to death with thirst.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And her sons I do not pity, For sons of
whoredoms \[are\] they,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For gone a-whoring hath their mother, Acted
shamefully hath their conceiver, For she hath said, I go after my
lovers, Those giving my bread and my water, My wool and my flax, my oil
and my drink.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Therefore, lo, I am hedging up thy way with
thorns, And I have made for her a wall, And her paths she doth not find.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And she hath pursued her lovers, And she
doth not overtake them, And hath sought them, and doth not find, And she
hath said: I go, and I turn back unto My first husband, For -- better to
me then than now.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And she knew not that I had given to her,
The corn, and the new wine, and the oil. Yea, silver I did multiply to
her, And the gold they prepared for Baal.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore do I turn back, And I have taken
My corn in its season, And My new wine in its appointed time, And I have
taken away My wool and My flax, covering her nakedness.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And now do I reveal her dishonour before
the eyes of her lovers, And none doth deliver her out of My hand.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And I have caused to cease all her joy,
Her festival, her new moon, and her sabbath, Even all her appointed
times,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And made desolate her vine and her
fig-tree, Of which she said, A gift they \[are\] to me, That my lovers
have given to me, And I have made them for a forest, And consumed them
hath a beast of the field.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And I have charged on her the days of the
Baalim, To whom she maketh perfume, And putteth on her ring and her
ornament, And goeth after her lovers, And Me forgat -- an affirmation of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Therefore, lo, I am enticing her, And
have caused her to go to the wilderness, And I have spoken unto her
heart,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And given to her her vineyards from
thence, And the valley of Achor for an opening of hope, And she hath
responded there as in the days of her youth, And as in the day of her
coming up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day, An
affirmation of Jehovah, Thou dost call Me -- My husband, And dost not
call Me any more -- My lord.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And I have turned aside the names of the
lords from her mouth, And they are not remembered any more by their
name.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And I have made to them a covenant in
that day, with the beast of the field, And with the fowl of the heavens,
And the creeping thing of the ground, And bow, and sword, and war I
break from off the land, And have caused them to lie down confidently.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I have betrothed thee to Me to the
age, And betrothed thee to Me in righteousness, And in judgment, and
kindness, and mercies,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And betrothed thee to Me in faithfulness,
And thou hast known Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it hath come to pass in that day, I
answer -- an affirmation of Jehovah, I answer the heavens, and they
answer the earth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And the earth doth answer the corn, And
the new wine, and the oil, And they answer Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And I have sowed her to Me in the land,
And I have pitied Lo-Ruhamah, And I have said to Lo-Ammi, My people thou
\[art\], and it saith, My God!'

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto me: \`Again, go,
love a woman, loved of a friend, and an adulteress, like the loved of
Jehovah, the sons of Israel, and they are turning unto other gods, and
are lovers of grape-cakes.'

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And I buy her to me for fifteen
silverlings, and a homer and a letech of barley;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and I say unto her, \`Many days thou dost
remain for Me, thou dost not go a-whoring, nor become any one's; and I
also \[am\] for thee.'

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For many days remain do the sons of Israel
without a king, and there is no prince, and there is no sacrifice, and
there is no standing pillar, and there is no ephod and teraphim.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Afterwards turned back have the sons of
Israel, and sought Jehovah their God, and David their king, and have
hastened unto Jehovah, and unto His goodness, in the latter end of the
days.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> \`Hear a word of Jehovah, sons of Israel,
For a strife \[is\] to Jehovah with inhabitants of the land, For there
is no truth, nor kindness, Nor knowledge of God, in the land,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Swearing, and lying, and murdering, And
stealing, and committing adultery -- have increased, And blood against
blood hath touched.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Therefore mourn doth the land, And weak is
every dweller in it, With the beast of the field, And with the fowl of
the heavens, And the fishes of the sea -- they are removed.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Only, let no one strive, nor reprove a man,
And thy people \[are\] as those striving with a priest.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And thou hast stumbled in the day, And
stumbled hath also a prophet with thee in the night, And I have cut off
thy mother.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Cut off have been My people for lack of
knowledge, Because thou knowledge hast rejected, I reject thee from
being priest to Me, And thou forgettest the law of thy God, I forget thy
sons, I also!

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> According to their abundance so they sinned
against Me, Their honour into shame I change.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> The sin of My people they do eat, And unto
their iniquity lift up their soul.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And it hath been, like people, like priest,
And I have charged on it its ways, And its habitual doings I return to
it.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And they have eaten, and are not
satisfied, They have gone a-whoring, and increase not, For they have
left off taking heed to Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Whoredom, and wine, and new wine, take
the heart,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> My people at its staff asketh and its rod
declareth to it, For a spirit of whoredoms hath caused to err, And they
go a-whoring from under their God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> On tops of the mountains they do
sacrifice, And on the hills they make perfume, Under oak, and poplar,
and terebinth, For good \[is\] its shade.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Therefore commit whoredom do your
daughters, And your spouses commit adultery, I do not see after your
daughters when they commit whoredom, And after your spouses when they
commit adultery, For they with the harlots are separated, And with the
whores they do sacrifice, A people that doth not understand kicketh.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Though a harlot thou \[art\], O Israel,
Let not Judah become guilty, And come not ye in to Gilgal, nor go up to
Beth-Aven, Nor swear ye, Jehovah liveth.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For as a refractory heifer hath Israel
turned aside, Now doth Jehovah feed them as a lamb in a large place.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Joined to idols \[is\] Ephraim, let him
alone.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Sour \[is\] their drink, They have gone
diligently a-whoring, Her protectors have loved shame thoroughly.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Distressed her hath wind with its wings,
And they are ashamed of their sacrifices!

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> \`Hear this, O priests, and attend, O house
of Israel, And, O house of the king, give ear, For the judgment \[is\]
for you, For, a snare ye have been on Mizpah, And a net spread out on
Tabor.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And to slaughter sinners have gone deep,
And I \[am\] a fetter to them all.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have known Ephraim, And Israel hath not
been hid from me, For now thou hast gone a-whoring, Ephraim, Defiled is
Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> They give not up their habitual doings, To
turn back unto their God, For a spirit of whoredoms \[is\] in their
midst, And Jehovah they have not known.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And humbled hath been the excellency of
Israel to his face, And Israel and Ephraim stumble by their iniquity,
Stumbled also hath Judah with them.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> With their flock and with their herd, They
go to seek Jehovah, and do not find, He hath withdrawn from them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Against Jehovah they dealt treacherously,
For strange sons they have begotten, Now consume them doth a month
\[with\] their portions.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Blow ye a cornet in Gibeah, a trumpet in
Ramah, Shout, O Beth-Aven, after thee, O Benjamin.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Ephraim is for a desolation in a day of
reproof, Among the tribes of Israel I have made known a sure thing.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Princes of Judah have been as those
removing a border, On them I do pour out as water My wrath.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Oppressed is Ephraim, broken in judgment,
When he pleased he went after the command.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And I \[am\] as a moth to Ephraim, And as
a rotten thing to the house of Judah.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And see doth Ephraim his sickness, and
Judah his wound, And Ephraim goeth unto Asshur, And sendeth unto a
warlike king, And he is not able to give healing to you, Nor doth he
remove from you a scar.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For I \[am\] as a lion to Ephraim, And as
a young lion to the house of Judah, I -- I tear and go, I bear away, and
there is no deliverer.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> I go -- I turn back unto My place, Till
that they are desolate, and have sought My face. In their distress they
do seek Me speedily!'

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> \`Come, and we turn back unto Jehovah, For
He hath torn, and He doth heal us, He doth smite, and He bindeth us up.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> He doth revive us after two days, In the
third day He doth raise us up, And we live before Him.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And we know -- we pursue to know Jehovah,
As the dawn prepared is His going forth, And He cometh in as a shower to
us, As gathered rain -- sprinkling earth.'

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> What do I do to thee, O Ephraim? What do I
do to thee, O Judah? Your goodness \[is\] as a cloud of the morning, And
as dew rising early -- going.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Therefore I have hewed by prophets, I have
slain them by sayings of My mouth, And My judgments to the light goeth
forth.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For kindness I desired, and not sacrifice,
And a knowledge of God above burnt-offerings.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And they, as Adam, transgressed a covenant,
There they dealt treacherously against me.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Gilead \[is\] a city of workers of
iniquity, Slippery from blood.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And as bands do wait for a man, A company
of priests do murder -- the way to Shechem, For wickedness they have
done.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> In the house of Israel I have seen a
horrible thing, There \[is\] the whoredom of Ephraim -- defiled is
Israel.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Also, O Judah, appointed is a harvest to
thee, In My turning back \[to\] the captivity of My people!

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> \`When I give healing to Israel, Then
revealed is the iniquity of Ephraim, And the wickedness of Samaria, For
they have wrought falsehood, And a thief doth come in, Stript off hath a
troop in the street,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And they do not say to their heart,
\[That\] all their evil I have remembered, Now compassed them have their
doings, Over-against My face they have been.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> With their wickedness they make glad a
king, And with their lies -- princes.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> All of them \[are\] adulterers, Like a
burning oven of a baker, He ceaseth from stirring up after kneading the
dough, till its leavening.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> A day of our king! Princes have polluted
themselves \[with\] the poison of wine, He hath drawn out his hand with
scorners.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For they have drawn near, As an oven \[is\]
their heart, In their lying in wait all the night sleep doth their
baker, Morning! he is burning as a flaming fire.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> All of them are warm as an oven, And they
have devoured their judges, All their kings have fallen, There is none
calling unto Me among them.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ephraim! among peoples he mixeth himself,
Ephraim hath been a cake unturned.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Devoured have strangers his power, And he
hath not known, Also old age hath sprinkled \[itself\] on him, And he
hath not known.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And humbled hath been the excellency of
Israel to his face, And they have not turned back unto Jehovah their
God, Nor have they sought Him for all this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And Ephraim is as a simple dove without
heart, Egypt they called on -- \[to\] Asshur they have gone.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> When they go I spread over them My net,
As the fowl of the heavens I bring them down, I chastise them as their
company hath heard.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Wo to them, for they wandered from Me,
Destruction to them, for they transgressed against Me, And I -- I ransom
them, and they have spoken lies against Me,

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And have not cried unto Me with their
heart, but howl on their beds, For corn and new wine they assemble
themselves, They turn aside against Me.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And I instructed -- I strengthened their
arms, And concerning Me they think evil!

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> They turn back -- not to the Most High,
They have been as a deceitful bow, Fall by sword do their princes, From
the insolence of their tongue, This \[is\] their derision in the land of
Egypt!

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> \`Unto thy mouth -- a trumpet, As an eagle
against the house of Jehovah, Because they transgressed My covenant, And
against My law they have rebelled.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> To Me they cry, \`My God, we -- Israel --
have known Thee.'

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Cast off good hath Israel, an enemy
pursueth him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They have made kings, and not by Me, They
have made princes, and I have not known, Their silver and their gold
they have made to them idols, So that they are cut off.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Cast off hath thy calf, O Samaria, Burned
hath Mine anger against them, Till when are they not capable of purity?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For even it \[is\] of Israel; an artificer
made it, And it \[is\] not God, For the calf of Samaria is fragments!

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For wind they sow, and a hurricane they
reap, Stalk it hath none -- a shoot not yielding grain, If so be it
yield -- strangers do swallow it up.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Israel hath been swallowed up, Now they
have been among nations, As a vessel in which is no delight.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For they -- they have gone up \[to\]
Asshur, A wild ass alone by himself \[is\] Ephraim, They have hired
lovers!

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Also though they hire among nations, Now
I gather them, and they are pained a little, From the burden of a king
of princes.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because Ephraim did multiply altars to
sin, They have been to him altars to sin.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I write for him numerous things of My
law, As a strange thing they have been reckoned.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The sacrifices of Mine offerings! They
sacrifice flesh, and they eat, Jehovah hath not accepted them, Now doth
He remember their iniquity, And inspect their sin, They -- \[to\] Egypt
they turn back.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And forget doth Israel his Maker, and
buildeth temples, And Judah hath multiplied cities of defence, And I
have sent a fire into his cities, And it hath consumed their palaces!

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> \`Rejoice not, O Israel, be not joyful like
the peoples, For thou hast gone a-whoring from thy God, Thou hast loved
a gift near all floors of corn.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Floor and wine-press do not delight them,
And new wine doth fail in her,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> They do not abide in the land of Jehovah,
And turned back hath Ephraim \[to\] Egypt, And in Asshur an unclean
thing they eat.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> They pour not out wine to Jehovah, Nor are
they sweet to Him, Their sacrifices \[are\] as bread of mourners to
them, All eating it are unclean: For their bread \[is\] for themselves,
It doth not come into the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> What do ye at the day appointed? And at the
day of Jehovah's festival?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For, lo, they have gone because of
destruction, Egypt gathereth them, Moph burieth them, The desirable
things of their silver, Nettles possess them -- a thorn \[is\] in their
tents.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Come in have the days of inspection, Come
in have the days of recompence, Israel doth know! a fool \[is\] the
prophet, Mad \[is\] the man of the Spirit, Because of the abundance of
thine iniquity, And great \[is\] the hatred.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Ephraim is looking \[away\] from My God,
The prophet! a snare of a fowler \[is\] over all his ways, Hatred \[is\]
in the house of his God.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> They have gone deep -- have done corruptly,
As \[in\] the days of Gibeah, He doth remember their iniquity, He doth
inspect their sins.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> As grapes in a wilderness I found Israel,
As the first-fruit in a fig-tree, at its beginning, I have seen your
fathers, They -- they have gone in \[to\] Baal-Peor, And are separated
to a shameful thing, And are become abominable like their love.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Ephraim \[is\] as a fowl, Fly away doth
their honour, without birth, And without womb, and without conception.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For though they nourish their sons, I
have made them childless -- without man, Surely also, wo to them, when I
turn aside from them.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Ephraim! when I have looked to the rock,
Is planted in comeliness, And Ephraim \[is\] to bring out unto a slayer
his sons.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Give to them, Jehovah -- what dost Thou
give? Give to them miscarrying womb, and dry breasts.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> All their evil \[is\] in Gilgal, Surely
there I have hated them, Because of the evil of their doings, Out of My
house I do drive them, I add not to love them, all their heads \[are\]
apostates.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Ephraim hath been smitten, Their root
hath dried up, fruit they yield not, Yea, though they bring forth, I
have put to death the desired of their womb.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Reject them doth my God, Because they
have not hearkened to Him, And they are wanderers among nations!

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> \`An empty vine \[is\] Israel, Fruit he
maketh like to himself, According to the abundance of his fruit, He hath
multiplied for the altars, According to the goodness of his land, They
have made goodly standing-pillars.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Their heart hath been divided, now they
are guilty, He doth break down their altars, He doth destroy their
standing-pillars.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For now they say: We have no king,
Because we have not feared Jehovah, And the king -- what doth he for us?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> They have spoken words, To swear
falsehood in making a covenant, And flourished as a poisonous herb hath
judgment, on the furrows of a field.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> For the calves of Beth-Aven fear do
inhabitants of Samaria, Surely mourned on account of it hath its people,
And its priests on account of it leap about, Because of its honour, for
it hath removed from it,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Also it to Asshur is carried, a present
to a warlike king, Shame doth Ephraim receive, And ashamed is Israel of
its own counsel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Cut off is Samaria! Its king \[is\] as a
chip on the face of the waters.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And destroyed have been high places of
Aven, the sin of Israel. Thorn and bramble go up on their altars, And
they have said to hills, Cover us, And to heights, Fall upon us.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> From the days of Gibeah thou hast sinned,
O Israel, There they have stood, Not overtake them in Gibeah doth
battle, Because of sons of perverseness.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> When I desire, then I do bind them, And
gathered against them have peoples, When they bind themselves to their
two iniquities.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Ephraim \[is\] a trained heifer --
loving to thresh, And I -- I have passed over on the goodness of its
neck, I cause \[one\] to ride Ephraim, Plough doth Judah, harrow for him
doth Jacob.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Sow for yourselves in righteousness,
Reap according to loving-kindness, Till for yourselves tillage of
knowledge, To seek Jehovah, Till he come and shew righteousness to you.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Ye have ploughed wickedness, Perversity
ye have reaped, Ye have eaten the fruit of lying, For thou hast trusted
in thy way, In the abundance of thy might.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And rise doth a tumult among thy
people, And all thy fortresses are spoiled, As the spoiling of Shalman
of Beth-Arbel, In a day of battle, Mother against sons dashed in pieces.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Thus hath Beth-El done to you, Because
of the evil of your wickedness, In the dawn cut off utterly is a king of
Israel!

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Because Israel \[is\] a youth, and I love
him, Out of Egypt I have called for My Son.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> They have called to them rightly, They
have gone from before them, To lords they do sacrifice, And to graven
images they make perfume.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And I have caused Ephraim to go on foot,
Taking them by their arms, And they have not known that I strengthened
them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> With cords of man I do draw them, With
thick cords of love, And I am to them as a raiser up of a yoke on their
jaws, And I incline unto him -- I feed \[him\].

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> He turneth not back unto the land of
Egypt, And Asshur -- he \[is\] his king, For they have refused to
return.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Grievous hath been the sword in his
cities, And it hath ended his bars, and consumed -- from their own
counsels.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And My people are hanging in suspense,
about My returning, And unto the Most High they do call, Together they
exalt not.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> How do I give thee up, O Ephraim? Do I
deliver thee up, O Israel? How do I make thee as Admah? Do I set thee as
Zeboim? Turned in Me is My heart, kindled together have been My
repentings.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> I do not the fierceness of My anger, I
turn not back to destroy Ephraim, For God I \[am\], and not a man. In
thy midst the Holy One, and I enter not in enmity,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> After Jehovah they go -- as a lion He
roareth, When He doth roar, then tremble do the sons from the west.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> They tremble as a sparrow out of Egypt,
And as a dove out of the land of Asshur, And I have caused them to dwell
in their own houses, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Compassed Me with feigning hath
Ephraim, And with deceit the house of Israel. And Judah again is ruling
with God, And with the Holy Ones \[is\] faithful!

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Ephraim is enjoying wind, And is pursuing
an east wind, All the day lying and spoiling he multiplieth, And a
covenant with Asshur they make, And oil to Egypt is carried.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And a controversy hath Jehovah with
Judah, To lay a charge on Jacob according to his ways, According to his
doings He returneth to him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> In the womb he took his brother by the
heel, And by his strength he was a prince with God,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Yea, he is a prince unto the Messenger,
And he overcometh \[by\] weeping, And he maketh supplication to Him, At
Bethel He doth find him, And there He doth speak with us,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Even Jehovah, God of the Hosts, Jehovah
\[is\] His memorial.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And thou, through thy God, dost turn,
Kindness and judgment keep thou, And wait on thy God continually.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Canaan! in his hand \[are\] balances of
deceit! To oppress he hath loved.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And Ephraim saith: \`Surely I have become
rich, I have found wealth for myself, All my labours -- they find not
against me iniquity that \[is\] sin.'

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And I -- Jehovah thy God from the land of
Egypt, Again do I turn thee back into tents, As in the days of the
appointed time.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And I have spoken unto the prophets,
And I have multiplied vision, And by the hand of the prophets I use
similes.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Surely Gilead \[is\] iniquity, Only,
vanity they have been, In Gilead bullocks they have sacrificed, Also
their altars \[are\] as heaps, on the furrows of a field.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And Jacob doth flee to the country of
Aram, And Israel doth serve for a wife, Yea, for a wife he hath kept
watch.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And by a prophet hath Jehovah brought
up Israel out of Egypt, And by a prophet it hath been watched.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Ephraim hath provoked most bitterly,
And his blood on himself he leaveth, And his reproach turn back to him
doth his Lord!

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> When Ephraim speaketh tremblingly, He
hath been lifted up in Israel, When he becometh guilty in Baal he dieth.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And now do they add to sin, And make to
them a molten image of their silver, By their own understanding --
idols, A work of artizans -- all of it, Of them they say, who \[are\]
sacrificers among men, \`The calves let them kiss.'

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Therefore they are as a cloud of the
morning, And as dew, rising early, going away, As chaff tossed about out
of a floor, And as smoke out of a window.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And I \[am\] Jehovah thy God from the
land of Egypt, And a God besides Me thou dost not know, And a Saviour --
there is none save Me.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> I -- I have known thee in a wilderness,
In a land of droughts.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> According to their feedings they are
satiated, They have been satiated, And their heart is lifted up,
Therefore they have forgotten Me,

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And I am to them as a lion, As a leopard
by the way I look out.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> I do meet them as a bereaved bear, And I
rend the enclosure of their heart.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And I consume them there as a lioness, A
beast of the field doth rend them.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Thou hast destroyed thyself, O Israel,
But in Me \[is\] thy help, Where \[is\] thy king now -- And he doth save
thee in all thy cities? And thy judges of whom thou didst say, \`Give to
me a king and heads?'

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> I give to thee a king in Mine anger,
And I take away in My wrath.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Bound up \[is\] the iniquity of
Ephraim, Hidden \[is\] his sin,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Pangs of a travailing woman come to
him, He \[is\] a son not wise, For he remaineth not the time for the
breaking forth of sons.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> From the hand of Sheol I do ransom
them, From death I redeem them, Where \[is\] thy plague, O death? Where
thy destruction, O Sheol? Repentance is hid from Mine eyes.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Though he among brethren produceth
fruit, Come in doth an east wind, a wind of Jehovah, From a wilderness
it is coming up, And it drieth up his fountain, And become dry doth his
spring, It -- it spoileth a treasure -- every desirable vessel.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Become desolate doth Samaria, Because
she hath rebelled against her God, By sword they do fall, Their
sucklings are dashed in pieces, And its pregnant ones are ripped up!

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Turn back, O Israel, unto Jehovah thy
God, For thou hast stumbled by thine iniquity.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Take with you words, and turn to Jehovah,
Say ye unto Him: \`Take away all iniquity, and give good, And we do
render the fruit of our lips.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Asshur doth not save us, on a horse we
ride not, Nor do we say any more, Our God, to the work of our hands, For
in Thee find mercy doth the fatherless.'

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> I heal their backsliding, I love them
freely, For turned back hath Mine anger from him.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> I am as dew to Israel, he flourisheth as
a lily, And he striketh forth his roots as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Go on do his sucklings, And his beauty is
as an olive, And he hath fragrance as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Return do the dwellers under his shadow,
They revive \[as\] corn, and flourish as a vine, His memorial \[is\] as
wine of Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> O Ephraim, what to Me any more with
idols? I -- I afflicted, and I cause him to sing: \`I \[am\] as a green
fir-tree,' From Me is thy fruit found.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Who \[is\] wise, and doth understand
these? Prudent, and knoweth them? For upright are the ways of Jehovah,
And the righteous go on in them, And the transgressors stumble therein!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel](joe)
