[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jo3)  [Next](rev) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Jude

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Judas, of Jesus Christ a servant, and
brother of James, to those sanctified in God the Father, and in Jesus
Christ kept -- called,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> kindness to you, and peace, and love, be
multiplied!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Beloved, all diligence using to write to
you concerning the common salvation, I had necessity to write to you,
exhorting to agonize for the faith once delivered to the saints,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> for there did come in unobserved certain
men, long ago having been written beforehand to this judgment, impious,
the grace of our God perverting to lasciviousness, and our only Master,
God, and Lord -- Jesus Christ -- denying,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and to remind you I intend, you knowing
once this, that the Lord, a people out of the land of Egypt having
saved, again those who did not believe did destroy;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> messengers also, those who did not keep
their own principality, but did leave their proper dwelling, to a
judgment of a great day, in bonds everlasting, under darkness He hath
kept,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities
around them, in like manner to these, having given themselves to
whoredom, and gone after other flesh, have been set before -- an
example, of fire age-during, justice suffering.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> In like manner, nevertheless, those
dreaming also the flesh indeed do defile, and lordship they put away,
and dignities they speak evil of,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> yet Michael, the chief messenger, when,
with the devil contending, he was disputing about the body of Moses, did
not dare to bring up an evil-speaking judgment, but said, \`The Lord
rebuke thee!'

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and these, as many things indeed as they
have not known, they speak evil of; and as many things as naturally (as
the irrational beasts) they understand, in these they are corrupted;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> wo to them! because in the way of Cain
they did go on, and to the deceit of Balaam for reward they did rush,
and in the gainsaying of Korah they did perish.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> These are in your love-feasts craggy
rocks; feasting together with you, without fear shepherding themselves;
clouds without water, by winds carried about; trees autumnal, without
fruit, twice dead, rooted up;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> wild waves of a sea, foaming out their
own shames; stars going astray, to whom the gloom of the darkness to the
age hath been kept.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And prophesy also to these did the
seventh from Adam -- Enoch -- saying, \`Lo, the Lord did come in His
saintly myriads,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> to do judgment against all, and to
convict all their impious ones, concerning all their works of impiety
that they did impiously, and concerning all the stiff things that speak
against Him did impious sinners.'

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These are murmurers, repiners; according
to their desires walking, and their mouth doth speak great swellings,
giving admiration to persons for the sake of profit;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> and ye, beloved, remember ye the sayings
spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> that they said to you, that in the last
time there shall be scoffers, after their own desires of impieties going
on,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> these are those setting themselves apart,
natural men, the Spirit not having.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And ye, beloved, on your most holy faith
building yourselves up, in the Holy Spirit praying,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> yourselves in the love of God keep ye,
waiting for the kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ -- to life age-during;

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> and to some be kind, judging thoroughly,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> and some in fear save ye, out of the fire
snatching, hating even the coat from the flesh spotted.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And to Him who is able to guard you not
stumbling, and to set \[you\] in the presence of His glory unblemished,
in gladness,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> to the only wise God our Saviour, \[is\]
glory and greatness, power and authority, both now and to all the ages!
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation](rev)
