[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](isa)  [Next](lam) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Jeremiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Words of Jeremiah son of Hilkiah, of the
priests who \[are\] in Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> unto whom the word of Jehovah hath been in
the days of Josiah son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of
his reign,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> and it is in the days of Jehoiakim son of
Josiah, king of Judah, till the completion of the eleventh year of
Zedekiah son of Josiah, king of Judah, till the removal of Jerusalem in
the fifth month.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> \`Before I form thee in the belly, I have
known thee; and before thou comest forth from the womb I have separated
thee, a prophet to nations I have made thee.'

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And I say, \`Ah, Lord Jehovah! lo, I have
not known -- to speak, for I \[am\] a youth.'

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And Jehovah saith unto me, \`Do not say, I
\[am\] a youth, for to all to whom I send thee thou goest, and all that
I command thee thou speakest.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Be not afraid of their faces, for with thee
\[am\] I to deliver thee, -- an affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Jehovah putteth forth His hand, and
striketh against my mouth, and Jehovah saith unto me, \`Lo, I have put
my words in thy mouth.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> See, I have charged thee this day
concerning the nations, and concerning the kingdoms, to pluck up, and to
break down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant.'

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me,
saying, \`What art thou seeing, Jeremiah?' And I say, \`A rod of an
almond tree I am seeing.'

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Jehovah saith unto me, \`Thou hast
well seen: for I am watching over My word to do it.'

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me a
second time, saying, \`What art thou seeing?' And I say, \`A blown pot I
am seeing, and its face \[is\] from the north.'

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Jehovah saith unto me, \`From the
north is the evil loosed against all inhabitants of the land.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For, lo, I am calling for all families of
the kingdoms of the north, -- an affirmation of Jehovah -- and they have
come, and put each his throne at the opening of the gates of Jerusalem,
and by its walls round about, and by all cities of Judah.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And I have spoken My judgments with them
concerning all their evil, in that they have forsaken Me, and make
perfume to other gods, and bow themselves to the works of their own
hands.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> \`And thou, thou dost gird up thy loins,
and hast arisen, and spoken unto them all that I command thee: be not
affrighted because of them, lest I affright thee before them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And I, lo, I have given thee this day for
a fenced city, and for an iron pillar, and for brazen walls over all the
land, to the kings of Judah, to its heads, to its priests, and to the
people of the land;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and they have fought against thee, and
they prevail not against thee; for with thee \[am\] I, -- an affirmation
of Jehovah -- to deliver thee.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> \`Go, and thou hast called in the ears of
Jerusalem, saying, Thus said Jehovah: I have remembered for thee The
kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, Thy going after Me
in a wilderness, in a land not sown.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Holy \[is\] Israel to Jehovah, The
first-fruit of His increase, All consuming him are guilty, Evil cometh
in unto them, an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Hear a word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob,
And all ye families of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Thus said Jehovah: What -- have your
fathers found in Me perversity, That they have gone far off from Me, And
go after the vanity, and become vain,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And have not said, Where \[is\] Jehovah,
Who bringeth us up out of the land of Egypt, Who leadeth us in a
wilderness, In a land of deserts and pits, In a dry land, and of
death-shade, In a land -- none hath passed through it, Nor dwelt hath
man there?'

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Yea, I bring you in to a land of fruitful
fields, To eat its fruit and its goodness, And ye come in and defile My
land, And Mine inheritance have made an abomination.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The priests have not said, \`Where \[is\]
Jehovah?' And those handling the law have not known Me. And the
shepherds transgressed against Me, And the prophets have prophesied by
Baal, And after those who profit not have gone.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore, yet I plead with you, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And with your sons' sons I plead.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For, pass to the isles of Chittim, and
see, And to Kedar send, and consider well, And see if there hath been
like this:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Hath a nation changed gods? (And they
\[are\] no gods!) And My people hath changed its honour For that which
doth not profit.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Be astonished, ye heavens, at this, Yea,
be frightened, be greatly wasted, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For two evils hath My people done, Me
they have forsaken, a fountain of living waters, To hew out for
themselves wells -- broken wells, That contain not the waters.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> A servant \[is\] Israel? Is he a child of
the house? Wherefore hath he been for a prey?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Against him roar do young lions, They
have given forth their voice, And make his land become a desolation, His
cities have been burnt without inhabitant.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Also sons of Noph and Tahapanes Consume
thee -- the crown of the head!

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Dost thou not do this to thyself? \[By\]
thy forsaking Jehovah thy God, At the time He is leading thee in the
way?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And now, what -- to thee in the way of
Egypt, To drink the waters of Sihor? And what -- to thee in the way of
Asshur, To drink the waters of the River?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Instruct thee doth thy wickedness, And
thy backslidings reprove thee, Know and see that an evil and a bitter
thing \[Is\] thy forsaking Jehovah thy God, And My fear not being on
thee, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For from of old thou hast broken thy
yoke, Drawn away thy bands, and sayest, \`I do not serve,' For, on every
high height, and under every green tree, Thou art wandering -- a harlot.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And I planted thee a choice vine, wholly
a true seed, And how hast thou been turned to Me, To the degenerate
shoots of a strange vine?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But though thou dost wash with nitre, And
dost multiply to thyself soap, Marked is thine iniquity before Me, An
affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> How sayest thou, \`I have not been
defiled, After the Baalim I have not gone?' See thy way in a valley,
know what thou hast done, A swift dromedary winding her ways,

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> A wild ass accustomed to a wilderness, In
the desire of her soul she hath swallowed up wind, Her meeting -- who
doth turn her back? None seeking her do weary themselves, In her month
they find her.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Withhold thy foot from being unshod, And
thy throat from thirst, And thou sayest, \`It is incurable, No, for I
have loved strangers, and after them I go.'

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> As the shame of a thief when he is found,
So put to shame have been the house of Israel, They, their kings, their
heads, And their priests, and their prophets,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Saying to wood, \`My father \[art\]
thou!' And to a stone, \`Thou hast brought me forth,' For they turned
unto me the back and not the face, And in the time of their vexation,
They say, \`Arise Thou, and save us.'

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And where \[are\] thy gods, that thou
hast made to thyself? Let them arise, if they may save thee, In the time
of thy vexation, For -- the number of thy cities have been thy gods, O
Judah,

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Why do ye strive with Me? All of you have
transgressed against Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> In vain I have smitten your sons,
Instruction they have not accepted, Devoured hath your sword your
prophets, As a destroying lion.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> O generation, see ye the word of Jehovah:
A wilderness have I been to Israel? A land of thick darkness? Wherefore
have My people said, \`We mourned, We come not in again unto Thee.'

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> Doth a virgin forget her ornaments? A
bride her bands? And My people have forgotten Me days without number.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> What -- dost thou make pleasing thy ways
to seek love? Therefore even the wicked thou hast taught thy ways.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Also in thy skirts hath been found the
blood of innocent needy souls, Not by digging have I found them, but
upon all these.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> And thou sayest, \`Because I have been
innocent, Surely turned back hath His anger from me?' Lo, I have been
judged with thee, Because of thy saying, \`I have not sinned.'

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> What? thou art very vile to repeat thy
way, Even of Egypt thou art ashamed, As thou hast been ashamed of
Asshur,

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Also from this thou goest out, And thy
hands on thy head, For Jehovah hath kicked at thy confidences, And thou
dost not give prosperity to them!

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Saying, \`Lo, one sendeth away his wife,
And she hath gone from him, And she hath been to another man, Doth he
turn back unto her again? Greatly defiled is not that land? And thou
hast committed whoredom with many lovers, And turn again to Me, an
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Lift thine eyes to the high places, and
see, Where hast thou not been lain with? On the ways thou hast sat for
them, As an Arab in a wilderness, And thou defilest the land, By thy
fornications, and by thy wickedness.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And withheld are showers, and gathered rain
hath not been. The forehead of a whorish woman thou hast, Thou hast
refused to be ashamed.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Hast thou not henceforth called to Me, \`My
father, Thou \[art\] the leader of my youth?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Doth He keep to the age? watch for ever?'
Lo, these things thou hast spoken, And thou dost the evil things, and
prevailest.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And Jehovah saith unto me, in the days of
Josiah the king, \`Hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel hath
done? She is going on every high mountain, and unto the place of every
green tree, and committeth fornication there.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And I say, after her doing all these, Unto
Me thou dost turn back, and she hath not turned back, and see \[it\]
doth her treacherous sister Judah.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And I see when (for all the causes whereby
backsliding Israel committed adultery) I have sent her away, and I give
the bill of her divorce unto her, that treacherous Judah her sister hath
not feared, and goeth and committeth fornication -- she also.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And it hath come to pass, from the vileness
of her fornication, that the land is defiled, and she committeth
fornication with stone and with wood.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And even in all this her treacherous
sister Judah hath not turned back unto Me with all her heart, but with
falsehood, an affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Jehovah saith unto me: \`Justified
herself hath backsliding Israel, More than treacherous Judah.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Go, and thou hast proclaimed these words
toward the north, and hast said, Turn back, O backsliding Israel, An
affirmation of Jehovah! I cause not Mine anger to fall upon you, For I
\[am\] kind, an affirmation of Jehovah, I watch not to the age.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Only, know thine iniquity, For against
Jehovah thy God thou hast transgressed, And thou dost scatter thy ways
to strangers, Under every green tree, And to My voice thou hast not
hearkened, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Turn back, O backsliding sons, An
affirmation of Jehovah. For I have ruled over you, And taken you one of
a city, and two of a family, And have brought you to Zion,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I have given to you shepherds
According to Mine own heart, And they have fed you with knowledge and
understanding.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And it hath come to pass, when ye are
multiplied, And have been fruitful in the land, In those days -- an
affirmation of Jehovah, They say not any more, \`The ark of the covenant
of Jehovah,' Nor doth it go up on the heart, Nor do they remember
concerning it, Nor do they inspect, nor is it made again.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> At that time they cry to Jerusalem, \`O
throne of Jehovah,' And gathered unto her hath been all the nations, For
the name of Jehovah, to Jerusalem, Nor do they go any more after the
stubbornness of their evil heart.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> In those days do the house of Judah Go
unto the house of Israel, And they come together from the land of the
south, unto the land That I caused your fathers to inherit.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And I have said, How do I put thee among
the sons, And give to thee a desirable land, A beauteous inheritance of
the hosts of nations, And I say, My father -- ye do call to Me, And from
after Me ye do not turn back.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> But -- a woman hath deceived her friend,
So ye have dealt treacherously with Me, O house of Israel, an
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> A voice on high places is heard --
weeping, Supplications of the sons of Israel, For they have made
perverse their way, They have forgotten Jehovah their God.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Turn back, O backsliding sons, I cause
your backslidings to cease. -- Behold us, we have come to Thee, For Thou
\[art\] Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Surely in vain from the heights, The
multitude of mountains -- Surely in Jehovah our God \[is\] the salvation
of Israel.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And the shameful thing hath devoured The
labour of our fathers from our youth, Their flock and their herd, Their
sons and their daughters.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> We have lain down in our shame, and cover
us doth our confusion, For against Jehovah our God we have sinned, We,
and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, Nor have we
hearkened to the voice of Jehovah our God!

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> If thou dost turn back, O Israel, An
affirmation of Jehovah, unto Me turn back, And if thou dost turn aside
Thine abominations from My face, Then thou dost not bemoan.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And thou hast sworn -- Jehovah liveth, In
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, And blessed themselves in Him
have nations, And in Him they boast themselves.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For thus said Jehovah, To the man of Judah,
and to Jerusalem: Till for yourselves tillage, And do not sow unto the
thorns.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Be circumcised to Jehovah, And turn aside
the foreskins of your heart, O man of Judah, and ye inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Lest My fury go out as fire, and hath burned, And there is
none quenching, Because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Declare in Judah, and in Jerusalem sound,
And say ye, \`Blow a trumpet in the land,' Call ye fully, and say ye:
\`Be gathered, and we go in to the fenced city.'

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Lift up an ensign Zionward, Strengthen
yourselves, stand not still, For evil I am bringing in from the north,
And a great destruction.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Gone up hath a lion from his thicket, And a
destroyer of nations hath journeyed, He hath come forth from his place
To make thy land become a desolation, Thy cities are laid waste, without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For this, gird on sackcloth, lament and
howl, For the fierce anger of Jehovah hath not turned back from us.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day, An
affirmation of Jehovah: \`Perish doth the heart of the king, And the
heart of the princes, And astonished have been the priests, And the
prophets do wonder.'

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And I say, \`Ah, Lord Jehovah, Surely
thou hast entirely forgotten this people and Jerusalem, saying, Peace is
for you, And struck hath a sword unto the soul!'

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> At that time it is said of this people,
And of Jerusalem: \`A dry wind of high places in the wilderness,' The
way of the daughter of My people, (Not for winnowing, nor for
cleansing,)

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> A full wind from these doth come for Me,
Now, also, I speak judgments with them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Lo, as clouds he cometh up, And as a
hurricane his chariots, Lighter than eagles have been his horses, Wo to
us, for we have been spoiled.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Wash from evil thy heart, O Jerusalem,
That thou mayest be saved, Till when dost thou lodge in thy heart
Thoughts of thy strength?

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For a voice is declaring from Dan, And
sounding sorrow from mount Ephraim.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Make ye mention to the nations, Lo, sound
ye to Jerusalem: \`Besiegers are coming from the land afar off, And they
give forth against cities of Judah their voice.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> As the keepers of a field They have been
against her round about, For with Me she hath been rebellious, An
affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Thy way and thy doings have done these to
thee, This \[is\] thy vexation, for \[it is\] bitter, For it hath struck
unto thy heart.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> My bowels, my bowels! I am pained \[at\]
the walls of my heart, Make a noise for me doth My heart, I am not
silent, For the voice of a trumpet I have heard, O my soul -- a shout of
battle!

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Destruction on destruction is proclaimed,
For spoiled hath been all the land, Suddenly spoiled have been my tents,
In a moment -- my curtains.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Till when do I see an ensign? Do I hear
the voice of a trumpet?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For my people \[are\] foolish, me they
have not known, Foolish sons \[are\] they, yea, they \[are\] not
intelligent, Wise \[are\] they to do evil, And to do good they have not
known.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> I looked \[to\] the land, and lo, waste
and void, And unto the heavens, and their light is not.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> I have looked \[to\] the mountains, And
lo, they are trembling. And all the hills moved themselves lightly.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> I have looked, and lo, man is not, And
all fowls of the heavens have fled.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I have looked, and lo, The fruitful place
\[is\] a wilderness, And all its cities have been broken down, Because
of Jehovah, Because of the fierceness of His anger.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For thus said Jehovah: All the land is a
desolation, but a completion I make not.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For this doth the land mourn, And black
have been the heavens above, because I have spoken -- I have purposed,
And I have not repented, Nor do I turn back from it.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> From the voice of the horseman, And of
him shooting with the bow, all the city is fleeing, They have come into
thickets, And on cliffs they have gone up, All the city is forsaken, And
there is no one dwelling in them.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And thou, O spoiled one, what dost thou?
For thou puttest on scarlet, For thou adornest thyself \[with\]
ornaments of gold. For thou rendest with pain thine eyes, In vain thou
dost make thyself fair, Kicked against thee have doting ones, Thy life
they do seek.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> For a voice as of a sick woman I have
heard, Distress, as of one bringing forth a first-born, The voice of the
daughter of Zion, She bewaileth herself, she spreadeth out her hands,
\`Wo to me now, for weary is my soul of slayers!'

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Go to and fro in streets of Jerusalem, And
see, I pray you, and know, And seek in her broad places, if ye find a
man, If there be one doing judgment, seeking stedfastness -- Then am I
propitious to her.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And if they say, \`Jehovah liveth,' Surely
to a falsehood they swear.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Jehovah, Thine eyes, are they not on
stedfastness? Thou hast smitten them, and they have not grieved, Thou
hast consumed them, They have refused to receive instruction, They made
their faces harder than a rock, They have refused to turn back.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And I -- I said, \`Surely these \[are\]
poor, They have been foolish, For they have not known the way of
Jehovah, The judgment of their God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I get me to the great, and I speak with
them, For they have known the way of Jehovah, The judgment of their
God.' Surely they together have broken the yoke, They have drawn away
the bands.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Therefore smitten them hath a lion out of
the forest, A wolf of the deserts doth spoil them, A leopard is watching
over their cities, Every one who is going out of them is torn, For many
have been their transgressions, Mighty have been their backslidings.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For this I am not propitious to thee, Thy
sons have forsaken Me, And are satisfied by that which is not god, I
satisfy them, and they commit adultery, And at the house of a harlot
They gather themselves together.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Fed horses -- they have been early risers,
Each to the wife of his neighbour they neigh.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For these do I not lay a charge? An
affirmation of Jehovah, And on a nation such as this, Doth not My soul
avenge itself?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Go ye up on her walls, and destroy, And a
completion make not, Turn aside her branches, for they \[are\] not
Jehovah's,

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> For dealt treacherously against Me have
the house of Israel, And the house of Judah, an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> They have lied against Jehovah, And they
say, \`\[It is\] not He, Nor come in against us doth evil, Yea, sword
and famine we do not see.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And the prophets become wind, And the
word is not in them,' -- thus it is done by them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah, God of
Hosts, Because of your speaking this word, Lo, I am making My words in
thy mouth become fire, And this people wood, and it hath devoured them.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Lo, I am bringing against you a nation
from afar, O house of Israel, an affirmation of Jehovah, A nation --
strong it \[is\], a nation -- from of old it \[is\], A nation -- thou
knowest not its tongue, Nor understandest what it speaketh.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Its quiver \[is\] as an open sepulchre,
All of them -- mighty ones.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And it hath consumed thy harvest and thy
bread, They consume thy sons, and thy daughters, It consumeth thy flock,
and thy herd, It consumeth thy vine, and thy fig-tree, It maketh poor
thy fenced cities, In which thou art trusting -- by the sword.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And even in those days, an affirmation of
Jehovah, I do not make you a completion.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And it hath come to pass, when ye say,
\`For what hath Jehovah our God done to us all these?' That thou hast
said unto them, \`As ye have forsaken Me, And serve the gods of a
foreigner in your land, So do ye serve strangers in a land not yours.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Declare ye this in the house of Jacob,
And sound ye it in Judah, saying,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Hear ye, I pray you, this, O people,
foolish and without heart, Eyes they have, and they see not, Ears they
have, and they hear not.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Me do ye not fear, an affirmation of
Jehovah? From My presence are ye not pained? Who hath made sand the
border of the sea, A limit age-during, and it passeth not over it, They
shake themselves, and they are not able, Yea, sounded have its billows,
and they pass not over.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And this people hath an apostate and
rebellious heart, They have turned aside, and they go on.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And they have not said in their heart,
\`Let us fear, we pray you, Jehovah our God, who is giving rain, The
sprinkling and the gathered, in its season, The appointed weeks of
harvest He keepeth for us.'

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Your iniquities have turned these away,
And your sins have kept the good from you.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For the wicked have been found among My
people. It looketh about the covering of snares, They have set up a trap
-- men they capture.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> As a cage full of fowls, So their houses
are full of deceit, Therefore they have been great, and are rich.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> They have been fat, they have shone, Yea,
they have overpassed the acts of the evil, Judgment they have not
judged, The judgment of the fatherless -- and they prosper, And the
judgment of the needy they have not judged.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> For these do not I inspect, an
affirmation of Jehovah, On a nation such as this, Doth not My soul
avenge itself?

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> An astonishing and horrible thing hath
been in the land.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> The prophets have prophesied falsely, And
the priests bear rule by their means, And My people have loved \[it\]
so, And what do they at its latter end?

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Strengthen yourselves, sons of Benjamin,
From the midst of Jerusalem, And in Tekoa blow ye a trumpet, And over
Beth-Haccerem lift ye up a flame, For evil hath been seen from the
north, And great destruction.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The comely and the delicate one I have cut
off, The daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Unto her come do shepherds and their
droves, They have stricken tents by her round about, They have fed each
\[in\] his own station.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Sanctify ye against her the battle, Rise,
and we go up at noon. Wo to us, for turned hath the day, For stretched
out are the shades of evening,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> \`Rise, and we go up by night, And we
destroy her palaces.'

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Cut down
her wood, And pour out against Jerusalem a mount, She \[is\] the city to
be inspected, Wholly -- she is oppression in her midst.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> As the digging of a well, is \[for\] its
waters, So she hath digged \[for\] her wickedness, Violence and spoil is
heard in her, Before My face continually \[are\] sickness and smiting.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Be instructed, O Jerusalem, Lest My soul be
alienated from thee, Lest I make thee a desolation, a land not
inhabited.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: They surely
glean, as a vine, the remnant of Israel, Put back thy hand, as a
gatherer to the baskets.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> To whom do I speak, and testify, and they
hear? Lo, their ear \[is\] uncircumcised, And they are not able to
attend. Lo, a word of Jehovah hath been to them for a reproach, They
delight not in it.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And with the fury of Jehovah I have been
filled, (I have been weary of containing,) To pour \[it\] on the
suckling in the street, And on the assembly of youths together, For even
husband with wife are captured, An elder with one full of days,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And their houses have been turned to
others, Fields and wives together, For I stretch out My hand against the
inhabitants of the land, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For from their least unto their greatest,
Every one is gaining dishonest gain, And from prophet even unto priest,
Every one is dealing falsely,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And they heal the breach of the daughter
of my people slightly, Saying, \`Peace, peace!' and there is no peace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> They were ashamed when they did
abomination! Yea, they are not at all ashamed, Yea, blushing they have
not known, Therefore they do fall among those falling, In the time I
have inspected them, They stumble, said Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Thus said Jehovah: Stand ye by the ways
and see, and ask for paths of old, Where \[is\] this -- the good way?
and go ye in it, And find rest for yourselves. And they say, \`We do not
go.'

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And I have raised up for you watchmen,
Attend ye to the voice of the trumpet. And they say, \`We do not
attend.'

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Therefore hear, O nations, and know, O
company, That which \[is\] upon them.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Hear, O earth, lo, I am bringing evil on
this people, The fruit of their devices, For to My words they gave no
attention, And My law -- they kick against it.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Why \[is\] this to Me? frankincense from
Sheba cometh, And the sweet cane from a land afar off, Your
burnt-offerings \[are\] not for acceptance, And your sacrifices have not
been sweet to Me.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Therefore thus said Jehovah: Lo, I do
give to this people stumbling blocks, And stumbled against them have
fathers and sons together, The neighbour and his friend do perish.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Thus said Jehovah: Lo, a people hath come
from a north country, And a great nation is stirred up from the sides of
the earth.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Bow and javelin they take hold of, Fierce
it \[is\], and they have no mercy, Their voice as a sea doth sound, And
on horses they ride, set in array as a man of war, Against thee, O
daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> \`We have heard its sound, feeble have
been our hands, Distress hath seized us, pain as of a travailing woman.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Go not forth to the field, And in the way
walk not, For a sword hath the enemy, fear \[is\] round about.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> O daughter of My people, Gird on
sackcloth, and roll thyself in ashes, The mourning of an only one make
for thee, A lamentation most bitter, For suddenly come doth the spoiler
against us.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> A watch-tower I have given thee, Among My
people a fortress, And thou knowest, and hast tried their way.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> All of them are turned aside by
apostates, Walking slanderously -- brass and iron, All of them are
corrupters.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> The bellows have been burnt, By fire hath
the lead been consumed, In vain hath a refiner refined, And the wicked
have not been drawn away.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> \`Silver rejected,' they have called to
them, For Jehovah hath kicked against them!

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Stand in the gate of the house of Jehovah,
and thou hast proclaimed there this word, and hast said, Hear a word of
Jehovah, all ye of Judah, who are coming in at these gates, to bow
before Jehovah:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel,
Amend your ways, and your doings, And I cause you to dwell in this
place.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Do not trust for yourselves Unto the words
of falsehood, saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, The
temple of Jehovah \[are\] they!

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For, if ye do thoroughly amend your ways
and your doings, If ye do judgment thoroughly Between a man and his
neighbour,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Sojourner, fatherless, and widow, ye
oppress not, And innocent blood do not shed in this place, And after
other gods do not walk, for evil to yourselves,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Then I have caused you to dwell in this
place, In the land that I gave to your fathers, From age even unto age.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Lo, ye are trusting for yourselves On the
words of falsehood, so as not to profit.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Stealing, murdering, and committing
adultery, And swearing to falsehood, and giving perfume to Baal, And
going after other gods whom ye knew not.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And ye have come in and stood before Me,
In this house on which My name is called, And have said, \`We have been
delivered,' In order to do all these abominations.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> A den of burglars hath this house, On
which My name is called, been in your eyes? Even I, lo, I have seen, an
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But go ye, I pray you, Unto My place that
\[is\] in Shiloh, Where I caused My name to dwell at first, And see that
which I have done to it, For the wickedness of My people Israel.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And now, because of your doing all these
works, An affirmation of Jehovah, And I speak unto you, rising early and
speaking, And ye have not hearkened, And I call you, and ye have not
answered,

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> I also to the house on which My name is
called, In which ye are trusting, And to the place that I gave to you,
and to your fathers, Have done, as I have done to Shiloh.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And I have cast you from before My face,
As I have cast out all your brethren, The whole seed of Ephraim.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thou dost not pray for this people,
Nor lift up for them crying and prayer, Nor intercede with Me, for I
hear thee not.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Art thou not seeing what they are doing
In cities of Judah, and in streets of Jerusalem?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> The sons are gathering wood, And the
fathers are causing the fire to burn, And the women are kneading dough,
To make cakes to the queen of the heavens, And to pour out libations to
other gods, So as to provoke Me to anger.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Me are they provoking to anger? an
affirmation of Jehovah, Is it not themselves, For the shame of their own
faces?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah,
Lo, Mine anger and My fury is poured out on this place, On man, and
beast, and on tree of the field, And on fruit of the ground, And it hath
burned, and it is not quenched.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, Your burnt-offerings add to your sacrifices, And eat ye flesh.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I did not speak with your fathers,
Nor did I command them in the day of My bringing them out of the land of
Egypt, Concerning the matters of burnt-offering and sacrifice,

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But this thing I commanded them, saying:
Hearken to My voice, And I have been to you for God, And ye -- ye are to
Me for a people, And have walked in all the way that I command you, So
that it is well for you.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And they have not hearkened, nor inclined
their ear, And they walk in the counsels, In the stubbornness, of their
evil heart, And are for backward, and not for forward.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Even from the day when your fathers Went
out of the land of Egypt till this day, I send to you all my servants
the prophets, Daily rising early and sending,

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And they have not hearkened unto Me, Nor
inclined their ear, and harden their neck, They have done evil above
their fathers.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And thou hast spoken unto them all these
words, And they do not hearken to thee, And thou hast called unto them,
And they do not answer thee.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And thou hast said unto them: This \[is\]
the nation that hath not hearkened, To the voice of Jehovah its God, Nor
have they accepted instruction, Perished hath stedfastness, Yea, it hath
been cut off from their mouth.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Cut off thy crown, and cast \[it\] away,
And lift up on high places lamentation, For Jehovah hath rejected, And
He leaveth the generation of His wrath.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> For the sons of Judah Have done the evil
thing in Mine eyes, An affirmation of Jehovah, They have set their
abominations in the house On which My name is called -- to defile it,

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And have built the high places of Tophet,
That \[are\] in the valley of the son of Hinnom, To burn their sons and
their daughters with fire, Which I did not command, Nor did it come up
on My heart.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> Therefore, lo, days are coming, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And it is not said any more, \`The Tophet,' And
\`Valley of the son of Hinnom,' But \`Valley of the slaughter,' And they
have buried in Tophet -- without place.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the carcase of this people hath been
for food To a fowl of the heavens, and to a beast of the earth, And
there is none troubling.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> And I have caused to cease from cities of
Judah, And from streets of Jerusalem, The voice of joy, and the voice of
gladness, Voice of bridegroom, and voice of bride, For the land doth
become a desolation!

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> At that time, an affirmation of Jehovah,
They bring the bones of the kings of Judah, And the bones of its
princes, And the bones of the priests, And the bones of the prophets,
And the bones of inhabitants of Jerusalem, Out of their graves,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And have spread them to sun, and to moon,
And to all the host of the heavens, that they have loved, And that they
have served, And that they have walked after, And that they have sought,
And to which they have bowed themselves, They are not gathered, nor
buried, They are for dung on the face of the ground.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And chosen is death rather than life By all
the remnant who are left of this evil family, In all the remaining
places, whither I have driven them, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And thou hast said unto them: Thus said
Jehovah, Do they fall, and not rise? Doth he turn back, and not return?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Wherefore hath this people of Jerusalem
Turned back -- a perpetual backsliding? They have kept hold on deceit,
They have refused to turn back.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> I have given attention, yea, I hearken,
They do not speak right, No man hath repented of his wickedness, Saying,
What have I done? Every one hath turned to his courses, As a horse is
rushing into battle.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Even a stork in the heavens hath known her
seasons, And turtle, and swallow, and crane, Have watched the time of
their coming, And -- My people have not known the judgment of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> How do ye say, We \[are\] wise, And the law
of Jehovah \[is\] with us? Surely, lo, falsely it hath wrought, The
false pen of scribes.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Ashamed have been the wise, They have been
affrighted, and are captured, Lo, against a word of Jehovah they kicked,
And the wisdom of what -- have they?

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Therefore, I give their wives to others,
Their fields to dispossessors, For from the least even unto the
greatest, Every one is gaining dishonest gain, From prophet even unto
priest, every one is dealing falsely.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And they heal the breach of the daughter
of my people slightly, Saying, Peace, peace! and there is no peace.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> They were ashamed when they did
abomination! Yea, they are not at all ashamed, And blushing they have
not known, Therefore, they do fall among falling ones, In the time of
their inspection they stumble, said Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> I utterly consume them, an affirmation of
Jehovah, There are no grapes in the vine, Yea, there are no figs in the
fig-tree, And the leaf hath faded, And the strength they have passeth
from them.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Wherefore are we sitting still? Be
gathered, and we go in to the fenced cities, And we are silent there,
For Jehovah our God hath made us silent, Yea, He causeth us to drink
water of gall, For we have sinned against Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Looking for peace -- and there is no
good, For a time of healing, and lo, terror.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> From Dan hath been heard the snorting of
his horses, From the voice of the neighings of his mighty ones, Trembled
hath all the land, And they come in and consume the land and its
fulness, The city and the inhabitants in it.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For, lo, I am sending among you serpents,
Vipers that have no charmer, And they have bitten you, an affirmation of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> My refreshing for me \[is\] sorrow, For
me my heart \[is\] sick.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Lo, the voice of a cry of the daughter of
my people from a land afar off, Is Jehovah not in Zion? is her king not
in her? Wherefore have they provoked Me with their graven images, With
the vanities of a foreigner?

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Harvest hath passed, summer hath ended,
And we -- we have not been saved.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> For a breach of the daughter of my people
have I been broken, I have been black, astonishment hath seized me.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no
physician there? For wherefore hath not the health of the daughter of my
people gone up?

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Who doth make my head waters, And mine eye
a fountain of tears? And I weep by day and by night, For the wounded of
the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Who doth give me in a wilderness A
lodging-place of travellers? And I leave my people, and go from them,
For all of them \[are\] adulterers, An assembly of treacherous ones.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And they bend their tongue, their bow
\[is\] a lie, And not for stedfastness have they been mighty in the
land, For from evil unto evil they have gone forth, And Me they have not
known, An affirmation of Jehovah!

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Each of his friend -- beware ye, And on any
brother, do not trust, For every brother doth utterly supplant, For
every friend slanderously doth walk,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And each at his friend they mock, And truth
they do not speak, They taught their tongue to speak falsehood, To
commit iniquity they have laboured.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> thy dwelling \[is\] in the midst of deceit,
Through deceit they refused to know Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Lo,
I am refining them, and have tried them, For how do I do because of the
daughter of My people?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> A slaughtering arrow \[is\] their tongue,
Deceit it hath spoken in its mouth, Peace with its neighbour it
speaketh, And in its heart it layeth its ambush,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For these things do not I see after them?
An affirmation of Jehovah, Against a nation such as this doth not My
soul avenge itself?

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> For the mountains I lift up weeping and
wailing, And for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation, For
they have been burnt up without any passing over, Nor have they heard
the voice of cattle, From the fowl of the heavens unto the beast they
have fled, they have gone.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And I make Jerusalem become heaps, A
habitation of dragons, And the cities of Judah I make a desolation,
Without inhabitant.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Who \[is\] the wise man? and he
understandeth this, And he to whom the mouth of Jehovah spake? And he
doth declare it, For what hath the land perished? It hath been burnt up
as a wilderness, Without any passing through.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And Jehovah saith: Because of their
forsaking My law that I set before them, And they have not hearkened to
My voice nor walked in it,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And they walk after the stubbornness of
their heart, And after the Baalim, that their fathers taught them,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts,
God of Israel: Lo, I am causing them -- this people -- to eat wormwood,
And I have caused them to drink water of gall,

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And I have scattered them among nations
Which they knew not, they and their fathers, And have sent after them
the sword, Till I have consumed them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Consider ye,
and call for mourning women, And they come, And to the wise women send,
and they come,

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And they hasten, and lift up for us a
wailing. And run down our eyes do tears, And from our eyelids do waters
flow.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For -- a voice of wailing is heard from
Zion: How have we been spoiled! We have been greatly ashamed, Because we
have forsaken the land, Because they have cast down our tabernacles.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> But hear, ye women, a word of Jehovah,
And your ear receiveth a word of His mouth, And teach ye your daughters
wailing, and each her neighbour lamentation.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> For death hath come up into our windows,
It hath come into our palaces, To cut off the suckling from without,
Young men from the broad places.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Speak thus -- an affirmation of Jehovah,
And fallen hath the carcase of man, As dung on the face of the field,
And as a handful after the reaper, And there is none gathering.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Thus said Jehovah: Let not the wise boast
himself in his wisdom, Nor let the mighty boast himself in his might,
Let not the rich boast himself in his riches,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But -- in this let the boaster boast
himself, In understanding and knowing Me, For I \[am\] Jehovah, doing
kindness, Judgment, and righteousness, in the earth, For in these I have
delighted, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Lo, days are coming -- an affirmation of
Jehovah, And I have laid a charge on all circumcised in the foreskin,

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> On Egypt, and on Judah, and on Edom, And
on the sons of Ammon, and on Moab, And on all cutting the corner \[of
the beard\], Who are dwelling in the wilderness, For all the nations
\[are\] uncircumcised, And all the house of Israel \[are\] uncircumcised
in heart!

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Hear ye the word, O house of Israel, That
Jehovah hath spoken for you.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Thus said Jehovah: Unto the way of the
nations accustom not yourselves, And by the signs of the heavens be not
affrighted, For the nations are affrighted by them.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For the statutes of the peoples are
vanity, For a tree from a forest hath one cut, Work of the hands of an
artificer, with an axe,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> With silver and with gold they beautify
it, With nails and with hammers they fix it, And it doth not stumble.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> As a palm they \[are\] stiff, and they
speak not, They are surely borne, for they step not, Be not afraid of
them, for they do no evil, Yea, also to do good is not in them.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Because there is none like Thee, O
Jehovah, Great \[art\] Thou, and great Thy name in might.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Who doth not fear Thee, king of the
nations? For to Thee it is becoming, For among all the wise of the
nations, And in all their kingdom there is none like Thee.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And in one they are brutish and foolish,
An instruction of vanities \[is\] the tree itself.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Spread-out silver from Tarshish is
brought, And gold from Uphaz, Work of an artizan, and of the hands of a
refiner, Blue and purple \[is\] their clothing, Work of the skilful --
all of them.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And Jehovah \[is\] a God of truth, He
\[is\] a living God, and a king age-during, From His wrath shake doth
the earth, And nations endure not His indignation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Thus do ye say to them, The gods Who
the heavens and earth have not made, They do perish from the earth, And
from under these heavens.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The maker of the earth by His power,
The establisher of the world by His wisdom, Who, by His understanding,
stretched forth the heavens,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> At the voice He giveth forth, A
multitude of waters \[is\] in the heavens, And He causeth vapours to
come up from the end of the earth, Lightnings for rain He hath made, And
bringeth out wind from His treasures.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Brutish is every man by knowledge, Put
to shame is every refiner by a graven image, For false \[is\] his molten
image. And there is no breath in them.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Vanity \[are\] they, work of erring
ones, In the time of their inspection they perish.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Not like these \[is\] the Portion of
Jacob, For framer of all things \[is\] He, And Israel \[is\] the rod of
His inheritance, Jehovah of Hosts \[is\] His name.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Gather from the land thy merchandise, O
dweller in the bulwark,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am
slinging out the inhabitants of the land at this time, And have been an
adversary to them, So that they are found out.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Wo to me for my breaking, Grievious
hath been my smiting, And I said, Only, this \[is\] my sickness, and I
bear it.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> My tent hath been spoiled, And all my
cords have been broken, My sons have gone out from me, and they are not,
There is none stretching out any more my tent, And raising up my
curtains.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> For the shepherds have become brutish,
And Jehovah they have not sought, Therefore they have not acted wisely,
And all their flock is scattered.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> A voice of a report, lo, it hath come,
Even a great shaking from the north country, To make the cities of Judah
a desolation, A habitation of dragons.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> I have known, O Jehovah, that not of
man \[is\] his way, Not of man the going and establishing of his step.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Chastise me, O Jehovah, only in
judgment, Not in Thine anger, lest Thou make me small.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Pour out Thy fury on the nations that
have not known Thee, And on the families that have not called in Thy
name, For they have eaten up Jacob, Yea, they have eaten him up, yea,
they consume him, And his habitation they have made desolate!

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah, saying:

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> \`Hear ye the words of this covenant, and
ye have spoken unto the men of Judah, and unto the inhabitants of
Jerusalem,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and thou hast said unto them, Thus said
Jehovah God of Israel: Cursed \[is\] the man who doth not obey the words
of this covenant,

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> That I commanded your fathers, In the day
of My bringing them out from the land of Egypt, Out of the iron furnace,
saying, Hearken to My voice, and ye have done them, According to all
that I command you, And ye have been to Me for a people, And I am to you
for God,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> In order to establish the oath that I
have sworn to your fathers, To give to them a land flowing with milk and
honey, as this day. And I answer and say, \`Amen, O Jehovah.'

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And Jehovah saith unto me, \`Proclaim all
these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem,
saying: Hear ye the words of this covenant, And ye have done them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For I certainly testified against your
fathers, In the day of My bringing them up out of the land of Egypt --
till this day, Rising early and testifying, saying, Hearken to My voice,

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And they have not hearkened nor inclined
their ear, And they walk each in the stubbornness of their evil heart,
And I bring on them all the words of this covenant, That I commanded to
do, and they did not.'

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Jehovah saith unto me: \`A conspiracy
is found in the men of Judah, And in the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They have turned back to the iniquities
of their first fathers, Who refused to hear My words, And they have gone
after other gods to serve them, The house of Israel, and the house of
Judah, Have made void My covenant, that I made with their fathers.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Therefore thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am
bringing in unto them evil, That they are not able to go out from, And
they have cried unto Me, And I do not hearken unto them.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the cities of Judah, and
inhabitants of Jerusalem have gone, And they have cried unto the gods,
To whom they are making perfume, And they give no deliverance at all to
them, In the time of their vexation.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For -- the number of thy cities have
been thy gods, O Judah, And -- the number of the streets of Jerusalem Ye
have placed altars to a shameful thing, Altars to make perfume to Baal.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And thou, thou dost not pray for this
people, Nor dost thou lift up for them cry and prayer, For I do not
hearken in the time of their calling unto Me for their vexation.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> What -- to My beloved in My house, Her
doing wickedness with many, And the holy flesh do pass over from thee?
When thou dost evil, then thou exultest.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> \`An olive, green, fair, of goodly
fruit,' Hath Jehovah called thy name, At the noise of a great tumult He
hath kindled fire against it, And broken have been its thin branches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And Jehovah of Hosts, who is planting
thee, Hath spoken evil concerning thee, For the evil of the house of
Israel, and of the house of Judah, That they have done to themselves, To
provoke Me to anger, to make perfume to Baal.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And, O Jehovah, cause me to know, and I
know, Then Thou hast showed me their doings.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And I \[am\] as a trained lamb brought
to slaughter, And I have not known That against me they have devised
devices: We destroy the tree with its food, and cut him off From the
land of the living, And his name is not remembered again.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And O Jehovah of Hosts, judging
righteousness, Trying reins and heart, I do see Thy vengeance against
them, For unto Thee I have revealed my cause.'

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah concerning
the men of Anathoth, who are seeking thy life, saying: Do not prophesy
in the name of Jehovah, And thou dost not die by our hands.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts:
\`Lo, I am seeing after them, The chosen ones die by sword, Their sons
and their daughters die by famine,

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And they have no remnant, For I bring
evil unto the men of Anathoth, The year of their inspection!'

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Righteous \[art\] Thou, O Jehovah, When I
plead towards thee, Only, judgments do I speak with Thee, Wherefore did
the way of the wicked prosper? At rest have been all treacherous
dealers.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Thou hast planted them, yea, they have
taken root, They go on, yea, they have made fruit, Near \[art\] Thou in
their mouth, And far off from their reins.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And Thou, O Jehovah, Thou hast known me,
Thou seest me, and hast tried my heart with Thee, Draw them away as
sheep to slaughter, And separate them for a day of slaughter.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Till when doth the earth mourn, And the
herb of the whole field wither? For the wickedness of those dwelling in
it, Consumed have been beast and fowl, Because they said, \`He doth not
see our latter end.'

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> For -- with footmen thou hast run, And
they weary thee, And how dost thou fret thyself with horses! Even in the
land of peace, \[In which\] thou art confident -- And how dost thou in
the rising of Jordan!

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For even thy brethren and the house of
thy father, Even they dealt treacherously against thee, Even they --
they called after thee fully, Trust not in them, when they speak to thee
good things.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> I have forsaken My house, I have left
Mine inheritance, I have given the beloved of My soul Into the hand of
her enemies.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Mine inheritance hath been to Me as a
lion in a forest, She gave forth against Me with her voice, Therefore I
have hated her.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> A speckled fowl \[is\] Mine inheritance
to Me? Is the fowl round about against her? Come, assemble, every beast
of the field, Come ye for food.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Many shepherds did destroy My vineyard,
They have trodden down My portion, They have made My desirable portion
Become a wilderness -- a desolation.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> He hath made it become a desolation,
The desolation hath mourned unto Me, Desolated hath been all the land,
But there is no one laying it to heart.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> On all high places in the plain have
spoilers come in, For the sword of Jehovah is consuming, From the end of
the land even unto the end of the land, There is no peace to any flesh.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> They sowed wheat, and have thorns
reaped, They have become sick -- they profit not, And they have been
ashamed of your increases, Because of the fierceness of the anger of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Thus said Jehovah concerning all my
evil neighbours, who are striking against the inheritance that I caused
my people -- Israel -- to inherit: \`Lo, I am plucking them from off
their ground, And the house of Judah I pluck out of their midst.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And it hath been, after My plucking
them out, I turn back, and have pitied them, And I have brought them
back, Each to his inheritance, and each to his land.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And it hath come to pass, If they learn
well the ways of My people, To swear by My name, \`Jehovah liveth,' As
they taught My people to swear by Baal, Then they have been built up in
the midst of My people.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And if they do not hearken, Then I have
plucked up that nation, Plucking up and destroying, An affirmation of
Jehovah!'

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Thus said Jehovah unto me, \`Go, and thou
hast got for thee a girdle of linen, and hast placed it on thy loins,
and into water thou dost not cause it to enter:'

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and I get the girdle, according to the
word of Jehovah, and I place \[it\] on my loins.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me a
second time, saying,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> \`Take the girdle that thou hast got,
that \[is\] on thy loins, and rise, go to Phrat, and hide it there in a
hole of the rock;

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> and I go and hide it by Phrat, as Jehovah
commanded me.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And it cometh to pass, at the end of many
days, that Jehovah saith unto me, \`Rise, go to Phrat, and take thence
the girdle, that I commanded thee to hide there;'

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> and I go to Phrat, and dig, and take the
girdle from the place where I had hid it; and lo, the girdle hath been
marred, it is not profitable for anything.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me,
saying, \`Thus said Jehovah:

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Thus do I mar the excellency of Judah,
And the great excellency of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> This evil people, who refuse to hear My
words, Who walk in the stubbornness of their heart, And go after other
gods to serve them, And to bow themselves to them, Yea it is -- as this
girdle, that is not profitable for anything.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For, as the girdle cleaveth unto the
loins of a man, So I caused to cleave unto Me The whole house of Israel,
And the whole house of Judah, an affirmation of Jehovah, To be to Me for
a people, and for a name, And for praise, and for beauty, And they have
not hearkened.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And thou hast said unto them this word,
Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, \`Every bottle is full of wine,' And
they have said unto thee: \`Do we not certainly know that every bottle
is full of wine?'

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And thou hast said unto them, \`Thus
said Jehovah: Lo, I am filling all the inhabitants of this land, And the
kings who sit for David on his throne, And the priests, and the
prophets, And all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, \[With\] drunkenness,

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And have dashed them one against
another, And the fathers and the sons together, An affirmation of
Jehovah, I do not pity, nor spare, nor have I mercy, So as not to
destroy them.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Hear, and give ear -- be not haughty,
For Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Give ye to Jehovah your God honour,
Before He doth cause darkness, And before your feet stumble on dark
mountains, And ye have waited for light, And He hath made it for
death-shade, And hath appointed \[it\] for thick darkness.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And if ye do not hear it, In secret
places doth my soul weep, because of pride, Yea, it weepeth sore, And
the tear cometh down mine eyes, For the flock of Jehovah hath been taken
captive.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Say to the king and to the mistress:
Make yourselves low -- sit still, For come down have your
principalities, The crown of your beauty.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> The cities of the south have been shut
up, And there is none opening, Judah hath been removed -- all of her,
She hath been removed completely --

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Lift up your eyes, and see those coming
in from the north, Where \[is\] the drove given to thee, thy beautiful
flock?

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> What dost thou say, when He looketh
after thee? And thou -- thou hast taught them \[to be\] over thee --
leaders for head? Do not pangs seize thee as a travailing woman?

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And when thou dost say in thy heart,
\`Wherefore have these met me?' For the abundance of thine iniquity Have
thy skirts been uncovered, Have thy heels suffered violence.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Doth a Cushite change his skin? and a
leopard his spots? Ye also are able to do good, who are accustomed to do
evil.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And I scatter them as stubble, Passing
away, by a wind of the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> This \[is\] thy lot, the portion of thy
measures from Me -- an affirmation of Jehovah, Because thou hast
forgotten me, And dost trust in falsehood.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> I also have made bare thy skirts before
thy face, And thy shame hath been seen.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> Thine adulteries, and thy neighings,
The wickedness of thy whoredom, on heights in a field, I have seen thine
abominations. Wo to thee, O Jerusalem, Thou art not cleansed, after when
\[is it\] again?

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> That which hath been the word of Jehovah
unto Jeremiah concerning the matters of the dearths:

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Mourned hath Judah, and her gates have
languished, They have mourned to the earth, And the cry of Jerusalem
hath gone up.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And their honourable ones have sent their
little ones to the water, They have come unto ditches, They have not
found water, They have turned back -- their vessels empty! They have
been ashamed, And have blushed and covered their head.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Because the ground hath been broken, For
there hath been no rain in the land, Ashamed have been husbandmen, They
have covered their head.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> For even the hind in the field hath
brought forth -- to forsake \[it!\] For there hath been no grass.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And wild asses have stood on high places,
They have swallowed up wind like dragons, Consumed have been their eyes,
for there is no herb.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Surely our iniquities have testified
against us, O Jehovah, work for Thy name's sake, For many have been our
backslidings, Against Thee we have sinned.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> O Hope of Israel -- its saviour in time
of trouble, Why art Thou as a sojourner in the land? And as a traveller
turned aside to lodge?

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Why art Thou as one dumb? As a mighty one
not able to save? And Thou \[art\] in our midst, O Jehovah, And Thy name
over us is called, leave us not.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Thus said Jehovah concerning this
people: Well they have loved to wander, Their feet they have not
restrained, And Jehovah hath not accepted them, Now doth He remember
their iniquity, And inspect their sin.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And Jehovah saith unto me: Thou dost
not pray for this people for good,

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> When they fast, I hearken not unto
their cry, And when they cause to ascend burnt-offering and present, I
accept them not, For by sword, and by famine, And by pestilence, I am
consuming them.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And I say, \`Ah, Lord Jehovah, Lo, the
prophets are saying to them: Ye do not see a sword, yea, famine is not
to you, For true peace I give to you in this place.'

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And Jehovah saith unto me: Falsehood
the prophets are prophesying in My name, I did not send them, nor
command them, Nor have I spoken unto them: A false vision, and
divination, and vanity, And the deceit of their own heart, they are
prophesying to you.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah concerning
the prophets who are prophesying in My name, and I have not sent them,
and they are saying, Sword and famine is not in this land: By sword and
by famine are these prophets consumed.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And the people to whom they are
prophesying, Are cast into out-places of Jerusalem, Because of the
famine, and of the sword, And they have none burying them, Them, their
wives, and their sons, and their daughters, And I have poured out upon
them this evil.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And thou hast said unto them this word:
Tears come down mine eyes night and day, And they do not cease, For,
\[with\] a great breach, Broken hath been the virgin daughter of my
people, A very grievous stroke.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> If I have gone forth to the field,
Then, lo, the pierced of the sword! And if I have entered the city,
Then, lo, the diseased of famine! For both prophet and priest have gone
up and down Unto a land that they knew not.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Hast Thou utterly rejected Judah? Zion
hath Thy soul loathed? Wherefore hast Thou smitten us, And there is no
healing to us? Looking for peace, and there is no good, And for a time
of healing, and lo, terror.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> We have known, O Jehovah, our
wickedness, The iniquity of our fathers, For we have sinned against
Thee.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Do not despise, for Thy name's sake,
Dishonour not the throne of Thine honour, Remember, break not Thy
covenant with us.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Are there among the vanities of the
nations any causing rain? And do the heavens give showers? Art not Thou
He, O Jehovah our God? And we wait for thee, for Thou -- Thou hast done
all these!

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto me: Though Moses
and Samuel should stand before Me, My soul is not toward this people,
Send from before My face, and they go out.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And it hath come to pass, when they say
to thee, Whither do we go out? that thou hast said unto them, Thus said
Jehovah: Those who \[are\] for death -- to death, And those who are for
the sword, to the sword, And those who are for famine, to famine, And
those who are for captivity, to captivity.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And I have appointed over them four
kinds, an affirmation of Jehovah, The sword to slay, and the dogs to
drag, And the fowl of the heavens, And the beast of the earth, to
consume and to devour.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And I have given them for a trembling To
all kingdoms of the earth, Because of Manasseh son of Hezekiah king of
Judah, For that which he did in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For who hath pity on thee, O Jerusalem?
And who doth bemoan for thee? And who turneth aside to ask of thy
welfare?

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thou -- thou hast left Me -- an
affirmation of Jehovah, Backward thou goest, And I stretch out My hand
against thee, And I destroy thee, I have been weary of repenting,

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And I scatter them with a fan, in the
gates the land, I bereaved, I have destroyed My people, From their ways
they turned not back.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Its widows have been more to Me than the
sand of the seas, I brought in to them -- against the mother -- A young
man -- a spoiler -- at noon. I caused to fall upon her suddenly, wrath
and trouble.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Languished hath the bearer of seven, She
hath breathed out her spirit, Gone in hath her sun while yet day, It
hath been ashamed and confounded, And their residue to the sword I give
up before their enemies, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Wo to me, my mother, For thou hast
borne me a man of strife, And a man of contention to all the land, I
have not lent on usury, Nor have they lent on usury to me -- All of them
are reviling me.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Jehovah said, Did I not direct thee for
good? Did not I intercede for thee in a time of evil, And in a time of
adversity, with the enemy?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Doth one break iron -- northern iron,
and brass?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Thy strength and thy treasures For a
prey I do give -- not for price, Even for all thy sins, and in all thy
borders.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And I have caused thine enemies To pass
over into the land -- Thou hast not known, For a fire hath been kindled
in Mine anger, Against you it doth burn.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Thou, Thou hast known, O Jehovah,
Remember me, and inspect me, And take vengeance for me of my pursuers,
In Thy long-suffering take me not away, Know -- I have borne for Thee
reproach.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Thy words have been found, and I eat
them, And Thy word is to me for a joy, And for the rejoicing of my
heart, For Thy name is called on me, O Jehovah, God of Hosts.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I have not sat in an assembly of
deriders, Nor do I exult, because of thy hand, -- Alone I have sat, For
\[with\] indignation Thou hast filled me.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Why hath my pain been perpetual? And my
wound incurable? It hath refused to be healed, Thou art surely to me as
a failing stream, Waters not stedfast.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah: If thou
turnest back, then I bring thee back, Before Me thou dost stand, And if
thou bringest out the precious from the vile, As My mouth thou art! They
-- they turn back unto thee, And thou dost not turn back unto them.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And I have made thee to this people For
a wall -- brazen -- fenced, And they have fought against thee, And they
do not prevail against thee, For with thee \[am\] I to save thee, And to
deliver thee -- an affirmation of Jehovah,

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And I have delivered thee from the hand
of evil doers, And I have ransomed thee From the hand of the terrible!

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me,
saying:

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Thou dost not take to thee a wife, Nor
hast thou sons and daughters in this place.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> For thus said Jehovah, Of the sons and of
the daughters who are born in this place, And of their mothers -- those
bearing them, And of their fathers -- those begetting them in this land:

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Of painful deaths they die, They are not
lamented, nor are they buried, For dung on the face of the ground they
are, And by sword and by famine are consumed, And their carcase hath
been for food To the fowl of the heavens, And to the beast of the earth.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> For thus said Jehovah: Do not enter the
house of a mourning-feast, Nor go to lament nor bemoan for them, For I
have removed My peace from this people, An affirmation of Jehovah, The
kindness and the mercies.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And died have great and small in this
land, They are not buried, and none lament for them, Nor doth any cut
himself, nor become bald for them.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Nor do they deal out to them for
mourning, To comfort him concerning the dead, Nor cause them to drink a
cup of consolations For his father and for his mother.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> A house of banqueting thou dost not
enter, To sit with them, to eat and to drink,

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel: Lo, I am causing to cease from this place, Before your eyes, and
in your days, The voice of joy, and the voice of rejoicing, The voice of
bridegroom and voice of bride.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And it hath come to pass when thou
declarest to this people all these words, and they have said unto thee,
\`For what hath Jehovah spoken against us all this great evil? yea, what
\[is\] our iniquity, and what our sin, that we have sinned against
Jehovah our God?'

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Then thou hast said unto them: Because
that your fathers have forsaken Me, An affirmation of Jehovah, And go
after other gods, and serve them, And they bow themselves to them, And
Me have forsaken, and My law not kept,

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Ye also have done evil above your
fathers, And lo, ye are walking each after the stubbornness of his evil
heart, So as not to hearken unto Me.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And I have cast you from off this land,
On to a land that ye have not known, Ye and your fathers, And ye have
served there other gods by day and by night, Where I do not give to you
grace.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Therefore, lo, days are coming, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And it is not said any more: \`Jehovah liveth,
who brought up The sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt,'

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> But, \`Jehovah liveth, who brought up
The sons of Israel out of the land of the north, And out of all the
lands whither He drove them,' And I have brought them back to their
land, That I gave to their fathers.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Lo, I am sending for many fishers, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And they have fished them, And after this I send
for many hunters, And they have hunted them from off every mountain, And
from off every hill, and from holes of the rocks.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> For Mine eyes \[are\] upon all their
ways, They have not been hidden from My face, Nor hath their iniquity
been concealed from before Mine eyes.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And I have recompensed a first -- A
second time -- their iniquity and their sin, Because of their polluting
My land, With the carcase of their detestable things, Yea, their
abominable things have filled Mine inheritance.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> O Jehovah, my strength, and my
fortress, And my refuge in a day of adversity, Unto Thee nations do come
from the ends of earth, And say, Only falsehood did our fathers inherit,
Vanity, and none among them is profitable.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Doth man make for himself gods, And
they -- no gods?

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Therefore, lo, I am causing them to
know at this time, I cause them to know My hand and My might, And they
have known that My name \[is\] Jehovah!

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> The sin of Judah is written with a pen of
iron, With the point of a diamond, Graven on the tablet of their heart,
And on the horns of your altars,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> As their sons remember their altars and
their shrines, By the green tree, by the high hills.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> O My mountain in the field -- thy
strength, All thy treasures -- for a prey I give, Thy high places for
sin in all thy borders.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And thou hast let go -- even through
thyself, Of thine inheritance that I gave to thee, And I have caused
thee to serve thine enemies, In a land that thou hast not known, For a
fire ye have kindled in Mine anger, Unto the age it doth burn.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Thus said Jehovah: Cursed \[is\] the man
who doth trust in man, And hath made flesh his arm, And from Jehovah
whose heart turneth.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And he hath been as a naked thing in a
desert, And doth not see when good cometh, And hath inhabited parched
places in a wilderness, A salt land, and not inhabited.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Blessed \[is\] the man who trusteth in
Jehovah, And whose confidence hath been Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And hath been as a tree planted by
waters, And by a rivulet he sendeth forth his roots, And he doth not see
when heat cometh, And his leaf hath been green, And in a year of dearth
he is not sorrowful, Nor doth he cease from making fruit.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Crooked \[is\] the heart above all
things, And it \[is\] incurable -- who doth know it?

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> I Jehovah do search the heart, try the
reins, Even to give to each according to his way, According to the fruit
of his doings.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> A partridge hatching, and not bringing
forth, \[Is\] one making wealth, and not by right, In the midst of his
days he doth forsake it, And in his latter end -- he is a fool.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> A throne of honour on high from the
beginning, The place of our sanctuary,

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> The hope of Israel \[is\] Jehovah, All
forsaking Thee are ashamed, And \`My apostates' in the earth are
written, For they have forsaken Jehovah, A fountain of living waters.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Heal me, O Jehovah, and I am healed,
Save me, and I am saved, for my praise \[art\] Thou.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Lo, they are saying unto me: \`Where
\[is\] the word of Jehovah? pray, let it come.'

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And I hastened not from feeding after
Thee, And the desperate day I have not desired, Thou -- Thou hast known,
The produce of my lips, before Thy face it hath been,

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Be not Thou to me for a terror, My hope
\[art\] Thou in a day of evil.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Let my pursuers be ashamed, and let not
me be ashamed -- me! Let them be affrighted, and let not me be
affrighted -- me! Bring in on them a day of evil, And a second time
\[with\] destruction destroy them.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Thus said Jehovah unto me: \`Go, and
thou hast stood in the gate of the sons of the people, by which kings of
Judah come in, and by which they go out, and in all gates of Jerusalem,

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> and thou hast said unto them: Hear a
word of Jehovah, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all inhabitants
of Jerusalem, who are coming in by these gates,

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> Thus said Jehovah, Take ye heed to
yourselves, And ye bear not a burden on the day of rest, Nor have ye
brought \[it\] in by the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Nor do ye take out a burden from your
houses on the day of rest, Yea, any work ye do not do, And ye have
sanctified the day of rest, As I have commanded your fathers.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And they have not hearkened nor
inclined their ear, And they stiffen their neck not to hear, And not to
receive instruction.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And it hath been, if ye certainly
hearken unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah, So as not to bring in a
burden By the gates of this city on the day of rest, And to sanctify the
day of rest, So as not to do in it any work --

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Then entered by the gates of this city
have kings and princes, Sitting on the throne of David, Riding in a
chariot, and on horses, They, and their princes, the man of Judah, And
inhabitants of Jerusalem, And this city hath remained to the age.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And they have come in from cities of
Judah, And from suburbs of Jerusalem, And from the land of Benjamin, And
from the low country, And from the hill-country, and from the south,
Bringing in burnt-offering, and sacrifice, And present, and
frankincense, And bringing praise \[to\] the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And if ye do not hearken unto me to
sanctify the day of rest, And so as not to bear a burden, And to come in
at the gates of Jerusalem on the day of rest, Then I have kindled a fire
in its gates, And it hath consumed the high places of Jerusalem, And it
is not quenched!'

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Rise, and thou hast gone down \[to\] the
potter's house, and there I cause thee to hear My words;

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and I go down \[to\] the potter's house,
and lo, he is doing a work on the stones,

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> and marred is the vessel that he is
making, as clay in the hand of the potter, and he hath turned and he
maketh it another vessel, as it was right in the eyes of the potter to
make.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And there is a word of Jehovah to me,
saying:

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> As this potter am I not able to do to
you? O house of Israel, an affirmation of Jehovah. Lo, as clay in the
hand of the potter, So \[are\] ye in My hand, O house of Israel.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The moment I speak concerning a nation,
And concerning a kingdom, To pluck up and to break down, and to destroy,

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And that nation hath turned from its
evil, Because I have spoken against it, Then I have repented of the evil
that I thought to do to it.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And the moment I speak concerning a
nation, And concerning a kingdom, to build, and to plant,

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And it hath done the evil thing in Mine
eyes, So as not to hearken to My voice, Then I have repented of the good
That I have spoken of doing to it.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And now, speak, I pray thee, unto men
of Judah, And against inhabitants of Jerusalem, Saying: Thus said
Jehovah: Lo, I am framing against you evil, And devising against you a
device, Turn back, I pray you, each from his evil way And amen your ways
and your doings.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And they have said, It is incurable,
For after our own devices we do go, And each the stubbornness of his
evil heart we do.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah: Ask, I
pray you, among the nations, Who hath heard like these? A very horrible
thing hath the virgin of Israel done.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Doth snow of Lebanon Cease from the
rock of the field? Failed are the cold strange waters that flow?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> But My people have forgotten Me, to a
vain thing they make perfume, And they cause them to stumble in their
ways -- paths of old, To walk in paths -- a way not raised up,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> To make their land become a desolation,
A hissing age-during, Every passer by it is astonished, And bemoaneth
with his head.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> As an east wind I scatter them before
an enemy, The neck, and not the face, I shew them, In the day of their
calamity.'

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And they say, Come, And we devise
against Jeremiah devices, For law doth not perish from the priest, Nor
counsel from the wise, Nor the word from the prophet, Come, and we smite
him with the tongue, And we do not attend to any of his words.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Give attention, O Jehovah, unto me, And
hearken to the voice of those contending with me.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Is evil recompensed instead of good,
That they have dug a pit for my soul? Remember my standing before Thee
to speak good of them, To turn back Thy wrath from them.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Therefore, give up their sons to
famine, And cause them to run on the sides of the sword, And their wives
are bereaved and widows, And their men are slain by death, Their young
men smitten by sword in battle,

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> A cry is heard from their houses, For
Thou bringest against them suddenly a troop, For they dug a pit to
capture me, And snares they have hidden for my feet.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And Thou, O Jehovah, Thou hast known,
All their counsel against me \[is\] for death, Thou dost not cover over
their iniquity, Nor their sin from before Thee blottest out, And they
are made to stumble before Thee, In the time of Thine anger work against
them!

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Thus said Jehovah, \`Go, and thou hast
got a potter's earthen vessel, and of the elders of the people, and of
the elders of the priests,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and thou hast gone forth unto the valley
of the son of Hinnom, that \[is\] at the opening of the gate of the
pottery, and hast proclaimed there the words that I speak unto thee,

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> and hast said, Hear a word of Jehovah, ye
kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, Thus said Jehovah of
Hosts, God of Israel: \`Lo, I am bringing in evil on this place, at
which the ears of every one who is hearing it do tingle,

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> because that they have forsaken Me, and
make known this place, and make perfume in it to other gods, that they
knew not, they and their fathers, and the kings of Judah, and they have
filled this place \[with\] innocent blood,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> and have built the high places of Baal to
burn their sons with fire, burnt-offerings to Baal, that I commanded
not, nor spake of, nor did it come up on My heart.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> \`Therefore, lo, days are coming -- an
affirmation of Jehovah -- and this place is not called any more, Tophet,
and Valley of the son of Hinnom, but, Valley of slaughter.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And I have made void the counsel of Judah
and Jerusalem in this place, and have caused them to fall by the sword
before their enemies, and by the hand of those seeking their life, and I
have given their carcase for food to the fowl of the heavens, and to the
beast of the earth,

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> and I have made this city for a
desolation, and for a hissing, every passer by it is astonished, and
doth hiss for all its plagues.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And I have caused them to eat the flesh
of their sons, and the flesh of their daughters, and each the flesh of
his friend they do eat, in the siege and in the straitness with which
straiten them do their enemies, and those seeking their life.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> \`And thou hast broken the bottle
before the eyes of the men who are going with thee,

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> and hast said unto them: Thus said
Jehovah of Hosts, Thus do I break this people and this city, as one
breaketh the potter's vessel, that is not able to be repaired again, and
in Tophet they bury -- without place to bury;

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> so I do to this place -- an affirmation
of Jehovah -- and to its inhabitants, so as to make this city as Tophet;

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> and the houses of Jerusalem, and the
houses of the kings of Judah, have been -- as the place of Tophet --
defiled, even all the houses on whose roofs they have made perfume to
all the host of the heavens, so as to pour out oblations to other gods.'

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Jeremiah cometh in from Tophet,
whither Jehovah had sent him to prophesy, and he standeth in the court
of the house of Jehovah, and he saith unto all the people:

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel: Lo, I am bringing in unto this city, and on all its cities, all
the evil that I have spoken against it, for they have hardened their
neck -- not to hear My words!'

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And Pashhur son of Immer the priest --
who also \[is\] overseer, leader in the house of Jehovah -- heareth
Jeremiah prophesying these things,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> and Pashhur smiteth Jeremiah the prophet,
and putteth him unto the stocks, that \[are\] by the high gate of
Benjamin, that \[is\] by the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> and it cometh to pass on the morrow, that
Pashhur bringeth out Jeremiah from the stocks, and Jeremiah saith unto
him, \`Not Pashhur hath Jehovah called thy name, but -- Magor-Missabib.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> For thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am making
thee for a fear to thyself, And to all loving thee, And they have fallen
by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes are beholding, And all
Judah I give into the hand of the king of Babylon, And he hath removed
them to Babylon, And he hath smitten them with the sword.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And I have given all the strength of this
city, And all its labour, and all its precious things, Yea, all the
treasures of the kings of Judah I do give into the hand of their
enemies, And they have spoiled them, and taken them, And have brought
them into Babylon.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And thou, Pashhur, and all dwelling in
thy house, Do go into captivity. and Babylon thou dost enter, And there
thou diest, and there thou art buried, Thou and all loving thee, To whom
thou hast prophesied falsely.'

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Thou hast persuaded me, O Jehovah, and I
am persuaded; Thou hast hardened me, and dost prevail, I have been for a
laughter all the day, Every one is mocking at me,

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Because from the time I speak I cry out,
\`Violence and destruction,' I cry, For the word of Jehovah hath been to
me For reproach and for derision all the day.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And I said, \`I do not mention Him, Nor
do I speak any more in His name,' And it hath been in my heart As a
burning fire shut up in my bones, And I have been weary of containing,
And I am not able.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> For I have heard the evil report of
many, Fear \[is\] round about: \`Declare, and we declare it,' All mine
allies are watching \[for\] my halting, \`Perhaps he is enticed, and we
prevail over him, And we take our vengeance out of him.'

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And Jehovah \[is\] with me, as a
terrible mighty one, Therefore my persecutors stumble and prevail not,
They have been exceedingly ashamed, For they have not acted wisely,
Confusion age-during is not forgotten.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And, O Jehovah of Hosts, trier of the
righteous, Beholder of reins and heart, I do see Thy vengeance out of
them, For unto Thee I have revealed my cause.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Sing ye to Jehovah, praise Jehovah, For
He hath delivered the soul of the needy From the hand of evil doers.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Cursed \[is\] the day in which I was
born, The day that my mother bare me, Let it not be blessed!

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Cursed \[is\] the man who bore tidings
\[to\] my father, saying, \`Born to thee hath been a child -- a male,'
Making him very glad!

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Then hath that man been as the cities,
That Jehovah overthrew, and repented not, And he hath heard a cry at
morning, And a shout at time of noon.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Because he hath not put me to death
from the womb, And my mother is to me -- my grave, And her womb a
pregnancy age-during.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Why \[is\] this? from the womb I have
come out, To see labour and sorrow, Yea, consumed in shame are my days!

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah, in the king Zedekiah's sending unto him Pashhur son of
Malchiah, and Zephaniah son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> \`Inquire, we pray thee, for us at
Jehovah, for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath fought against us;
perhaps Jehovah doth deal with us according to all His wonders, and doth
cause him to go up from off us.'

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And Jeremiah saith unto them, \`Thus do
ye say unto Zedekiah,

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel: Lo, I
am turning round the weapons of battle That \[are\] in your hand, With
which ye do fight the king of Babylon, And the Chaldeans, who are laying
siege against you, At the outside of the wall, And I have gathered them
into the midst of this city,

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And I -- I have fought against you, With
a stretched-out hand, and with a strong arm, And in anger, and in fury,
and in great wrath,

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And I have smitten the inhabitants of
this city, Both man and beast, By a great pestilence do they die.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And after this -- an affirmation of
Jehovah, I give Zedekiah king of Judah, And his servants, and the
people, And those left in this city, From the pestilence, from the
sword, and from the famine, Into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon, And into the hand of their enemies, And into the hand of those
seeking their life, And he hath smitten them by the mouth of the sword,
He hath no pity on them, Nor doth he spare, nor hath he mercy.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And unto this people thou dost say, Thus
said Jehovah: Lo, I am setting before you the way of life, And the way
of death!

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Whoso is abiding in this city -- dieth,
By sword, and by famine, and by pestilence, And whoso is going forth,
And hath fallen unto the Chaldeans, Who are laying siege against you --
liveth, And his life hath been to him for a spoil.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> For I have set My face against this
city for evil, And not for good -- an affirmation of Jehovah. Into the
hand of the king of Babylon it is given, And he hath burned it with
fire.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And as to the house of the king of
Judah, Hear ye a word of Jehovah;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> O house of David, thus said Jehovah:
Decide ye judgment at morning, And deliver the plundered from the hand
of the oppressor, Lest My fury go forth as fire, And hath burned, and
none is quenching, Because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Lo, I \[am\] against thee -- an
affirmation of Jehovah, O inhabitant of the valley, rock of the plain,
Who are saying, Who cometh down against us? And who cometh into our
habitations?

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And I have laid a charge against you,
According to the fruit of your doings, An affirmation of Jehovah, And I
have kindled a fire in its forest, And it hath consumed -- all its
suburbs!

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Thus said Jehovah, \`Go down \[to\] the
house of the king of Judah, and thou hast spoken there this word, and
hast said,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Hear a word of Jehovah, O king of Judah,
who art sitting on the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy
people, who are coming in at these gates,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Thus said Jehovah: Do ye judgment and
righteousness, And deliver the plundered from the hand of the oppressor,
And sojourner, orphan, and widow, ye do not oppress nor wrong, And
innocent blood ye do not shed in this place.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> For, if ye certainly do this thing, Then
come in by the gates of this house Have kings sitting for David on his
throne, Riding on chariot, and on horses, He, and his servants, and his
people.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And if ye do not hear these words, By
myself I have sworn -- an affirmation of Jehovah, That this house is for
a desolation.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For thus said Jehovah, Concerning the
house of the king of Judah: Gilead \[art\] thou to Me -- head of
Lebanon, If not -- I make thee a wilderness, Cities not inhabited.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And I have separated for thee destroyers,
Each with his weapons, And they have cut down the choice of thy cedars,
And have cast them on the fire.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And many nations have passed by this
city, And they have said, each to his neighbour, For what hath Jehovah
done thus to this great city?

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they have said, \`Because that they
have forsaken The covenant of Jehovah their God, And bow themselves to
other gods, and serve them.'

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Ye do not weep for the dead, nor bemoan
for him, Weep ye sore for the traveller, For he doth not return again,
Nor hath he seen the land of his birth.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> For thus said Jehovah concerning
Shallum son of Josiah king of Judah, who is reigning instead of Josiah
his father, who hath gone forth from this place: He doth not turn back
hither again;

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> For in the place whither they have
removed him he dieth, And this land he doth not see again.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Wo to him who is building his house by
unrighteousness, And his upper chambers by injustice, On his neighbour
he layeth service for nought, And his wage he doth not give to him.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Who is saying, \`I build for myself a
large house, And airy upper chambers,' And he hath cut out for himself
its windows, Ceiled with cedar, and painted with vermillion.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Dost thou reign, because thou art
fretting thyself in cedar? Thy father -- did he not eat and drink? Yea,
he did judgment and righteousness, Then \[it is\] well with him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He decided the cause of the poor and
needy, Then \[it is\] well -- is it not to know Me? An affirmation of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> But thine eyes and thy heart are not,
Except on thy dishonest gain, And on shedding of innocent blood, And on
oppression, and on doing of violence.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah concerning
Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah: They do not lament for him, Ah,
my brother, and Ah, sister, They do not lament for him, Ah, lord, and
Ah, his honour.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> The burial of an ass -- he is buried,
Dragged and cast out thence to the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Go up to Lebanon, and cry, And in
Bashan give forth thy voice, And cry from Abarim, For destroyed have
been all loving thee.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> I have spoken unto thee in thine ease,
Thou hast said, \`I do not hearken,' This \[is\] thy way from thy youth,
For thou hast not hearkened to My voice.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> All thy friends consume doth wind, And
thy lovers into captivity do go, Surely then thou art ashamed, And hast
blushed for all thy wickedness.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> O dweller in Lebanon, making a nest
among cedars, How gracious hast thou been when pangs come to thee, Pain
-- as of a travailing woman.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> I live -- an affirmation of Jehovah,
Though Coniah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah Were a seal on My right
hand, Surely thence I draw thee away,

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And I have given thee into the hand of
those seeking thy life, And into hands of which thou art afraid, Into
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, And into the hand of the
Chaldeans.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And I have cast thee, And thy mother
who bore thee, unto another country, Where ye were not born, and there
do ye die.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And to the land whither they are
lifting up their soul to return, Thither they do not return.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> A grief -- a despised broken thing --
is this man Coniah? A vessel in which there is no pleasure? Wherefore
have they been cast up and down, He and his seed, Yea, they were cast on
to a land that they knew not?

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Earth, earth, earth, hear a word of
Jehovah,

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> Thus said Jehovah: Write ye this man
childless, A man -- he doth not prosper in his days, For none of his
seed doth prosper, Sitting on the throne of David, And ruling again in
Judah!

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Wo to shepherds destroying, And
scattering the flock of My pasture, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah, God of
Israel, Against the shepherds who feed My people, Ye have scattered My
flock, and drive them away, And have not inspected them, Lo, I am
charging on you the evil of your doings, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And I do gather the remnant of My flock
Out of all the lands whither I drove them, And have brought them back
unto their fold, And they have been fruitful, and multiplied.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And I have raised for them shepherds, And
they have fed them, And they fear no more, nor are affrighted, Nor are
they lacking -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Lo, days are coming -- an affirmation of
Jehovah, And I have raised to David a righteous shoot, And a king hath
reigned and acted wisely, And done judgment and righteousness in the
earth.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> In his days is Judah saved, and Israel
dwelleth confidently, And this his name that Jehovah proclaimeth him,
\`Our Righteousness.'

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Therefore, lo, days are coming, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And they do not say any more, Jehovah liveth who
brought up The sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But -- Jehovah liveth, who brought up,
And who brought in, the seed of the house of Israel, From the land of
the north, And from all the lands whither I drove them, And they have
dwelt on their own ground!

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> In reference to the prophets: Broken hath
been my heart in my midst, Fluttered have all my bones, I have been as a
man -- a drunkard, And as a man -- wine hath passed over him, Because of
Jehovah, and of His holy words.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> For of adulterers hath the land been
full, For because of these hath the land mourned, Dried up hath been the
pleasant places of the wilderness, And their course is evil, and their
might -- not right.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> For both prophet and priest have been
profane, Yea, in My house I found their wickedness, An affirmation of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Therefore is their way to them as
slippery places, Into thick darkness they are driven, And they have
fallen in it, For I bring in against them evil, The year of their
inspection, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And in prophets of Samaria I have seen
folly, They have prophesied by Baal, And cause my people -- Israel -- to
err.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And in prophets of Jerusalem I have
seen a horrible thing, Committing adultery, and walking falsely, Yea,
they strengthened the hands of evil doers, So that they have not turned
back Each from his wickedness, They have been to me -- all of them -- as
Sodom, And its inhabitants as Gomorrah.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts,
concerning the prophets: Lo, I am causing them to eat wormwood, And have
caused them to drink water of gall, For, from prophets of Jerusalem Hath
profanity gone forth to all the land.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Ye do not
hearken unto the words Of the prophets who are prophesying to you, They
are making you vain things, A vision of their own heart they speak, Not
from the mouth of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Saying diligently to those despising
The word of Jehovah: Peace is for you, And \[to\] every one walking in
the stubbornness of his heart they have said: Evil doth not come in unto
you.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> For who hath stood in the counsel of
Jehovah, And seeth and heareth His word? Who hath regarded My word, and
hearkeneth?

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Lo, a whirlwind of Jehovah -- Fury hath
gone out, even a piercing whirlwind, On the head of the wicked it
stayeth.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> The anger of Jehovah doth not turn back
Till His doing, and till His establishing, The thoughts of His heart, In
the latter end of the days ye attend to it With understanding.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> I have not sent the prophets, and they
have run, I have not spoken unto them, and they have prophesied.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But -- if they stood in My counsel,
Then they cause My people to hear My words, And they turn them back from
their evil way, And from the evil of their doings.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> A God near \[am\] I -- an affirmation
of Jehovah, And not a God afar off?

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Is any one hidden in secret places, And
I see him not? an affirmation of Jehovah, Do not I fill the heavens and
the earth? An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> I have heard that which the prophets
said, Who prophesy in My name falsehood, saying, \`I have dreamed, I
have dreamed.'

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Till when is it in the heart of the
prophets? The prophets of falsehood, Yea, prophets of the deceit of
their heart,

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Who are devising to cause My people To
forget My name by their dreams, That they recount each to his neighbour,
As their fathers forgot my name for Baal.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> The prophet with whom \[is\] a dream,
Let him recount the dream, And he with whom \[is\] My word, Let him
truly speak My word. What -- to the straw with the corn? An affirmation
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Is it not thus? My word \[is\] as a
fire, An affirmation of Jehovah. And as a hammer -- it breaketh in
pieces a rock.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Therefore, lo, I \[am\] against the
prophets, An affirmation of Jehovah, Stealing My words each from his
neighbour.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Lo, I \[am\] against the prophets, An
affirmation of Jehovah, Who are making smooth their tongue, And they
affirm -- an affirmation.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Lo, I \[am\] against the prophets of
false dreams, An affirmation of Jehovah, And they recount them, and
cause my people to err, By their falsehoods, and by their instability,
And I -- I have not sent them, Nor have I commanded them, And they are
not at all profitable to this people, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> And when this people, or the prophet,
Or a priest, doth ask thee, saying, What \[is\] the burden of Jehovah?
Then thou hast said unto them: Ye \[are\] the burden, and I have left
you, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And the prophet, and the priest, and
the people, That saith, The burden of Jehovah, I have seen after that
man, and after his house.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Thus do ye say each unto his neighbour,
And each unto his brother: What hath Jehovah answered? And what hath
Jehovah spoken?

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> And the burden of Jehovah ye do not
mention any more, For the burden to each is -- His word, And ye have
overturned the words of the living God, Jehovah of Hosts, our God.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> Thus dost thou say unto the prophet
What hath Jehovah answered thee? And what hath Jehovah spoken?

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> And if the burden of Jehovah ye say,
Therefore thus said Jehovah: Because of your saying this word, The
burden of Jehovah, And I do send unto you, saying, Ye do not say, The
burden of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> Therefore, lo, I -- I have taken you
utterly away, And I have sent you out, And the city that I gave to you,
And to your fathers, from before My face,

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> And I have put on you reproach
age-during, And shame age-during that is not forgotten!

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Jehovah hath shewed me, and lo, two
baskets of figs, appointed before the temple of Jehovah, -- after the
removing by Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, of Jeconiah, son of
Jehoiakim king of Judah, and the heads of Judah, and the artizan, and
the smith, from Jerusalem, when he bringeth them into Babylon --

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> In the one basket \[are\] figs very good,
like the first-ripe figs, and in the other basket \[are\] figs very bad,
that are not eaten for badness.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And Jehovah saith unto me, \`What art
thou seeing, Jeremiah?' and I say, \`Figs, the good figs \[are\] very
good, and the bad \[are\] very bad, that are not eaten for badness.'

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me,
saying:

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Like
these good figs so do I acknowledge The removed of Judah -- that I sent
from this place, \[To\] the land of the Chaldeans -- for good.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And I have set Mine eyes on them for
good, And have brought them back to this land, And built them up, and I
throw not down, And have planted them, and pluck not up.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And have given to them a heart to know
Me, For I \[am\] Jehovah, And they have been to Me for a people, And I
am to them for God, For they turned back unto Me with all their heart.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And like the bad figs, that are not eaten
for badness, Surely thus said Jehovah: So do I make Zedekiah king of
Judah, And his heads, and the remnant of Jerusalem, Who are left in this
land, And who are dwelling in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And I have given them for a trembling,
For evil -- to all kingdoms of the earth, For a reproach, and for a
simile, For a byword, and for a reviling, In all the places whither I
drive them.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And I have sent against them the sword,
The famine and the pestilence, Till their consumption from off the
ground, That I gave to them and to their fathers!

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son
of Josiah king of Judah, -- it \[is\] the first year of Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon, --

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Which Jeremiah the prophet hath spoken
concerning all the people of Judah, even unto all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, saying:

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> \`From the thirteenth year of Josiah son
of Amon king of Judah, and unto this day -- this three and twentieth
year -- hath the word of Jehovah been unto me, and I speak unto you,
rising early and speaking, and ye have not hearkened;

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And Jehovah hath sent unto you all His
servants, the prophets, rising early and sending, and ye have not
hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear, saying:

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> \`Turn back, I pray you, each from his
evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell on the ground that
Jehovah hath given to you and to your fathers from age unto age,

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And ye do not go after other gods to
serve them, and to bow yourselves to them, nor do ye provoke Me to anger
with the work of your hands, and I do no evil to you;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And ye have not hearkened unto Me -- an
affirmation of Jehovah -- so as to provoke Me to anger with the work of
your hands for evil to you.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> \`Therefore thus said Jehovah of Hosts,
Because that ye have not obeyed My words,

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Lo, I am sending, and have taken all the
families of the north -- an affirmation of Jehovah -- even unto
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, My servant, and have brought them in
against this land, and against its inhabitants, and against all these
nations round about, and have devoted them, and appointed them for an
astonishment, and for a hissing, and for wastes age-during.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And I have destroyed from them the
voice of rejoicing, and the voice of joy, voice of bridegroom and voice
of bride, noise of millstones, and the light of lamps.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And all this land hath been for a
waste, for an astonishment, and these nations have served the king of
Babylon seventy years.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> \`And it hath come to pass, at the
fulness of seventy years, I charge against the king of Babylon, and
against that nation -- an affirmation of Jehovah -- their iniquity, and
against the land of the Chaldeans, and have appointed it for desolations
age-during.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And I have brought in on that land all
My words that I have spoken against it, all that is written in this
book, that Jeremiah hath prophesied concerning all the nations.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> For laid service on them -- also them
-- have many nations and great kings, and I have given recompence to
them according to their doing, and according to the work of their hands.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> \`For thus said Jehovah God of Israel
unto me, Take the wine cup of this fury out of My hand, and thou hast
caused all the nations to drink it unto whom I am sending thee;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And they have drunk, and shaken
themselves and shewn themselves foolish, because of the sword that I am
sending among them.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> \`And I take the cup out of the hand of
Jehovah, and cause all the nations to drink unto whom Jehovah sent me:

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, And
its kings, its heads, To give them to waste, to astonishment, To
hissing, and to reviling, as \[at\] this day.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his
servants, And his heads, and all his people,

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And all the mixed people, And all the
kings of the land of Uz, And all the kings of the land of the
Philistines, And Ashkelon, and Gazzah, and Ekron, And the remnant of
Ashdod,

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> Edom, and Moab, and the sons of Ammon,

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And all the kings of Tyre, And all the
kings of Zidon, And the kings of the isle that \[is\] beyond the sea,

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, And all
cutting the corners \[of the beard\],

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And all the kings of Arabia, And all
the kings of the mixed people, Who are dwelling in the wilderness,

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And all the kings of Zimri, And all the
kings of Elam, And all the kings of Media,

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And all the kings of the north, The
near and the far off, one unto another, And all the kingdoms of the
earth, That \[are\] on the face of the ground, And king Sheshach
drinketh after them.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> And thou hast said unto them: Thus said
Jehovah of Hosts God of Israel, Drink ye, yea drink abundantly, And
vomit, and fall, and rise not, Because of the sword that I am sending
among you.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> And it hath come to pass, When they
refuse to receive the cup out of thy hand to drink, That thou hast said
unto them: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Ye do certainly drink.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> For lo, in the city over which My name
is called, I am beginning to do evil, And ye -- ye are entirely
acquitted! Ye are not acquitted, for a sword I am proclaiming, For all
inhabitants of the land, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And thou, thou dost prophesy unto them
all these words, and hast said unto them: Jehovah from the high place
doth roar, And from His holy habitation giveth forth His voice, He
surely roareth for His habitation, A shout as of treaders down, God
answereth all the inhabitants of the land,

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> Wasting hath come unto the end of the
earth, For a controversy hath Jehovah with nations, He hath executed
judgment for all flesh, The wicked! He hath given them to the sword, An
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Lo, evil is
going out from nation to nation, And a great whirlwind is stirred up
from the sides of the earth.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And the pierced of Jehovah have been in
that day, From the end of the earth even unto the end of the earth, They
are not lamented, nor gathered, nor buried, For dung on the face of the
ground they are.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Howl, ye shepherds, and cry, And roll
yourselves, ye honourable of the flock, For full have been your days,
For slaughtering, and \[for\] your scatterings, And ye have fallen as a
desirable vessel.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> And perished hath refuge from the
shepherds, And escape from the honourable of the flock.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> A voice \[is\] of the cry of the
shepherds, And a howling of the honourable of the flock, For Jehovah is
spoiling their pasture.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> And the peaceable habitations have been
cut down, Because of the fierceness of the anger of Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> He hath forsaken, as a young lion, His
covert, Surely their land hath become a desolation, Because of the
oppressing fierceness, And because of the fierceness of His anger!

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, hath this word been from
Jehovah, saying:

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah, Stand thou in the
court of the house of Jehovah, and thou hast spoken unto all \[those
of\] the cities of Judah who are coming in to bow themselves in the
house of Jehovah, all the words that I have commanded thee to speak unto
them, thou dost not diminish a word.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> If so be they hearken, and turn back each
from his evil way, then I have repented concerning the evil that I am
thinking of doing to them, because of the evil of their doings.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> \`And thou hast said unto them: Thus said
Jehovah, If ye do not hearken unto Me, to walk in My law, that I set
before you,

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> To hearken to the words of My servants
the prophets, whom I am sending unto you, yea, rising early and sending,
and ye have not hearkened,

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Then I have given up this house as
Shiloh, and this city I give up for a reviling to all nations of the
earth.'

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And the priests, and the prophets, and
all the people, hear Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of
Jehovah,

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And it cometh to pass, at the completion
of Jeremiah's speaking all that Jehovah hath commanded him to speak unto
all the people, that the priests, and the prophets, and all the people
catch him, saying, Thou dost surely die,

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Wherefore hast thou prophesied in the
name of Jehovah, saying, \`As Shiloh this house shall be, and this city
is wasted, without inhabitant?' and all the people are assembled unto
Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And the heads of Judah hear these
things, and they go up from the house of the king \[to\] the house of
Jehovah, and sit in the opening of the new gate of Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And the priests and the prophets speak
unto the heads, and unto all the people, saying, \`Judgment of death
\[is\] for this man, for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye
have heard with your ears.'

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And Jeremiah speaketh unto all the
heads, and unto all the people, saying, \`Jehovah sent me to prophesy
concerning this house, and concerning this city, all the words that ye
have heard;

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And now, amend your ways, and your
doings, and hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God, and Jehovah doth
repent concerning the evil that He hath spoken against you.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> \`And I, lo, I \[am\] in your hand, do
to me as is good and as is right in your eyes;

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Only, know ye certainly, that if ye are
putting me to death, surely innocent blood ye are putting on yourselves,
and on this city, and on its inhabitants; for truly hath Jehovah sent me
unto you to speak in your ears all these words.'

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> And the heads and all the people say
unto the priests and unto the prophets, \`There is not for this man a
judgment of death, for in the name of Jehovah our God he hath spoken
unto us.'

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And certain of the elders of the land
rise up, and speak unto all the assembly of the people, saying,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> \`Micah the Morashtite hath been
prophesying in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and he saith unto all
the people of Judah, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Zion is a
plowed field, and Jerusalem is heaps, And the mountain of the house is
for high places of a forest.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> \`Put him at all to death did Hezekiah
king of Judah, and all Judah? Did he not fear Jehovah? yea, he appeaseth
the face of Jehovah, and Jehovah repenteth concerning the evil that He
spake against them; and we are doing great evil against our souls.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> \`And also there hath been a man
prophesying in the name of Jehovah, Urijah son of Shemaiah, of
Kirjath-Jearim, and he prophesieth against this city, and against this
land according to all the words of Jeremiah,

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And the king Jehoiakim, and all his
mighty ones, and all the heads, hear his words, and the king seeketh to
put him to death, and Urijah heareth, and feareth, and fleeth, and goeth
in to Egypt.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And the king Jehoiakim sendeth men to
Egypt -- Elnathan son of Achbor, and men with him unto Egypt --

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And they bring out Urijah from Egypt,
and bring him in unto the king Jehoiakim, and he smiteth him with a
sword, and casteth his corpse unto the graves of the sons of the
people.'

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> Only, the hand of Ahikam son of Shaphan
hath been with Jeremiah so as not to give him up into the hand of the
people to put him to death.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, hath this word been unto
Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah unto me, Make to thee
bands and yokes,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And thou hast put them on thy neck, and
hast sent them unto the king of Edom, and unto the king of Moab, and
unto the king of the sons of Ammon, and unto the king of Tyre, and unto
the king of Zidon, by the hand of messengers who are coming in to
Jerusalem, unto Zedekiah king of Judah;

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And thou hast commanded them for their
lords, saying, Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel,

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Thus do ye say unto your lords, I -- I
have made the earth with man, and the cattle that \[are\] on the face of
the earth, by My great power, and by My stretched-out arm, and I have
given it to whom it hath been right in Mine eyes.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> \`And now, I -- I have given all these
lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, My servant, and
also the beast of the field I have given to him to serve him;

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And served him have all the nations, and
his son, and his son's son, till the coming in of the time of his land,
also it; and done service for him have many nations and great kings.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And it hath come to pass, the nation and
the kingdom that do not serve him -- Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon --
and that which putteth not its neck into the yoke of the king of
Babylon, with sword, and with famine, and with pestilence, I lay a
charge on that nation -- an affirmation of Jehovah -- till I consume
them by his hand.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> \`And ye, ye do not hearken unto your
prophets, and unto your diviners, and unto your dreamers, and unto your
observers of clouds, and unto your sorcerers who are speaking unto you,
saying, Ye do not serve the king of Babylon, --

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> For falsehood they are prophesying to
you, so as to remove you far from off your ground, and I have driven you
out, and ye have perished.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And the nation that causeth its neck to
enter into the yoke of the king of Babylon, and hath served him -- I
have left it on its ground -- an affirmation of Jehovah -- and it hath
tilled it, and dwelt in it.'

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And unto Zedekiah king of Judah I have
spoken according to all these words, saying, \`Cause your necks to enter
into the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and
live.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Why do ye die, thou and thy people, by
sword, by famine, and by pestilence, as Jehovah hath spoken concerning
the nation that doth not serve the king of Babylon?

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> \`And ye do not hearken unto the words
of the prophets who are speaking unto you, saying, Ye do not serve the
king of Babylon, -- for falsehood they are prophesying to you.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> For I have not sent them -- an
affirmation of Jehovah -- and they are prophesying in My name falsely,
so as to drive you out, and ye have perished, ye, and the prophets who
are prophesying to you.'

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And unto the priests, and unto all this
people, I have spoken, saying, \`Thus said Jehovah, Ye do not hearken
unto the words of your prophets, who are prophesying to you, saying, Lo,
the vessels of the house of Jehovah are brought back from Babylon now in
haste, for falsehood they are prophesying to you.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Ye do not hearken unto them, serve the
king of Babylon, and live. Why is this city a waste?

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> \`And, if they be prophets, and if a
word of Jehovah be with them, let them intercede, I pray you, with
Jehovah of Hosts, so that the vessels that are left in the house of
Jehovah, and \[in\] the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem,
have not gone into Babylon.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> For thus said Jehovah of Hosts
concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the
bases, and concerning the rest of the vessels that are left in this
city,

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> That Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
hath not taken, in his removing Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah
from Jerusalem to Babylon with all the freemen of Judah and Jerusalem,

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Surely thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God
of Israel, concerning the vessels that are left of the house of Jehovah,
and of the house of the king of Judah, and \[in\] Jerusalem:

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> To Babylon they are brought, and there
they are till the day of My inspecting them -- an affirmation of
Jehovah; then I have brought them up, and have brought them back unto
this place.'

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And it cometh to pass, in that year, in
the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth
year, in the fifth month, spoken unto me hath Hananiah son of Azur the
prophet, who \[is\] of Gibeon, in the house of Jehovah, before the eyes
of the priests, and all the people, saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> \`Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon;

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Within two years of days I am bringing
back unto this place all the vessels of the house of Jehovah that
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon hath taken from this place, and doth
carry to Babylon,

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim, king of
Judah, and all the removed of Judah, who are entering Babylon, I am
bringing back unto this place -- an affirmation of Jehovah; for I do
break the yoke of the king of Babylon.'

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And Jeremiah the prophet saith unto
Hananiah the prophet, before the eyes of the priests, and before the
eyes of all the people who are standing in the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Yea, Jeremiah the prophet saith, \`Amen!
so may Jehovah do; Jehovah establish thy words that thou hast
prophesied, to bring back the vessels of the house of Jehovah and all
the removal from Babylon, unto this place.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> \`Only, hear, I pray thee, this word that
I am speaking in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The prophets who have been before me, and
before thee, from of old, even they prophesy concerning many lands, and
concerning great kingdoms, of battle, and of evil, and of pestilence.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> The prophet who doth prophesy of peace --
by the coming in of the word of the prophet, known is the prophet that
Jehovah hath truly sent him.'

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And Hananiah the prophet taketh the
yoke from off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet, and breaketh it,

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And Hananiah speaketh before the eyes
of all the people, saying, \`Thus said Jehovah, Thus I break the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, within two years of days, from off the
neck of all the nations;' and Jeremiah the prophet goeth on his way.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah after the breaking, by Hananiah the prophet, of the yoke from
off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> \`Go, and thou hast spoken unto
Hananiah, saying, Thus said Jehovah, Yokes of wood thou hast broken, and
I have made instead of them yokes of iron;

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, A yoke of iron I have put on the neck of all these nations to
serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and they have served him, and also
the beast of the field I have given to him.'

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And Jeremiah the prophet saith unto
Hananiah the prophet, \`Hear, I pray thee, O Hananiah; Jehovah hath not
sent thee, and thou hast caused this people to trust on falsehood.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Therefore thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am
casting thee from off the face of the ground; this year thou diest, for
apostacy thou hast spoken concerning Jehovah.'

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And Hananiah the prophet dieth in that
year, in the seventh month.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And these \[are\] words of the letter
that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the remnant of the
elders of the removal, and unto the priests, and unto the prophets, and
unto all the people -- whom Nebuchadnezzar removed from Jerusalem to
Babylon,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> After the going forth of Jeconiah the
king, and the mistress, and the officers, heads of Judah and Jerusalem,
and the artificer, and the smith, from Jerusalem --

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> By the hand of Eleasah son of Shaphan,
and Gemariah son of Hilkijah, whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon -- to Babylon, saying,

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, to all the removal that I removed from Jerusalem to Babylon,

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Build ye houses, and abide; and plant ye
gardens, and eat their fruit;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Take ye wives, and beget sons and
daughters; and take for your sons wives, and your daughters give to
husbands, and they bear sons and daughters; and multiply there, and ye
are not few;

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And seek the peace of the city whither I
have removed you, and pray for it unto Jehovah, for in its peace ye have
peace.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> \`For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, Let not your prophets who \[are\] in your midst, and your
diviners, lift you up, nor hearken ye unto their dreams, thay ye are
causing \[them\] to dream;

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> For with falsehood they are prophesying
to you in My name; I have not sent them, an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> \`For thus said Jehovah, Surely at the
fulness of Babylon -- seventy years -- I inspect you, and have
established towards you My good word, to bring you back unto this place.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> For I have known the thoughts that I am
thinking towards you -- an affirmation of Jehovah; thoughts of peace,
and not of evil, to give to you posterity and hope.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> \`And ye have called Me, and have gone,
and have prayed unto Me, and I have hearkened unto you,

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And ye have sought Me, and have found,
for ye seek Me with all your heart;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> And I have been found of you -- an
affirmation of Jehovah; and I have turned back \[to\] your captivity,
and have gathered you out of all the nations, and out of all the places
whither I have driven you -- an affirmation of Jehovah -- and I have
brought you back unto the place whence I removed you.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> \`Because ye have said, Jehovah hath
raised up to us prophets in Babylon,

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> Surely thus said Jehovah concerning the
king who is sitting on the throne of David, and concerning all the
people that is dwelling in this city, your brethren who went not forth
with you in the removal;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Lo, I am
sending among them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and I have
given them up as figs that \[are\] vile, that are not eaten for badness.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And I have pursued after them with
sword, with famine, and with pestilence, and have given them for a
trembling to all kingdoms of the earth, for a curse and for an
astonishment, and for a hissing, and for a reproach among all the
nations whither I have driven them,

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Because that they have not hearkened
unto My words -- an affirmation of Jehovah -- that I sent unto them by
My servants the prophets, rising early and sending, and ye hearkened not
-- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> \`And ye, hear ye a word of Jehovah,
all ye of the captivity that I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon,

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, concerning Ahab son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah son of
Maaseiah, who are prophesying to you in My name falsehood: Lo, I am
giving them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he hath
smitten them before your eyes,

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And taken from them hath been a
reviling by all the removed of Judah that \[are\] in Babylon, saying,
Jehovah doth set thee as Zedekiah, and as Ahab, whom the king of Babylon
roasted with fire;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> Because that they have done folly in
Israel, and commit adultery with the wives of their neighbours, and
speak a word in My name falsely that I have not commanded them, and I
\[am\] He who knoweth and a witness -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> \`And unto Shemaiah the Nehelamite thou
dost speak, saying,

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, saying, Because that thou hast sent in thy name letters unto all
the people who \[are\] in Jerusalem, and unto Zephaniah son of Maaseiah
the priest, and unto all the priests, saying,

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Jehovah hath made thee priest instead
of Jehoiada the priest, for there being inspectors of the house of
Jehovah, for every one mad and making himself a prophet, and thou hast
put him unto the torture and unto the stocks.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And now, why hast thou not pushed
against Jeremiah of Anathoth, who is making himself a prophet to you?

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> Because that he hath sent unto us to
Babylon, saying, It \[is\] long, build ye houses, and abide; and plant
ye gardens, and eat their fruit.'

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And Zephaniah the priest readeth this
letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> \`Send unto all the removal, saying,
Thus said Jehovah concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite, Because that
Shemaiah prophesied to you, and I -- I have not sent him, and he doth
cause you to trust on falsehood,

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am
seeing after Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and after his seed, he hath none
dwelling in the midst of this people, nor doth he look on the good that
I am doing to My people -- an affirmation of Jehovah -- for apostacy he
hath spoken against Jehovah.'

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> \`Thus spake Jehovah, God of Israel,
saying, Write for thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee on a
book.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For, lo, days are coming -- an
affirmation of Jehovah -- and I have turned back \[to\] the captivity of
My people Israel and Judah, said Jehovah, and I have caused them to turn
back unto the land that I gave to their fathers, and they do possess
it.'

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And these \[are\] the words that Jehovah
hath spoken concerning Israel and concerning Judah:

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Surely thus said Jehovah: A voice of
trembling we have heard, Fear -- and there is no peace.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Ask, I pray you, and see, is a male
bringing forth? Wherefore have I seen every man, His hands on his loins,
as a travailing woman, And all faces have been turned to paleness?

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Wo! for great \[is\] that day, without
any like it, Yea, a time of adversity it \[is\] to Jacob, Yet out of it
he is saved.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day, An
affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, I break his yoke from off thy neck, And
thy bands I draw away, And lay no more service on him do strangers.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And they have served Jehovah their God,
And David their king whom I raise up to them.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And thou, be not afraid, My servant
Jacob, An affirmation of Jehovah, Nor be affrighted, O Israel, For, lo,
I am saving thee from afar, And thy seed from the land of their
captivity, And Jacob hath turned back and rested, And is quiet, and
there is none troubling.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For with thee \[am\] I, An affirmation
of Jehovah -- to save thee, For I make an end of all the nations Whither
I have scattered thee, Only, of thee I do not make an end, And I have
chastised thee in judgment, And do not entirely acquit thee.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> For thus said Jehovah: Incurable is thy
breach, grievous thy stroke,

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> There is none judging thy cause to bind
up, Healing medicines there are none for thee.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> all loving thee have forgotten thee,
Thee they do not seek, For with the stroke of an enemy I smote thee, The
chastisement of a fierce one, Because of the abundance of thy iniquity,
Mighty have been thy sins!

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> What! -- thou criest concerning thy
breach! Incurable \[is\] thy pain, Because of the abundance of thy
iniquity, Mighty have been thy sins! I have done these to thee.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> Therefore all consuming thee are
consumed, And all thine adversaries -- all of them -- Into captivity do
go, And thy spoilers have been for a spoil, And all thy plunderers I
give up to plunder.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> For I increase health to thee, And from
thy strokes I do heal thee, An affirmation of Jehovah, For \`Outcast'
they have called to thee, \`Zion it \[is\], there is none seeking for
her.'

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I turn back
\[to\] the captivity of the tents of Jacob, And his dwelling places I
pity, And the city hath been built on its heap, And the palace according
to its ordinance remaineth.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And gone forth from them hath
thanksgiving, And the voice of playful ones, And I have multiplied them
and they are not few, And made them honourable, and they are not small.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And his sons have been as aforetime,
And his company before Me is established, And I have seen after all his
oppressors.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And his honourable one hath been of
himself, And his ruler from his midst goeth forth, And I have caused him
to draw near, And he hath drawn nigh unto Me, For who \[is\] he who hath
pledged his heart To draw nigh unto Me? An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And ye have been to Me for a people,
And I am to you for God.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Lo, a whirlwind of Jehovah -- Fury hath
gone forth -- a cutting whirlwind, On the head of the wicked it stayeth.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> The fierceness of the anger of Jehovah
Doth not turn back till His doing, Yea, till His establishing the
devices of His heart, In the latter end of the days we consider it!

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> At that time, an affirmation of Jehovah,
I am for God to all families of Israel, And they -- they are to Me for a
people.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Thus said Jehovah: Found grace in the
wilderness Hath a people remaining from the sword Going to cause it to
rest -- Israel.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> From afar Jehovah hath appeared to me,
With love age-during I have loved thee, Therefore I have drawn thee
\[with\] kindness.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Again do I build thee, And thou hast been
built, O virgin of Israel, Again thou puttest on thy tabrets, And hast
gone out in the chorus of the playful.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Again thou dost plant vineyards In
mountains of Samaria, Planters have planted, and made common.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> For there is a day, Cried have watchmen
on mount Ephraim, \`Rise, and we go up to Zion, unto Jehovah our God;

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> For thus said Jehovah: Sing, O ye to
Jacob, \[with\] joy, And cry aloud at the head of the nations, Sound ye,
praise ye, and say, Save, O Jehovah, thy people, the remnant of Israel.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Lo, I am bringing them in from the north
country, And have gathered them from the sides of the earth, Among them
\[are\] blind and lame, Conceiving and travailing one -- together, A
great assembly -- they turn back hither.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> With weeping they come in, And with
supplications I bring them, I cause them to go unto streams of waters,
In a right way -- they stumble not in it, For I have been to Israel for
a father, And Ephraim -- My first-born \[is\] he.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Hear a word of Jehovah, O nations, And
declare ye among isles afar off, and say: He who is scattering Israel
doth gather him, And hath kept him as a shepherd \[doth\] his flock,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For Jehovah hath ransomed Jacob, And
redeemed him from a hand stronger than he.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And they have come in, And have sung in
the high place of Zion, And flowed unto the goodness of Jehovah, For
wheat, and for new wine, and for oil, And for the young of the flock and
herd, And their soul hath been as a watered garden, And they add not to
grieve any more.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Then rejoice doth a virgin in a chorus,
Both young men and old men -- together, And I have turned their mourning
to joy, And have comforted them, And gladdened them above their sorrow,

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And satisfied the soul of the priests
\[with\] fatness, And My people with My goodness are satisfied, An
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Thus said Jehovah, A voice in Ramah is
heard, wailing, weeping most bitter, Rachel is weeping for her sons, She
hath refused to be comforted for her sons, because they are not.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Thus said Jehovah: Withhold thy voice
from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, For there is a reward for thy
work, An affirmation of Jehovah, And they have turned back from the land
of the enemy.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> And there is hope for thy latter end,
An affirmation of Jehovah, And the sons have turned back \[to\] their
border.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself, \`Thou hast chastised me, And I am chastised, as a heifer not
taught, Turn me back, and I turn back, For thou \[art\] Jehovah my God.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> For after my turning back I repented,
And after my being instructed I struck on the thigh, I have been
ashamed, I have also blushed, For I have borne the reproach of my youth.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> A precious son is Ephraim to Me? A
child of delights? For since My speaking against him, I do thoroughly
remember him still, Therefore have My bowels been moved for him, I do
greatly love him, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> Set up for thee signs, make for thee
heaps, Set thy heart to the highway, the way thou wentest, Turn back, O
virgin of Israel, Turn back unto these thy cities.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> Till when dost thou withdraw thyself, O
backsliding daughter? For Jehovah hath prepared a new thing in the land,
Woman doth compass man.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, Still they say this word in the land of Judah, And in its
cities, In My turning back \[to\] their captivity, Jehovah doth bless
thee, habitation of righteousness, Mountain of holiness.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And dwelt in Judah have husbandmen, and
in all its cities together, And they have journeyed in order.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> For I have satiated the weary soul, And
every grieved soul I have filled.'

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> On this I have awaked, and I behold,
and my sleep hath been sweet to me.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> Lo, days are coming, an affirmation of
Jehovah, And I have sown the house of Israel, And the house of Judah,
With seed of man, and seed of beast.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> And it hath been, as I watched over
them to pluck up, And to break down, and to throw down, And to destroy,
and to afflict; So do I watch over them to build, and to plant, An
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> In those days they do not say any more:
Fathers have eaten unripe fruit, And the sons' teeth are blunted.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> But -- each for his own iniquity doth
die, Every man who is eating the unripe fruit, Blunted are his teeth.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Lo, days are coming, an affirmation of
Jehovah, And I have made with the house of Israel And with the house of
Judah a new covenant,

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> Not like the covenant that I made with
their fathers, In the day of My laying hold on their hand, To bring them
out of the land of Egypt, In that they made void My covenant, And I
ruled over them -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> For this \[is\] the covenant that I
make, With the house of Israel, after those days, An affirmation of
Jehovah, I have given My law in their inward part, And on their heart I
do write it, And I have been to them for God, And they are to me for a
people.

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> And they do not teach any more Each his
neighbour, and each his brother, Saying, Know ye Jehovah, For they all
know Me, from their least unto their greatest, An affirmation of
Jehovah; For I pardon their iniquity, And of their sin I make mention no
more.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Thus said Jehovah, Who is giving the
sun for a light by day, The statutes of moon and stars for a light by
night, Quieting the sea when its billows roar, Jehovah of Hosts \[is\]
His name:

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> If these statutes depart from before
Me, An affirmation of Jehovah, Even the seed of Israel doth cease From
being a nation before Me all the days.

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> Thus said Jehovah: If the heavens above
be measured, And the foundations of earth below searched, Even I kick
against all the seed of Israel, For all that they have done, An
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> Lo, days \[are coming\], an affirmation
of Jehovah, And the city hath been built to Jehovah, From the tower of
Hananeel to the gate of the corner.

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> And gone out again hath the measuring
line Over-against it, unto the height of Gareb, And it hath compassed to
Goah.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> And all the valley of the carcases and
of the ashes, And all the fields unto the brook Kidron, Unto the corner
of the horse-gate eastward, \[Are\] holy to Jehovah, it is not plucked
up, Nor is it thrown down any more to the age!

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah, in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah -- it \[is\]
the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar,

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And then the forces of the king of
Babylon are laying siege against Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet
hath been shut up in the court of the prison that \[is\] in the house of
the king of Judah,

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Where Zedekiah king of Judah hath shut
him up, saying, \`Wherefore art thou prophesying, saying, Thus said
Jehovah, Lo, I am giving this city into the hand of the king of Babylon,
and he hath captured it;

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And Zedekiah king of Judah doth not
escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but is certainly given into the
hand of the king of Babylon, and his mouth hath spoken with his mouth,
and his eyes see his eyes,

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And \[to\] Babylon he leadeth Zedekiah,
and there he is till My inspecting him, -- an affirmation of Jehovah --
because ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye do not prosper.'

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Jeremiah saith, \`A word of Jehovah
hath been unto me saying,

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Lo, Hanameel son of Shallum, thine uncle,
is coming unto thee, saying, Buy for thee my field that \[is\] in
Anathoth, for thine \[is\] the right of redemption -- to buy.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> And Hanameel, my uncle's son, cometh in
unto me, according to the word of Jehovah, unto the court of the prison,
and saith unto me, \`Buy, I pray thee, my field that \[is\] in Anathoth,
that \[is\] in the land of Benjamin, for thine \[is\] the right of
possession, and thine of redemption -- buy for thee.' And I know that it
\[is\] the word of Jehovah,

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And I buy the field, that \[is\] in
Anathoth, from Hanameel, my uncle's son, and I weigh to him the money --
seventeen shekels of silver.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> And I write in a book, and seal, and
cause witnesses to testify, and weigh the silver in balances;

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> And I take the purchase-book, the
sealed one, according to law and custom, and the open one.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> And I give the purchase-book unto
Baruch son of Neriah, son of Maaseiah, before the eyes of Hanameel, my
uncle's son, and before the eyes of the witnesses, those writing in the
purchase-book, before the eyes of all the Jews who are sitting in the
court of the prison.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And I charge Baruch before their eyes,
saying,

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, Take these books, this purchase-book, both the sealed one and
the open one, and thou hast put them in an earthen vessel, that they may
remain many days;

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, Again are houses and fields and vineyards bought in this land.'

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And I pray unto Jehovah -- after my
giving the purchase-book unto Baruch son of Neriah -- saying,

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> \`Ah, Lord Jehovah, lo, Thou hast made
the heavens and the earth by Thy great power, and by Thy stretched-out
arm; there is nothing too wonderful for Thee:

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Doing kindness to thousands, and
recompensing iniquity of fathers into the bosom of their sons after
them; God, the great, the mighty, Jehovah of Hosts \[is\] His name,

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Great in counsel, and mighty in act, in
that Thine eyes are open on all the ways of the sons of Adam, to give to
each according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings:

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> In that thou hast done signs and
wonders in the land of Egypt unto this day, and in Israel, and among
men, and Thou dost make for Thee a name as \[at\] this day.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> \`And Thou bringest forth Thy people
Israel from the land of Egypt, with signs and with wonders, and by a
strong hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by great fear,

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And thou givest to them this land that
thou didst swear to their fathers to give to them, a land flowing with
milk and honey,

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> And they come in, and possess it, and
they have not hearkened to Thy voice, and in Thy law have not walked,
all that which Thou didst lay a charge on them to do they have not done,
and Thou dost proclaim \[to\] them all this evil.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> \`Lo, the mounts -- they have come in
to the city to capture it, and the city hath been given into the hand of
the Chaldeans who are fighting against it, because of the sword, and the
famine, and the pestilence; and that which Thou hast spoken hath come to
pass, and lo, Thou art seeing;

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> Yet Thou hast said unto me, O Lord
Jehovah, Buy for thee the field with money, and cause witnesses to
testify -- and the city hath been given into the hand of the Chaldeans!'

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> And the word of Jehovah is unto
Jeremiah, saying:

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> \`Lo, I \[am\] Jehovah, God of all
flesh: For Me is anything too wonderful?

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> \`Therefore, thus said Jehovah, Lo, I
am giving this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he hath captured it;

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And come in have the Chaldeans who are
fighting against this city, and they have set this city on fire, and
have burned it, and the houses on whose roofs they made perfume to Baal,
and poured out libations to other gods, so as to provoke Me to anger.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> For the sons of Israel and the sons of
Judah have been only doing evil in Mine eyes, from their youth; for the
sons of Israel are only provoking Me with the work of their hands -- an
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> \`For a cause of Mine anger, and a
cause of My fury, hath this city been to Me, even from the day that they
built it, and unto this day -- to turn it aside from before My face,

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Because of all the evil of the sons of
Israel, and of the sons of Judah that they have done, so as to provoke
Me -- they, their kings, their heads, their priests, and their prophets,
and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And they turn unto Me the neck, and not
the face, and teaching them, rising early and teaching, and they are not
hearkening to accept instruction.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> \`And they set their abominations in
the house over which My name is called, so as to defile it;

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> And they build the high places of Baal,
that \[are\] in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and
their daughters to pass through to Molech, which I did not command them,
nor did it come up on my heart to do this abomination, so as to cause
Judah to sin.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> \`And now, therefore, thus said
Jehovah, God of Israel, concerning this city, of which ye are saying, It
hath been given into the hand of the king of Babylon by sword, and by
famine, and by pestilence,

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> Lo, I am gathering them out of all the
lands whither I have driven them in Mine anger, and in My fury, and in
great wrath, and I have brought them back unto this place, and have
caused them to dwell confidently;

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> and they have been to Me for a people,
and I am to them for God;

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> and I have given to them one heart, and
one way, to fear Me all the days, for good to them, and to their sons
after them:

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> and I have made for them a covenant
age-during, in that I turn not back from after them for My doing them
good, and My fear I put in their heart, so as not to turn aside from me;

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> and I have rejoiced over them to do
them good, and have planted them in this land in truth, with all my
heart, and with all My soul.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> \`For thus said Jehovah: As I brought
in unto this people all this great evil, so I am bringing in on them all
the good that I am speaking concerning them;

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> and bought hath been the field in this
land of which ye are saying, A desolation it \[is\], without man and
beast, it hath been given into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> Fields with money they buy, so as to
write in a book, and to seal, and to cause witnesses to testify, in the
land of Benjamin, and in suburbs of Jerusalem, and in cities of Judah,
and in cities of the hill-country, and in cities of the low country, and
in cities of the south, for I turn back their captivity -- an
affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah a second time -- and he \[is\] yet detained in the court of the
prison -- saying:

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Thus said Jehovah its maker, Jehovah its
former, at establishing it, Jehovah \[is\] His name:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Call unto Me, and I do answer thee, yea,
I declare to thee great and fenced things -- thou hast not known them.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> For thus said Jehovah, God of Israel,
concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the
kings of Judah, that are broken down for the mounts, and for the tool;

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> they are coming in to fight with the
Chaldeans, and to fill them with the carcases of men, whom I have
smitten in Mine anger, and in My fury, and \[for\] whom I have hidden My
face from this city, because of all their evil:

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Lo, I am increasing to it health and
cure, And have healed them, and revealed to them The abundance of peace
and truth.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And I have turned back the captivity of
Judah, And the captivity of Israel, And I have built them as at the
first,

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And cleansed them from all their
iniquity, That they have sinned against Me, And I have pardoned all
their iniquities, That they have sinned against Me, And that they
transgressed against Me.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And it hath been to Me for a name of joy,
For praise, and for beauty, to all nations of the earth, Who hear of all
the good that I am doing them, And they have feared, And they have
trembled for all the good, And for all the peace, that I am doing to it.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Thus said Jehovah: Again heard in this
place of which ye are saying, Waste it \[is\], without man and without
beast, In cities of Judah, and in streets of Jerusalem, That are
desolated, without man, And without inhabitant, and without beast,

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Is a voice of joy and a voice of
gladness, Voice of bridegroom, and voice of bride, The voice of those
saying, Thank Jehovah of Hosts, for Jehovah \[is\] good, For His
kindness \[is\] to the age, Who are bringing in thanksgiving to the
house of Jehovah, For I turn back the captivity of the land, As at the
first, said Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Again there
is in this place -- that is waste, Without man and beast, And in all its
cities -- a habitation of shepherds, Causing the flock to lie down.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> In the cities of the hill-country, In
the cities of the low country, And in the cities of the south, And in
the land of Benjamin, And in the suburbs of Jerusalem, And in the cities
of Judah, Again doth the flock pass by under the hands of the numberer,
said Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Lo, days are coming, an affirmation of
Jehovah, And I have established the good word That I spake unto the
house of Israel, And concerning the house of Judah.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> In those days, and at that time, I
cause to shoot up to David a shoot of righteousness, And he hath done
judgment and righteousness in the earth.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> In those days is Judah saved, And
Jerusalem doth dwell confidently, And this \[is\] he whom Jehovah
proclaimeth to her: \`Our Righteousness.'

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> For thus said Jehovah: \`Not cut off to
David is one sitting on the throne of the house of Israel,

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And to the priests -- the Levites, Not
cut off from before Me is one, Causing a burnt-offering to ascend, And
perfuming a present, and making sacrifice -- all the days.'

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> \`Thus said Jehovah: If ye do break My
covenant of the day, And My covenant of the night, So that they are not
daily and nightly in their season,

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> Also My covenant is broken with David
My servant, So that he hath not a son reigning on his throne, And with
the Levites the priests, My ministers.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> As the host of the heavens is not
numbered, Nor the sand of the sea measured, So I multiply the seed of
David My servant, And the Levites My ministers.'

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah, saying:

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> \`Hast thou not considered what this
people have spoken, saying: The two families on which Jehovah fixed, He
doth reject them, And my people they despise -- So that they are no more
a people before them!

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Thus said Jehovah: If My covenant
\[is\] not daily and nightly, The statutes of heaven and earth I have
not appointed --

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> Also the seed of Jacob, and David My
servant, I reject, Against taking from his seed rulers For the seed of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, For I turn back \[to\] their captivity, and
have pitied them.'

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah -- and Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his force,
and all kingdoms of the land of the dominion of his hand, and all the
peoples are fighting against Jerusalem, and against all its cities --
saying:

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel: Go,
and thou hast spoken unto Zedekiah king of Judah, and hast said unto
him, Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am giving this city into the hand of the
king of Babylon, and he hath burned it with fire,

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> and thou, thou dost not escape out of his
hand, for thou art certainly caught, and into his hand thou art given,
and thine eyes see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and his mouth with
thy mouth speaketh, and Babylon thou enterest.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> \`Only, hear a word of Jehovah, O
Zedekiah king of Judah, Thus said Jehovah unto thee: Thou dost not die
by sword,

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> in peace thou diest, and with the
burnings of thy fathers, the former kings who have been before thee, so
they make a burning for thee; and Ah, lord, they lament for thee, for
the word I have spoken -- an affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And Jeremiah the prophet speaketh unto
Zedekiah king of Judah all these words in Jerusalem,

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> and the forces of the king of Babylon are
fighting against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that are
left -- against Lachish, and against Azekah, for these have been left
among the cities of Judah, cities of fortresses.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah, after the making by the king Zedekiah of a covenant with
all the people who \[are\] in Jerusalem, to proclaim to them liberty,

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> to send out each his man-servant, and
each his maid-servant -- the Hebrew and the Hebrewess -- free, so as not
to lay service on them, any on a Jew his brother;

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> and hearken do all the heads, and all
the people who have come in to the covenant to send forth each his
man-servant and each his maid-servant free, so as not to lay service on
them any more, yea, they hearken, and send them away;

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> and they turn afterwards, and cause the
men-servants and the maid-servants to return, whom they had sent forth
free, and they subdue them for men-servants and for maid-servants.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> \`Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, I
-- I made a covenant with your fathers in the day of My bringing them
forth from the land of Egypt, from a house of servants, saying,

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> At the end of seven years ye do send
forth each his brother, the Hebrew, who is sold to thee, and hath served
thee six years, yea, thou hast sent him forth free from thee: and your
fathers hearkened not unto Me, nor inclined their ear.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> \`And ye turn back, ye to-day, and ye
do that which is right in Mine eyes, to proclaim liberty each to his
neighbour, and ye make a covenant before Me in the house over which My
name is called.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> And -- ye turn back, and pollute My
name, and ye cause each his man-servant and each his maid-servant, whom
he had sent forth free, (at their pleasure,) to return, and ye subdue
them to be to you for men-servants and for maid-servants.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> \`Therefore, thus said Jehovah: Ye have
not hearkened unto Me to proclaim freedom, each to his brother, and each
to his neighbour; lo, I am proclaiming to you liberty -- an affirmation
of Jehovah -- unto the sword, unto the pestilence, and unto the famine,
and I have given you for a trembling to all kingdoms of the earth.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> \`And I have given the men who are
transgressing My covenant, who have not established the words of the
covenant that they have made before Me, by the calf, that they have cut
in two, and pass through between its pieces --

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> heads of Judah, and heads of Jerusalem,
the officers, and the priests, and all the people of the land those
passing through between the pieces of the calf --

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> yea, I have given them into the hand of
their enemies, and into the hand of those seeking their soul, and their
carcase hath been for food to the fowl of the heavens, and to the beast
of the earth.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> \`And Zedekiah king of Judah, and his
heads, I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those
seeking their soul, and into the hand of the forces of the king of
Babylon, that are going up from off you.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Lo, I am commanding -- an affirmation
of Jehovah -- and have brought them back unto this city, and they have
fought against it, and captured it, and burned it with fire, and the
cities of Judah I do make a desolation -- without inhabitant.'

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah, in the days of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah,
saying:

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> \`Go unto the house of the Rechabites,
and thou hast spoken with them, and brought them into the house of
Jehovah, unto one of the chambers, and caused them to drink wine.'

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> And I take Jaazaniah son of Jeremiah, son
of Habazziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and all the house of
the Rechabites,

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> and bring them into the house of Jehovah,
unto the chamber of the sons of Hanan son of Igdaliah, a man of God,
that \[is\] near to the chamber of the princes, that \[is\] above the
chamber of Maaseiah son of Shallum, keeper of the threshold;

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> and I put before the sons of the house of
the Rechabites goblets full of wine, and cups, and I say unto them,
Drink ye wine.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> And they say, \`We do not drink wine: for
Jonadab son of Rechab, our father, charged us, saying, Ye do not drink
wine, ye and your sons -- unto the age;

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> and a house ye do not build, and seed ye
do not sow, and a vineyard ye do not plant, nor have ye any; for in
tents do ye dwell all your days, that ye may live many days on the face
of the ground whither ye are sojourning.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> \`And we hearken to the voice of Jonadab
son of Rechab, our father, to all that he commanded us, not to drink
wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, and our daughters;

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> nor to build houses for our dwelling; and
vineyard, and field, and seed, we have none;

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> and we dwell in tents, and we hearken,
and we do according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us;

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> and it cometh to pass, in the coming up
of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon unto the land, that we say, Come, and
we enter Jerusalem, because of the force of the Chaldeans, and because
of the force of Aram -- and we dwell in Jerusalem.'

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah, saying: \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel:

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> \`Go, and thou hast said to the men of
Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Do ye not receive
instruction? -- to hearken unto My words -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Performed have been the words of
Jonadab son of Rechab, when he commanded his sons not to drink wine, and
they have not drunk unto this day, for they have obeyed the command of
their father; and I -- I have spoken unto you, rising early and
speaking, and ye have not hearkened unto Me.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And I send unto you all My servants the
prophets, rising early and sending, saying: Turn back, I pray you, each
from his evil way, and amend your doings, yea, ye do not walk after
other gods, to serve them, and dwell ye on the ground that I have given
to you and to your fathers; and ye have not inclined your ear, nor
hearkened unto Me.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> \`Because the sons of Jonadab son of
Rechab have performed the command of their father, that he commanded
them, and this people have not hearkened unto Me,

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> therefore thus said Jehovah, God of
Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am bringing in unto Judah, and unto all
inhabitants of Jerusalem, all the evil that I have spoken against them,
because I have spoken unto them, and they have not hearkened, yea, I
call to them, and they have not answered.'

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> And to the house of the Rechabites said
Jeremiah: \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Because that ye
have hearkened unto the command of Jonadab your father, and ye observe
all his commands, and do according to all that he commanded you;

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts,
God of Israel, Of Jonadab son of Rechab one standing before me is not
cut off all the days.'

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And it cometh to pass, in the fourth year
of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, this word hath been unto
Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> \`Take to thee a roll of a book, and thou
hast written on it all the words that I have spoken unto thee concerning
Israel, and concerning Judah, and concerning all the nations, from the
day I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day;

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> if so be the house of Israel do hear all
the evil that I am thinking of doing to them, so that they turn back
each from is evil way, and I have been propitious to their iniquity, and
to their sin.'

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And Jeremiah calleth Baruch son of
Neriah, and Baruch writeth from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of
Jehovah, that He hath spoken unto him, on a roll of a book.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> And Jeremiah commandeth Baruch, saying,
\`I am restrained, I am not able to enter the house of Jehovah;

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> but thou hast entered -- and thou hast
read in the roll that thou hast written from my mouth, the words of
Jehovah, in the ears of the people, in the house of Jehovah, in the day
of the fast, and also in the ears of all Judah who are coming in from
their cities thou dost read them;

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> if so be their supplication doth fall
before Jehovah, and they turn back each from his evil way, for great
\[is\] the anger and the fury that Jehovah hath spoken concerning this
people.'

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And Baruch son of Neriah doth according
to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, to read in the book the
words of Jehovah in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> And it cometh to pass, in the fifth year
of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, proclaimed
a fast before Jehovah have all the people in Jerusalem, and all the
people who are coming in from cities of Judah to Jerusalem;

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> and Baruch readeth in the book the
words of Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gemariah
son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the opening of the
new gate of the house of Jehovah, in the ears of all the people.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And Michaiah son of Gemariah, son of
Shaphan, heareth all the words of Jehovah from off the book,

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> and he goeth down \[to\] the house of
the king, unto the chamber of the scribe, and lo, there are all the
heads sitting: Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah son of Shemaiah, and
Elnathan son of Acbor, and Gemariah son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah son of
Hananiah, and all the heads.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And declare to them doth Micaiah all
the words that he hath heard, when Baruch readeth in the book in the
ears of the people;

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> and all the heads send unto Baruch,
Jehudi son of Nethaniah, son of Shelemiah, son of Cushi, saying, \`The
roll in which thou hast read in the ears of the people take in thy hand,
and come.' And Baruch son of Neriah taketh the roll in his hand and
cometh in unto them,

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> and they say unto him, \`Sit down, we
pray thee, and read it in our ears,' and Baruch readeth in their ears,

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> and it cometh to pass, when they hear
all the words, they have been afraid one at another, and say unto
Baruch, \`We do surely declare to the king all these words.'

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And they asked Baruch, saying,
\`Declare, we pray thee, to us, how didst thou write all these words --
from his mouth?'

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And Baruch saith to them, \`From his
mouth, he pronounceth unto me all these words, and I am writing on the
book with ink.'

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And the heads say unto Baruch, \`Go, be
hidden, thou and Jeremiah, and let no one know where ye \[are\].'

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And they go in unto the king, to the
court, and the roll they have laid up in the chamber of Elishama the
scribe, and they declare in the ears of the king all the words.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> And the king sendeth Jehudi to take the
roll, and he taketh it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and
Jehudi readeth it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the
heads who are standing by the king;

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> and the king is sitting in the
winter-house, in the ninth month, and the stove before him is burning,

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> and it cometh to pass, when Jehudi
readeth three or four leaves, he cutteth it out with the scribe's knife,
and hath cast unto the fire, that \[is\] on the stove, till the
consumption of all the roll by the fire that \[is\] on the stove.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And the king and all his servants who
are hearing all these words have not been afraid, nor rent their
garments.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And also Elnathan, and Delaiah, and
Gemariah have interceded with the king not to burn the roll, and he hath
not hearkened unto them.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> And the king commandeth Jerahmeel son
of Hammelek, and Seraiah son of Azriel, and Shelemiah son of Abdeel, to
take Baruch the scribe, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Jehovah doth hide
them.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah -- after the king's burning the roll, even the words that
Baruch hath written from the mouth of Jeremiah -- saying:

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> \`Turn, take to thee another roll, and
write on it all the former words that were on the first roll, that
Jehoiakim king of Judah burnt,

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> and unto Jehoiakim king of Judah thou
dost say: Thus said Jehovah, Thou hast burnt this roll, saying,
Wherefore hast thou written on it, saying, The king of Babylon surely
cometh in, and hath destroyed this land, and caused to cease from it man
and beast?

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> \`Therefore, thus said Jehovah,
concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah: He hath none sitting on the throne
of David, and his carcase is cast out to heat by day, and to cold by
night;

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> and I have charged on him, and on his
seed, and on his servants, their iniquity; and I have brought in on
them, and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto the men of Judah,
all the evil that I have spoken unto them, and they hearkened not.'

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> And Jeremiah hath taken another roll,
and giveth it unto Baruch son of Neriah the scribe, and he writeth on it
from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book that Jehoiakim king
of Judah hath burnt in the fire; and again there were added unto them
many words like these.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And reign doth king Zedekiah son of
Josiah instead of Coniah son of Jehoiakim whom Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon had caused to reign in the land of Judah,

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> and he hath not hearkened, he, and his
servants, and the people of the land, unto the words of Jehovah, that He
spake by the hand of Jeremiah the prophet.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And Zedekiah the king sendeth Jehucal son
of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah son of Maaseiah the priest, unto Jeremiah
the prophet, saying, \`Pray, we beseech thee, for us unto Jehovah our
God.'

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And Jeremiah is coming in and going out
in the midst of the people, (and they have not put him in the
prison-house),

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> and the force of Pharaoh hath come out of
Egypt, and the Chaldeans, who are laying siege against Jerusalem, hear
their report, and go up from off Jerusalem.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> \`Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Thus
do ye say unto the king of Judah, who is sending you unto Me, to seek
Me: Lo, the force of Pharaoh that is coming out to you for help hath
turned back to its land, to Egypt,

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> and the Chaldeans have turned back, and
fought against this city, and captured it, and burnt it with fire.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> \`Thus said Jehovah: Lift not up your
souls saying, The Chaldeans surely go from off us, for they do not go;

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> for though ye had smitten all the force
of the Chaldeans who are fighting with you, and there were left of them
wounded men -- each in his tent -- they rise, and have burnt this city
with fire.'

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> And it hath come to pass, in the going
up of the force of the Chaldeans from off Jerusalem, because of the
force of Pharaoh,

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> that Jeremiah goeth out from Jerusalem
to go \[to\] the land of Benjamin, to receive a portion thence in the
midst of the people.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And it cometh to pass, he is at the
gate of Benjamin, and there \[is\] a master of the ward -- and his name
is Irijah son of Shelemiah, son of Hananiah -- and he catcheth Jeremiah
the prophet, saying, \`Unto the Chaldeans thou art falling.'

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And Jeremiah saith, \`Falsehood -- I am
not falling unto the Chaldeans;' and he hath not hearkened unto him, and
Irijah layeth hold on Jeremiah, and bringeth him in unto the heads,

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> and the heads are wroth against
Jeremiah, and have smitten him, and put him in the prison-house -- the
house of Jonathan the scribe, for it they had made for a prison-house.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> When Jeremiah hath entered into the
house of the dungeon, and unto the cells, then Jeremiah dwelleth there
many days,

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> and the king Zedekiah sendeth, and
taketh him, and the king asketh him in his house in secret, and saith,
\`Is there a word from Jehovah?' And Jeremiah saith, \`There is,' and he
saith, \`Into the hand of the king of Babylon thou art given.'

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And Jeremiah saith unto the king
Zedekiah, \`What have I sinned against thee, and against thy servants,
and against this people, that ye have given me unto a prison-house?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> And where \[are\] your prophets who
prophesied to you, saying, The king of Babylon doth not come in against
you, and against this land?

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And now, hearken, I pray thee, my lord,
O king, let my supplication fall, I pray thee, before thee, and cause me
not to return \[to\] the house of Jonathan the scribe, that I die not
there.'

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And the king Zedekiah commandeth, and
they commit Jeremiah into the court of the prison, also to give to him a
cake of bread daily from the bakers' street, till the consumption of all
the bread of the city, and Jeremiah dwelleth in the court of the prison.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And Shephatiah son of Mattan, and
Gedaliah son of Pashhur, and Jucal son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur son of
Malchiah, hear the words that Jeremiah is speaking unto all the people,
saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah: He who is remaining
in this city dieth, by sword, by famine, and by pestilence, and he who
is going forth unto the Chaldeans liveth, and his soul hath been to him
for a prey, and he liveth.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Thus said Jehovah: This city is certainly
given into the hand of the force of the king of Babylon, and he hath
captured it.'

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And the heads say unto the king, \`Let,
we pray thee, this man be put to death, because that he is making feeble
the hands of the men of war, who are left in this city, and the hands of
all the people, by speaking unto them according to these words, for this
man is not seeking for the peace of this people, but for its evil.'

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> And the king Zedekiah saith, \`Lo, he
\[is\] in your hand: for the king is not able for you \[in\] anything.'

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And they take Jeremiah, and cast him into
the pit of Malchiah son of the king, that \[is\] in the court of the
prison, and they send down Jeremiah with cords; and in the pit there is
no water, but mire, and Jeremiah sinketh in the mire.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And Ebed-Melech the Cushite, a eunuch who
\[is\] in the king's house, heareth that they have put Jeremiah into the
pit; and the king is sitting at the gate of Benjamin,

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> and Ebed-Melech goeth forth from the
king's house, and speaketh unto the king, saying,

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> \`My lord, O king, these men have done
evil \[in\] all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they
have cast into the pit, and he dieth in his place because of the famine,
for there is no more bread in the city.'

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> And the king commandeth Ebed-Melech the
Cushite, saying, \`Take with thee from this thirty men, and thou hast
brought up Jeremiah the prophet from the pit, before he dieth.'

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And Ebed-Melech taketh the men with
him, and entereth the house of the king, unto the place of the treasury,
and taketh thence worn-out clouts, and worn-out rags, and sendeth them
unto Jeremiah unto the pit by cords.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And Ebed-Melech the Cushite saith unto
Jeremiah, \`Put, I pray thee, the worn-out clouts and rags under thine
arm-holes, at the place of the cords,' and Jeremiah doth so,

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> and they draw out Jeremiah with cords,
and bring him up out of the pit, and Jeremiah dwelleth in the court of
the prison.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> And the king Zedekiah sendeth, and
taketh Jeremiah the prophet unto him, unto the third entrance that
\[is\] in the house of Jehovah, and the king saith unto Jeremiah, \`I am
asking thee a thing, do not hide from me anything.'

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And Jeremiah saith unto Zedekiah,
\`When I declare to thee, dost thou not surely put me to death? and when
I counsel thee, thou dost not hearken unto me.'

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> And the king Zedekiah sweareth unto
Jeremiah in secret, saying, \`Jehovah liveth, He who made for us this
soul, I do not put thee to death, nor give thee unto the hand of these
men who are seeking thy soul.'

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> And Jeremiah saith unto Zedekiah,
\`Thus said Jehovah, God of Hosts, God of Israel: If thou dost certainly
go forth unto the heads of the king of Babylon, then hath thy soul
lived, and this city is not burned with fire, yea, thou hast lived, thou
and thy house.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And if thou dost not go forth unto the
heads of the king of Babylon, then hath this city been given into the
hand of the Chaldeans, and they have burnt it with fire, and thou dost
not escape from their hand.'

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> And the king Zedekiah saith unto
Jeremiah, \`I am fearing the Jews who have fallen unto the Chaldeans,
lest they give me into their hand, and they have insulted me.'

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> And Jeremiah saith, \`They do not give
thee up; hearken, I pray thee, to the voice of Jehovah, to that which I
am speaking unto thee, and it is well for thee, and thy soul doth live.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> \`And if thou art refusing to go forth,
this \[is\] the thing that Jehovah hath shewn me:

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> That, lo, all the women who have been
left in the house of the king of Judah are brought forth unto the heads
of the king of Babylon, and lo, they are saying: Persuaded thee, and
prevailed against thee, Have thine allies, Sunk into mire have thy feet,
They have been turned backward.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> \`And all thy wives, and thy sons, are
brought forth unto the Chaldeans, and thou dost not escape from their
hand, for by the hand of the king of Babylon thou art caught, and this
city is burnt with fire.'

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> And Zedekiah saith unto Jeremiah, \`Let
no man know of these words, and thou dost not die;

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> and when the heads hear that I have
spoken with thee, and they have come in unto thee, and have said unto
thee, Declare to us, we pray thee, what thou didst speak unto the king,
do not hide \[it\] from us, and we do not put thee to death, and what
the king spake unto thee,

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> then thou hast said unto them, I am
causing my supplication to fall before the king, not to cause me to
return to the house of Jonathan, to die there.'

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> And all the heads come in unto
Jeremiah, and ask him, and he declareth to them according to all these
words that the king commanded, and they keep silent from him, for the
matter was not heard;

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> and Jeremiah dwelleth in the court of
the prison till the day that Jerusalem hath been captured, and he was
\[there\] when Jerusalem was captured.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of
Judah, in the tenth month, come hath Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and
all his force unto Jerusalem, and they lay siege against it;

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the
fourth month, in the ninth of the month, hath the city been broken up;

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> and come in do all the heads of the king
of Babylon, and they sit at the middle gate, Nergal-Sharezer,
Samgar-Nebo, Sarsechim, chief of the eunuchs, Nergal-Sharezer, chief of
the Mages, and all the rest of the heads of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And it cometh to pass, when Zedekiah king
of Judah, and all the men of war, have seen them, that they flee and go
forth by night from the city, the way of the king's garden, through the
gate between the two walls, and he goeth forth the way of the plain.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And the forces of the Chaldeans pursue
after them, and overtake Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, and they
take him, and bring him up unto Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, to
Riblah, in the land of Hamath, and he speaketh with him -- judgments.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And the king of Babylon slaughtereth the
sons of Zedekiah, in Riblah, before his eyes, yea, all the freemen of
Judah hath the king of Babylon slaughtered.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And the eyes of Zedekiah he hath blinded,
and he bindeth him with brazen fetters, to bring him in to Babylon.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> And the house of the king, and the house
of the people, have the Chaldeans burnt with fire, and the walls of
Jerusalem they have broken down.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> And the remnant of the people who are
left in the city, and those falling who have fallen to him, and the
remnant of the people who are left, hath Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the
executioners, removed \[to\] Babylon.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And of the poor people, who have
nothing, hath Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, left in the land
of Judah, and he giveth to them vineyards and fields on the same day.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> And Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon
giveth a charge concerning Jeremiah, by the hand of Nebuzar-Adan, chief
of the executioners, saying,

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> \`Take him, and place thine eyes upon
him, and do no evil thing to him, but as he speaketh unto thee, so do
with him.'

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> And Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the
executioners sendeth, and Nebushazban, chief of the eunuchs, and
Nergal-Sharezer, chief of the Mages, and all the chiefs of the king of
Babylon;

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> yea, they send and take Jeremiah out of
the court of the prison, and give him unto Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son
of Shaphan, to carry him home, and he dwelleth in the midst of the
people.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And unto Jeremiah hath a word of
Jehovah been -- in his being detained in the court of the prison --
saying:

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> \`Go, and thou hast spoken to
Ebed-Melech the Cushite, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel: Lo, I am bringing in My words unto this city for evil, and not
for good, and they have been before thee in that day.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And I have delivered thee in that day
-- an affirmation of Jehovah -- and thou art not given into the hand of
the men of whose face thou art afraid,

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> for I do certainly deliver thee, and by
sword thou fallest not, and thy life hath been to thee for a spoil, for
thou hast trusted in Me -- an affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
from Jehovah, after Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, hath sent
him from Ramah, in his taking him -- and he a prisoner in chains -- in
the midst of all the removal of Jerusalem and of Judah, who are removed
to Babylon.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> And the chief of the executioners taketh
Jeremiah, and saith unto him, \`Jehovah thy God hath spoken this evil
concerning this place,

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> and Jehovah bringeth \[it\] in, and doth
as He spake, because ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have not
hearkened to His voice, even this thing hath been to you.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> \`And now, lo, I have loosed thee to-day
from the chains that \[are\] on thy hand; if good in thine eyes to come
with me \[to\] Babylon, come, and I keep mine eye upon thee: and if evil
in thine eyes to come with me to Babylon, forbear; see, all the land
\[is\] before thee, whither \[it be\] good, and whither \[it be\] right
in thine eyes to go -- go.' --

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> and while he doth not reply -- \`Or turn
back unto Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, whom the king of
Babylon hath appointed over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him in
the midst of the people, or whithersoever it is right in thine eyes to
go -- go.' And the chief of the executioners giveth to him for the way,
and a gift, and sendeth him away,

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> and Jeremiah cometh in unto Gedaliah son
of Ahikam, to Mizpah, and dwelleth with him, in the midst of the people
who are left in the land.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And all the heads of the forces that
\[are\] in the field hear, they and their men, that the king of Babylon
hath appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam over the land, and that he hath
charged him \[with\] men, and women, and infants, and of the poor of the
land, of those who have not been removed to Babylon;

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> and they come in unto Gedaliah to Mizpah,
even Ishmael son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan sons of Kareah,
and Seraiah son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite,
and Jezaniah son of the Maachathite, they and their men.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And swear to them doth Gedaliah son of
Ahikam, son of Shaphan, and to their men, saying, \`Be not afraid of
serving the Chaldeans, abide in the land, and serve the king of Babylon,
and it is well for you;

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> and I, lo, I am dwelling in Mizpah, to
stand before the Chaldeans who are come in unto us, and ye, gather ye
wine, and summer fruit, and oil, and put in your vessels, and dwell in
your cities that ye have taken.'

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And also all the Jews who \[are\] in
Moab, and among the sons of Ammon, and in Edom, and who \[are\] in all
the lands, have heard that the king of Babylon hath given a remnant to
Judah, and that he hath appointed over them Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son
of Shaphan,

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> and all the Jews from all the places
whither they have been driven, turn back and enter the land of Judah,
unto Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and they gather wine and summer fruit -- very
much.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> And Johanan son of Kareah, and all the
heads of the forces that \[are\] in the field, have come in unto
Gedaliah to Mizpah,

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> and they say unto him, \`Dost thou
really know that Baalis king of the sons of Ammon hath sent Ishmael son
of Nethaniah to smite thy soul?' And Gedaliah son of Ahikam hath not
given to them credence.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> And Johanan son of Kareah hath spoken
unto Gedaliah in secret, in Mizpah, saying, \`Let me go, I pray thee,
and I smite Ishmael son of Nethaniah, and no one doth know; why doth he
smite thy soul? and scattered have been all Judah who are gathered unto
thee, and perished hath the remnant of Judah.'

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And Gedaliah son of Ahikam saith unto
Johanan son of Kareah, \`Thou dost not do this thing, for falsehood thou
art speaking concerning Ishmael.'

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> And it cometh to pass, in the seventh
month, come hath Ishmael son of Nethaniah, son of Elishama, of the seed
royal, and of the chiefs of the king, and ten men with him, unto
Gedaliah son of Ahikam, to Mizpah, and they eat there bread together in
Mizpah.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> And Ishmael son of Nethaniah riseth, and
the ten men who have been with him, and they smite Gedaliah son of
Ahikam, son of Shaphan, with the sword, and he putteth him to death whom
the king of Babylon hath appointed over the land.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> And all the Jews who have been with him,
with Gedaliah, in Mizpah, and the Chaldeans who have been found there --
the men of war -- hath Ishmael smitten.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And it cometh to pass, on the second day
of the putting of Gedaliah to death, (and no one hath known,)

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> that men come in from Shechem, from
Shiloh, and from Samaria -- eighty men -- with shaven beards, and rent
garments, and cutting themselves, and an offering and frankincense in
their hand, to bring in to the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And Ishmael son of Nethaniah goeth forth
to meet them, from Mizpah, going on and weeping, and it cometh to pass,
at meeting them, that he saith unto them, \`Come in unto Gedaliah son of
Ahikam.'

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And it cometh to pass, at their coming in
unto the midst of the city, that Ishmael son of Nethaniah doth slaughter
them, at the midst of the pit, he and the men who \[are\] with him.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> And ten men have been found among them,
and they say unto Ishmael, \`Do not put us to death, for we have things
hidden in the field -- wheat, and barley, and oil, and honey.' And he
forbeareth, and hath not put them to death in the midst of their
brethren.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> And the pit whither Ishmael hath cast all
the carcases of the men whom he hath smitten along with Gedaliah, is
that which the king Asa made because of Baasha king of Israel -- it hath
Ishmael son of Nethaniah filled with the pierced.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> And Ishmael taketh captive all the
remnant of the people who \[are\] in Mizpah, the daughters of the king,
and all the people who are left in Mizpah, whom Nebuzar-Adan, chief of
the executioners, hath committed \[to\] Gedaliah son of Ahikam, and
Ishmael son of Nethaniah taketh them captive, and goeth to pass over
unto the sons of Ammon.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> And hear doth Johanan son of Kareah,
and all the heads of the forces that \[are\] with him, of all the evil
that Ishmael son of Nethaniah hath done,

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> and they take all the men, and go to
fight with Ishmael son of Nethaniah, and they find him at the great
waters that \[are\] in Gibeon.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> And it cometh to pass, when all the
people who \[are\] with Ishmael see Johanan son of Kareah, and all the
heads of the forces who \[are\] with him, that they rejoice.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> And all the people whom Ishmael hath
taken captive from Mizpah turn round, yea, they turn back, and go unto
Johanan son of Kareah.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> And Ishmael son of Nethaniah hath
escaped, with eight men, from the presence of Johanan, and he goeth unto
the sons of Ammon.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> And Johanan son of Kareah, and all the
heads of the forces who \[are\] with him, take all the remnant of the
people whom he hath brought back from Ishmael son of Nethaniah, from
Mizpah -- after he had smitten Gedaliah son of Ahikam -- mighty ones,
men of war, and women, and infants, and eunuchs, whom he had brought
back from Gibeon,

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> and they go and abide in the
habitations of Chimham, that \[are\] near Beth-Lehem, to go to enter
Egypt,

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> from the presence of the Chaldeans, for
they have been afraid of them, for Ishmael son of Nethaniah had smitten
Gedaliah son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the
land.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> And they come nigh -- all the heads of
the forces, and Johanan son of Kareah, and Jezaniah son of Hoshaiah, and
all the people from the least even unto the greatest --

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> and they say unto Jeremiah the prophet,
\`Let, we pray thee, our supplication fall before thee, and pray for us
unto Jehovah thy God, for all this remnant; for we have been left a few
out of many, as thine eyes do see us;

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> and Jehovah thy God doth declare to us
the way in which we walk, and the thing that we do.'

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> And Jeremiah the prophet saith unto them,
\`I have heard: lo, I am praying unto Jehovah your God according to your
words, and it hath come to pass, the whole word that Jehovah answereth
you, I declare to you -- I do not withhold from you a word.'

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> And they have said to Jeremiah, \`Jehovah
is against us for a witness true and faithful, if -- according to all
the word with which Jehovah thy God doth send thee unto us -- we do not
so.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Whether good or evil, to the voice of
Jehovah our God, to whom we are sending thee, we do hearken; because it
is good for us when we hearken to the voice of Jehovah our God.'

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And it cometh to pass, at the end of ten
days, that there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah,

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> and he calleth unto Johanan son of
Kareah, and unto all the heads of the forces that \[are\] with him, and
to all the people, from the least even unto the greatest,

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> and he saith unto them, \`Thus said
Jehovah, God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me, to cause your supplication
to fall before Him:

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> \`If ye do certainly dwell in this
land, then I have builded you up, and I throw not down; and I have
planted you, and I pluck not up; for I have repented concerning the evil
that I have done to you.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Be not afraid of the king of Babylon,
whom ye are afraid of; be not afraid of him -- an affirmation of Jehovah
-- for with you \[am\] I, to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And I give to you mercies, and he hath
pitied you, and caused you to turn back unto your own ground.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> \`And if ye are saying, We do not dwell
in this land -- not to hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God,

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> saying, No; but the land of Egypt we
enter, that we see no war, and the sound of a trumpet do not hear, and
for bread be not hungry; and there do we dwell.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And now, therefore, hear ye a word of
Jehovah, O remnant of Judah: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel:
If ye really set your faces to enter Egypt, and have gone in to sojourn
there,

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> then it hath come to pass, the sword
that ye are afraid of, doth there overtake you, in the land of Egypt;
and the hunger, because of which ye are sorrowful, doth there cleave
after you in Egypt, and there ye die.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> \`Thus are all the men who have set
their faces to enter Egypt to sojourn there; they die -- by sword, by
hunger, and by pestilence, and there is not to them a remnant and an
escaped one, because of the evil that I am bringing in upon them;

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> for thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel: As poured out hath been Mine anger and My fury on the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so poured out is My fury upon you in your
entering Egypt, and ye have been for an execration, and for an
astonishment, and for a reviling, and for a reproach, and ye do not see
any more this place.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> \`Jehovah hath spoken against you, O
remnant of Judah, do not enter Egypt: know certainly that I have
testified against you to-day;

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> for ye have shewed yourselves perverse
in your souls, for ye sent me unto Jehovah your God, saying, Pray for us
unto Jehovah our God, and according to all that Jehovah our God saith,
so declare to us, and we have done \[it\];

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> and I declare to you to-day, and ye
have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah your God, and to anything
with which He hath sent me unto you.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> And now, know ye certainly that by
sword, by famine, and by pestilence ye die, in the place that ye have
desired to go in to sojourn there.'

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> And it cometh to pass, when Jeremiah doth
finish to speak unto all the people all the words of Jehovah their God,
with which Jehovah their God hath sent him unto them -- all these words
--

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> that Azariah son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan
son of Kareah, and all the proud men, speak unto Jeremiah, saying,
\`Falsehood thou art speaking; Jehovah our God hath not sent thee to
say, Do not enter Egypt to sojourn there;

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> for Baruch son of Neriah is moving thee
against us, in order to give us up into the hand of the Chaldeans, to
put us to death, and to remove us to Babylon.'

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> And Johanan son of Kareah, and all the
heads of the forces, and all the people, have not hearkened to the voice
of Jehovah, to dwell in the land of Judah;

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> and Johanan son of Kareah, and all the
heads of the forces, take all the remnant of Judah who have turned from
all the nations whither they were driven to sojourn in the land of
Judah,

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> the men, and the women, and the infant,
and the daughters of the king, and every person that Nebuzar-Adan, chief
of the executioners, had left with Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of
Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch son of Neriah,

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> and they enter the land of Egypt, for
they have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, and they enter unto
Tahpanhes.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> \`Take in thy hand great stones, and thou
hast hidden them, in the clay, in the brick-kiln, that \[is\] at the
opening of the house of Pharaoh in Tahpanhes, before the eyes of the men
of Judah,

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> and thou hast said unto them: Thus said
Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: \`Lo, I am sending, and I have taken
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, My servant, and I have set his throne
above these stones that I have hid, and he hath stretched out his
pavilion over them,

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> and he hath come, and smitten the land
of Egypt -- those who \[are\] for death to death, and those who \[are\]
for captivity to captivity, and those who \[are\] for the sword to the
sword.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> And I have kindled a fire in the houses
of the gods of Egypt, and it hath burned them, and he hath taken them
captive, and covered himself with the land of Egypt, as cover himself
doth the shepherd with his garment, and he hath gone forth thence in
peace;

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> and he hath broken the standing pillars
of the house of the sun, that \[is\] in the land of Egypt, and the
houses of the gods of Egypt he doth burn with fire.'

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> The word that hath been unto Jeremiah
concerning all the Jews who are dwelling in the land of Egypt -- who are
dwelling in Migdol, and in Tahpanhes, and in Noph, and in the land of
Pathros -- saying,

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel: Ye -- ye have seen all the evil that I have brought in on
Jerusalem, and on all the cities of Judah, and lo, they \[are\] a waste
this day, and there is none dwelling in them,

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> because of their wickedness that they
have done, by provoking Me to anger, by going to make perfume, by
serving other gods, that they knew not, they, ye, and your fathers.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> \`And I send unto you all my servants,
the prophets, rising early and sending, saying: I pray you, do not this
abomination that I have hated --

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> and they have not hearkened nor inclined
their ear, to turn back from their wickedness, not to make perfume to
other gods,

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> and poured out is My fury, and Mine
anger, and it burneth in cities of Judah, and in streets of Jerusalem,
and they are for a waste, for a desolation, as \[at\] this day.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> \`And, now, thus said Jehovah of Hosts,
God of Israel: Why are ye doing great evil unto your own souls, to cut
off to you man and woman, infant and suckling, from the midst of Judah,
so as not to leave to you a remnant:

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> by provoking Me to anger by the works of
your hands, by making perfume to other gods in the land of Egypt,
whither ye are going in to sojourn, so as to cut yourselves off, and so
as to your being for a reviling and for a reproach among all nations of
the earth?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> \`Have ye forgotten the wickedness of
your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the
wickedness of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness
of your wives, that they have done in the land of Judah, and in streets
of Jerusalem?

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> They have not been humbled unto this
day, nor have they been afraid, nor have they walked in My law, and in
My statutes, that I have set before you and before your fathers.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> \`Therefore, thus said Jehovah of
Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am setting my face against you for evil,
even to cut off all Judah,

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> and I have taken the remnant of Judah,
who have set their faces to enter the land of Egypt to sojourn there,
and they have all been consumed in the land of Egypt; they fall by
sword, by famine they are consumed, from the least even unto the
greatest, by sword and by famine they die, and they have been for an
execration, for an astonishment, and for a reviling, and for a reproach.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> \`And I have seen after those dwelling
in the land of Egypt, as I saw after Jerusalem, with sword, with famine,
and with pestilence,

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> and there is not an escaped and
remaining one of the remnant of Judah, who are entering into the land of
Egypt to sojourn there, even to turn back to the land of Judah, whither
they are lifting up their soul to return to dwell, for they do not turn
back, except those escaping.'

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> And they answer Jeremiah -- all the men
who are knowing that their wives are making perfume to other gods, and
all the women who are remaining, a great assembly, even all the people
who are dwelling in the land of Egypt, in Pathros -- saying:

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> \`The word that thou hast spoken unto
us in the name of Jehovah -- we are not hearkening unto thee;

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> for we certainly do everything that
hath gone out of our mouth, to make perfume to the queen of the heavens,
and to pour out to her libations, as we have done, we, and our fathers,
our kings, and our heads, in cities of Judah, and in streets of
Jerusalem, and -- we are satisfied with bread, and we are well, and evil
we have not seen.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> \`And from the time we have ceased to
make perfume to the queen of the heavens, and to pour out to her
libations, we have lacked all, and by sword and by famine we have been
consumed,

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> and when we are making perfume to the
queen of the heavens, and pouring out to her libations -- without our
husbands have we made for her cakes to idolize her, and to pour out to
her libations?'

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> And Jeremiah saith unto all the people,
concerning the men and concerning the women, and concerning all the
people who are answering him, saying:

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> \`The perfume that ye made in the
cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers,
your kings, and your heads, and the people of the land, hath not Jehovah
remembered it? yea, it cometh up on His heart.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> And Jehovah is not able any more to
accept \[you\], because of the evil of your doings, because of the
abominations that ye have done, and your land is for a waste, and for an
astonishment, and for a reviling, without inhabitant, as \[at\] this
day.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> \`Because that ye have made perfume,
and because ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have not hearkened to
the voice of Jehovah, and in His law, and in His statutes, and in His
testimonies ye have not walked, therefore hath this evil met you as
\[at\] this day.'

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> And Jeremiah saith unto all the people,
and unto all the women, \`Hear ye a word of Jehovah, all Judah who
\[are\] in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, saying: Ye and your wives both speak with your mouth, and with
your hands have fulfilled, saying: We certainly execute our vows that we
have vowed, to make perfume to the queen of the heavens, and to pour out
to her libations, ye do certainly establish your vows, and certainly
execute your vows.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> \`Therefore, hear ye a word of Jehovah,
all Judah who are dwelling in the land of Egypt: Lo, I -- I have sworn
by My great name, said Jehovah, My name is no more proclaimed by the
mouth of any man of Judah, saying, Live doth the Lord Jehovah -- in all
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> Lo, I am watching over them for evil,
and not for good, and consumed have been all the men of Judah who
\[are\] in the land of Egypt, by sword and by famine, till their
consumption.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> \`And the escaped of the sword turn
back out of the land of Egypt to the land of Judah, few in number, and
known have all the remnant of Judah who are coming into the land of
Egypt to sojourn there, whose word is established, Mine or theirs.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> \`And this \[is\] to you the sign -- an
affirmation of Jehovah -- that I am seeing after you in this place, so
that ye know that My words are certainly established against you for
evil;

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> Thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am giving
Pharaoh-Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the
hand of those seeking his life, as I have given Zedekiah king of Judah
into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and who is
seeking his life.'

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> The word that Jeremiah the prophet hath
spoken unto Baruch son of Neriah, in his writing these words on a book
from the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of
Josiah king of Judah, saying:

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel,
concerning thee, O Baruch:

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> \`Thou hast said, Wo to me, now, for
Jehovah hath added sorrow to my pain, I have been wearied with my
sighing, and rest I have not found.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> Thus dost thou say unto him: Thus said
Jehovah: Lo, that which I have built I am throwing down, and that which
I have planted I am plucking up, even the whole land itself.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> And thou -- thou seekest for thee great
things -- do not seek, for lo, I am bringing in evil on all flesh -- an
affirmation of Jehovah -- and I have given to thee thy life for a spoil,
in all places whither thou goest.'

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> That which hath been the word of Jehovah
unto Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations,

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> For Egypt, concerning the force of
Pharaoh-Necho king of Egypt, that hath been by the river Phrat, in
Carchemish, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath smitten, in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah:

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> \`Set ye in array shield and buckler, And
draw nigh to battle.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> Gird the horses, and go up, ye horsemen,
And station yourselves with helmets, Polish the javelins, put on the
coats of mail.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> Wherefore have I seen them dismayed --
They are turned backward, And their mighty ones are beaten down, And
\[to\] a refuge they have fled, and not turned the face? Fear \[is\]
round about -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> The swift do not flee, nor do the mighty
escape, Northward, by the side of the river Phrat, They have stumbled
and fallen.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> Who is this? as a flood he cometh up, As
rivers do his waters shake themselves!

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> Egypt, as a flood cometh up, And as
rivers the waters shake themselves. And he saith, I go up; I cover the
land, I destroy the city and the inhabitants in it.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> Go up, ye horses; and boast yourselves,
ye chariots, And go forth, ye mighty, Cush and Phut handling the shield,
And Lud handling -- treading the bow.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> And that day \[is\] to the Lord Jehovah
of Hosts A day of vengeance, To be avenged of His adversaries, And the
sword hath devoured, and been satisfied, And it hath been watered from
their blood, For a sacrifice \[is\] to the Lord Jehovah of Hosts, In the
land of the north, by the river Phrat.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> Go up to Gilead, and take balm, O
virgin daughter of Egypt, In vain thou hast multiplied medicines,
Healing there is none for thee.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> Nations have heard of thy shame, And
thy cry hath filled the land, For the mighty on the mighty did stumble,
Together they have fallen -- both of them!'

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> The word that Jehovah hath spoken unto
Jeremiah the prophet concerning the coming in of Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon, to smite the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> \`Declare ye in Egypt, and sound in
Migdol, Yea, sound in Noph, and in Tahpanhes say: Station thyself, yea,
prepare for thee, For a sword hath devoured around thee,

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> Wherefore hath thy bull been swept
away? He hath not stood, because Jehovah thrust him away.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> He hath multiplied the stumbling, Yea
one hath fallen upon his neighbour, And they say: Rise, and we turn back
to our people, And unto the land of our birth, Because of the oppressing
sword.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> They have cried there: Pharaoh king of
Egypt \[is\] a desolation, Passed by hath the appointed time.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> I live -- an affirmation of the King,
Jehovah of Hosts \[is\] His name, Surely as Tabor \[is\] among
mountains, And as Carmel by the sea -- he cometh in,

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> Goods for removal make for thee, O
inhabitant, daughter of Egypt, For Noph becometh a desolation, And hath
been burnt up, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> A heifer very fair \[is\] Egypt,
Rending from the north doth come into her.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> Even her hired ones in her midst
\[are\] as calves of the stall, For even they have turned, They have
fled together, they have not stood, For the day of their calamity hath
come on them, The time of their inspection.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> Its voice as a serpent goeth on, For
with a force they go, And with axes they have come in to her, As hewers
of trees.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> They have cut down her forest, An
affirmation of Jehovah -- for it is not searched, For they have been
more than the grasshopper, And they have no numbering.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> Ashamed hath been the daughter of
Egypt, She hath been given into the hand of the people of the north.

<span id="an_46:25">46:25</span> Said hath Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel: Lo, I am seeing after Amon of No, And after Pharaoh, and after
Egypt, And after her gods, and after her kings, And after Pharaoh, and
after those trusting in him,

<span id="an_46:26">46:26</span> And I have given them into the hand of
those seeking their life, And into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon, And into the hand of his servants, And afterwards it is
inhabited, As \[in\] days of old -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_46:27">46:27</span> And thou, thou dost not fear, my
servant Jacob, Nor \[art\] thou dismayed, O Israel, For lo, I am saving
thee from afar, And thy seed from the land of their captivity, And Jacob
hath turned back, And hath been at rest, and been at ease, And there is
none disturbing.

<span id="an_46:28">46:28</span> Thou, thou dost not fear, My servant
Jacob, An affirmation of Jehovah -- for with thee I \[am\], For I make
an end of all the nations Whither I have driven thee, And of thee I do
not make an end, And I have reproved thee in judgment, And do not
entirely acquit thee!'

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> That which hath been the word of Jehovah
unto Jeremiah concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh smiteth Gaza:

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah: Lo, waters are
coming up from the north, And have been for an overflowing stream, And
they overflow the land and its fulness, The city, and the inhabitants in
it, And men have cried out, And howled hath every inhabitant of the
land.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> From the sound of the stamping of the
hoofs of his mighty ones, From the rushing of his chariot, the noise of
his wheels, Fathers have not turned unto sons, From feebleness of hands,

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Because of the day that hath come to
spoil all the Philistines, To cut off to Tyre and to Zidon every helping
remnant. For Jehovah is spoiling the Philistines, The remnant of the
isle of Caphtor.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Come hath baldness unto Gaza, Cut off
hath been Ashkelon, O remnant of their valley, Till when dost thou cut
thyself?

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> Ho, sword of Jehovah, till when art thou
not quiet? Be removed unto thy sheath, rest and cease.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> How shall it be quiet, And Jehovah hath
given a charge to it, Against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? There
hath He appointed it!'

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Concerning Moab: \`Thus said Jehovah of
Hosts, God of Israel: Wo unto Nebo, for it is spoiled, Put to shame,
captured hath been Kiriathaim, Put to shame hath been the high tower,
Yea, it hath been broken down.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> There is no more praise of Moab, In
Heshbon they devised against it evil: Come, and we cut it off from
\[being\] a nation, Also, O Madmen, thou art cut off, After thee goeth a
sword.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> A voice of a cry \[is\] from Horonaim,
Spoiling and great destruction.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> Destroyed hath been Moab, Caused a cry to
be heard have her little ones.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> For the ascent of Luhith with weeping, Go
up doth weeping, For in the descent of Horonaim Adversaries a cry of
desolation have heard.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> Flee ye, deliver yourselves, Ye are as a
naked thing in a wilderness.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> For, because of thy trusting in thy
works, And in thy treasures, even thou art captured, And gone out hath
Chemosh in a removal, His priests and his heads together.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> And come in doth a spoiler unto every
city, And no city doth escape, And perished hath the valley, And
destroyed been the plain, as Jehovah said.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> Give wings to Moab, for she utterly goeth
out, And her cities are for a desolation, Without an inhabitant in them.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Cursed \[is\] he who is doing the work
of Jehovah slothfully, And cursed \[is\] he Who is withholding his sword
from blood.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> Secure is Moab from his youth, And at
rest \[is\] he for his preserved things, And he hath not been emptied
out from vessel unto vessel, And into captivity he hath not gone,
Therefore hath his taste remained in him, And his fragrance hath not
been changed.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Therefore, lo, days are coming, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And I have sent to him wanderers, And they have
caused him to wander, And his vessels they empty out, And his bottles
they dash in pieces.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And ashamed hath been Moab because of
Chemosh, As the house of Israel have been ashamed Because of Beth-El
their confidence.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> How do ye say, We \[are\] mighty, And
men of strength for battle?

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> Spoiled is Moab, and her cities hath
one gone up, And the choice of its young men Have gone down to
slaughter, An affirmation of the King, Jehovah of Hosts \[is\] His name.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> Near is the calamity of Moab to come,
And his affliction hath hasted exceedingly.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> Bemoan for him, all ye round about him,
And all knowing his name, say ye: How hath it been broken, the staff of
strength, The rod of beauty.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> Come down from honour, sit in thirst, O
inhabitant, daughter of Dibon, For a spoiler of Moab hath come up to
thee, He hath destroyed thy fenced places.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> On the way stand, and watch, O
inhabitant of Aroer, Ask the fugitive and escaped, Say, What hath
happened?

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> Put to shame hath been Moab, For it
hath been broken down, Howl and cry, declare ye in Arnon, For spoiled is
Moab,

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And judgment hath come in unto the land
of the plain -- unto Holon, And unto Jahazah, and on Mephaath,

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> And on Dibon, and on Nebo, And on
Beth-Diblathaim, and on Kirathaim,

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> And on Beth-Gamul, and on Beth-Meon,

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> And on Kerioth, and on Bozrah, And on
all cities of the land of Moab, The far off and the near.

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> Cut down hath been the horn of Moab,
And his arm hath been broken, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> Declare ye him drunk, For against
Jehovah he made himself great And Moab hath stricken in his vomit, And
he hath been for a derision -- even he.

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> And was not Israel the derision to
thee? Among thieves was he found? For since thy words concerning him,
Thou dost bemoan thyself.

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> Forsake cities, and dwell in a rock, Ye
inhabitants of Moab, And be as a dove making a nest in the passages of a
pit's mouth.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> We have heard of the arrogance of Moab,
Exceeding proud! His haughtiness, and his arrogance, And his pride, and
the height of his heart,

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> I -- I have known, an affirmation of
Jehovah, His wrath, and \[it is\] not right, His devices -- not right
they have done.

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> Therefore for Moab I howl, even for
Moab -- all of it, I cry for men of Kir-Heres, it doth mourn,

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> With the weeping of Jazer, I weep for
thee, O vine of Sibmah, Thy branches have passed over a sea, Unto the
sea of Jazer they have come, On thy summer fruits, and on thy harvest, A
spoiler hath fallen.

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> And removed hath been joy and gladness
From the fruitful field, Even from the land of Moab, And wine from
wine-presses I have caused to cease, Shouting doth not proceed, The
shouting \[is\] no shouting!

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> Because of the cry of Heshbon unto
Elealeh, Unto Jahaz they have given their voice, From Zoar unto
Horonaim, A heifer of the third \[year\], For even waters of Nimrim
become desolations.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> And I have caused to cease to Moab, An
affirmation of Jehovah, Him who is offering in a high place, And him who
is making perfume to his god.

<span id="an_48:36">48:36</span> Therefore my heart for Moab as pipes
doth sound, And my heart for men of Kir-Heres As pipes doth sound,
Therefore the abundance he made did perish.

<span id="an_48:37">48:37</span> For every head \[is\] bald, and every
beard diminished, On all hands cuttings, and on the loins -- sackcloth.

<span id="an_48:38">48:38</span> On all roofs of Moab, and in her
broad-places, All of it -- \[is\] lamentation, For I have broken Moab as
a vessel in which there is no pleasure, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:39">48:39</span> How hath it been broken down! they have
howled, How hath Moab turned the neck ashamed, And Moab hath been for a
derision. And for a terror to all round about her.

<span id="an_48:40">48:40</span> For thus said Jehovah: Lo, as an eagle
he doth flee, And hath spread his wings unto Moab.

<span id="an_48:41">48:41</span> Captured have been the cities, And the
strongholds are caught, And the heart of the mighty of Moab Hath been in
that day as the heart of a distressed woman.

<span id="an_48:42">48:42</span> And Moab hath been destroyed from
\[being\] a people, For against Jehovah he exerted himself.

<span id="an_48:43">48:43</span> Fear, and a snare, and a gin, \[are\]
for thee, O inhabitant of Moab -- an affirmation of Jehovah,

<span id="an_48:44">48:44</span> Whoso is fleeing because of the fear
falleth into the snare, And whoso is coming up from the snare is
captured by the gin, For I bring in unto her -- unto Moab -- The year of
their inspection, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:45">48:45</span> In the shadow of Heshbon stood
powerless have fugitives, For fire hath gone forth from Heshbon, And a
flame from within Sihon, And it consumeth the corner of Moab, And the
crown of the sons of Shaon.

<span id="an_48:46">48:46</span> Wo to thee, O Moab, Perished hath the
people of Chemosh, For thy sons were taken with the captives, And thy
daughters with the captivity.

<span id="an_48:47">48:47</span> And I have turned back \[to\] the
captivity of Moab, In the latter end of the days, An affirmation of
Jehovah! Hitherto \[is\] the judgment of Moab.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> Concerning the sons of Ammon: \`Thus said
Jehovah: Sons -- hath Israel none? heir -- hath he none? Wherefore hath
Malcam possessed Gad? And his people in its cities have dwelt?

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> Therefore, lo, days are coming, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And I have sounded unto Rabbah of the sons of
Ammon a shout of battle, And it hath been for a heap -- a desolation,
And her daughters with fire are burnt, And Israel hath succeeded its
heirs, Said hath Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> Howl, Heshbon, for spoiled is Ai, Cry,
daughters of Rabbah, gird on sackcloth, Lament, and go to and fro by the
hedges, For Malcam into captivity doth go, His priests and his princes
together.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> What -- dost thou boast thyself in
valleys? Flowed hath thy valley, O backsliding daughter, Who is trusting
in her treasures: Who doth come in unto me?

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Lo, I am bringing in upon thee a fear, An
affirmation of the Lord Jehovah of Hosts, From all round about thee, And
ye have been driven out each before it, And there is no gatherer of the
wandering.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> And after this I turn back the captivity
of the sons of Ammon, An affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Concerning Edom: \`Thus said Jehovah of
Hosts: Is wisdom no more in Teman? Perished hath counsel from the
intelligent? Vanished hath their wisdom?

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Flee, turn, go deep to dwell, ye
inhabitants of Dedan, For the calamity of Esau I brought in upon him,
The time I inspected him.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> If gatherers have come in to thee, They
do not leave gleanings, If thieves in the night, They have destroyed
their sufficiency!

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> For I -- I have made Esau bare, I have
uncovered his secret places, And to be hidden he is not able, Spoiled
\[is\] his seed, and his brethren, And his neighbours, and he is not.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> Leave thine orphans -- I do keep alive,
And thy widows -- on Me trust ye,

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> For thus said Jehovah: They whose
judgment is not to drink of the cup, Do certainly drink, And thou
\[art\] he that is entirely acquitted! Thou art not acquitted, for thou
certainly drinkest.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> For, by Myself, I have sworn, An
affirmation of Jehovah, That for a desolation, for a reproach, For a
waste, and for a reviling -- is Bozrah, And all her cities are for
wastes age-during.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> A report I have heard from Jehovah, And
an ambassador among nations is sent, Gather yourselves and come in
against her, And rise ye for battle.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> For, lo, little I have made thee among
nations, Despised among men.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Thy terribleness hath lifted thee up,
The pride of thy heart, O dweller in clefts of the rock, Holding the
high place of the height, For thou makest high as an eagle thy nest,
From thence I bring thee down, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> And Edom hath been for a desolation,
Every passer by her is astonished, And doth hiss because of all her
plagues.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> As the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah,
And its neighbours, said Jehovah, No one doth dwell there, Nor sojourn
in her doth a son of man.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Lo, as a lion he cometh up, Because of
the rising of the Jordan, Unto the enduring habitation, But I cause to
rest, I cause him to run from off her, And who is chosen? concerning her
I lay a charge, For who is like Me? and who conveneth Me? And who \[is\]
this shepherd who standeth before Me?

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> Therefore, hear ye the counsel of
Jehovah, That He hath counselled concerning Edom, And His devices that
He hath devised Concerning the inhabitants of Teman: Drag them out do
not little ones of the flock, Make desolate over them doth he not their
habitation?

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> From the noise of their fall hath the
earth shaken, The cry -- at the sea of Suph is its voice heard.

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Lo, as an eagle he cometh up, and
flieth, And he spreadeth his wings over Bozrah, And the heart of the
mighty of Edom hath been in that day, As the heart of a distressed
woman!'

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> Concerning Damascus: Ashamed hath been
Hamath and Arpad, For an evil report they have heard, They have been
melted, in the sea \[is\] sorrow, To be quiet it is not able.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> Feeble hath been Damascus, She turned
to flee, and fear strengthened her, Distress and pangs have seized her,
as a travailing woman.

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> How is it not left -- the city of
praise, The city of my joy!

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> Therefore fall do her young men in her
broad places, And all the men of war are cut off in that day, An
affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_49:27">49:27</span> And I have kindled a fire against the
wall of Damascus, And it consumed palaces of Ben-Hadad!'

<span id="an_49:28">49:28</span> Concerning Kedar, and concerning the
kingdoms of Hazor, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath smitten:
\`Thus said Jehovah: Arise ye, go ye up unto Kedar, And spoil the sons
of the east.

<span id="an_49:29">49:29</span> Their tents and their flock they do
take, Their curtains, and all their vessels, And their camels, they bear
away for themselves, And they called concerning them, Fear \[is\] round
about.

<span id="an_49:30">49:30</span> Flee, bemoan mightily, go deep to
dwell, Ye inhabitants of Hazor -- an affirmation of Jehovah, For given
counsel against you hath Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, Yea, he
deviseth against them a device.

<span id="an_49:31">49:31</span> Rise ye, go up unto a nation at rest,
Dwelling confidently, an affirmation of Jehovah, It hath no two-leaved
doors nor bar, Alone they do dwell.

<span id="an_49:32">49:32</span> And their camels have been for a prey,
And the multitude of their cattle for a spoil, And I have scattered them
to every wind, Who cut off the corner \[of the beard\], And from all its
passages I bring in their calamity, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:33">49:33</span> And Hazor hath been for a habitation of
dragons, A desolation -- unto the age, No one doth dwell there, nor
sojourn in it doth a son of man!'

<span id="an_49:34">49:34</span> That which hath been the word of
Jehovah unto Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam, in the beginning of
the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying:

<span id="an_49:35">49:35</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Lo, I am
breaking the bow of Elam, The beginning of their might.

<span id="an_49:36">49:36</span> And I have brought in to Elam four
winds, From the four ends of the heavens, And have scattered them to all
these winds, And there is no nation whither outcasts of Elam come not
in.

<span id="an_49:37">49:37</span> And I have affrighted Elam before their
enemies, And before those seeking their life, And I have brought in
against them evil, The heat of Mine anger, An affirmation of Jehovah,
And I have sent after them the sword, Till I have consumed them;

<span id="an_49:38">49:38</span> And I have set My throne in Elam, And I
have destroyed thence King and princes -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:39">49:39</span> And it hath come to pass, in the latter
end of the days, I turn back \[to\] the captivity of Elam, An
affirmation of Jehovah!'

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> The word that Jehovah hath spoken
concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, by the hand of
Jeremiah the prophet:

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> \`Declare ye among nations, and sound,
And lift up an ensign, sound, do not hide, Say ye: Captured hath been
Babylon, Put to shame hath been Bel, Broken hath been Merodach, Put to
shame have been her grievous things, Broken have been her idols.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> For come up against her hath a nation
from the north, It maketh her land become a desolation, And there is not
an inhabitant in it. From man even unto beast, They have moved, they
have gone.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> In those days, and at that time, An
affirmation of Jehovah, Come in do sons of Israel, They and sons of
Judah together, Going on and weeping they go, And Jehovah their God they
seek.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> \[To\] Zion they ask the way, Thitherward
\[are\] their faces: Come in, and we are joined unto Jehovah, A covenant
age-during -- not forgotten.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> A perishing flock hath My people been,
Their shepherds have caused them to err, \[To\] the mountains causing
them to go back, From mountain unto hill they have gone, They have
forgotten their crouching-place.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> All finding them have devoured them, And
their adversaries have said: We are not guilty, Because that they sinned
against Jehovah, The habitation of righteousness, And the hope of their
fathers -- Jehovah.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> Move ye from the midst of Babylon, And
from the land of the Chaldeans go out. And be as he-goats before a
flock.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> For, lo, I am stirring up, And am causing
to come up against Babylon, An assembly of great nations from a land of
the north, And they have set in array against her, From thence she is
captured, Its arrow -- as a skilful hero -- returneth not empty,

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> And Chaldea hath been for a spoil, All
her spoilers are satisfied, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> Because thou rejoicest, because thou
exultest, O spoilers of Mine inheritance, Because thou increasest as a
heifer \[at\] the tender grass, And dost cry aloud as bulls,

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> Ashamed hath been your mother greatly,
Confounded hath she been that bare you, Lo, the hindermost of nations
\[is\] a wilderness, A dry land, and a desert.

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> Because of the wrath of Jehovah it is
not inhabited, And it hath been a desolation -- all of it. Every passer
by at Babylon is astonished, And doth hiss because of all her plagues.

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> Set yourselves in array against Babylon
round about, All ye treading a bow, Shoot at her, have no pity on the
arrow, For against Jehovah she hath sinned.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> Shout against her round about, She hath
given forth her hand, Fallen have her foundations, Thrown down have been
her walls, For it \[is\] the vengeance of Jehovah, Be avenged of her, as
she did -- do ye to her.

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> Cut off the sower from Babylon, And him
handling the sickle in the time of harvest, Because of the oppressing
sword, Each unto his people -- they turn, And each to his land -- they
flee.

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> A scattered sheep is Israel, lions have
driven away, At first, devour him did the king of Asshur, And now, at
last, broken his bone Hath Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> Therefore thus said Jehovah of Hosts,
God of Israel: Lo, I am seeing after the king of Babylon, And after his
land, As I have seen after the king of Asshur;

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> And I have brought back Israel unto his
habitation, And he hath fed on Carmel, and on Bashan. And in mount
Ephraim, and on Gilead is his soul satisfied.

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> In those days, and at that time, An
affirmation of Jehovah, Sought is the iniquity of Israel, and it is not,
And the sin of Judah, and it is not found, For I am propitious to those
whom I leave!

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> Against the land of Merathaim: Go up
against it, and unto the inhabitants of Pekod, Waste and devote their
posterity, An affirmation of Jehovah, And do according to all that I
have commanded thee.

<span id="an_50:22">50:22</span> A noise of battle \[is\] in the land,
and of great destruction.

<span id="an_50:23">50:23</span> How hath it been cut and broken, The
hammer of the whole earth! How hath Babylon been for a desolation among
nations!

<span id="an_50:24">50:24</span> I have laid a snare for thee, And also
-- thou art captured, O Babylon, And thou -- thou hast known, Thou hast
been found, and also art caught, For against Jehovah thou hast stirred
thyself up.

<span id="an_50:25">50:25</span> Jehovah hath opened His treasury, And
He bringeth out the weapons of His indignation, For a work \[is\] to the
Lord Jehovah of Hosts, In the land of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_50:26">50:26</span> Come ye in to her from the extremity,
Open ye her storehouses, Raise her up as heaps, and devote her, Let her
have no remnant.

<span id="an_50:27">50:27</span> Slay all her kine, they go down to
slaughter, Wo \[is\] on them, for come hath their day, The time of their
inspection.

<span id="an_50:28">50:28</span> A voice of fugitives and escaped ones
\[Is\] from the land of Babylon, To declare in Zion the vengeance of
Jehovah our God, The vengeance of His temple.

<span id="an_50:29">50:29</span> Summon unto Babylon archers, all
treading the bow, Encamp against her round about, Let \[her\] have no
escape; Recompense to her according to her work, According to all that
she did -- do to her, For unto Jehovah she hath been proud, Unto the
Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_50:30">50:30</span> Therefore fall do her young men in her
broad places, And all her men of war are cut off in that day, An
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_50:31">50:31</span> Lo, I \[am\] against thee, O pride, An
affirmation of the Lord Jehovah of Hosts, For thy day hath come, the
time of thy inspection.

<span id="an_50:32">50:32</span> And stumbled hath pride, And he hath
fallen, and hath no raiser up, And I have kindled a fire in his cities,
And it hath devoured all round about him.

<span id="an_50:33">50:33</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Oppressed
are the sons of Israel, And the sons of Judah together, And all their
captors have kept hold on them, They have refused to send them away.

<span id="an_50:34">50:34</span> Their Redeemer \[is\] strong, Jehovah
of Hosts \[is\] His name, He doth thoroughly plead their cause, So as to
cause the land to rest, And He hath given trouble to the inhabitants of
Babylon.

<span id="an_50:35">50:35</span> A sword \[is\] for the Chaldeans, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And it \[is\] on the inhabitants of Babylon, And
on her heads, and on her wise men;

<span id="an_50:36">50:36</span> A sword \[is\] on the princes, And they
have become foolish; A sword \[is\] on her mighty ones, And they have
been broken down;

<span id="an_50:37">50:37</span> A sword \[is\] on his horses and on his
chariot, And on all the rabble who \[are\] in her midst, And they have
become women; A sword \[is\] on her treasuries, And they have been
spoiled;

<span id="an_50:38">50:38</span> A sword \[is\] on her waters, and they
have been dried up, For it \[is\] a land of graven images, And in idols
they do boast themselves.

<span id="an_50:39">50:39</span> Therefore dwell do Ziim with Iim, Yea,
dwelt in her have daughters of the ostrich, And it is not inhabited any
more for ever, Nor dwelt in unto all generations.

<span id="an_50:40">50:40</span> As overthrown by God with Sodom, And
with Gomorrah, and with its neighbours, An affirmation of Jehovah, none
doth dwell there, Nor sojourn in her doth a son of man.

<span id="an_50:41">50:41</span> Lo, a people hath come from the north,
Even a great nation, And many kings are stirred up from the sides of the
earth.

<span id="an_50:42">50:42</span> Bow and halbert they seize, Cruel
\[are\] they, and they have no mercy, Their voice as a sea soundeth, and
on horses they ride, Set in array as a man for battle, Against thee, O
daughter of Babylon.

<span id="an_50:43">50:43</span> Heard hath the king of Babylon their
report, And feeble have been his hands, Distress hath seized him; pain
as a travailing woman.

<span id="an_50:44">50:44</span> Lo, as a lion he cometh up, Because of
the rising of the Jordan, Unto the enduring habitation, But I cause to
rest, I cause them to run from off her. And who is chosen? on her I lay
a charge, For who \[is\] like Me? And who doth convene Me? And who
\[is\] this shepherd who standeth before Me?

<span id="an_50:45">50:45</span> Therefore, hear ye the counsel of
Jehovah, That He counselled concerning Babylon, And His devices that He
hath devised Concerning the land of the Chaldeans; Drag them out do not
little ones of the flock, Doth He not make desolate over them the
habitation?

<span id="an_50:46">50:46</span> From the voice: Captured was Babylon,
Hath the earth been shaken, And a cry among nations hath been heard!

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am stirring up
against Babylon, And the inhabitants of Leb -- My withstanders, A
destroying wind,

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> And I have sent to Babylon fanners, And
they have fanned it, and they empty its land, For they have been against
it, Round about -- in the day of evil.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> Let not the treader tread his bow, Nor
lift himself up in his coat of mail, Nor have ye pity on her young men,
Devote ye to destruction all her host.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> And fallen have the wounded in the land
of the Chaldeans, And the pierced-through in her streets.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> For, not forsaken is Israel and Judah, By
its God -- by Jehovah of Hosts, For their land hath been full of guilt,
Against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Flee ye from the midst of Babylon, And
deliver ye each his soul, Be not cut off in its iniquity, For a time of
vengeance it \[is\] to Jehovah, Recompence He is rendering to her.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> A golden cup \[is\] Babylon in the hand
of Jehovah, Making drunk all the earth, Of its wine drunk have nations,
Therefore boast themselves do nations.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> Suddenly hath Babylon fallen, Yea, it is
broken, howl ye for it, Take balm for her pain, if so be it may be
healed.

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> We healed Babylon, and she was not
healed, Forsake her, and we go, each to his land, For come unto the
heavens hath its judgment, And it hath been lifted up unto the clouds.

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> Jehovah hath brought forth our
righteousnesses, Come, and we recount in Zion the work of Jehovah our
God.

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> Cleanse ye the arrows, fill the
shields, Stirred up hath Jehovah the spirit of the kings of Madia, For
against Babylon His device \[is\] to destroy it, For the vengeance of
Jehovah it \[is\], The vengeance of His temple.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> Unto the walls of Babylon lift up an
ensign, Strengthen the watch, Establish the watchers, prepare the
ambush, For Jehovah hath both devised and done that which He spake,
Concerning the inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> O dweller on many waters, abundant in
treasures, Come in hath thine end, the measure of thy dishonest gain.

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> Sworn hath Jehovah of Hosts by Himself,
That, Surely I have filled thee \[with\] men as the cankerworm, And they
have cried against thee -- shouting.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> The maker of earth by His power, The
establisher of the world by His wisdom, Who by His understanding
stretched out the heavens,

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> At the voice He giveth forth, A
multitude of waters \[are\] in the heavens, And He causeth vapours to
come up from the end of the earth, Lightnings for rain He hath made, And
He bringeth out wind from His treasures.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Brutish hath been every man by
knowledge, Put to shame hath been every refiner by a graven image, For
false \[is\] his molten image, And there is no breath in them.

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> Vanity \[are\] they -- work of errors,
In the time of their inspection they perish.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> Not like these \[is\] the portion of
Jacob, For He \[is\] former of all things, And \[Israel is\] the rod of
His inheritance, Jehovah of Hosts \[is\] His name.

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> An axe \[art\] thou to me -- weapons of
war, And I have broken in pieces by thee nations, And I have destroyed
by thee kingdoms,

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> And I have broken in pieces by thee
horse and its rider, And I have broken in pieces by thee chariot and its
charioteer,

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> And I have broken in pieces by thee man
and woman, And I have broken in pieces by thee old and young, And I have
broken in pieces by thee young man and virgin,

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> And I have broken in pieces by thee
shepherd and his drove, And I have broken in pieces by thee husbandman
and his team, And I have broken in pieces by thee governors and
prefects.

<span id="an_51:24">51:24</span> And I have recompensed to Babylon, And
to all inhabitants of Chaldea, All the evil that they have done in Zion,
Before your eyes -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:25">51:25</span> Lo, I \[am\] against thee, O destroying
mount, An affirmation of Jehovah, That is destroying all the earth, And
I have stretched out My hand against thee, And I have rolled thee from
the rocks, And given thee for a burnt mountain.

<span id="an_51:26">51:26</span> And they take not out of thee a stone
for a corner, And a stone for foundations, For desolations age-during
art thou, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:27">51:27</span> Lift ye up an ensign in the land, Blow
a trumpet among nations, Sanctify against it nations, Summon against it
the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz, Appoint against it an
infant head, Cause the horse to ascend as the rough cankerworm.

<span id="an_51:28">51:28</span> Sanctify against it the nations with
the kings of Media, Its governors and all its prefects, And all the land
of its dominion.

<span id="an_51:29">51:29</span> And shake doth the land, and it is
pained, For stood against Babylon have the purposes of Jehovah, To make
the land of Babylon a desolation without inhabitant.

<span id="an_51:30">51:30</span> Ceased have the mighty of Babylon to
fight, They have remained in strongholds, Failed hath their might, they
have become woman, They have burnt her tabernacles, Broken have been her
bars.

<span id="an_51:31">51:31</span> Runner to meet runner doth run, And
announcer to meet announcer, To announce to the king of Babylon, For,
captured hath been his city -- at the extremity.

<span id="an_51:32">51:32</span> And the passages have been captured,
And the reeds they have burnt with fire, And the men of war have been
troubled.

<span id="an_51:33">51:33</span> For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of
Israel, The daughter of Babylon \[is\] as a threshing-floor, The time of
her threshing -- yet a little, And come hath the time of her harvest.

<span id="an_51:34">51:34</span> Devoured us, crushed us, hath
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, He hath set us \[as\] an empty vessel,
He hath swallowed us as a dragon, He hath filled his belly with my
dainties, He hath driven us away.

<span id="an_51:35">51:35</span> My wrong, and \[that of\] my flesh
\[is\] on Babylon, Say doth the inhabitant of Zion, And my blood \[is\]
on the inhabitants of Chaldea, Say doth Jerusalem.

<span id="an_51:36">51:36</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am
pleading thy cause, And I have avenged thy vengeance, And dried up its
sea, and made its fountains dry.

<span id="an_51:37">51:37</span> And Babylon hath been for heaps, A
habitation of dragons, An astonishment, and a hissing, without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_51:38">51:38</span> Together as young lions they roar, They
have shaken themselves as lions' whelps.

<span id="an_51:39">51:39</span> In their heat I make their banquets,
And I have caused them to drink, so that they exult, And have slept a
sleep age-during, And awake not -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:40">51:40</span> I cause them to go down as lambs to
slaughter, As rams with he-goats.

<span id="an_51:41">51:41</span> How hath Sheshach been captured, Yea,
caught is the praise of the whole earth, How hath Babylon been for an
astonishment among nations.

<span id="an_51:42">51:42</span> Come up against Babylon hath the sea,
With a multitude of its billows it hath been covered.

<span id="an_51:43">51:43</span> Its cities have been for a desolation,
A dry land, and a wilderness, A land -- none doth dwell in them, Nor
pass over into them doth a son of man.

<span id="an_51:44">51:44</span> And I have seen after Bel in Babylon,
And I have brought forth that which he swallowed -- from his mouth, And
flow no more unto him do nations, Also the wall of Babylon hath fallen.

<span id="an_51:45">51:45</span> Go forth from its midst, O My people,
And deliver ye, each his soul, Because of the fierceness of the anger of
Jehovah,

<span id="an_51:46">51:46</span> And lest your heart be tender, And ye
be afraid of the report that is heard in the land, And come in a year
hath the report, And after it in a year the report, And violence \[is\]
in the land, ruler against ruler;

<span id="an_51:47">51:47</span> Therefore, lo, days are coming, And I
have seen after the graven images of Babylon. And all its land is
ashamed, And all its pierced ones do fall in its midst.

<span id="an_51:48">51:48</span> And cried aloud against Babylon Have
heavens and earth, and all that \[is\] in them, For, from the north come
to it do the spoilers, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:49">51:49</span> Even Babylon \[is\] to fall, ye pierced
of Israel, Even they of Babylon have fallen, Ye pierced of all the
earth.

<span id="an_51:50">51:50</span> Ye escaped of the sword, go on, stand
not, Remember ye from afar Jehovah, And let Jerusalem come up on your
heart.

<span id="an_51:51">51:51</span> We have been ashamed, for we heard
reproach, Covered hath shame our faces, For come in have strangers,
against the sanctuaries of the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:52">51:52</span> Therefore, lo, days are coming, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And I have seen after its graven images, And in
all its land groan doth the wounded.

<span id="an_51:53">51:53</span> Because Babylon goeth up to the
heavens, And because it fenceth the high place of its strength, From Me
come into it do spoilers, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:54">51:54</span> A voice of a cry \[is\] from Babylon,
And of great destruction from the land of the Chaldean.

<span id="an_51:55">51:55</span> For Jehovah is spoiling Babylon, And
hath destroyed out of it a great voice, And sounded have its billows as
many waters, Given forth a noise hath their voice.

<span id="an_51:56">51:56</span> For come in against it -- against
Babylon -- hath a spoiler, And captured have been its mighty ones,
Broken have been their bows, For the God of recompences -- Jehovah --
doth certainly repay.

<span id="an_51:57">51:57</span> And I have caused its princes to drink,
And its wise men, its governors, And its prefects, and its mighty ones,
And they have slept a sleep age-during, And they awake not -- an
affirmation of the king, Jehovah of Hosts \[is\] His name.

<span id="an_51:58">51:58</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, the wall of
Babylon -- The broad one -- is utterly made bare, And her high gates
with fire are burnt, And peoples labour in vain, And nations in fire,
and have been weary!

<span id="an_51:59">51:59</span> The word that Jeremiah the prophet hath
commanded Seraiah son of Neriah, son of Maaseiah, in his going with
Zedekiah king of Judah to Babylon, in the fourth year of his reign --
and Seraiah \[is\] a quiet prince;

<span id="an_51:60">51:60</span> and Jeremiah writeth all the evil that
cometh unto Babylon on one book -- all these words that are written
concerning Babylon.

<span id="an_51:61">51:61</span> And Jeremiah saith unto Seraiah, \`When
thou dost enter Babylon, then thou hast seen, and hast read all these
words,

<span id="an_51:62">51:62</span> and hast said: Jehovah, Thou, Thou hast
spoken concerning this place, to cut it off, that there is none dwelling
in it, from man even unto cattle, for it is a desolation age-during.

<span id="an_51:63">51:63</span> And it hath come to pass, when thou
dost finish reading this book, thou dost bind to it a stone, and hast
cast it into the midst of Phrat,

<span id="an_51:64">51:64</span> and said, Thus sink doth Babylon, and
it doth not arise, because of the evil that I am bringing in against it,
and they have been weary.' Hitherto \[are\] words of Jeremiah.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> A son of twenty and one years \[is\]
Zedekiah in his reigning, and eleven years he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and the name of his mother \[is\] Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah of
Libnah.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of
Jehovah, according to all that Jehoiakim hath done,

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> for, because of the anger of Jehovah, it
hath been in Jerusalem and Judah till He hath cast them from before His
face, and Zedekiah doth rebel against the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> And it cometh to pass, in the ninth year
of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth of the month, come hath
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon -- he and all his force -- against
Jerusalem, and they encamp against it, and build against it a
fortification round about;

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> and the city cometh into siege till the
eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> In the fourth month, in the ninth of the
month, when the famine is severe in the city, and there hath been no
bread for the people of the land,

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> then is the city broken up, and all the
men of war flee, and go forth from the city by night, the way of the
gate between the two walls, that \[is\] by the king's garden -- and the
Chaldeans \[are\] by the city round about -- and they go the way of the
plain.

<span id="an_52:8">52:8</span> And the forces of the Chaldeans pursue
after the king, and overtake Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, and all
his forces have been scattered from him,

<span id="an_52:9">52:9</span> and they capture the king, and bring him
up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah, in the land of Hamath, and he
speaketh with him -- judgments.

<span id="an_52:10">52:10</span> And the king of Babylon slaughtereth
the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and also all the princes of Judah
hath he slaughtered in Riblah;

<span id="an_52:11">52:11</span> and the eyes of Zedekiah he hath
blinded, and he bindeth him in brazen fetters, and the king of Babylon
bringeth him to Babylon, and putteth him in the house of inspection unto
the day of his death.

<span id="an_52:12">52:12</span> And in the fifth month, in the tenth of
the month -- it \[is\] the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadrezzar king
of Babylon -- come hath Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners; he hath
stood before the king of Babylon in Jerusalem,

<span id="an_52:13">52:13</span> and he burneth the house of Jehovah,
and the house of the king, and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every
great house he hath burned with fire,

<span id="an_52:14">52:14</span> and all the walls of Jerusalem round
about broken down have all the forces of the Chaldeans that \[are\] with
the chief of the executioners.

<span id="an_52:15">52:15</span> And of the poor of the people, and the
remnant of the people who are left in the city, and those who are
falling away, who have fallen unto the king of Babylon, and the remnant
of the multitude, hath Nebuzar-Adan chief of the executioners, removed;

<span id="an_52:16">52:16</span> and of the poor of the land hath
Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, left for vine-dressers and for
husbandmen.

<span id="an_52:17">52:17</span> And the pillars of brass that \[are\]
to the house of Jehovah, and the bases, and the brasen sea that \[is\]
in the house of Jehovah, have the Chaldeans broken, and they bear away
all the brass of them to Babylon;

<span id="an_52:18">52:18</span> and the pots, and the shovels, and the
snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass
with which they minister, they have taken away;

<span id="an_52:19">52:19</span> and the basins, and the fire-pans, and
the bowls, and the pots, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the
cups, the gold of that which \[is\] gold, and the silver of that which
\[is\] silver, hath the chief of the executioners taken.

<span id="an_52:20">52:20</span> The two pillars, the one sea, and the
twelve brazen oxen that \[are\] beneath the bases, that king Solomon
made for the house of Jehovah, there was no weighing of the brass of all
these vessels.

<span id="an_52:21">52:21</span> As to the pillars, eighteen cubits
\[is\] the height of the one pillar, and a cord of twelve cubits doth
compass it, and its thickness \[is\] four fingers hollow.

<span id="an_52:22">52:22</span> And the chapiter upon it \[is\] of
brass, and the height of the one chapiter \[is\] five cubits, and
net-work and pomegranates \[are\] on the chapiter round about, the whole
\[is\] of brass; and like these have the second pillar, and
pomegranates.

<span id="an_52:23">52:23</span> And the pomegranates are ninety and six
on a side, all the pomegranates \[are\] a hundred on the net-work round
about.

<span id="an_52:24">52:24</span> And the chief of the executioners
taketh Seraiah the head priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the
three keepers of the threshold,

<span id="an_52:25">52:25</span> and out of the city he hath taken a
certain eunuch, who hath been inspector over the men of war, and seven
men of those seeing the king's face, who have been found in the city,
and the head scribe of the host, who mustereth the people of the land,
and sixty men of the people of the land, who are found in the midst of
the city;

<span id="an_52:26">52:26</span> and Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the
executioners, taketh them, and bringeth them unto the king of Babylon to
Riblah,

<span id="an_52:27">52:27</span> and the king of Babylon smiteth them,
and putteth them to death in Riblah, in the land of Hamath, and he
removeth Judah from off its own ground.

<span id="an_52:28">52:28</span> This \[is\] the people whom
Nebuchadrezzar hath removed: in the seventh year, of Jews, three
thousand and twenty and three;

<span id="an_52:29">52:29</span> in the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadrezzar -- from Jerusalem, souls, eight hundred thirty and two;

<span id="an_52:30">52:30</span> in the three and twentieth year of
Nebuchadrezzar, hath Nebuzar-Adan chief of the guard removed of Jewish
souls, seven hundred forty and five; all the souls \[are\] four thousand
and six hundred.

<span id="an_52:31">52:31</span> And it cometh to pass, in the thirty
and seventh year of the removal of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the
twelfth month, in the twenty and fifth of the month, hath Evil-Merodach
king of Babylon lifted up, in the year of his reign, the head of
Jehoiachin king of Judah, and bringeth him out from the house of
restraint,

<span id="an_52:32">52:32</span> and speaketh with him good things, and
setteth his throne above the throne of the kings who \[are\] with him in
Babylon,

<span id="an_52:33">52:33</span> and he hath changed his prison
garments, and he hath eaten bread before him continually, all the days
of his life.

<span id="an_52:34">52:34</span> And his allowance -- a continual
allowance -- hath been given to him by the king of Babylon, the matter
of a day in its day, till the day of his death -- all days of his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations](lam)
