[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](est)  [Next](psa) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Job

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> A man there hath been in the land of Uz --
Job his name -- and that man hath been perfect and upright -- both
fearing God, and turning aside from evil.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And there are borne to him seven sons and
three daughters,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> and his substance is seven thousand sheep,
and three thousand camels, and five hundred pairs of oxen, and five
hundred she-asses, and a service very abundant; and that man is greater
than any of the sons of the east.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And his sons have gone and made a banquet
-- the house of each \[in\] his day -- and have sent and called to their
three sisters to eat and to drink with them;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and it cometh to pass, when they have gone
round the days of the banquet, that Job doth send and sanctify them, and
hath risen early in the morning, and caused to ascend burnt-offerings --
the number of them all -- for Job said, \`Perhaps my sons have sinned,
yet blessed God in their heart.' Thus doth Job all the days.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And the day is, that sons of God come in to
station themselves by Jehovah, and there doth come also the Adversary in
their midst.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary,
\`Whence comest thou?' And the Adversary answereth Jehovah and saith,
\`From going to and fro in the land, and from walking up and down on
it.'

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary,
\`Hast thou set thy heart against My servant Job because there is none
like him in the land, a man perfect and upright, fearing God, and
turning aside from evil?'

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And the Adversary answereth Jehovah and
saith, \`For nought is Job fearing God?

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hast not Thou made a hedge for him, and
for his house, and for all that he hath -- round about?

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> The work of his hands Thou hast blessed,
and his substance hath spread in the land, and yet, put forth, I pray
Thee, Thy hand, and strike against anything that he hath -- if not: to
Thy face he doth bless Thee!'

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary,
\`Lo, all that he hath \[is\] in thy hand, only unto him put not forth
thy hand.' And the Adversary goeth out from the presence of Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the day is, that his sons and his
daughters are eating, and drinking wine, in the house of their brother,
the first-born.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And a messenger hath come in unto Job and
saith, \`The oxen have been plowing, and the she-asses feeding by their
sides,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and Sheba doth fall, and take them, and
the young men they have smitten by the mouth of the sword, and I am
escaped -- only I alone -- to declare \[it\] to thee.'

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> While this \[one\] is speaking another
also hath come and saith, \`Fire of God hath fallen from the heavens,
and burneth among the flock, and among the young men, and consumeth
them, and I am escaped -- only I alone -- to declare \[it\] to thee.'

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> While this \[one\] is speaking another
also hath come and saith, \`Chaldeans made three heads, and rush on the
camels, and take them, and the young men they have smitten by the mouth
of the sword, and I am escaped -- only I alone -- to declare \[it\] to
thee.'

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> While this \[one\] is speaking another
also hath come and saith, \`Thy sons and thy daughters are eating, and
drinking wine, in the house of their brother, the first-born.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And lo, a great wind hath come from over
the wilderness, and striketh against the four corners of the house, and
it falleth on the young men, and they are dead, and I am escaped -- only
I alone -- to declare \[it\] to thee.'

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And Job riseth, and rendeth his robe, and
shaveth his head, and falleth to the earth, and doth obeisance,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> and he saith, \`Naked came I forth from
the womb of my mother, and naked I turn back thither: Jehovah hath given
and Jehovah hath taken: let the name of Jehovah be blessed.'

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> In all this Job hath not sinned, nor
given folly to God.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And the day is, that sons of God come in to
station themselves by Jehovah, and there doth come also the Adversary in
their midst to station himself by Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary,
\`Whence camest thou?' And the Adversary answereth Jehovah and saith,
\`From going to and fro in the land, and from walking up and down in
it.'

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary,
\`Hast thou set thy heart unto My servant Job because there is none like
him in the land, a man perfect and upright, fearing God and turning
aside from evil? and still he is keeping hold on his integrity, and thou
dost move Me against him to swallow him up for nought!'

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the Adversary answereth Jehovah and
saith, \`A skin for a skin, and all that a man hath he doth give for his
life.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Yet, put forth, I pray Thee, Thy hand, and
strike unto his bone and unto his flesh -- if not: unto Thy face he doth
bless Thee!'

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary, \`Lo,
he \[is\] in thy hand; only his life take care of.'

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the Adversary goeth forth from the
presence of Jehovah, and smiteth Job with a sore ulcer from the sole of
his foot unto his crown.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And he taketh to him a potsherd to scrape
himself with it, and he is sitting in the midst of the ashes.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And his wife saith to him, \`Still thou art
keeping hold on thine integrity: bless God and die.'

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And he saith unto her, \`As one of the
foolish women speaketh, thou speakest; yea, the good we receive from
God, and the evil we do not receive.' In all this Job hath not sinned
with his lips.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And three of the friends of Job hear of
all this evil that hath come upon him, and they come in each from his
place -- Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the
Naamathite -- and they are met together to come in to bemoan him, and to
comfort him;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and they lift up their eyes from afar and
have not discerned him, and they lift up their voice and weep, and rend
each his robe, and sprinkle dust on their heads -- heavenward.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And they sit with him on the earth seven
days and seven nights, and there is none speaking unto him a word when
they have seen that the pain hath been very great.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> After this hath Job opened his mouth, and
revileth his day.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let the day perish in which I am born, And
the night that hath said: \`A man-child hath been conceived.'

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> That day -- let it be darkness, Let not God
require it from above, Nor let light shine upon it.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Let darkness and death-shade redeem it, Let
a cloud tabernacle upon it, Let them terrify it as the most bitter of
days.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> That night -- let thick darkness take it,
Let it not be united to days of the year, Into the number of months let
it not come.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Lo! that night -- let it be gloomy, Let no
singing come into it.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Let the cursers of day mark it, Who are
ready to wake up Leviathan.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Let the stars of its twilight be dark, Let
it wait for light, and there is none, And let it not look on the eyelids
of the dawn.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Because it hath not shut the doors Of the
womb that was mine! And hide misery from mine eyes.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Why from the womb do I not die? From the
belly I have come forth and gasp!

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Wherefore have knees been before me? And
what \[are\] breasts, that I suck?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For now, I have lain down, and am quiet,
I have slept -- then there is rest to me,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> With kings and counsellors of earth,
These building wastes for themselves.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Or with princes -- they have gold, They
are filling their houses \[with\] silver.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> (Or as a hidden abortion I am not, As
infants -- they have not seen light.)

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> There the wicked have ceased troubling,
And there rest do the wearied in power.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Together prisoners have been at ease,
They have not heard the voice of an exactor,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Small and great \[are\] there the same.
And a servant \[is\] free from his lord.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Why giveth He to the miserable light, and
life to the bitter soul?

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who are waiting for death, and it is not,
And they seek it above hid treasures.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Who are glad -- unto joy, They rejoice
when they find a grave.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> To a man whose way hath been hidden, And
whom God doth shut up?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> For before my food, my sighing cometh,
And poured out as waters \[are\] my roarings.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For a fear I feared and it meeteth me,
And what I was afraid of doth come to me.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> I was not safe -- nor was I quiet -- Nor
was I at rest -- and trouble cometh!

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite answereth and
saith: --

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Hath one tried a word with thee? -- Thou
art weary! And to keep in words who is able?

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Lo, thou hast instructed many, And feeble
hands thou makest strong.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> The stumbling one do thy words raise up,
And bowing knees thou dost strengthen.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But now, it cometh in unto thee, And thou
art weary; It striketh unto thee, and thou art troubled.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Is not thy reverence thy confidence? Thy
hope -- the perfection of thy ways?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Remember, I pray thee, Who, being innocent,
hath perished? And where have the upright been cut off?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> As I have seen -- ploughers of iniquity,
And sowers of misery, reap it!

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> From the breath of God they perish, And
from the spirit of His anger consumed.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The roaring of a lion, And the voice of a
fierce lion, And teeth of young lions have been broken.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> An old lion is perishing without prey,
And the whelps of the lioness do separate.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And unto me a thing is secretly brought,
And receive doth mine ear a little of it.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> In thoughts from visions of the night, In
the falling of deep sleep on men,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Fear hath met me, and trembling, And the
multitude of my bones caused to fear.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And a spirit before my face doth pass,
Stand up doth the hair of my flesh;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> It standeth, and I discern not its
aspect, A similitude \[is\] over-against mine eyes, Silence! and a voice
I hear:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> \`Is mortal man than God more righteous?
Than his Maker is a man cleaner?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Lo, in His servants He putteth no
credence, Nor in His messengers setteth praise.'

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Also -- the inhabitants of houses of
clay, (Whose foundation \[is\] in the dust, They bruise them before a
moth.)

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> From morning to evening are beaten down,
Without any regarding, for ever they perish.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Hath not their excellency been removed
with them? They die, and not in wisdom!

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Pray, call, is there any to answer thee?
And unto which of the holy ones dost thou turn?

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For provocation slayeth the perverse, And
envy putteth to death the simple,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I -- I have seen the perverse taking root,
And I mark his habitation straightway,

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Far are his sons from safety, And they are
bruised in the gate, And there is no deliverer.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Whose harvest the hungry doth eat, And even
from the thorns taketh it, And the designing swallowed their wealth.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For sorrow cometh not forth from the dust,
Nor from the ground springeth up misery.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For man to misery is born, And the sparks
go high to fly.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Yet I -- I inquire for God, And for God I
give my word,

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Doing great things, and there is no
searching. Wonderful, till there is no numbering.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Who is giving rain on the face of the
land, And is sending waters on the out-places.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> To set the low on a high place, And the
mourners have been high \[in\] safety.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Making void thoughts of the subtile, And
their hands do not execute wisdom.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Capturing the wise in their subtilty, And
the counsel of wrestling ones was hastened,

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> By day they meet darkness, And as night
-- they grope at noon.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And He saveth the wasted from their
mouth, And from a strong hand the needy,

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And there is hope to the poor, And
perverseness hath shut her mouth.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Lo, the happiness of mortal man, God doth
reprove him: And the chastisement of the Mighty despise not,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For He doth pain, and He bindeth up, He
smiteth, and His hands heal.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> In six distresses He delivereth thee, And
in seven evil striketh not on thee.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> In famine He hath redeemed thee from
death, And in battle from the hands of the sword.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> When the tongue scourgeth thou art hid,
And thou art not afraid of destruction, When it cometh.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> At destruction and at hunger thou
mockest, And of the beast of the earth, Thou art not afraid.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> (For with sons of the field \[is\] thy
covenant, And the beast of the field Hath been at peace with thee.)

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And thou hast known that thy tent \[is\]
peace, And inspected thy habitation, and errest not,

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And hast known that numerous \[is\] Thy
seed, And thine offspring as the herb of the earth;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Thou comest in full age unto the grave,
As the going up of a stalk in its season.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Lo, this -- we searched it out -- it
\[is\] right, hearken; And thou, know for thyself!

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> O that my provocation were thoroughly
weighed, And my calamity in balances They would lift up together!

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> For now, than the sands of the sea it is
heavier, Therefore my words have been rash.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For arrows of the Mighty \[are\] with me,
Whose poison is drinking up my spirit. Terrors of God array themselves
\[for\] me!

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Brayeth a wild ass over tender grass?
Loweth an ox over his provender?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Eaten is an insipid thing without salt? Is
there sense in the drivel of dreams?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> My soul is refusing to touch! They \[are\]
as my sickening food.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> O that my request may come, That God may
grant my hope!

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> That God would please -- and bruise me,
Loose His hand and cut me off!

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And yet it is my comfort, (And I exult in
pain -- He doth not spare,) That I have not hidden The sayings of the
Holy One.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> What \[is\] my power that I should hope?
And what mine end That I should prolong my life?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Is my strength the strength of stones? Is
my flesh brazen?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Is not my help with me, And substance
driven from me?

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> To a despiser of his friends \[is\]
shame, And the fear of the Mighty he forsaketh.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> My brethren have deceived as a brook, As
a stream of brooks they pass away.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> That are black because of ice, By them
doth snow hide itself.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> By the time they are warm they have been
cut off, By its being hot they have been Extinguished from their place.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Turn aside do the paths of their way,
They ascend into emptiness, and are lost.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Passengers of Tema looked expectingly,
Travellers of Sheba hoped for them.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> They were ashamed that one hath trusted,
They have come unto it and are confounded.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Surely now ye have become the same! Ye
see a downfall, and are afraid.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Is it because I said, Give to me? And, By
your power bribe for me?

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And, Deliver me from the hand of an
adversary? And, From the hand of terrible ones ransom me?

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Shew me, and I -- I keep silent, And what
I have erred, let me understand.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> How powerful have been upright sayings,
And what doth reproof from you reprove?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> For reproof -- do you reckon words? And
for wind -- sayings of the desperate.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Anger on the fatherless ye cause to fall,
And are strange to your friend.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And, now, please, look upon me, Even to
your face do I lie?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Turn back, I pray you, let it not be
perverseness, Yea, turn back again -- my righteousness \[is\] in it.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Is there in my tongue perverseness?
Discerneth not my palate desirable things?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Is there not a warfare to man on earth? And
as the days of an hireling his days?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> As a servant desireth the shadow, And as a
hireling expecteth his wage,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So I have been caused to inherit months of
vanity, And nights of misery they numbered to me.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> If I lay down then I said, \`When do I
rise!' And evening hath been measured, And I have been full of tossings
till dawn.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Clothed hath been my flesh \[with\] worms,
And a clod of dust, My skin hath been shrivelled and is loathsome,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> My days swifter than a weaving machine, And
they are consumed without hope.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Remember Thou that my life \[is\] a breath,
Mine eye turneth not back to see good.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> The eye of my beholder beholdeth me not.
Thine eyes \[are\] upon me -- and I am not.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Consumed hath been a cloud, and it goeth,
So he who is going down to Sheol cometh not up.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> He turneth not again to his house, Nor
doth his place discern him again.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Also I -- I withhold not my mouth -- I
speak in the distress of my spirit, I talk in the bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> A sea-\[monster\] am I, or a dragon, That
thou settest over me a guard?

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> When I said, \`My bed doth comfort me,'
He taketh away in my talking my couch.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And thou hast affrighted me with dreams,
And from visions thou terrifiest me,

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And my soul chooseth strangling, Death
rather than my bones.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have wasted away -- not to the age do I
live. Cease from me, for my days \[are\] vanity.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> What \[is\] man that Thou dost magnify
him? And that Thou settest unto him Thy heart?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And inspectest him in the mornings, In
the evenings dost try him?

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> How long dost Thou not look from me? Thou
dost not desist till I swallow my spittle.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> I have sinned, what do I to Thee, O
watcher of man? Why hast Thou set me for a mark to Thee, And I am for a
burden to myself -- and what?

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Thou dost not take away my transgression,
And cause to pass away mine iniquity, Because now, for dust I lie down:
And Thou hast sought me -- and I am not!

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Bildad the Shuhite answereth and saith:
--

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Till when dost thou speak these things? And
a strong wind -- sayings of thy mouth?

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Doth God pervert judgment? And doth the
Mighty One pervert justice?

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> If thy sons have sinned before Him, And He
doth send them away, By the hand of their transgression,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> If thou dost seek early unto God, And unto
the Mighty makest supplication,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> If pure and upright thou \[art\], Surely
now He waketh for thee, And hath completed The habitation of thy
righteousness.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And thy beginning hath been small, And thy
latter end is very great.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For, ask I pray thee of a former
generation, And prepare to a search of their fathers,

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> (For of yesterday we \[are\], and we know
not, For a shadow \[are\] our days on earth.)

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Do they not shew thee -- speak to thee,
And from their heart bring forth words?

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> \`Doth a rush wise without mire? A reed
increase without water?

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> While it \[is\] in its budding --
uncropt, Even before any herb it withereth.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> So \[are\] the paths of all forgetting
God, And the hope of the profane doth perish,

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Whose confidence is loathsome, And the
house of a spider his trust.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He leaneth on his house -- and it
standeth not: He taketh hold on it -- and it abideth not.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Green he \[is\] before the sun, And over
his garden his branch goeth out.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> By a heap his roots are wrapped, A house
of stones he looketh for.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> If \[one\] doth destroy him from his
place, Then it hath feigned concerning him, I have not seen thee!

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Lo, this \[is\] the joy of his way, And
from the dust others spring up.'

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Lo, God doth not reject the perfect, Nor
taketh hold on the hand of evil doers.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> While he filleth with laughter thy mouth,
And thy lips with shouting,

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Those hating thee do put on shame, And
the tent of the wicked is not!

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Truly I have known that \[it is\] so, And
what -- is man righteous with God?

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> If he delight to strive with Him -- He doth
not answer him one of a thousand.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Wise in heart and strong in power -- Who
hath hardened toward Him and is at peace?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Who is removing mountains, And they have
not known, Who hath overturned them in His anger.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Who is shaking earth from its place, And
its pillars move themselves.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Who is speaking to the sun, and it riseth
not, And the stars He sealeth up.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Stretching out the heavens by Himself, And
treading on the heights of the sea,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Making Osh, Kesil, and Kimah, And the inner
chambers of the south.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Doing great things till there is no
searching, And wonderful, till there is no numbering.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Lo, He goeth over by me, and I see not,
And He passeth on, and I attend not to it.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Lo, He snatches away, who bringeth it
back? Who saith unto Him, \`What dost Thou?'

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> God doth not turn back His anger, Under
Him bowed have proud helpers.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> How much less do I -- I answer Him?
Choose out my words with Him?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Whom, though I were righteous, I answer
not, For my judgment I make supplication.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Though I had called and He answereth me,
I do not believe that He giveth ear \[to\] my voice.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Because with a tempest He bruiseth me,
And hath multiplied my wounds for nought.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> He permitteth me not to refresh my
spirit, But filleth me with bitter things.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> If of power, lo, the Strong One; And if
of judgment -- who doth convene me?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> If I be righteous, Mine mouth doth
declare me wicked, Perfect I am! -- it declareth me perverse.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Perfect I am! -- I know not my soul, I
despise my life.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> It is the same thing, therefore I said,
\`The perfect and the wicked He is consuming.'

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> If a scourge doth put to death suddenly,
At the trial of the innocent He laugheth.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Earth hath been given Into the hand of
the wicked one. The face of its judges he covereth, If not -- where, who
\[is\] he?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> My days have been swifter than a runner,
They have fled, they have not seen good,

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> They have passed on with ships of reed,
As an eagle darteth on food.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Though I say, \`I forget my talking, I
forsake my corner, and I brighten up!'

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> I have been afraid of all my griefs, I
have known that Thou dost not acquit me.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> I -- I am become wicked; why \[is\] this?
\[In\] vain I labour.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> If I have washed myself with snow-water,
And purified with soap my hands,

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Then in corruption Thou dost dip me, And
my garments have abominated me.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> But if a man like myself -- I answer him,
We come together into judgment.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> If there were between us an umpire, He
doth place his hand on us both.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> He doth turn aside from off me his rod,
And His terror doth not make me afraid,

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> I speak, and do not fear Him, But I am
not right with myself.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> My soul hath been weary of my life, I
leave off my talking to myself, I speak in the bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> I say unto God, \`Do not condemn me, Let
me know why Thou dost strive \[with\] me.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Is it good for Thee that Thou dost
oppress? That Thou despisest the labour of Thy hands, And on the counsel
of the wicked hast shone?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Eyes of flesh hast Thou? As man seeth --
seest Thou?

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> As the days of man \[are\] Thy days? Thy
years as the days of a man?

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> That Thou inquirest for mine iniquity,
And for my sin seekest?

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> For Thou knowest that I am not wicked,
And there is no deliverer from Thy hand.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Thy hands have taken pains about me, And
they make me together round about, And Thou swallowest me up!

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Remember, I pray Thee, That as clay Thou
hast made me, And unto dust Thou dost bring me back.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Dost Thou not as milk pour me out? And
as cheese curdle me?

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Skin and flesh Thou dost put on me, And
with bones and sinews dost fence me.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Life and kindness Thou hast done with
me. And Thy inspection hath preserved my spirit.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And these Thou hast laid up in Thy
heart, I have known that this \[is\] with Thee.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> If I sinned, then Thou hast observed
me, And from mine iniquity dost not acquit me,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> If I have done wickedly -- wo to me,
And righteously -- I lift not up my head, Full of shame -- then see my
affliction,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And it riseth -- as a lion Thou huntest
me. And Thou turnest back -- Thou shewest Thyself wonderful in me.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Thou renewest Thy witnesses against me,
And dost multiply Thine anger with me, Changes and warfare \[are\] with
me.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And why from the womb Hast Thou brought
me forth? I expire, and the eye doth not see me.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> As I had not been, I am, From the belly
to the grave I am brought,

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Are not my days few? Cease then, and
put from me, And I brighten up a little,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Before I go, and return not, Unto a
land of darkness and death-shade,

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> A land of obscurity as thick darkness,
Death-shade -- and no order, And the shining \[is\] as thick darkness.'

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And Zophar the Naamathite answereth and
saith: --

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Is a multitude of words not answered? And
is a man of lips justified?

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Thy devices make men keep silent, Thou
scornest, and none is causing blushing!

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And thou sayest, \`Pure \[is\] my
discourse, And clean I have been in Thine eyes.'

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And yet, O that God had spoken! And doth
open His lips with thee.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And declare to thee secrets of wisdom,
For counsel hath foldings. And know thou that God forgetteth for thee,
\[Some\] of thine iniquity.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> By searching dost thou find out God? Unto
perfection find out the Mighty One?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Heights of the heavens! -- what dost
thou? Deeper than Sheol! -- what knowest thou?

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Longer than earth \[is\] its measure, And
broader than the sea.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> If He pass on, and shut up, and
assemble, Who then dost reverse it?

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> For he hath known men of vanity, And He
seeth iniquity, And one doth not consider \[it\]!

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And empty man is bold, And the colt of
a wild ass man is born.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> If thou -- thou hast prepared thy
heart, And hast spread out unto Him thy hands,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> If iniquity \[is\] in thy hand, put it
far off, And let not perverseness dwell in thy tents.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For then thou liftest up thy face from
blemish, And thou hast been firm, and fearest not.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For thou dost forget misery, As waters
passed away thou rememberest.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And above the noon doth age rise, Thou
fliest -- as the morning thou art.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And thou hast trusted because their is
hope, And searched -- in confidence thou liest down,

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And thou hast rested, And none is
causing trembling, And many have entreated thy face;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And the eyes of the wicked are
consumed, And refuge hath perished from them, And their hope \[is\] a
breathing out of soul!

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Truly -- ye \[are\] the people, And with
you doth wisdom die.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> I also have a heart like you, I am not
fallen more than you, And with whom is there not like these?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> A laughter to his friend I am: \`He
calleth to God, and He answereth him,' A laughter \[is\] the perfect
righteous one.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> A torch -- despised in the thoughts of
the secure Is prepared for those sliding with the feet.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> At peace are the tents of spoilers, And
those provoking God have confidence, He into whose hand God hath
brought.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And yet, ask, I pray thee, \[One of\] the
beasts, and it doth shew thee, And a fowl of the heavens, And it doth
declare to thee.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Or talk to the earth, and it sheweth
thee, And fishes of the sea recount to thee:

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> \`Who hath not known in all these, That
the hand of Jehovah hath done this?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> In whose hand \[is\] the breath of
every living thing, And the spirit of all flesh of man.'

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Doth not the ear try words? And the
palate taste food for itself?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> With the very aged \[is\] wisdom, And
\[with\] length of days understanding.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> With Him \[are\] wisdom and might, To
him \[are\] counsel and understanding.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Lo, He breaketh down, and it is not
built up, He shutteth against a man, And it is not opened.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Lo, He keepeth in the waters, and they
are dried up, And he sendeth them forth, And they overturn the land.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> With Him \[are\] strength and wisdom,
His the deceived and deceiver.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Causing counsellors to go away a spoil,
And judges He maketh foolish.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> The bands of kings He hath opened, And
He bindeth a girdle on their loins.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Causing ministers to go away a spoil
And strong ones He overthroweth.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Turning aside the lip of the stedfast,
And the reason of the aged He taketh away.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Pouring contempt upon princes, And the
girdle of the mighty He made feeble.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Removing deep things out of darkness,
And He bringeth out to light death-shade.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Magnifying the nations, and He
destroyeth them, Spreading out the nations, and He quieteth them.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Turning aside the heart Of the heads of
the people of the land, And he causeth them to wander In vacancy -- no
way!

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> They feel darkness, and not light, He
causeth them to wander as a drunkard.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Lo, all -- hath mine eye seen, Heard hath
mine ear, and it attendeth to it.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> According to your knowledge I have known
-- also I. I am not fallen more than you.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Yet I for the Mighty One do speak, And to
argue for God I delight.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And yet, ye \[are\] forgers of falsehood,
Physicians of nought -- all of you,

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> O that ye would keep perfectly silent,
And it would be to you for wisdom.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Hear, I pray you, my argument, And to the
pleadings of my lips attend,

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> For God do ye speak perverseness? And for
Him do ye speak deceit?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> His face do ye accept, if for God ye
strive?

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Is \[it\] good that He doth search you,
If, as one mocketh at a man, ye mock at Him?

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> He doth surely reprove you, if in
secret ye accept faces.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Doth not His excellency terrify you?
And His dread fall upon you?

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Your remembrances \[are\] similes of
ashes, For high places of clay your heights.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Keep silent from me, and I speak, And
pass over me doth what?

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Wherefore do I take my flesh in my
teeth? And my soul put in my hand?

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Lo, He doth slay me -- I wait not!
Only, my ways unto His face I argue.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Also -- He \[is\] to me for salvation,
For the profane cometh not before Him.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Hear ye diligently my word, And my
declaration with your ears.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Lo, I pray you, I have set in order the
cause, I have known that I am righteous.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Who \[is\] he that doth strive with me?
For now I keep silent and gasp.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Only two things, O God, do with me:
Then from Thy face I am not hidden.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Thy hand put far off from me, And Thy
terror let not terrify me.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And call Thou, and I -- I answer, Or --
I speak, and answer Thou me.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> How many iniquities and sins have I? My
transgression and my sin let me know.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Why dost Thou hide Thy face? And
reckonest me for an enemy to Thee?

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> A leaf driven away dost Thou terrify?
And the dry stubble dost Thou pursue?

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> For Thou writest against me bitter
things, And causest me to possess iniquities of my youth:

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And puttest in the stocks my feet, And
observest all my paths, On the roots of my feet Thou settest a print,

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he, as a rotten thing, weareth
away, As a garment hath a moth consumed him.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Man, born of woman! Of few days, and full
of trouble!

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> As a flower he hath gone forth, and is
cut off, And he fleeth as a shadow and standeth not.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Also -- on this Thou hast opened Thine
eyes, And dost bring me into judgment with Thee.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who giveth a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> If determined are his days, The number of
his months \[are\] with Thee, His limit Thou hast made, And he passeth
not over;

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Look away from off him that he may cease,
Till he enjoy as an hireling his day.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For there is of a tree hope, if it be cut
down, That again it doth change, That its tender branch doth not cease.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> If its root becometh old in the earth,
And its stem doth die in the dust,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> From the fragrance of water it doth
flourish, And hath made a crop as a plant.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And a man dieth, and becometh weak, And
man expireth, and where \[is\] he?

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Waters have gone away from a sea, And a
river becometh waste and dry.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And man hath lain down, and riseth not,
Till the wearing out of the heavens they awake not, Nor are roused from
their sleep.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> O that in Sheol Thou wouldst conceal
me, Hide me till the turning of Thine anger, Set for me a limit, and
remember me.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> If a man dieth -- doth he revive? All
days of my warfare I wait, till my change come.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Thou dost call, and I -- I answer Thee;
To the work of Thy hands Thou hast desire.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> But now, my steps Thou numberest, Thou
dost not watch over my sin.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Sealed up in a bag \[is\] my
transgression, And Thou sewest up mine iniquity.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And yet, a falling mountain wasteth
away, And a rock is removed from its place.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Stones have waters worn away, Their
outpourings wash away the dust of earth, And the hope of man Thou hast
destroyed.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Thou prevailest \[over\] him for ever,
and he goeth, He is changing his countenance, And Thou sendest him away.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Honoured are his sons, and he knoweth
not; And they are little, and he attendeth not to them.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Only -- his flesh for him is pained,
And his soul for him doth mourn.'

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite answereth and
saith: --

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Doth a wise man answer \[with\] vain
knowledge? And fill \[with\] an east wind his belly?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> To reason with a word not useful? And
speeches -- no profit in them?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Yea, thou dost make reverence void, And
dost diminish meditation before God.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For thy mouth teacheth thine iniquity,
And thou chooseth the tongue of the subtile.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thy mouth declareth thee wicked, and not
I, And thy lips testify against thee.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> The first man art thou born? And before
the heights wast thou formed?

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Of the secret counsel of God dost thou
hear? And withdrawest thou unto thee wisdom?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> What hast thou known, and we know not?
Understandest thou -- and it is not with us?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Both the gray-headed And the very aged
\[are\] among us -- Greater than thy father \[in\] days.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Too few for thee are the comforts of
God? And a gentle word \[is\] with thee,

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> What -- doth thine heart take thee
away? And what -- are thine eyes high?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> For thou turnest against God thy
spirit? And hast brought out words from thy mouth:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> What \[is\] man that he is pure, And
that he is righteous, one born of woman?

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Lo, in His holy ones He putteth no
credence, And the heavens have not been pure in His eyes.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Also -- surely abominable and filthy Is
man drinking as water perverseness.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I shew thee -- hearken to me -- And
this I have seen and declare:

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Which the wise declare -- And have not
hid -- from their fathers.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> To them alone was the land given, And a
stranger passed not over into their midst:

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> \`All days of the wicked he is paining
himself, And few years have been laid up for the terrible one.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> A fearful voice \[is\] in his ears, In
peace doth a destroyer come to him.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> He believeth not to return from
darkness, And watched \[is\] he for the sword.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> He is wandering for bread -- \`Where
\[is\] it?' He hath known that ready at his hand Is a day of darkness.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Terrify him do adversity and distress,
They prevail over him As a king ready for a boaster.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> For he stretched out against God his
hand, And against the Mighty he maketh himself mighty.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> He runneth unto Him with a neck, With
thick bosses of his shields.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> For he hath covered his face with his
fat, And maketh vigour over \[his\] confidence.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And he inhabiteth cities cut off,
houses not dwelt in, That have been ready to become heaps.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> He is not rich, nor doth his wealth
rise, Nor doth he stretch out on earth their continuance.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> He turneth not aside from darkness, His
tender branch doth a flame dry up, And he turneth aside at the breath of
His mouth!

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Let him not put credence in vanity, He
hath been deceived, For vanity is his recompence.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Not in his day is it completed, And his
bending branch is not green.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> He shaketh off as a vine his unripe
fruit, And casteth off as an olive his blossom.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> For the company of the profane \[is\]
gloomy, And fire hath consumed tents of bribery.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> To conceive misery, and to bear
iniquity, Even their heart doth prepare deceit.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> I have heard many such things, Miserable
comforters \[are\] ye all.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Is there an end to words of wind? Or what
doth embolden thee that thou answerest?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> I also, like you, might speak, If your
soul were in my soul's stead. I might join against you with words, And
nod at you with my head.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> I might harden you with my mouth, And the
moving of my lips might be sparing.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> If I speak, my pain is not restrained,
And I cease -- what goeth from me?

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Only, now, it hath wearied me; Thou hast
desolated all my company,

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Thou dost loathe me, For a witness it
hath been, And rise up against me doth my failure, In my face it
testifieth.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> His anger hath torn, and he hateth me, He
hath gnashed at me with his teeth, My adversary sharpeneth his eyes for
me.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> They have gaped on me with their mouth,
In reproach they have smitten my cheeks, Together against me they set
themselves.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> God shutteth me up unto the perverse,
And to the hands of the wicked turneth me over.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> At ease I have been, and he breaketh
me, And he hath laid hold on my neck, And he breaketh me in pieces, And
he raiseth me to him for a mark.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Go round against me do his archers. He
splitteth my reins, and spareth not, He poureth out to the earth my
gall.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He breaketh me -- breach upon breach,
He runneth upon me as a mighty one.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Sackcloth I have sewed on my skin, And
have rolled in the dust my horn.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> My face is foul with weeping, And on
mine eyelids \[is\] death-shade.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Not for violence in my hands, And my
prayer \[is\] pure.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> O earth, do not thou cover my blood!
And let there not be a place for my cry.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Also, now, lo, in the heavens \[is\] my
witness, And my testifier in the high places.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> My interpreter \[is\] my friend, Unto
God hath mine eye dropped:

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And he reasoneth for a man with God,
And a son of man for his friend.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> When a few years do come, Then a path I
return not do I go.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> My spirit hath been destroyed, My days
extinguished -- graves \[are\] for me.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> If not -- mockeries \[are\] with me. And
in their provocations mine eye lodgeth.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Place, I pray Thee, my pledge with Thee;
Who is he that striketh hand with me?

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> For their heart Thou hast hidden From
understanding, Therefore Thou dost not exalt them.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> For a portion he sheweth friendship, And
the eyes of his sons are consumed.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And he set me up for a proverb of the
peoples, And a wonder before them I am.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And dim from sorrow is mine eye, And my
members as a shadow all of them.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Astonished are the upright at this, And
the innocent against the profane Stirreth himself up.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And the righteous layeth hold \[on\] his
way, And the clean of hands addeth strength, And -- dumb are they all.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Return, and come in, I pray you, And I
find not among you a wise man.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> My days have passed by, My devices have
been broken off, The possessions of my heart!

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Night for day they appoint, Light
\[is\] near because of darkness.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> If I wait -- Sheol \[is\] my house, In
darkness I have spread out my couch.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> To corruption I have called: -- \`Thou
\[art\] my father.' \`My mother' and \`my sister' -- to the worm.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And where \[is\] now my hope? Yea, my
hope, who doth behold it?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> \[To\] the parts of Sheol ye go down,
If together on the dust we may rest.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And Bildad the Shuhite answereth and
saith: --

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> When do ye set an end to words? Consider
ye, and afterwards do we speak.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Wherefore have we been reckoned as
cattle? We have been defiled in your eyes!

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> (He is tearing himself in his anger.) For
thy sake is earth forsaken? And removed is a rock from its place?

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Also, the light of the wicked is
extinguished. And there doth not shine a spark of his fire.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> The light hath been dark in his tent, And
his lamp over him is extinguished.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Straitened are the steps of his strength,
And cast him down doth his own counsel.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> For he is sent into a net by his own
feet, And on a snare he doth walk habitually.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> Seize on the heel doth a gin, Prevail
over him do the designing.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Hidden in the earth is his cord, And
his trap on the path.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Round about terrified him have terrors,
And they have scattered him -- at his feet.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Hungry is his sorrow, And calamity is
ready at his side.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> It consumeth the parts of his skin,
Consume his parts doth death's first-born.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Drawn from his tent is his confidence,
And it causeth him to step to the king of terrors.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> It dwelleth in his tent -- out of his
provender, Scattered over his habitation is sulphur.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> From beneath his roots are dried up,
And from above cut off is his crop.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> His memorial hath perished from the
land, And he hath no name on the street.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> They thrust him from light unto
darkness, And from the habitable earth cast him out.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> He hath no continuator, Nor successor
among his people, And none is remaining in his dwellings.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> At this day westerns have been
astonished And easterns have taken fright.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Only these \[are\] tabernacles of the
perverse, And this the place God hath not known.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Till when do ye afflict my soul, And
bruise me with words?

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> These ten times ye put me to shame, ye
blush not. Ye make yourselves strange to me --

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And also -- truly, I have erred, With me
doth my error remain.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> If, truly, over me ye magnify yourselves,
And decide against me my reproach;

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Know now, that God turned me upside down,
And His net against me hath set round,

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Lo, I cry out -- violence, and am not
answered, I cry aloud, and there is no judgment.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> My way He hedged up, and I pass not over,
And on my paths darkness He placeth.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> Mine honour from off me He hath stripped,
And He turneth the crown from my head.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> He breaketh me down round about, and I
go, And removeth like a tree my hope.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And He kindleth against me His anger,
And reckoneth me to Him as His adversaries.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Come in do His troops together, And
they raise up against me their way, And encamp round about my tent.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> My brethren from me He hath put far
off, And mine acquaintances surely Have been estranged from me.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Ceased have my neighbours And my
familiar friends have forgotten me,

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Sojourners of my house and my maids,
For a stranger reckon me: An alien I have been in their eyes.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> To my servant I have called, And he
doth not answer, With my mouth I make supplication to him.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> My spirit is strange to my wife, And my
favours to the sons of my \[mother's\] womb.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Also sucklings have despised me, I
rise, and they speak against me.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Abominate me do all the men of my
counsel, And those I have loved, Have been turned against me.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> To my skin and to my flesh Cleaved hath
my bone, And I deliver myself with the skin of my teeth.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Pity me, pity me, ye my friends, For
the hand of God hath stricken against me.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Why do you pursue me as God? And with
my flesh are not satisfied?

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Who doth grant now, That my words may
be written? Who doth grant that in a book they may be graven?

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> With a pen of iron and lead -- For ever
in a rock they may be hewn.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> That -- I have known my Redeemer, The
Living and the Last, For the dust he doth rise.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And after my skin hath compassed this
\[body\], Then from my flesh I see God:

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Whom I -- I see on my side, And mine
eyes have beheld, and not a stranger, Consumed have been my reins in my
bosom.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> But ye say, \`Why do we pursue after
him?' And the root of the matter hath been found in me.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Be ye afraid because of the sword, For
furious \[are\] the punishments of the sword, That ye may know that
\[there is\] a judgment.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And Zophar the Naamathite answereth and
saith: --

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Therefore my thoughts cause me to answer,
And because of my sensations in me.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> The chastisement of my shame I hear, And
the spirit of mine understanding Doth cause me to answer:

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> This hast thou known from antiquity?
Since the placing of man on earth?

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> That the singing of the wicked \[is\]
short, And the joy of the profane for a moment,

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Though his excellency go up to the
heavens, And his head against a cloud he strike --

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> As his own dung for ever he doth perish,
His beholders say: \`Where \[is\] he?'

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> As a dream he fleeth, and they find him
not, And he is driven away as a vision of the night,

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> The eye hath not seen him, and addeth
not. And not again doth his place behold him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> His sons do the poor oppress, And his
hands give back his wealth.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> His bones have been full of his youth,
And with him on the dust it lieth down.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Though he doth sweeten evil in his
mouth, Doth hide it under his tongue,

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Hath pity on it, and doth not forsake
it, And keep it back in the midst of his palate,

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> His food in his bowels is turned, The
bitterness of asps \[is\] in his heart.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Wealth he hath swallowed, and doth
vomit it. From his belly God driveth it out.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Gall of asps he sucketh, Slay him doth
the tongue of a viper.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> He looketh not on rivulets, Flowing of
brooks of honey and butter.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> He is giving back \[what\] he laboured
for, And doth not consume \[it\]; As a bulwark \[is\] his exchange, and
he exults not.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> For he oppressed -- he forsook the
poor, A house he hath taken violently away, And he doth not build it.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> For he hath not known ease in his
belly. With his desirable thing he delivereth not himself.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> There is not a remnant to his food,
Therefore his good doth not stay.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> In the fulness of his sufficiency he is
straitened. Every perverse hand doth meet him.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> It cometh to pass, at the filling of
his belly, He sendeth forth against him The fierceness of His anger,
Yea, He raineth on him in his eating.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> He fleeth from an iron weapon, Pass
through him doth a bow of brass.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> One hath drawn, And it cometh out from
the body, And a glittering weapon from his gall proceedeth. On him
\[are\] terrors.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> All darkness is hid for his treasures,
Consume him doth a fire not blown, Broken is the remnant in his tent.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Reveal do the heavens his iniquity, And
earth is raising itself against him.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Remove doth the increase of his house,
Poured forth in a day of His anger.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> This \[is\] the portion of a wicked man
from God. And an inheritance appointed him by God.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Hear ye diligently my word, And this is
your consolation.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Bear with me, and I speak, And after my
speaking -- ye may deride.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> I -- to man \[is\] my complaint? and if
\[so\], wherefore May not my temper become short?

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Turn unto me, and be astonished, And put
hand to mouth.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Yea, if I have remembered, then I have
been troubled. And my flesh hath taken fright.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Wherefore do the wicked live? They have
become old, Yea, they have been mighty in wealth.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Their seed is established, Before their
face with them, And their offspring before their eyes.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Their houses \[are\] peace without fear,
Nor \[is\] a rod of God upon them.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> His bullock hath eaten corn, and doth
not loath. His cow bringeth forth safely, And doth not miscarry.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> They send forth as a flock their
sucklings, And their children skip,

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> They lift \[themselves\] up at timbrel
and harp, And rejoice at the sound of an organ.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> They wear out in good their days, And
in a moment \[to\] Sheol go down.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And they say to God, \`Turn aside from
us, And the knowledge of Thy ways We have not desired.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> What \[is\] the Mighty One that we
serve Him? And what do we profit when we meet with Him?'

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Lo, not in their hand \[is\] their
good, (The counsel of the wicked Hath been far from me.)

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> How oft is the lamp of the wicked
extinguished, And come on them doth their calamity? Pangs He
apportioneth in His anger.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> They are as straw before wind, And as
chaff a hurricane hath stolen away,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> God layeth up for his sons his sorrow,
He giveth recompense unto him -- and he knoweth.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> His own eyes see his destruction, And
of the wrath of the Mighty he drinketh.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For what \[is\] his delight in his
house after him, And the number of his months cut off?

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> To God doth \[one\] teach knowledge,
And He the high doth judge?

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> This \[one\] dieth in his perfect
strength, Wholly at ease and quiet.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> His breasts have been full of milk, And
marrow his bones doth moisten.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And this \[one\] dieth with a bitter
soul, And have not eaten with gladness.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Together -- on the dust they lie down,
And the worm doth cover them over.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Lo, I have known your thoughts, And the
devices against me ye do wrongfully.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> For ye say, \`Where \[is\] the house of
the noble? And where the tent -- The tabernacles of the wicked?'

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Have ye not asked those passing by the
way? And their signs do ye not know?

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> That to a day of calamity is the wicked
spared. To a day of wrath they are brought.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Who doth declare to his face his way?
And \[for\] that which he hath done, Who doth give recompence to him?

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> And he -- to the graves he is brought.
And over the heap a watch is kept.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Sweet to him have been the clods of the
valley, And after him every man he draweth, And before him there is no
numbering.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And how do ye comfort me \[with\]
vanity, And in your answers hath been left trespass?

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite answereth and
saith: --

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> To God is a man profitable, Because a
wise man to himself is profitable?

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Is it a delight to the Mighty One That
thou art righteous? is it gain, That thou makest perfect thy ways?

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Because of thy reverence Doth He reason
\[with\] thee? He entereth with thee into judgment:

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Is not thy wickedness abundant? And there
is no end to thine iniquities.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For thou takest a pledge of thy brother
for nought, And the garments of the naked Thou dost strip off.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Thou causest not the weary to drink
water, And from the hungry thou withholdest bread.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> As to the man of arm -- he hath the
earth, And the accepted of face -- he dwelleth in it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Widows thou hast sent away empty, And the
arms of the fatherless are bruised.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Therefore round about thee \[are\]
snares, And trouble thee doth fear suddenly.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Or darkness -- thou dost not see, And
abundance of waters doth cover thee.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Is not God high \[in\] heaven? And see
the summit of the stars, That they are high.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And thou hast said, \`What -- hath God
known? Through thickness doth He judge?

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Thick clouds \[are\] a secret place to
Him, And He doth not see;' And the circle of the heavens He walketh
habitually,

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> The path of the age dost thou observe,
That men of iniquity have trodden?

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Who have been cut down unexpectedly, A
flood is poured out on their foundation.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Those saying to God, \`Turn aside from
us,' And what doth the Mighty One to them?

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And he hath filled their houses
\[with\] good: (And the counsel of the wicked Hath been far from me.)

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> See do the righteous and they rejoice,
And the innocent mocketh at them,

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> \`Surely our substance hath not been
cut off, And their excellency hath fire consumed.'

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Acquaint thyself, I pray thee, with
Him, And be at peace, Thereby thine increase \[is\] good.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Receive, I pray thee, from His mouth a
law, And set His sayings in thy heart.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If thou dost return unto the Mighty
Thou art built up, Thou puttest iniquity far from thy tents.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> So as to set on the dust a defence, And
on a rock of the valleys a covering.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And the Mighty hath been thy defence,
And silver \[is\] strength to thee.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> For then on the Mighty thou delightest
thyself, And dost lift up unto God thy face,

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Thou dost make supplication unto Him,
And He doth hear thee, And thy vows thou completest.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And thou decreest a saying, And it is
established to thee, And on thy ways hath light shone.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> For they have made low, And thou
sayest, \`Lift up.' And the bowed down of eyes he saveth.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> He delivereth the not innocent, Yea, he
hath been delivered By the cleanness of thy hands.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Also -- to-day \[is\] my complaint
bitter, My hand hath been heavy because of my sighing.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> O that I had known -- and I find Him, I
come in unto His seat,

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I arrange before Him the cause, And my
mouth fill \[with\] arguments.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> I know the words He doth answer me, And
understand what He saith to me.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> In the abundance of power doth He strive
with me? No! surely He putteth \[it\] in me.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> There the upright doth reason with Him,
And I escape for ever from my judge.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Lo, forward I go -- and He is not, And
backward -- and I perceive him not.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> \[To\] the left in His working -- and I
see not, He is covered \[on\] the right, and I behold not.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> For He hath known the way with me, He
hath tried me -- as gold I go forth.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> On His step hath my foot laid hold, His
way I have kept, and turn not aside,

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> The command of His lips, and I depart
not. Above my allotted portion I have laid up The sayings of His mouth.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And He \[is\] in one \[mind\], And who
doth turn Him back? And His soul hath desired -- and He doth \[it\].

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> For He doth complete my portion, And
many such things \[are\] with Him.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Therefore, from His presence I am
troubled, I consider, and am afraid of Him.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And God hath made my heart soft, And
the Mighty hath troubled me.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> For I have not been cut off before
darkness, And before me He covered thick darkness.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Wherefore from the Mighty One Times have
not been hidden, And those knowing Him have not seen His days.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> The borders they reach, A drove they have
taken violently away, Yea, they do evil.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> The ass of the fatherless they lead away,
They take in pledge the ox of the widow,

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> They turn aside the needy from the way,
Together have hid the poor of the earth.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Lo, wild asses in a wilderness, They have
gone out about their work, Seeking early for prey, A mixture for himself
-- food for young ones.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> In a field his provender they reap, And
the vineyard of the wicked they glean.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> The naked they cause to lodge Without
clothing. And there is no covering in the cold.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> From the inundation of hills they are
wet, And without a refuge -- have embraced a rock.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> They take violently away From the breast
the orphan, And on the poor they lay a pledge.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Naked, they have gone without clothing,
And hungry -- have taken away a sheaf.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Between their walls they make oil,
Wine-presses they have trodden, and thirst.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Because of enmity men do groan, And the
soul of pierced ones doth cry, And God doth not give praise.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> They have been among rebellious ones of
light, They have not discerned His ways, Nor abode in His paths.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> At the light doth the murderer rise, He
doth slay the poor and needy, And in the night he is as a thief.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And the eye of an adulterer Hath
observed the twilight, Saying, \`No eye doth behold me.' And he putteth
the face in secret.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> He hath dug in the darkness -- houses;
By day they shut themselves up, They have not known light.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> When together, morning \[is\] to them
death shade, When he discerneth the terrors of death shade.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Light he \[is\] on the face of the
waters, Vilified is their portion in the earth, He turneth not the way
of vineyards.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Drought -- also heat -- consume
snow-waters, Sheol \[those who\] have sinned.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Forget him doth the womb, Sweeten
\[on\] him doth the worm, No more is he remembered, And broken as a tree
is wickedness.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Treating evil the barren \[who\]
beareth not, And \[to\] the widow he doth no good,

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And hath drawn the mighty by his power,
He riseth, and none believeth in life.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> He giveth to him confidence, and he is
supported, And his eyes \[are\] on their ways.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> High they were \[for\] a little, and
they are not, And they have been brought low. As all \[others\] they are
shut up, And as the head of an ear of corn cut off.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And if not now, who doth prove me a
liar, And doth make of nothing my word?

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Bildad the Shuhite answereth and
saith: --

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> The rule and fear \[are\] with Him,
Making peace in His high places.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Is their \[any\] number to His troops?
And on whom ariseth not His light?

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And what? is man righteous with God? And
what? is he pure -- born of a woman?

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Lo -- unto the moon, and it shineth not,
And stars have not been pure in His eyes.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> How much less man -- a grub, And the son
of man -- a worm!

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And Job answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> What -- thou hast helped the powerless,
Saved an arm not strong!

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> What -- thou hast given counsel to the
unwise, And wise plans in abundance made known.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> With whom hast thou declared words? And
whose breath came forth from thee?

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> The Rephaim are formed, Beneath the
waters, also their inhabitants.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Naked \[is\] Sheol over-against Him, And
there is no covering to destruction.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> Stretching out the north over desolation,
Hanging the earth upon nothing,

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Binding up the waters in His thick
clouds, And the cloud is not rent under them.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Taking hold of the face of the throne,
Spreading over it His cloud.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> A limit He hath placed on the waters,
Unto the boundary of light with darkness.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Pillars of the heavens do tremble, And
they wonder because of His rebuke.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> By His power He hath quieted the sea,
And by His understanding smitten the proud.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> By His Spirit the heavens He
beautified, Formed hath His hand the fleeing serpent.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Lo, these \[are\] the borders of His
way, And how little a matter is heard of Him, And the thunder of His
might Who doth understand?

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And Job addeth to lift up his simile, and
saith: --

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> God liveth! He turned aside my judgment,
And the Mighty -- He made my soul bitter.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> For all the while my breath \[is\] in me,
And the spirit of God in my nostrils.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> My lips do not speak perverseness, And my
tongue doth not utter deceit.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Pollution to me -- if I justify you, Till
I expire I turn not aside mine integrity from me.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> On my righteousness I have laid hold, And
I do not let it go, My heart doth not reproach me while I live.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> As the wicked is my enemy, And my
withstander as the perverse.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> For what \[is\] the hope of the profane,
When He doth cut off? When God doth cast off his soul?

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> His cry doth God hear, When distress
cometh on him?

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> On the Mighty doth he delight himself?
Call God at all times?

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> I shew you by the hand of God, That
which \[is\] with the Mighty I hide not.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Lo, ye -- all of you -- have seen, And
why \[is\] this -- ye are altogether vain?

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> This \[is\] the portion of wicked man
with God, And the inheritance of terrible ones From the Mighty they
receive.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> If his sons multiply -- for them \[is\]
a sword. And his offspring \[are\] not satisfied \[with\] bread.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> His remnant in death are buried, And
his widows do not weep.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> If he heap up as dust silver, And as
clay prepare clothing,

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> He prepareth -- and the righteous
putteth \[it\] on, And the silver the innocent doth apportion.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> He hath built as a moth his house, And
as a booth a watchman hath made.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Rich he lieth down, and he is not
gathered, His eyes he hath opened, and he is not.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Overtake him as waters do terrors, By
night stolen him away hath a whirlwind.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Take him up doth an east wind, and he
goeth, And it frighteneth him from his place,

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And it casteth at him, and doth not
spare, From its hand he diligently fleeth.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> It clappeth at him its hands, And it
hisseth at him from his place.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Surely there is for silver a source, And
a place for the gold they refine;

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Iron from the dust is taken, And \[from\]
the firm stone brass.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> An end hath he set to darkness, And to
all perfection he is searching, A stone of darkness and death-shade.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> A stream hath broken out from a
sojourner, Those forgotten of the foot, They were low, from man they
wandered.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> The earth! from it cometh forth bread,
And its under-part is turned like fire.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> A place of the sapphire \[are\] its
stones, And it hath dust of gold.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> A path -- not known it hath a ravenous
fowl, Nor scorched it hath an eye of the kite,

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> Nor trodden it have the sons of pride,
Not passed over it hath the fierce lion.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Against the flint he sent forth his hand,
He overturned from the root mountains.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Among rocks, brooks he hath cleaved,
And every precious thing hath his eye seen.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> From overflowing floods he hath bound,
And the hidden thing bringeth out \[to\] light.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And the wisdom -- whence is it found?
And where \[is\] this, the place of understanding?

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Man hath not known its arrangement, Nor
is it found in the land of the living.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> The deep hath said, \`It \[is\] not in
me,' And the sea hath said, \`It is not with me.'

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Gold is not given for it, Nor is silver
weighed -- its price.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> It is not valued with pure gold of
Ophir, With precious onyx and sapphire,

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Not equal it do gold and crystal, Nor
\[is\] its exchange a vessel of fine gold.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Corals and pearl are not remembered,
The acquisition of wisdom \[is\] above rubies.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Not equal it doth the topaz of Cush,
With pure gold it is not valued.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And the wisdom -- whence doth it come?
And where \[is\] this, the place of understanding?

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> It hath been hid from the eyes of all
living. And from the fowl of the heavens It hath been hidden.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Destruction and death have said: \`With
our ears we have heard its fame.'

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> God hath understood its way, And He
hath known its place.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> For He to the ends of the earth doth
look, Under the whole heavens He doth see,

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> To make for the wind a weight, And the
waters He meted out in measure.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> In His making for the rain a limit, And
a way for the brightness of the voices,

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Then He hath seen and declareth it, He
hath prepared it, and also searched it out,

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And He saith to man: -- \`Lo, fear of
the Lord, that \[is\] wisdom, And to turn from evil \[is\]
understanding.'

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And Job addeth to lift up his simile, and
saith: --

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Who doth make me as \[in\] months past,
As \[in\] the days of God's preserving me?

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> In His causing His lamp to shine on my
head, By His light I walk \[through\] darkness.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> As I have been in days of my maturity,
And the counsel of God upon my tent.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> When yet the Mighty One \[is\] with me.
Round about me -- my young ones,

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> When washing my goings with butter, And
the firm rock \[is\] with me rivulets of oil.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When I go out to the gate by the city, In
a broad place I prepare my seat.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Seen me have youths, and they, been
hidden, And the aged have risen -- they stood up.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Princes have kept in words, And a hand
they place on their mouth.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The voice of leaders hath been hidden,
And their tongue to the palate hath cleaved.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> For the ear heard, and declareth me
happy, And the eye hath seen, and testifieth \[to\] me.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> For I deliver the afflicted who is
crying, And the fatherless who hath no helper.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The blessing of the perishing cometh on
me, And the heart of the widow I cause to sing.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> Righteousness I have put on, and it
clotheth me, As a robe and a diadem my justice.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Eyes I have been to the blind, And feet
to the lame \[am\] I.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> A father I \[am\] to the needy, And the
cause I have not known I search out.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And I break the jaw-teeth of the
perverse, And from his teeth I cast away prey.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And I say, \`With my nest I expire, And
as the sand I multiply days.'

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> My root is open unto the waters, And
dew doth lodge on my branch.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> My honour \[is\] fresh with me, And my
bow in my hand is renewed.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> To me they have hearkened, Yea, they
wait, and are silent for my counsel.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> After my word they change not, And on
them doth my speech drop,

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And they wait as \[for\] rain for me,
And their mouth they have opened wide \[As\] for the latter rain.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> I laugh unto them -- they give no
credence, And the light of my face cause not to fall.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> I choose their way, and sit head, And I
dwell as a king in a troop, When mourners he doth comfort.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And now, laughed at me, Have the younger
in days than I, Whose fathers I have loathed to set With the dogs of my
flock.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Also -- the power of their hands, why
\[is it\] to me? On them hath old age perished.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> With want and with famine gloomy, Those
fleeing to a dry place, Formerly a desolation and waste,

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Those cropping mallows near a shrub, And
broom-roots \[is\] their food.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> From the midst they are cast out, (They
shout against them as a thief),

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> In a frightful place of valleys to dwell,
Holes of earth and clefts.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Among shrubs they do groan, Under nettles
they are gathered together.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Sons of folly -- even sons without name,
They have been smitten from the land.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And now, their song I have been, And I am
to them for a byword.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> They have abominated me, They have kept
far from me, And from before me have not spared to spit.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> Because His cord He loosed and
afflicteth me, And the bridle from before me, They have cast away.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> On the right hand doth a brood arise,
My feet they have cast away, And they raise up against me, Their paths
of calamity.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> They have broken down my path, By my
calamity they profit, \`He hath no helper.'

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> As a wide breach they come, Under the
desolation have rolled themselves.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> He hath turned against me terrors, It
pursueth as the wind mine abundance, And as a thick cloud, Hath my
safety passed away.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And now, in me my soul poureth itself
out, Seize me do days of affliction.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> At night my bone hath been pierced in
me, And mine eyelids do not lie down.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> By the abundance of power, Is my
clothing changed, As the mouth of my coat it doth gird me.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Casting me into mire, And I am become
like dust and ashes.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> I cry unto Thee, And Thou dost not
answer me, I have stood, and Thou dost consider me.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Thou art turned to be fierce to me,
With the strength of Thy hand, Thou oppresest me.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Thou dost lift me up, On the wind Thou
dost cause me to ride, And Thou meltest -- Thou levellest me.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> For I have known To death Thou dost
bring me back, And \[to\] the house appointed for all living.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> Surely not against the heap Doth He
send forth the hand, Though in its ruin they have safety.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> Did not I weep for him whose day is
hard? Grieved hath my soul for the needy.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> When good I expected, then cometh evil,
And I wait for light, and darkness cometh.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> My bowels have boiled, and have not
ceased, Gone before me have days of affliction.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> Mourning I have gone without the sun, I
have risen, in an assembly I cry.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> A brother I have been to dragons, And a
companion to daughters of the ostrich.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> My skin hath been black upon me, And my
bone hath burned from heat,

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And my harp doth become mourning, And
my organ the sound of weeping.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> A covenant I made for mine eyes, And what
-- do I attend to a virgin?

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> And what \[is\] the portion of God from
above? And the inheritance of the Mighty from the heights?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Is not calamity to the perverse? And
strangeness to workers of iniquity?

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Doth not He see my ways, And all my steps
number?

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> If I have walked with vanity, And my foot
doth hasten to deceit,

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> He doth weigh me in righteous balances,
And God doth know my integrity.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> If my step doth turn aside from the way,
And after mine eyes hath my heart gone, And to my hands cleaved hath
blemish,

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Let me sow -- and another eat, And my
products let be rooted out.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> If my heart hath been enticed by woman,
And by the opening of my neighbour I laid wait,

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Grind to another let my wife, And over
her let others bend.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For it \[is\] a wicked thing, and a
judicial iniquity;

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> For a fire it \[is\], to destruction it
consumeth, And among all mine increase doth take root,

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> If I despise the cause of my
man-servant, And of my handmaid, In their contending with me,

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Then what do I do when God ariseth? And
when He doth inspect, What do I answer Him?

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Did not He that made me in the womb
make him? Yea, prepare us in the womb doth One.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> If I withhold from pleasure the poor,
And the eyes of the widow do consume,

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> And I do eat my morsel by myself, And
the orphan hath not eat of it,

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> (But from my youth He grew up with me
as \[with\] a father, And from the belly of my mother I am led.)

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> If I see \[any\] perishing without
clothing, And there is no covering to the needy,

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> If his loins have not blessed me, And
from the fleece of my sheep He doth not warm himself,

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> If I have waved at the fatherless my
hand, When I see in \[him\] the gate of my court,

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> My shoulder from its blade let fall,
And mine arm from the bone be broken.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> For a dread unto me \[is\] calamity
\[from\] God, And because of His excellency I am not able.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> If I have made gold my confidence, And
to the pure gold have said, \`My trust,'

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> If I rejoice because great \[is\] my
wealth, And because abundance hath my hand found,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> If I see the light when it shineth, And
the precious moon walking,

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> And my heart is enticed in secret, And
my hand doth kiss my mouth,

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> It also \[is\] a judicial iniquity, For
I had lied to God above.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> If I rejoice at the ruin of my hater,
And stirred up myself when evil found him,

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Yea, I have not suffered my mouth to
sin, To ask with an oath his life.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> If not -- say ye, O men of my tent, \`O
that we had of his flesh, we are not satisfied.'

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> In the street doth not lodge a
stranger, My doors to the traveller I open.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> If I have covered as Adam my
transgressions, To hide in my bosom mine iniquity,

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> Because I fear a great multitude, And
the contempt of families doth affright me, Then I am silent, I go not
out of the opening.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Who giveth to me a hearing? lo, my
mark. The Mighty One doth answer me, And a bill hath mine adversary
written.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> If not -- on my shoulder I take it up,
I bind it a crown on myself.

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> The number of my steps I tell Him, As a
leader I approach Him.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> If against me my land doth cry out, And
together its furrows weep,

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> If its strength I consumed without
money, And the life of its possessors, I have caused to breathe out,

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> Instead of wheat let a thorn go forth,
And instead of barley a useless weed! The words of Job are finished.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And these three men cease from answering
Job, for he \[is\] righteous in his own eyes,

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> and burn doth the anger of Elihu son of
Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram; against Job hath his anger
burned, because of his justifying himself more than God;

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> and against his three friends hath his
anger burned, because that they have not found an answer, and condemn
Job.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And Elihu hath waited earnestly beside
Job with words, for they are older than he in days.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And Elihu seeth that there is no answer
in the mouth of the three men, and his anger burneth.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Elihu son of Barachel the Buzite
answereth and saith: -- Young I \[am\] in days, and ye \[are\] age
Therefore I have feared, And am afraid of shewing you my opinion.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> I said: Days do speak, And multitude of
years teach wisdom.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> Surely a spirit is in man, And the breath
of the Mighty One Doth cause them to understand.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> The multitude are not wise, Nor do the
aged understand judgment.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Therefore I have said: Hearken to me, I
do shew my opinion -- even I.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Lo, I have waited for your words, I
give ear unto your reasons, Till ye search out sayings.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> And unto you I attend, And lo, there is
no reasoner for Job, \[Or\] answerer of his sayings among you.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Lest ye say, We have found wisdom, God
doth thrust him away, not man.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> And he hath not set in array words for
me, And with your sayings I do not answer him.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> (They have broken down, They have not
answered again, They removed from themselves words.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And I have waited, but they do not
speak, For they have stood still, They have not answered any more.)

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> I answer, even I -- my share, I shew my
opinion -- even I.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> For I have been full of words,
Distressed me hath the spirit of my breast,

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Lo, my breast \[is\] as wine not
opened, Like new bottles it is broken up.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> I speak, and there is refreshment to
me, I open my lips and answer.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> Let me not, I pray you, accept the face
of any, Nor unto man give flattering titles,

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For I have not known to give flattering
titles, In a little doth my Maker take me away.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And yet, I pray thee, O Job, Hear my
speech and \[to\] all my words give ear.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Lo, I pray thee, I have opened my mouth,
My tongue hath spoken in the palate.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Of the uprightness of my heart \[are\] my
sayings, And knowledge have my lips clearly spoken.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> The Spirit of God hath made me, And the
breath of the Mighty doth quicken me.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> If thou art able -- answer me, Set in
array before me -- station thyself.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Lo, I \[am\], according to thy word, for
God, From the clay I -- I also, have been formed.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Lo, my terror doth not frighten thee, And
my burden on thee is not heavy.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> Surely -- thou hast said in mine ears,
And the sounds of words I hear:

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> \`Pure \[am\] I, without transgression,
Innocent \[am\] I, and I have no iniquity.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Lo, occasions against me He doth find,
He doth reckon me for an enemy to Him,

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> He doth put in the stocks my feet, He
doth watch all my paths.'

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Lo, \[in\] this thou hast not been
righteous, I answer thee, that greater is God than man.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Wherefore against Him hast thou
striven, When \[for\] all His matters He answereth not?

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> For once doth God speak, and twice, (He
doth not behold it.)

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> In a dream -- a vision of night, In the
falling of deep sleep on men, In slumberings on a bed.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> Then He uncovereth the ear of men, And
for their instruction sealeth:

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> To turn aside man \[from\] doing, And
pride from man He concealeth.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> He keepeth back his soul from
corruption, And his life from passing away by a dart.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And he hath been reproved With pain on
his bed, And the strife of his bones \[is\] enduring.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And his life hath nauseated bread, And
his soul desirable food.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> His flesh is consumed from being seen,
And high are his bones, they were not seen!

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And draw near to the pit doth his soul,
And his life to those causing death.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> If there is by him a messenger, An
interpreter -- one of a thousand, To declare for man his uprightness:

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Then He doth favour him and saith,
\`Ransom him from going down to the pit, I have found an atonement.'

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Fresher \[is\] his flesh than a
child's, He returneth to the days of his youth.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> He maketh supplication unto God, And He
accepteth him. And he seeth His face with shouting, And He returneth to
man His righteousness.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> He looketh on men, and saith, \`I
sinned, And uprightness I have perverted, And it hath not been
profitable to me.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> He hath ransomed my soul From going
over into the pit, And my life on the light looketh.'

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Lo, all these doth God work, Twice --
thrice with man,

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> To bring back his soul from the pit, To
be enlightened with the light of the living.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> Attend, O Job, hearken to me, Keep
silent, and I -- I do speak.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> If there are words -- answer me, Speak,
for I have a desire to justify thee.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> If there are not -- hearken thou to me,
Keep silent, and I teach thee wisdom.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Elihu answereth and saith:

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Hear, O wise men, my words, And, O
knowing ones, give ear to me.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> For the ear doth try words, And the
palate tasteth to eat.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Judgment let us choose for ourselves, Let
us know among ourselves what \[is\] good.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For Job hath said, \`I have been
righteous, And God hath turned aside my right,

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> Against my right do I lie? Mortal \[is\]
mine arrow -- without transgression.'

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Who \[is\] a man like Job? He drinketh
scoffing like water,

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And he hath travelled for company With
workers of iniquity, So as to go with men of wickedness.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> For he hath said, \`It doth not profit a
man, When he delighteth himself with God.'

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Therefore, O men of heart, hearken to
me; Far be it from God to do wickedness, And \[from\] the Mighty to do
perverseness:

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For the work of man he repayeth to him,
And according to the path of each He doth cause him to find.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Yea, truly, God doth not do wickedly,
And the Mighty doth not pervert judgment.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Who hath inspected for Himself the
earth? And who hath placed all the habitable world?

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> If He doth set on him His heart, His
spirit and his breath unto Him He gathereth.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> Expire doth all flesh together, And man
to dust returneth.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> And if \[there is\] understanding, hear
this, Give ear to the voice of my words.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Yea, doth one hating justice govern? Or
the Most Just dost thou condemn?

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Who hath said to a king --
\`Worthless,' Unto princes -- \`Wicked?'

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> That hath not accepted the person of
princes, Nor hath known the rich before the poor, For a work of His
hands \[are\] all of them.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> \[In\] a moment they die, and at
midnight Shake do people, and they pass away, And they remove the mighty
without hand.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> For His eyes \[are\] on the ways of
each, And all his steps He doth see.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> There is no darkness nor death-shade,
For workers of iniquity to be hidden there;

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> For He doth not suffer man any more, To
go unto God in judgment,

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> He breaketh the mighty -- no searching!
And He appointeth others in their stead.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Therefore He knoweth their works, And
He hath overturned by night, And they are bruised.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> As wicked He hath stricken them, In the
place of beholders.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> Because that against right They have
turned aside from after Him, And none of His ways have considered
wisely,

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> To cause to come in unto Him The cry of
the poor, And the cry of the afflicted He heareth.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And He giveth rest, and who maketh
wrong? And hideth the face, and who beholdeth it? And in reference to a
nation and to a man, \[It is\] the same.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> From the reigning of a profane man,
From the snares of a people;

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> For unto God hath any said: \`I have
taken away, I do not corruptly,

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> Besides \[that which\] I see, shew Thou
me, If iniquity I have done -- I do not add?'

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> By thee doth He recompense, That thou
hast refused -- That thou dost choose, and not I? And what thou hast
known, speak.

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> Let men of heart say to me, And a wise
man is hearkening to me.

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> Job -- not with knowledge doth he
speak, And his words \[are\] not with wisdom.

<span id="an_34:36">34:36</span> My Father! let Job be tried -- unto
victory, Because of answers for men of iniquity,

<span id="an_34:37">34:37</span> For he doth add to his sin,
Transgression among us he vomiteth, And multiplieth his sayings to God.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And Elihu answereth and saith: --

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> This hast thou reckoned for judgment:
Thou hast said -- \`My righteousness \[is\] more than God's?'

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> For thou sayest, \`What doth it profit
Thee! What do I profit from my sin?'

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I return thee words, and thy friends with
thee,

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Behold attentively the heavens -- and
see, And behold the clouds, They have been higher than thou.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> If thou hast sinned, what dost thou
against Him? And thy transgressions have been multiplied, What dost thou
to Him?

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> If thou hast been righteous, What dost
thou give to Him? Or what from thy hand doth He receive?

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> For a man like thyself \[is\] thy
wickedness, And for a son of man thy righteousness.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> Because of the multitude of oppressions
They cause to cry out, They cry because of the arm of the mighty.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And none said, \`Where \[is\] God my
maker? Giving songs in the night,

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> Teaching us more than the beasts of the
earth, Yea, than the fowl of the heavens He maketh us wiser.'

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> There they cry, and He doth not answer,
Because of the pride of evil doers.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Surely vanity God doth not hear, And
the Mighty doth not behold it.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Yea, though thou sayest thou dost not
behold Him, Judgment \[is\] before Him, and stay for Him.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And, now, because there is not, He hath
appointed His anger, And He hath not known in great extremity.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> And Job \[with\] vanity doth open his
mouth, Without knowledge words he multiplieth.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And Elihu addeth and saith: --

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Honour me a little, and I shew thee, That
yet for God \[are\] words.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> I lift up my knowledge from afar, And to
my Maker I ascribe righteousness.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> For, truly, my words \[are\] not false,
The perfect in knowledge \[is\] with thee.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Lo, God \[is\] mighty, and despiseth not,
Mighty \[in\] power \[and\] heart.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> He reviveth not the wicked, And the
judgment of the poor appointeth;

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> He withdraweth not from the righteous His
eyes, And \[from\] kings on the throne, And causeth them to sit for
ever, and they are high,

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And if prisoners in fetters They are
captured with cords of affliction,

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Then He declareth to them their work, And
their transgressions, Because they have become mighty,

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And He uncovereth their ear for
instruction, And saith that they turn back from iniquity.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> If they do hear and serve, They
complete their days in good, And their years in pleasantness.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And if they do not hearken, By the dart
they pass away, And expire without knowledge.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And the profane in heart set the face,
They cry not when He hath bound them.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Their soul dieth in youth, And their
life among the defiled.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> He draweth out the afflicted in his
affliction, And uncovereth in oppression their ear.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> And also He moved thee from a strait
place, \[To\] a broad place -- no straitness under it, And the sitting
beyond of thy table Hath been full of fatness.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And the judgment of the wicked thou
hast fulfilled, Judgment and justice are upheld -- because of fury,

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Lest He move thee with a stroke, And
the abundance of an atonement turn thee not aside.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Doth He value thy riches? He hath gold,
and all the forces of power.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> Desire not the night, For the going up
of peoples in their stead.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> Take heed -- do not turn unto iniquity,
For on this thou hast fixed Rather than \[on\] affliction.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Lo, God doth sit on high by His power,
Who \[is\] like Him -- a teacher?

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> Who hath appointed unto Him his way?
And who said, \`Thou hast done iniquity?'

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> Remember that thou magnify His work
That men have beheld.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> All men have looked on it, Man looketh
attentively from afar.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> Lo, God \[is\] high, And we know not
the number of His years, Yea, there \[is\] no searching.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> When He doth diminish droppings of the
waters, They refine rain according to its vapour,

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Which clouds do drop, They distil on
man abundantly.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> Yea, doth \[any\] understand The
spreadings out of a cloud? The noises of His tabernacle?

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> Lo, He hath spread over it His light,
And the roots of the sea He hath covered,

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> For by them He doth judge peoples, He
giveth food in abundance.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> By two palms He hath covered the light,
And layeth a charge over it in meeting,

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> He sheweth by it \[to\] his friend
substance, Anger against perversity.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> Also, at this my heart trembleth, And it
moveth from its place.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> Hearken diligently to the trembling of
His voice, Yea, the sound from His mouth goeth forth.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> Under the whole heavens He directeth it,
And its light \[is\] over the skirts of the earth.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> After it roar doth a voice -- He
thundereth with the voice of His excellency, And He doth not hold them
back, When His voice is heard.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> God thundereth with His voice
wonderfully, Doing great things and we know not.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> For to snow He saith, \`Be \[on\] the
earth.' And the small rain and great rain of His power.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Into the hand of every man he sealeth,
For the knowledge by all men of His work.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And enter doth the beast into covert, And
in its habitations it doth continue.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> From the inner chamber cometh a
hurricane, And from scatterings winds -- cold,

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> From the breath of God is frost given,
And the breadth of waters is straitened,

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Yea, by filling He doth press out a
cloud, Scatter a cloud doth His light.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And it is turning itself round by His
counsels, For their doing all He commandeth them, On the face of the
habitable earth.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Whether for a rod, or for His land, Or
for kindness -- He doth cause it to come.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Hear this, O Job, Stand and consider
the wonders of God.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> Dost thou know when God doth place
them, And caused to shine the light of His cloud?

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> Dost thou know the balancings of a
cloud? The wonders of the Perfect in knowledge?

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> How thy garments \[are\] warm, In the
quieting of the earth from the south?

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Thou hast made an expanse with Him For
the clouds -- strong as a hard mirror!

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Let us know what we say to Him, We set
not in array because of darkness.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Is it declared to Him that I speak? If
a man hath spoken, surely he is swallowed up.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And now, they have not seen the light,
Bright it \[is\] in the clouds, And the wind hath passed by and
cleanseth them.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> From the golden north it cometh, Beside
God \[is\] fearful honour.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> The Mighty! we have not found Him out,
High in power and judgment, He doth not answer! And abundant in
righteousness,

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> Therefore do men fear Him, He seeth not
any of the wise of heart.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And Jehovah answereth Job out of the
whirlwind, and saith: --

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Who \[is\] this -- darkening counsel, By
words without knowledge?

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Gird, I pray thee, as a man, thy loins,
And I ask thee, and cause thou Me to know.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Where wast thou when I founded earth?
Declare, if thou hast known understanding.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Who placed its measures -- if thou
knowest? Or who hath stretched out upon it a line?

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> On what have its sockets been sunk? Or
who hath cast its corner-stone?

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> In the singing together of stars of
morning, And all sons of God shout for joy,

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> And He shutteth up with doors the sea, In
its coming forth, from the womb it goeth out.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> In My making a cloud its clothing, And
thick darkness its swaddling band,

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> And I measure over it My statute, And
place bar and doors,

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And say, \`Hitherto come thou, and add
not, And a command is placed On the pride of thy billows.'

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> Hast thou commanded morning since thy
days? Causest thou the dawn to know its place?

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> To take hold on the skirts of the
earth, And the wicked are shaken out of it,

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> It turneth itself as clay of a seal And
they station themselves as clothed.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And withheld from the wicked is their
light, And the arm lifted up is broken.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> Hast thou come in to springs of the
sea? And in searching the deep Hast thou walked up and down?

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Revealed to thee were the gates of
death? And the gates of death-shade dost thou see?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> Thou hast understanding, Even unto the
broad places of earth! Declare -- if thou hast known it all.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> Where \[is\] this -- the way light
dwelleth? And darkness, where \[is\] this -- its place?

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> That thou dost take it unto its
boundary, And that thou dost understand The paths of its house.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> Thou hast known -- for then thou art
born And the number of thy days \[are\] many!

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Hast thou come in unto the treasure of
snow? Yea, the treasures of hail dost thou see?

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> That I have kept back for a time of
distress, For a day of conflict and battle.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> Where \[is\] this, the way light is
apportioned? It scattereth an east wind over the earth.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> Who hath divided for the flood a
conduit? And a way for the lightning of the voices?

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> To cause \[it\] to rain on a land -- no
man, A wilderness -- no man in it.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> To satisfy a desolate and waste place,
And to cause to shoot up The produce of the tender grass?

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> Hath the rain a father? Or who hath
begotten the drops of dew?

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> From whose belly came forth the ice?
And the hoar-frost of the heavens, Who hath begotten it?

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> As a stone waters are hidden, And the
face of the deep is captured.

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> Dost thou bind sweet influences of
Kimah? Or the attractions of Kesil dost thou open?

<span id="an_38:32">38:32</span> Dost thou bring out Mazzaroth in its
season? And Aysh for her sons dost thou comfort?

<span id="an_38:33">38:33</span> Hast thou known the statutes of heaven?
Or dost thou appoint Its dominion in the earth?

<span id="an_38:34">38:34</span> Dost thou lift up to the cloud thy
voice, And abundance of water doth cover thee?

<span id="an_38:35">38:35</span> Dost thou send out lightnings, and they
go And say unto thee, \`Behold us?'

<span id="an_38:36">38:36</span> Who hath put in the inward parts
wisdom? Or who hath given To the covered part understanding?

<span id="an_38:37">38:37</span> Who doth number the clouds by wisdom?
And the bottles of the heavens, Who doth cause to lie down,

<span id="an_38:38">38:38</span> In the hardening of dust into hardness,
And clods cleave together?

<span id="an_38:39">38:39</span> Dost thou hunt for a lion prey? And the
desire of young lions fulfil?

<span id="an_38:40">38:40</span> When they bow down in dens -- Abide in
a thicket for a covert?

<span id="an_38:41">38:41</span> Who doth prepare for a raven his
provision, When his young ones cry unto God? They wander without food.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> Hast thou known the time of The bearing
of the wild goats of the rock? The bringing forth of hinds thou dost
mark!

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> Thou dost number the months they fulfil?
And thou hast known the time of their bringing forth!

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> They bow down, Their young ones they
bring forth safely, Their pangs they cast forth.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Safe are their young ones, They grow up
in the field, they have gone out, And have not returned to them.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Who hath sent forth the wild ass free?
Yea, the bands of the wild ass who opened?

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Whose house I have made the wilderness,
And his dwellings the barren land,

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> He doth laugh at the multitude of a city,
The cries of an exactor he heareth not.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> The range of mountains \[is\] his
pasture, And after every green thing he seeketh.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Is a Reem willing to serve thee? Doth he
lodge by thy crib?

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> Dost thou bind a Reem in a furrow
\[with\] his thick band? Doth he harrow valleys after thee?

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Dost thou trust in him because great
\[is\] his power? And dost thou leave unto him thy labour?

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Dost thou trust in him That he doth
bring back thy seed? And \[to\] thy threshing-floor doth gather \[it\]?

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> The wing of the rattling ones exulteth,
Whether the pinion of the ostrich or hawk.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> For she leaveth on the earth her eggs,
And on the dust she doth warm them,

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And she forgetteth that a foot may
press it, And a beast of the field tread it down.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> Her young ones it hath hardened without
her, In vain \[is\] her labour without fear.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> For God hath caused her to forget
wisdom, And He hath not given a portion To her in understanding:

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> At the time on high she lifteth herself
up, She laugheth at the horse and at his rider.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> Dost thou give to the horse might? Dost
thou clothe his neck \[with\] a mane?

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> Dost thou cause him to rush as a
locust? The majesty of his snorting \[is\] terrible.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> They dig in a valley, and he rejoiceth
in power, He goeth forth to meet the armour.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> He laugheth at fear, and is not
affrighted, And he turneth not back from the face of the sword.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> Against him rattle doth quiver, The
flame of a spear, and a halbert.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> With trembling and rage he swalloweth
the ground, And remaineth not stedfast Because of the sound of a
trumpet.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> Among the trumpets he saith, Aha, And
from afar he doth smell battle, Roaring of princes and shouting.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> By thine understanding flieth a hawk?
Spreadeth he his wings to the south?

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> At thy command goeth an eagle up high?
Or lifteth he up his nest?

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> A rock he doth inhabit, Yea, he lodgeth
on the tooth of a rock, and fortress.

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> From thence he hath sought food, To a
far off place his eyes look attentively,

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> And his brood gulph up blood, And where
the pierced \[are\] -- there \[is\] he!

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And Jehovah doth answer Job, and saith:
--

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Is the striver with the Mighty
instructed? The reprover of God, let him answer it.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And Job answereth Jehovah, and saith: --

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Lo, I have been vile, What do I return to
Thee? My hand I have placed on my mouth.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> Once I have spoken, and I answer not, And
twice, and I add not.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And Jehovah answereth Job out of the
whirlwind, and saith: --

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> Gird, I pray thee, as a man, thy loins, I
ask thee, and cause thou Me to know.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> Dost thou also make void My judgment?
Dost thou condemn Me, That thou mayest be righteous?

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And an arm like God hast thou? And with a
voice like Him dost thou thunder?

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> Put on, I pray thee, excellency and
loftiness, Yea, honour and beauty put on.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> Scatter abroad the wrath of thine
anger, And see every proud one, and make him low.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> See every proud one -- humble him, And
tread down the wicked in their place.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Hide them in the dust together, Their
faces bind in secret.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> And even I -- I do praise thee, For thy
right hand giveth salvation to thee.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> Lo, I pray thee, Behemoth, that I made
with thee: Grass as an ox he eateth.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> Lo, I pray thee, his power \[is\] in
his loins, And his strength in the muscles of his belly.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> He doth bend his tail as a cedar, The
sinews of his thighs are wrapped together,

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> His bones \[are\] tubes of brass, His
bones \[are\] as a bar of iron.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> He \[is\] a beginning of the ways of
God, His Maker bringeth nigh his sword;

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> For food do mountains bear for him, And
all the beasts of the field play there.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> Under shades he lieth down, In a secret
place of reed and mire.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> Cover him do shades, \[with\] their
shadow, Cover him do willows of the brook.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> Lo, a flood oppresseth -- he doth not
haste, He is confident though Jordan Doth come forth unto his mouth.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> Before his eyes doth \[one\] take him,
With snares doth \[one\] pierce the nose?

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Dost thou draw leviathan with an angle?
And with a rope thou lettest down -- his tongue?

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Dost thou put a reed in his nose? And
with a thorn pierce his jaw?

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Doth he multiply unto thee supplications?
Doth he speak unto thee tender things?

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Doth he make a covenant with thee? Dost
thou take him for a servant age-during?

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Dost thou play with him as a bird? And
dost thou bind him for thy damsels?

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> (Feast upon him do companions, They
divide him among the merchants!)

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> Dost thou fill with barbed irons his
skin? And with fish-spears his head?

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> Place on him thy hand, Remember the
battle -- do not add!

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Lo, the hope of him is found a liar, Also
at his appearance is not one cast down?

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> None so fierce that he doth awake him,
And who \[is\] he before Me stationeth himself?

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Who hath brought before Me and I repay?
Under the whole heavens it \[is\] mine.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> I do not keep silent concerning his
parts, And the matter of might, And the grace of his arrangement.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> Who hath uncovered the face of his
clothing? Within his double bridle who doth enter?

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> The doors of his face who hath opened?
Round about his teeth \[are\] terrible.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> A pride -- strong ones of shields, Shut
up -- a close seal.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> One unto another they draw nigh, And
air doth not enter between them.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> One unto another they adhere, They
stick together and are not separated.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> His sneezings cause light to shine, And
his eyes \[are\] as the eyelids of the dawn.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> Out of his mouth do flames go, sparks
of fire escape.

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> Out of his nostrils goeth forth smoke,
As a blown pot and reeds.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> His breath setteth coals on fire, And a
flame from his mouth goeth forth.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> In his neck lodge doth strength, And
before him doth grief exult.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> The flakes of his flesh have adhered --
Firm upon him -- it is not moved.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> His heart \[is\] firm as a stone, Yea,
firm as the lower piece.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> From his rising are the mighty afraid,
From breakings they keep themselves free.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> The sword of his overtaker standeth
not, Spear -- dart -- and lance.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> He reckoneth iron as straw, brass as
rotten wood.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> The son of the bow doth not cause him
to flee, Turned by him into stubble are stones of the sling.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> As stubble have darts been reckoned,
And he laugheth at the shaking of a javelin.

<span id="an_41:30">41:30</span> Under him \[are\] sharp points of clay,
He spreadeth gold on the mire.

<span id="an_41:31">41:31</span> He causeth to boil as a pot the deep,
The sea he maketh as a pot of ointment.

<span id="an_41:32">41:32</span> After him he causeth a path to shine,
One thinketh the deep to be hoary.

<span id="an_41:33">41:33</span> There is not on the earth his like,
That is made without terror.

<span id="an_41:34">41:34</span> Every high thing he doth see, He \[is\]
king over all sons of pride.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> And Job answereth Jehovah and saith: --

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> Thou hast known that \[for\] all things
Thou art able, And not withheld from Thee is \[any\] device:

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> \`Who \[is\] this, hiding counsel without
knowledge?' Therefore, I have declared, and understand not, Too
wonderful for me, and I know not.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> \`Hear, I pray thee, and I -- I do speak,
I ask thee, and cause thou me to know.'

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> By the hearing of the ear I heard Thee,
And now mine eye hath seen Thee.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Therefore do I loathe \[it\], And I have
repented on dust and ashes.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And it cometh to pass after Jehovah's
speaking these words unto Job, that Jehovah saith unto Eliphaz the
Temanite, \`Burned hath Mine anger against thee, and against thy two
friends, because ye have not spoken concerning Me rightly, like My
servant Job.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> And now, take to you seven bullocks and
seven rams, and go ye unto My servant Job, and ye have caused a
burnt-offering to ascend for you; and Job My servant doth pray for you,
for surely his face I accept, so as not to do with you folly, because ye
have not spoken concerning Me rightly, like My servant Job.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And they go -- Eliphaz the Temanite, and
Bildad the Shuhite, Zophar the Naamathite -- and do as Jehovah hath
spoken unto them; and Jehovah doth accept the face of Job.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> And Jehovah hath turned \[to\] the
captivity of Job in his praying for his friends, and Jehovah doth add
\[to\] all that Job hath -- to double.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> And come unto him do all his brethren,
and all his sisters, and all his former acquaintances, and they eat
bread with him in his house, and bemoan him, and comfort him concerning
all the evil that Jehovah had brought upon him, and they gave to him
each one kesitah, and each one ring of gold.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And Jehovah hath blessed the latter end
of Job more than his beginning, and he hath fourteen thousand of a
flock, and six thousand camels, and a thousand pairs of oxen, and a
thousand she-asses.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> And he hath seven sons and three
daughters;

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> and he calleth the name of the one
Jemima, and the name of the second Kezia, and the name of the third
Keren-Happuch.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And there have not been found women
fair as the daughters of Job in all the land, and their father doth give
to them an inheritance in the midst of their brethren.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> And Job liveth after this a hundred and
forty years, and seeth his sons, and his sons' sons, four generations;

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> and Job dieth, aged and satisfied
\[with\] days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms](psa)
