[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jer)  [Next](eze) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Lamentations

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> How hath she sat alone, The city abounding
with people! She hath been as a widow, The mighty among nations! Princes
among provinces, She hath become tributary!

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> She weepeth sore in the night, And her tear
\[is\] on her cheeks, There is no comforter for her out of all her
lovers, All her friends dealt treacherously by her, They have been to
her for enemies.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Removed hath Judah because of affliction,
And because of the abundance of her service; She hath dwelt among
nations, She hath not found rest, All her pursuers have overtaken her
between the straits.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> The ways of Zion are mourning, Without any
coming at the appointed time, All her gates are desolate, her priests
sigh, Her virgins are afflicted -- and she hath bitterness.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Her adversaries have become chief, Her
enemies have been at ease, For Jehovah hath afflicted her, For the
abundance of her transgressions, Her infants have gone captive before
the adversary.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And go out from the daughter of Zion doth
all her honour, Her princes have been as harts -- They have not found
pasture, And they go powerless before a pursuer.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Remembered hath Jerusalem \[In\] the days
of her affliction and her mournings, all her desirable things that were
from the days of old, In the falling of her people into the hand of an
adversary, And she hath no helper; Seen her have adversaries, They have
laughed at her cessation.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> A sin hath Jerusalem sinned, Therefore
impure she hath become, All who honoured her have esteemed her lightly,
For they have seen her nakedness, Yea, she herself hath sighed and
turneth backward.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Her uncleanness \[is\] in her skirts, She
hath not remembered her latter end, And she cometh down wonderfully,
There is no comforter for her. See, O Jehovah, mine affliction, For
exerted himself hath an enemy.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> His hand spread out hath an adversary On
all her desirable things, For she hath seen -- Nations have entered her
sanctuary, Concerning which Thou didst command, \`They do not come into
the assembly to thee.'

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> All her people are sighing -- seeking
bread, They have given their desirable things For food to refresh the
body; See, O Jehovah, and behold attentively, For I have been lightly
esteemed.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> \[Is it\] nothing to you, all ye passing
by the way? Look attentively, and see, If there is any pain like my
pain, That He is rolling to me? Whom Jehovah hath afflicted In the day
of the fierceness of His anger.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> From above He hath sent fire into my
bone, And it subdueth it, He hath spread a net for my feet, He hath
turned me backward, He hath made me desolate -- all the day sick.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Bound hath been the yoke of my
transgressions by His hand, They are wrapped together, They have gone up
on my neck, He hath caused my power to stumble, The Lord hath given me
into hands, I am not able to rise.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Trodden down all my mighty ones hath the
Lord in my midst, He proclaimed against me an appointed time, To destroy
my young men, A wine-press hath the Lord trodden, To the virgin daughter
of Judah.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For these I am weeping, My eye, my eye,
is running down with waters, For, far from me hath been a comforter,
Refreshing my soul, My sons have been desolate, For mighty hath been an
enemy.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Spread forth hath Zion her hands, There
is no comforter for her, Jehovah hath charged concerning Jacob, His
neighbours \[are\] his adversaries, Jerusalem hath become impure among
them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Righteous is Jehovah, For His mouth I
have provoked. Hear, I pray you, all ye peoples, and see my pain, My
virgins and my young men have gone into captivity.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> I called for my lovers, they -- they have
deceived me, My priests and my elders in the city have expired; When
they have sought food for themselves, Then they give back their soul.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> See, O Jehovah, for distress \[is\] to
me, My bowels have been troubled, Turned hath been my heart in my midst,
For I have greatly provoked, From without bereaved hath the sword, In
the house \[it is\] as death.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> They have heard that I have sighed, There
is no comforter for me, All my enemies have heard of my calamity, They
have rejoiced that Thou hast done \[it\], Thou hast brought in the day
Thou hast called, And they are like to me.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Come in doth all their evil before Thee,
And one is doing to them as Thou hast done to me, For all my
transgressions, For many \[are\] my sighs, and my heart \[is\] sick!

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> How doth the Lord cloud in His anger the
daughter of Zion, He hath cast from heaven \[to\] earth the beauty of
Israel, And hath not remembered His footstool in the day of His anger.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Swallowed up hath the Lord, He hath not
pitied any of the pleasant places of Jacob, He hath broken down in His
wrath The fortresses of the daughter of Judah, He hath caused to come to
the earth, He polluted the kingdom and its princes.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> He hath cut off in the heat of anger every
horn of Israel, He hath turned backward His right hand From the face of
the enemy, And He burneth against Jacob as a flaming fire, It hath
devoured round about.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He hath trodden His bow as an enemy, Stood
hath His right hand as an adversary, And He slayeth all the desirable
ones of the eye, In the tent of the daughter of Zion, He hath poured out
as fire His fury.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The Lord hath been as an enemy, He hath
swallowed up Israel, He hath swallowed up all her palaces, He hath
destroyed His fortresses, And He multiplieth in the daughter of Judah
Mourning and moaning.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And He shaketh as a garden His tabernacle,
He hath destroyed His appointed place, Jehovah hath forgotten in Zion
the appointed time and sabbath, And despiseth, in the indignation of His
anger, king and priest.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The Lord hath cast off His altar, He hath
rejected His sanctuary, He hath shut up into the hand of the enemy The
walls of her palaces, A noise they have made in the house of Jehovah
Like a day of appointment.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Devised hath Jehovah to destroy the wall of
the daughter of Zion, He hath stretched out a line, He hath not turned
His hand from destroying, And He causeth bulwark and wall to mourn,
Together -- they have been weak.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Sunk into the earth have her gates, He hath
destroyed and broken her bars, Her king and her princes \[are\] among
the nations, There is no law, also her prophets Have not found vision
from Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Sit on the earth -- keep silent do the
elders of the daughter of Zion, They have caused dust to go up on their
head, They have girded on sackcloth, Put down to the earth their head
have the virgins of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Consumed by tears have been my eyes,
Troubled have been my bowels, Poured out to the earth hath been my
liver, For the breach of the daughter of my people; In infant and
suckling being feeble, In the broad places of the city,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> To their mothers they say, \`Where
\[are\] corn and wine?' In their becoming feeble as a pierced one In the
broad places of the city, In their soul pouring itself out into the
bosom of their mothers.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> What do I testify \[to\] thee, what do I
liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? What do I equal to thee, and I
comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? For great as a sea \[is\] thy
breach, Who doth give healing to thee?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Thy prophets have seen for thee a false
and insipid thing, And have not revealed concerning thine iniquity, To
turn back thy captivity, And they see for thee false burdens and causes
of expulsion.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Clapped hands at thee have all passing by
the way, They have hissed -- and they shake the head At the daughter of
Jerusalem: \`Is this the city of which they said: The perfection of
beauty, a joy to all the land?'

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Opened against thee their mouth have all
thine enemies, They have hissed, yea, they gnash the teeth, They have
said: \`We have swallowed \[her\] up, Surely this \[is\] the day that we
looked for, We have found -- we have seen.'

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Jehovah hath done that which He devised,
He hath fulfilled His saying That He commanded from the days of old, He
hath broken down and hath not pitied, And causeth an enemy to rejoice
over thee, He lifted up the horn of thine adversaries.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Cried hath their heart unto the Lord; O
wall of the daughter of Zion, Cause to go down as a stream tears daily
and nightly, Give not rest to thyself, Let not the daughter of thine eye
stand still.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Arise, cry aloud in the night, At the
beginning of the watches. Pour out as water thy heart, Over against the
face of the Lord, Lift up unto Him thy hands, for the soul of thine
infants, Who are feeble with hunger at the head of all out-places.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> See, O Jehovah, and look attentively, To
whom Thou hast acted thus, Do women eat their fruit, infants of a
handbreadth? Slain in the sanctuary of the Lord are priest and prophet?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Lain on the earth \[in\] out-places have
young and old, My virgins and my young men have fallen by the sword,
Thou hast slain in a day of Thine anger, Thou hast slaughtered -- Thou
hast not pitied.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Thou dost call as \[at\] a day of
appointment, My fears from round about, And there hath not been in the
day of the anger of Jehovah, An escaped and remaining one, They whom I
stretched out and nourished, My enemy hath consumed!

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> I \[am\] the man \[who\] hath seen
affliction By the rod of His wrath.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Me He hath led, and causeth to go \[in\]
darkness, and without light.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Surely against me He turneth back, He
turneth His hand all the day.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> He hath worn out my flesh and my skin. He
hath broken my bones.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He hath built up against me, And setteth
round poverty and weariness.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> In dark places He hath caused me to dwell,
As the dead of old.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He hath hedged me about, and I go not out,
He hath made heavy my fetter.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Also when I call and cry out, He hath shut
out my prayer.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> He hath hedged my ways with hewn work, My
paths He hath made crooked.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> A bear lying in wait He \[is\] to me, A
lion in secret hiding-places.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> My ways He is turning aside, and He
pulleth me in pieces, He hath made me a desolation.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> He hath trodden His bow, And setteth me
up as a mark for an arrow.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> He hath caused to enter into my reins The
sons of His quiver.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I have been a derision to all my people,
Their song all the day.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> He hath filled me with bitter things, He
hath filled me \[with\] wormwood.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And He breaketh with gravel my teeth, He
hath covered me with ashes.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And Thou castest off from peace my soul,
I have forgotten prosperity.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And I say, Perished hath my strength and
my hope from Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Remember my affliction and my mourning,
Wormwood and gall!

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Remember well, and bow down doth my soul
in me.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> This I turn to my heart -- therefore I
hope.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> The kindnesses of Jehovah! For we have
not been consumed, For not ended have His mercies.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> New every morning, abundant \[is\] thy
faithfulness.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> My portion \[is\] Jehovah, hath my soul
said, Therefore I hope for Him.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Good \[is\] Jehovah to those waiting for
Him, To the soul \[that\] seeketh Him.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Good! when one doth stay and stand still
For the salvation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Good for a man that he beareth a yoke in
his youth.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> He sitteth alone, and is silent, For He
hath laid \[it\] upon him.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> He putteth in the dust his mouth, if so
be there is hope.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> He giveth to his smiter the cheek, He is
filled with reproach.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> For the Lord doth not cast off to the
age.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For though He afflicted, yet He hath
pitied, According to the abundance of His kindness.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> For He hath not afflicted with His heart,
Nor doth He grieve the sons of men.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> To bruise under one's feet any bound ones
of earth,

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> To turn aside the judgment of a man,
Over-against the face of the Most High,

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord
hath not approved.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> Who \[is\] this -- he hath said, and it
is, \[And\] the Lord hath not commanded \[it\]?

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> From the mouth of the Most High Go not
forth the evils and the good.

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> What -- sigh habitually doth a living
man, A man for his sin?

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> We search our ways, and investigate, And
turn back unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> We lift up our heart on the hands unto
God in the heavens.

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> We -- we have transgressed and rebelled,
Thou -- Thou hast not forgiven.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> Thou hast covered Thyself with anger, And
dost pursue us; Thou hast slain -- Thou hast not pitied.

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> Thou hast covered Thyself with a cloud,
So that prayer doth not pass through.

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> Offscouring and refuse Thou dost make us
In the midst of the peoples.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> Opened against us their mouth have all
our enemies.

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> Fear and a snare hath been for us,
Desolation and destruction.

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> Rivulets of water go down my eye, For the
destruction of the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> Mine eye is poured out, And doth not
cease without intermission,

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> Till Jehovah looketh and seeth from the
heavens,

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> My eye affecteth my soul, Because of all
the daughters of my city.

<span id="an_3:52">3:52</span> Hunted me sore as a bird have my enemies
without cause.

<span id="an_3:53">3:53</span> They have cut off in a pit my life, And
they cast a stone against me.

<span id="an_3:54">3:54</span> Flowed have waters over my head, I have
said, I have been cut off.

<span id="an_3:55">3:55</span> I called Thy name, O Jehovah, from the
lower pit.

<span id="an_3:56">3:56</span> My voice Thou hast heard, Hide not Thine
ear at my breathing -- at my cry.

<span id="an_3:57">3:57</span> Thou hast drawn near in the day I call
Thee, Thou hast said, Fear not.

<span id="an_3:58">3:58</span> Thou hast pleaded, O Lord, the pleadings
of my soul, Thou hast redeemed my life.

<span id="an_3:59">3:59</span> Thou hast seen, O Jehovah, my overthrow,
Judge Thou my cause.

<span id="an_3:60">3:60</span> Thou hast seen all their vengeance, All
their thoughts of me.

<span id="an_3:61">3:61</span> Thou hast heard their reproach, O
Jehovah, All their thoughts against me,

<span id="an_3:62">3:62</span> The lips of my withstanders, Even their
meditation against me all the day.

<span id="an_3:63">3:63</span> Their sitting down, and their rising up,
Behold attentively, I \[am\] their song.

<span id="an_3:64">3:64</span> Thou returnest to them the deed, O
Jehovah, According to the work of their hands.

<span id="an_3:65">3:65</span> Thou givest to them a covered heart, Thy
curse to them.

<span id="an_3:66">3:66</span> Thou pursuest in anger, and destroyest
them, From under the heavens of Jehovah!

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> How is the gold become dim, Changed the
best -- the pure gold? Poured out are stones of the sanctuary At the
head of all out-places.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> The precious sons of Zion, Who are
comparable with fine gold, How have they been reckoned earthen bottles,
Work of the hands of a potter.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Even dragons have drawn out the breast,
They have suckled their young ones, The daughter of my people is become
cruel, Like the ostriches in a wilderness.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Cleaved hath the tongue of a suckling unto
his palate with thirst, Infants asked bread, a dealer out they have
none.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Those eating of dainties have been desolate
in out-places, Those supported on scarlet have embraced dunghills.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And greater is the iniquity of the daughter
of my people, Than the sin of Sodom, That was overturned as \[in\] a
moment, And no hands were stayed on her.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Purer were her Nazarites than snow, Whiter
than milk, ruddier of body than rubies, Of sapphire their form.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Darker than blackness hath been their
visage, They have not been known in out-places, Cleaved hath their skin
unto their bone, It hath withered -- it hath been as wood.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Better have been the pierced of a sword
Than the pierced of famine, For these flow away, pierced through,
Without the increase of the field.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The hands of merciful women have boiled
their own children, They have been for food to them, In the destruction
of the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Completed hath Jehovah His fury, He hath
poured out the fierceness of His anger, And he kindleth a fire in Zion,
And it devoureth her foundations.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Believe not did the kings of earth, And
any of the inhabitants of the world, That come would an adversary and
enemy Into the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Because of the sins of her prophets, The
iniquities of her priests, Who are shedding in her midst the blood of
the righteous,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> They have wandered naked in out-places,
They have been polluted with blood, Without \[any\] being able to touch
their clothing,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> \`Turn aside -- unclean,' they called to
them, \`Turn aside, turn aside, touch not,' For they fled -- yea, they
have wandered, They have said among nations: \`They do not add to
sojourn.'

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The face of Jehovah hath divided them, He
doth not add to behold them, The face of priests they have not lifted
up, Elders they have not favoured.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> While we exist -- consumed are our eyes
for our vain help, In our watch-tower we have watched for a nation
\[that\] saveth not.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> They have hunted our steps from going in
our broad-places, Near hath been our end, fulfilled our days, For come
hath our end.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Swifter have been our pursuers, Than the
eagles of the heavens, On the mountains they have burned \[after\] us,
In the wilderness they have laid wait for us.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> The breath of our nostrils -- the
anointed of Jehovah, Hath been captured in their pits, of whom we said:
\`In his shadow we do live among nations.'

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Joy and rejoice, O daughter of Edom,
Dwelling in the land of Uz, Even unto thee pass over doth a cup, Thou
art drunk, and makest thyself naked.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Completed \[is\] thy iniquity, daughter
of Zion, He doth not add to remove thee, He hath inspected thy iniquity,
O daughter of Edom, He hath removed \[thee\] because of thy sins!

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Remember, O Jehovah, what hath befallen us,
Look attentively, and see our reproach.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Our inheritance hath been turned to
strangers, Our houses to foreigners.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Orphans we have been -- without a father,
our mothers \[are\] as widows.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Our water for money we have drunk, Our wood
for a price doth come.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> For our neck we have been pursued, We have
laboured -- there hath been no rest for us.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> \[To\] Egypt we have given a hand, \[To\]
Asshur, to be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Our fathers have sinned -- they are not, We
their iniquities have borne.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Servants have ruled over us, A deliverer
there is none from their hand.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> With our lives we bring in our bread,
Because of the sword of the wilderness.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Our skin as an oven hath been burning,
Because of the raging of the famine.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Wives in Zion they have humbled, Virgins
-- in cities of Judah.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Princes by their hand have been hanged,
The faces of elders have not been honoured.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Young men to grind they have taken, And
youths with wood have stumbled.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> The aged from the gate have ceased, Young
men from their song.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Ceased hath the joy of our heart, Turned
to mourning hath been our dancing.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Fallen hath the crown \[from\] our head,
Wo \[is\] now to us, for we have sinned.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For this hath our heart been sick, For
these have our eyes been dim.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For the mount of Zion -- that is
desolate, Foxes have gone up on it.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Thou, O Jehovah, to the age remainest,
Thy throne to generation and generation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Why for ever dost Thou forget us? Thou
forsakest us for length of days!

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Turn us back, O Jehovah, unto Thee, And
we turn back, renew our days as of old.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> For hast Thou utterly rejected us? Thou
hast been wroth against us -- exceedingly?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel](eze)
