[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jam)  [Next](pe2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 1 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the
choice sojourners of the dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> according to a foreknowledge of God the
Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, to obedience and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace be multiplied!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed \[is\] the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to the abundance of His kindness did
beget us again to a living hope, through the rising again of Jesus
Christ out of the dead,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> to an inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and unfading, reserved in the heavens for you,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> who, in the power of God are being guarded,
through faith, unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> in which ye are glad, a little now, if it
be necessary, being made to sorrow in manifold trials,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> that the proof of your faith -- much more
precious than of gold that is perishing, and through fire being approved
-- may be found to praise, and honour, and glory, in the revelation of
Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> whom, not having seen, ye love, in whom,
now not seeing and believing, ye are glad with joy unspeakable and
glorified,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> receiving the end of your faith --
salvation of souls;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> concerning which salvation seek out and
search out did prophets who concerning the grace toward you did
prophecy,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> searching in regard to what or what
manner of time the Spirit of Christ that was in them was manifesting,
testifying beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the glory after
these,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> to whom it was revealed, that not to
themselves, but to us they were ministering these, which now were told
to you (through those who did proclaim good news to you,) in the Holy
Spirit sent from heaven, to which things messengers do desire to bend
looking.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Wherefore having girded up the loins of
your mind, being sober, hope perfectly upon the grace that is being
brought to you in the revelation of Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> as obedient children, not fashioning
yourselves to the former desires in your ignorance,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> but according as He who did call you
\[is\] holy, ye also, become holy in all behaviour,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> because it hath been written, \`Become ye
holy, because I am holy;'

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> and if on the Father ye do call, who
without acceptance of persons is judging according to the work of each,
in fear the time of your sojourn pass ye,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> having known that, not with corruptible
things -- silver or gold -- were ye redeemed from your foolish behaviour
delivered by fathers,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> but with precious blood, as of a lamb
unblemished and unspotted -- Christ's --

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> foreknown, indeed, before the foundation
of the world, and manifested in the last times because of you,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> who through him do believe in God, who
did raise out of the dead, and glory to him did give, so that your faith
and hope may be in God.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Your souls having purified in the
obedience of the truth through the Spirit to brotherly love unfeigned,
out of a pure heart one another love ye earnestly,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> being begotten again, not out of seed
corruptible, but incorruptible, through a word of God -- living and
remaining -- to the age;

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> because all flesh \[is\] as grass, and
all glory of man as flower of grass; wither did the grass, and the
flower of it fell away,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> and the saying of the Lord doth remain --
to the age; and this is the saying that was proclaimed good news to you.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Having put aside, then, all evil, and all
guile, and hypocrisies, and envyings, and all evil speakings,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> as new-born babes the word's pure milk
desire ye, that in it ye may grow,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> if so be ye did taste that the Lord \[is\]
gracious,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> to whom coming -- a living stone -- by men,
indeed, having been disapproved of, but with God choice, precious,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> and ye yourselves, as living stones, are
built up, a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Wherefore, also, it is contained in the
Writing: \`Lo, I lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, choice, precious, and
he who is believing on him may not be put to shame;'

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> to you, then, who are believing \[is\] the
preciousness; and to the unbelieving, a stone that the builders
disapproved of, this one did become for the head of a corner,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and a stone of stumbling and a rock of
offence -- who are stumbling at the word, being unbelieving, -- to which
also they were set;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and ye \[are\] a choice race, a royal
priesthood, a holy nation, a people acquired, that the excellences ye
may shew forth of Him who out of darkness did call you to His wondrous
light;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> who \[were\] once not a people, and
\[are\] now the people of God; who had not found kindness, and now have
found kindness.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Beloved, I call upon \[you\], as
strangers and sojourners, to keep from the fleshly desires, that war
against the soul,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> having your behaviour among the nations
right, that in that which they speak against you as evil-doers, of the
good works having beheld, they may glorify God in a day of inspection.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Be subject, then, to every human
creation, because of the Lord, whether to a king, as the highest,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> whether to governors, as to those sent
through him, for punishment, indeed, of evil-doers, and a praise of
those doing good;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> because, so is the will of God, doing
good, to put to silence the ignorance of the foolish men;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> as free, and not having the freedom as
the cloak of the evil, but as servants of God;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> to all give ye honour; the brotherhood
love ye; God fear ye; the king honour ye.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The domestics! be subjecting yourselves
in all fear to the masters, not only to the good and gentle, but also to
the cross;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> for this \[is\] gracious, if because of
conscience toward God any one doth endure sorrows, suffering
unrighteously;

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> for what renown \[is it\], if sinning and
being buffeted, ye do endure \[it\]? but if, doing good and suffering
\[for it\], ye do endure, this \[is\] gracious with God,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> for to this ye were called, because
Christ also did suffer for you, leaving to you an example, that ye may
follow his steps,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> who did not commit sin, nor was guile
found in his mouth,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> who being reviled -- was not reviling
again, suffering -- was not threatening, and was committing himself to
Him who is judging righteously,

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> who our sins himself did bear in his
body, upon the tree, that to the sins having died, to the righteousness
we may live; by whose stripes ye were healed,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> for ye were as sheep going astray, but ye
turned back now to the shepherd and overseer of your souls.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> In like manner, the wives, be ye subject to
your own husbands, that even if certain are disobedient to the word,
through the conversation of the wives, without the word, they may be
won,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> having beheld your pure behaviour in fear,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> whose adorning -- let it not be that which
is outward, of plaiting of hair, and of putting around of things of
gold, or of putting on of garments,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> but -- the hidden man of the heart, in the
incorruptible thing of the meek and quiet spirit, which is, before God,
of great price,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> for thus once also the holy women who did
hope on God, were adorning themselves, being subject to their own
husbands,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> as Sarah was obedient to Abraham, calling
him \`sir,' of whom ye did become daughters, doing good, and not fearing
any terror.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> The husbands, in like manner, dwelling with
\[them\], according to knowledge, as to a weaker vessel -- to the wife
-- imparting honour, as also being heirs together of the grace of life,
that your prayers be not hindered.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And finally, being all of one mind, having
fellow-feeling, loving as brethren, compassionate, courteous,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not giving back evil for evil, or railing
for railing, and on the contrary, blessing, having known that to this ye
were called, that a blessing ye may inherit;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> for \`he who is willing to love life, and
to see good days, let him guard his tongue from evil, and his lips --
not to speak guile;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> let him turn aside from evil, and do
good, let him seek peace and pursue it;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> because the eyes of the Lord \[are\] upon
the righteous, and His ears -- to their supplication, and the face of
the Lord \[is\] upon those doing evil;'

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and who \[is\] he who will be doing you
evil, if of Him who is good ye may become imitators?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> but if ye also should suffer because of
righteousness, happy \[are ye\]! and of their fear be not afraid, nor be
troubled,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and the Lord God sanctify in your hearts.
And \[be\] ready always for defence to every one who is asking of you an
account concerning the hope that \[is\] in you, with meekness and fear;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> having a good conscience, that in that in
which they speak against you as evil-doers, they may be ashamed who are
traducing your good behaviour in Christ;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> for \[it is\] better doing good, if the
will of God will it, to suffer, than doing evil;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> because also Christ once for sin did
suffer -- righteous for unrighteous -- that he might lead us to God,
having been put to death indeed, in the flesh, and having been made
alive in the spirit,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> in which also to the spirits in prison
having gone he did preach,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> who sometime disbelieved, when once the
long-suffering of God did wait, in days of Noah -- an ark being
preparing -- in which few, that is, eight souls, were saved through
water;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> also to which an antitype doth now save
us -- baptism, (not a putting away of the filth of flesh, but the
question of a good conscience in regard to God,) through the rising
again of Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> who is at the right hand of God, having
gone on to heaven -- messengers, and authorities, and powers, having
been subjected to him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Christ, then, having suffered for us in the
flesh, ye also with the same mind arm yourselves, because he who did
suffer in the flesh hath done with sin,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> no more in the desires of men, but in the
will of God, to live the rest of the time in the flesh;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> for sufficient to us \[is\] the past time
of life the will of the nations to have wrought, having walked in
lasciviousnesses, desires, excesses of wines, revelings, drinking-bouts,
and unlawful idolatries,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> in which they think it strange -- your not
running with them to the same excess of dissoluteness, speaking evil,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> who shall give an account to Him who is
ready to judge living and dead,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> for for this also to dead men was good news
proclaimed, that they may be judged, indeed, according to men in the
flesh, and may live according to God in the spirit.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And of all things the end hath come nigh;
be sober-minded, then, and watch unto the prayers,

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> and, before all things, to one another
having the earnest love, because the love shall cover a multitude of
sins;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> hospitable to one another, without
murmuring;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> each, according as he received a gift, to
one another ministering it, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> if any one doth speak -- \`as oracles of
God;' if any one doth minister -- \`as of the ability which God doth
supply;' that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ,
to whom is the glory and the power -- to the ages of the ages. Amen.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Beloved, think it not strange at the
fiery suffering among you that is coming to try you, as if a strange
thing were happening to you,

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> but, according as ye have fellowship with
the sufferings of the Christ, rejoice ye, that also in the revelation of
his glory ye may rejoice -- exulting;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> if ye be reproached in the name of Christ
-- happy \[are ye\], because the Spirit of glory and of God upon you
doth rest; in regard, indeed, to them, he is evil-spoken of, and in
regard to you, he is glorified;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> for let none of you suffer as a murderer,
or thief, or evil-doer, or as an inspector into other men's matters;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> and if as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed; and let him glorify God in this respect;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> because it is the time of the beginning
of the judgment from the house of God, and if first from us, what the
end of those disobedient to the good news of God?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And if the righteous man is scarcely
saved, the ungodly and sinner -- where shall he appear?

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> so that also those suffering according to
the will of god, as to a stedfast Creator, let them commit their own
souls in good doing.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Elders who \[are\] among you, I exhort, who
\[am\] a fellow-elder, and a witness of the sufferings of the Christ,
and of the glory about to be revealed a partaker,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> feed the flock of God that \[is\] among
you, overseeing not constrainedly, but willingly, neither for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> neither as exercising lordship over the
heritages, but patterns becoming of the flock,

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and at the manifestation of the chief
Shepherd, ye shall receive the unfading crown of glory.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> In like manner, ye younger, be subject to
elders, and all to one another subjecting yourselves; with
humble-mindedness clothe yourselves, because God the proud doth resist,
but to the humble He doth give grace;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> be humbled, then, under the powerful hand
of God, that you He may exalt in good time,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> all your care having cast upon Him, because
He careth for you.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be sober, vigilant, because your opponent
the devil, as a roaring lion, doth walk about, seeking whom he may
swallow up,

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> whom resist, stedfast in the faith, having
known the same sufferings to your brotherhood in the world to be
accomplished.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And the God of all grace, who did call
you to His age-during glory in Christ Jesus, having suffered a little,
Himself make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle \[you\];

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> to Him \[is\] the glory, and the power --
to the ages and the ages! Amen.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Through Silvanus, to you the faithful
brother, as I reckon, through few \[words\] I did write, exhorting and
testifying this to be the true grace of God in which ye have stood.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Salute you doth the \[assembly\] in
Babylon jointly elected, and Markus my son.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Salute ye one another in a kiss of love;
peace to you all who \[are\] in Christ Jesus! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter](pe2)
