[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](act)  [Next](co1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Romans

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, a called
apostle, having been separated to the good news of God --

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> which He announced before through His
prophets in holy writings --

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> concerning His Son, (who is come of the
seed of David according to the flesh,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who is marked out Son of God in power,
according to the Spirit of sanctification, by the rising again from the
dead,) Jesus Christ our Lord;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> through whom we did receive grace and
apostleship, for obedience of faith among all the nations, in behalf of
his name;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> among whom are also ye, the called of Jesus
Christ;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> to all who are in Rome, beloved of God,
called saints; Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, and
\[from\] the Lord Jesus Christ!

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> first, indeed, I thank my God through Jesus
Christ for you all, that your faith is proclaimed in the whole world;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> for God is my witness, whom I serve in my
spirit in the good news of His Son, how unceasingly I make mention of
you,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> always in my prayers beseeching, if by
any means now at length I shall have a prosperous journey, by the will
of God, to come unto you,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> for I long to see you, that I may impart
to you some spiritual gift, that ye may be established;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> and that is, that I may be comforted
together among you, through the faith in one another, both yours and
mine.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And I do not wish you to be ignorant,
brethren, that many times I did purpose to come unto you -- and was
hindered till the present time -- that some fruit I might have also
among you, even as also among the other nations.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to
wise and to thoughtless, I am a debtor,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> so, as much as in me is, I am ready also
to you who \[are\] in Rome to proclaim good news,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> for I am not ashamed of the good news of
the Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation to every one who is
believing, both to Jew first, and to Greek.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For the righteousness of God in it is
revealed from faith to faith, according as it hath been written, \`And
the righteous one by faith shall live,'

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> for revealed is the wrath of God from
heaven upon all impiety and unrighteousness of men, holding down the
truth in unrighteousness.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Because that which is known of God is
manifest among them, for God did manifest \[it\] to them,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> for the invisible things of Him from the
creation of the world, by the things made being understood, are plainly
seen, both His eternal power and Godhead -- to their being inexcusable;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> because, having known God they did not
glorify \[Him\] as God, nor gave thanks, but were made vain in their
reasonings, and their unintelligent heart was darkened,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> professing to be wise, they were made
fools,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into the likeness of an image of corruptible man, and
of fowls, and of quadrupeds, and of reptiles.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Wherefore also God did give them up, in
the desires of their hearts, to uncleanness, to dishonour their bodies
among themselves;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> who did change the truth of God into a
falsehood, and did honour and serve the creature rather than the
Creator, who is blessed to the ages. Amen.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Because of this did God give them up to
dishonourable affections, for even their females did change the natural
use into that against nature;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> and in like manner also the males having
left the natural use of the female, did burn in their longing toward one
another; males with males working shame, and the recompense of their
error that was fit, in themselves receiving.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And, according as they did not approve of
having God in knowledge, God gave them up to a disapproved mind, to do
the things not seemly;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> having been filled with all
unrighteousness, whoredom, wickedness, covetousness, malice; full of
envy, murder, strife, deceit, evil dispositions; whisperers,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> evil-speakers, God-haters, insulting,
proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> unintelligent, faithless, without natural
affection, implacable, unmerciful;

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> who the righteous judgment of God having
known -- that those practising such things are worthy of death -- not
only do them, but also have delight with those practising them.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Therefore, thou art inexcusable, O man --
every one who is judging -- for in that in which thou dost judge the
other, thyself thou dost condemn, for the same things thou dost practise
who art judging,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and we have known that the judgment of God
is according to truth, upon those practising such things.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And dost thou think this, O man, who art
judging those who such things are practising, and art doing them, that
thou shalt escape the judgment of God?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> or the riches of His goodness, and
forbearance, and long-suffering, dost thou despise? -- not knowing that
the goodness of God doth lead thee to reformation!

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> but, according to thy hardness and
impenitent heart, thou dost treasure up to thyself wrath, in a day of
wrath and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who shall render to each according to his
works;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> to those, indeed, who in continuance of a
good work, do seek glory, and honour, and incorruptibility -- life
age-during;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and to those contentious, and disobedient,
indeed, to the truth, and obeying the unrighteousness -- indignation and
wrath,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> tribulation and distress, upon every soul
of man that is working the evil, both of Jew first, and of Greek;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and glory, and honour, and peace, to
every one who is working the good, both to Jew first, and to Greek.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For there is no acceptance of faces with
God,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> for as many as without law did sin,
without law also shall perish, and as many as did sin in law, through
law shall be judged,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> for not the hearers of the law \[are\]
righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be declared
righteous: --

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For, when nations that have not a law, by
nature may do the things of the law, these not having a law -- to
themselves are a law;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> who do shew the work of the law written
in their hearts, their conscience also witnessing with them, and between
one another the thoughts accusing or else defending,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> in the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men, according to my good news, through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Lo, thou art named a Jew, and dost rest
upon the law, and dost boast in God,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and dost know the will, and dost approve
the distinctions, being instructed out of the law,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and hast confidence that thou thyself art
a leader of blind ones, a light of those in darkness,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> an instructor of foolish ones, a teacher
of babes, having the form of the knowledge and of the truth in the law.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Thou, then, who art teaching another,
thyself dost thou not teach?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> thou who art preaching not to steal, dost
thou steal? thou who art saying not to commit adultery, dost thou commit
adultery? thou who art abhorring the idols, dost thou rob temples?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> thou who in the law dost boast, through
the transgression of the law God dost thou dishonour?

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> for the name of God because of you is
evil spoken of among the nations, according as it hath been written.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For circumcision, indeed, doth profit, if
law thou mayest practise, but if a transgressor of law thou mayest be,
thy circumcision hath become uncircumcision.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> If, therefore the uncircumcision the
righteousness of the law may keep, shall not his uncircumcision for
circumcision be reckoned?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> and the uncircumcision, by nature,
fulfilling the law, shall judge thee who, through letter and
circumcision, \[art\] a transgressor of law.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> For he is not a Jew who is \[so\]
outwardly, neither \[is\] circumcision that which is outward in flesh;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> but a Jew \[is\] he who is \[so\]
inwardly, and circumcision \[is\] of the heart, in spirit, not in
letter, of which the praise is not of men, but of God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> What, then, \[is\] the superiority of the
Jew? or what the profit of the circumcision?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> much in every way; for first, indeed, that
they were intrusted with the oracles of God;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for what, if certain were faithless? shall
their faithlessness the faithfulness of god make useless?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> let it not be! and let God become true, and
every man false, according as it hath been written, \`That Thou mayest
be declared righteous in Thy words, and mayest overcome in Thy being
judged.'

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And, if our unrighteousness God's
righteousness doth establish, what shall we say? is God unrighteous who
is inflicting the wrath? (after the manner of a man I speak)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> let it not be! since how shall God judge
the world?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> for if the truth of God in my falsehood did
more abound to His glory, why yet am I also as a sinner judged?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and not, as we are evil spoken of, and as
certain affirm us to say -- \`We may do the evil things, that the good
ones may come?' whose judgment is righteous.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What, then? are we better? not at all! for
we did before charge both Jews and Greeks with being all under sin,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> according as it hath been written --
\`There is none righteous, not even one;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> There is none who is understanding, there
is none who is seeking after God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All did go out of the way, together they
became unprofitable, there is none doing good, there is not even one.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> A sepulchre opened \[is\] their throat;
with their tongues they used deceit; poison of asps \[is\] under their
lips.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Swift \[are\] their feet to shed blood.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Ruin and misery \[are\] in their ways.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And a way of peace they did not know.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> There is no fear of God before their
eyes.'

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And we have known that as many things as
the law saith, to those in the law it doth speak, that every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world may come under judgment to God;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> wherefore by works of law shall no flesh
be declared righteous before Him, for through law is a knowledge of sin.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And now apart from law hath the
righteousness of God been manifested, testified to by the law and the
prophets,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and the righteousness of God \[is\]
through the faith of Jesus Christ to all, and upon all those believing,
-- for there is no difference,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> for all did sin, and are come short of
the glory of God --

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> being declared righteous freely by His
grace through the redemption that \[is\] in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> whom God did set forth a mercy seat,
through the faith in his blood, for the shewing forth of His
righteousness, because of the passing over of the bygone sins in the
forbearance of God --

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> for the shewing forth of His
righteousness in the present time, for His being righteous, and
declaring him righteous who \[is\] of the faith of Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Where then \[is\] the boasting? it was
excluded; by what law? of works? no, but by a law of faith:

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> therefore do we reckon a man to be
declared righteous by faith, apart from works of law.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> The God of Jews only \[is He\], and not
also of nations?

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> yes, also of nations; since one \[is\]
God who shall declare righteous the circumcision by faith, and the
uncircumcision through the faith.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Law then do we make useless through the
faith? let it not be! yea, we do establish law.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> What, then, shall we say Abraham our
father, to have found, according to flesh?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> for if Abraham by works was declared
righteous, he hath to boast -- but not before god;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> for what doth the writing say? \`And
Abraham did believe God, and it was reckoned to him -- to
righteousness;'

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and to him who is working, the reward is
not reckoned of grace, but of debt;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and to him who is not working, and is
believing upon Him who is declaring righteous the impious, his faith is
reckoned -- to righteousness:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> even as David also doth speak of the
happiness of the man to whom God doth reckon righteousness apart from
works:

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> \`Happy they whose lawless acts were
forgiven, and whose sins were covered;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> happy the man to whom the Lord may not
reckon sin.'

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> \[Is\] this happiness, then, upon the
circumcision, or also upon the uncircumcision -- for we say that the
faith was reckoned to Abraham -- to righteousness?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> how then was it reckoned? he being in
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and a sign he did receive of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith in the
uncircumcision, for his being father of all those believing through
uncircumcision, for the righteousness also being reckoned to them,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and father of circumcision to those not
of circumcision only, but who also walk in the steps of the faith, that
\[is\] in the uncircumcision of our father Abraham.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For not through law \[is\] the promise to
Abraham, or to his seed, of his being heir of the world, but through the
righteousness of faith;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> for if they who are of law \[are\] heirs,
the faith hath been made void, and the promise hath been made useless;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> for the law doth work wrath; for where
law is not, neither \[is\] transgression.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Because of this \[it is\] of faith, that
\[it may be\] according to grace, for the promise being sure to all the
seed, not to that which \[is\] of the law only, but also to that which
\[is\] of the faith of Abraham,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> who is father of us all (according as it
hath been written -- \`A father of many nations I have set thee,')
before Him whom he did believe -- God, who is quickening the dead, and
is calling the things that be not as being.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Who, against hope in hope did believe,
for his becoming father of many nations according to that spoken: \`So
shall thy seed be;'

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and not having been weak in the faith, he
did not consider his own body, already become dead, (being about a
hundred years old,) and the deadness of Sarah's womb,

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and at the promise of God did not stagger
in unbelief, but was strengthened in faith, having given glory to God,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and having been fully persuaded that what
He hath promised He is able also to do:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> wherefore also it was reckoned to him to
righteousness.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And it was not written on his account
alone, that it was reckoned to him,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> but also on ours, to whom it is about to
be reckoned -- to us believing on Him who did raise up Jesus our Lord
out of the dead,

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> who was delivered up because of our
offences, and was raised up because of our being declared righteous.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Having been declared righteous, then, by
faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> through whom also we have the access by the
faith into this grace in which we have stood, and we boast on the hope
of the glory of God.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And not only \[so\], but we also boast in
the tribulations, knowing that the tribulation doth work endurance;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and the endurance, experience; and the
experience, hope;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> and the hope doth not make ashamed, because
the love of God hath been poured forth in our hearts through the Holy
Spirit that hath been given to us.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For in our being still ailing, Christ in
due time did die for the impious;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> for scarcely for a righteous man will any
one die, for for the good man perhaps some one also doth dare to die;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> and God doth commend His own love to us,
that, in our being still sinners, Christ did die for us;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> much more, then, having been declared
righteous now in his blood, we shall be saved through him from the
wrath;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> for if, being enemies, we have been
reconciled to God through the death of His Son, much more, having been
reconciled, we shall be saved in his life.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And not only \[so\], but we are also
boasting in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we did
receive the reconciliation;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> because of this, even as through one man
the sin did enter into the world, and through the sin the death; and
thus to all men the death did pass through, for that all did sin;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> for till law sin was in the world: and
sin is not reckoned when there is not law;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> but the death did reign from Adam till
Moses, even upon those not having sinned in the likeness of Adam's
transgression, who is a type of him who is coming.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But, not as the offence so also \[is\]
the free gift; for if by the offence of the one the many did die, much
more did the grace of God, and the free gift in grace of the one man
Jesus Christ, abound to the many;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> and not as through one who did sin \[is\]
the free gift, for the judgment indeed \[is\] of one to condemnation,
but the gift \[is\] of many offences to a declaration of \`Righteous,'

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> for if by the offence of the one the
death did reign through the one, much more those, who the abundance of
the grace and of the free gift of the righteousness are receiving, in
life shall reign through the one -- Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> So, then, as through one offence to all
men \[it is\] to condemnation, so also through one declaration of
\`Righteous' \[it is\] to all men to justification of life;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> for as through the disobedience of the
one man, the many were constituted sinners: so also through the
obedience of the one, shall the many be constituted righteous.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And law came in, that the offence might
abound, and where the sin did abound, the grace did overabound,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> that even as the sin did reign in the
death, so also the grace may reign, through righteousness, to life
age-during, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> What, then, shall we say? shall we continue
in the sin that the grace may abound?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> let it not be! we who died to the sin --
how shall we still live in it?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> are ye ignorant that we, as many as were
baptized to Christ Jesus, to his death were baptized?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> we were buried together, then, with him
through the baptism to the death, that even as Christ was raised up out
of the dead through the glory of the Father, so also we in newness of
life might walk.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For, if we have become planted together to
the likeness of his death, \[so\] also we shall be of the rising again;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> this knowing, that our old man was
crucified with \[him\], that the body of the sin may be made useless,
for our no longer serving the sin;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> for he who hath died hath been set free
from the sin.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And if we died with Christ, we believe that
we also shall live with him,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> knowing that Christ, having been raised up
out of the dead, doth no more die, death over him hath no more lordship;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> for in that he died, to the sin he died
once, and in that he liveth, he liveth to God;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> so also ye, reckon yourselves to be dead
indeed to the sin, and living to God in Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Let not then the sin reign in your mortal
body, to obey it in its desires;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> neither present ye your members
instruments of unrighteousness to the sin, but present yourselves to God
as living out of the dead, and your members instruments of righteousness
to God;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> for sin over you shall not have lordship,
for ye are not under law, but under grace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> What then? shall we sin because we are
not under law but under grace? let it not be!

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> have ye not known that to whom ye present
yourselves servants for obedience, servants ye are to him to whom ye
obey, whether of sin to death, or of obedience to righteousness?

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and thanks to God, that ye were servants
of the sin, and -- were obedient from the heart to the form of teaching
to which ye were delivered up;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and having been freed from the sin, ye
became servants to the righteousness.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> In the manner of men I speak, because of
the weakness of your flesh, for even as ye did present your members
servants to the uncleanness and to the lawlessness -- to the
lawlessness, so now present your members servants to the righteousness
-- to sanctification,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for when ye were servants of the sin, ye
were free from the righteousness,

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> what fruit, therefore, were ye having
then, in the things of which ye are now ashamed? for the end of those
\[is\] death.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And now, having been freed from the sin,
and having become servants to God, ye have your fruit -- to
sanctification, and the end life age-during;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> for the wages of the sin \[is\] death,
and the gift of God \[is\] life age-during in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Are ye ignorant, brethren -- for to those
knowing law I speak -- that the law hath lordship over the man as long
as he liveth?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> for the married woman to the living husband
hath been bound by law, and if the husband may die, she hath been free
from the law of the husband;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> so, then, the husband being alive, an
adulteress she shall be called if she may become another man's; and if
the husband may die, she is free from the law, so as not to be an
adulteress, having become another man's.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> So that, my brethren, ye also were made
dead to the law through the body of the Christ, for your becoming
another's, who out of the dead was raised up, that we might bear fruit
to God;

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> for when we were in the flesh, the passions
of the sins, that \[are\] through the law, were working in our members,
to bear fruit to the death;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> and now we have ceased from the law, that
being dead in which we were held, so that we may serve in newness of
spirit, and not in oldness of letter.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> What, then, shall we say? the law \[is\]
sin? let it not be! but the sin I did not know except through law, for
also the covetousness I had not known if the law had not said:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> \`Thou shalt not covet;' and the sin having
received an opportunity, through the command, did work in me all
covetousness -- for apart from law sin is dead.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And I was alive apart from law once, and
the command having come, the sin revived, and I died;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and the command that \[is\] for life,
this was found by me for death;

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> for the sin, having received an
opportunity, through the command, did deceive me, and through it did
slay \[me\];

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> so that the law, indeed, \[is\] holy, and
the command holy, and righteous, and good.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> That which is good then, to me hath it
become death? let it not be! but the sin, that it might appear sin,
through the good, working death to me, that the sin might become
exceeding sinful through the command,

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> for we have known that the law is
spiritual, and I am fleshly, sold by the sin;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> for that which I work, I do not
acknowledge; for not what I will, this I practise, but what I hate, this
I do.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And if what I do not will, this I do, I
consent to the law that \[it is\] good,

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> and now it is no longer I that work it,
but the sin dwelling in me,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> for I have known that there doth not
dwell in me, that is, in my flesh, good: for to will is present with me,
and to work that which is right I do not find,

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> for the good that I will, I do not; but
the evil that I do not will, this I practise.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And if what I do not will, this I do, it
is no longer I that work it, but the sin that is dwelling in me.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I find, then, the law, that when I desire
to do what is right, with me the evil is present,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> for I delight in the law of God according
to the inward man,

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> and I behold another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to
the law of the sin that \[is\] in my members.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> A wretched man I \[am\]! who shall
deliver me out of the body of this death?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I thank God -- through Jesus Christ our
Lord; so then, I myself indeed with the mind do serve the law of God,
and with the flesh, the law of sin.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> There is, then, now no condemnation to
those in Christ Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh, but
according to the Spirit;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> for the law of the Spirit of the life in
Christ Jesus did set me free from the law of the sin and of the death;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> for what the law was not able to do, in
that it was weak through the flesh, God, His own Son having sent in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, did condemn the sin in the flesh,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> that the righteousness of the law may be
fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh, but according
to the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For those who are according to the flesh,
the things of the flesh do mind; and those according to the Spirit, the
things of the Spirit;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> for the mind of the flesh \[is\] death, and
the mind of the Spirit -- life and peace;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> because the mind of the flesh \[is\] enmity
to God, for to the law of God it doth not subject itself,

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> for neither is it able; and those who are
in the flesh are not able to please God.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God doth dwell in you; and if any one
hath not the Spirit of Christ -- this one is not His;

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> and if Christ \[is\] in you, the body,
indeed, \[is\] dead because of sin, and the Spirit \[is\] life because
of righteousness,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and if the Spirit of Him who did raise up
Jesus out of the dead doth dwell in you, He who did raise up the Christ
out of the dead shall quicken also your dying bodies, through His Spirit
dwelling in you.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> So, then, brethren, we are debtors, not
to the flesh, to live according to the flesh;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> for if according to the flesh ye do live,
ye are about to die; and if, by the Spirit, the deeds of the body ye put
to death, ye shall live;

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> for as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, these are the sons of God;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> for ye did not receive a spirit of
bondage again for fear, but ye did receive a spirit of adoption in which
we cry, \`Abba -- Father.'

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The Spirit himself doth testify with our
spirit, that we are children of God;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and if children, also heirs, heirs,
indeed, of God, and heirs together of Christ -- if, indeed, we suffer
together, that we may also be glorified together.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For I reckon that the sufferings of the
present time \[are\] not worthy \[to be compared\] with the glory about
to be revealed in us;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> for the earnest looking out of the
creation doth expect the revelation of the sons of God;

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> for to vanity was the creation made
subject -- not of its will, but because of Him who did subject \[it\] --
in hope,

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> that also the creation itself shall be
set free from the servitude of the corruption to the liberty of the
glory of the children of God;

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> for we have known that all the creation
doth groan together, and doth travail in pain together till now.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And not only \[so\], but also we
ourselves, having the first-fruit of the Spirit, we also ourselves in
ourselves do groan, adoption expecting -- the redemption of our body;

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> for in hope we were saved, and hope
beheld is not hope; for what any one doth behold, why also doth he hope
for \[it\]?

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> and if what we do not behold we hope for,
through continuance we expect \[it\].

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And, in like manner also, the Spirit doth
help our weaknesses; for, what we may pray for, as it behoveth \[us\],
we have not known, but the Spirit himself doth make intercession for us
with groanings unutterable,

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> and He who is searching the hearts hath
known what \[is\] the mind of the Spirit, because according to God he
doth intercede for saints.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And we have known that to those loving
God all things do work together for good, to those who are called
according to purpose;

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> because whom He did foreknow, He also did
fore-appoint, conformed to the image of His Son, that he might be
first-born among many brethren;

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> and whom He did fore-appoint, these also
He did call; and whom He did call, these also He declared righteous; and
whom He declared righteous, these also He did glorify.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> What, then, shall we say unto these
things? if God \[is\] for us, who \[is\] against us?

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> He who indeed His own Son did not spare,
but for us all did deliver him up, how shall He not also with him the
all things grant to us?

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Who shall lay a charge against the choice
ones of God? God \[is\] He that is declaring righteous,

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> who \[is\] he that is condemning? Christ
\[is\] He that died, yea, rather also, was raised up; who is also on the
right hand of God -- who also doth intercede for us.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Who shall separate us from the love of
the Christ? tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword?

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> (according as it hath been written --
\`For Thy sake we are put to death all the day long, we were reckoned as
sheep of slaughter,')

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> but in all these we more than conquer,
through him who loved us;

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> for I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor messengers, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present,

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> nor things about to be, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other created thing, shall be able to separate us from
the love of god, that \[is\] in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Truth I say in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience bearing testimony with me in the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> that I have great grief and unceasing pain
in my heart --

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> for I was wishing, I myself, to be anathema
from the Christ -- for my brethren, my kindred, according to the flesh,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> who are Israelites, whose \[is\] the
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the lawgiving, and the
service, and the promises,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> whose \[are\] the fathers, and of whom
\[is\] the Christ, according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed
to the ages. Amen.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And it is not possible that the word of God
hath failed; for not all who \[are\] of Israel are these Israel;

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> nor because they are seed of Abraham
\[are\] all children, but -- \`in Isaac shall a seed be called to thee;'

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> that is, the children of the flesh -- these
\[are\] not children of God; but the children of the promise are
reckoned for seed;

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> for the word of promise \[is\] this;
\`According to this time I will come, and there shall be to Sarah a
son.'

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And not only \[so\], but also Rebecca,
having conceived by one -- Isaac our father --

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> (for they being not yet born, neither
having done anything good or evil, that the purpose of God, according to
choice, might remain; not of works, but of Him who is calling,) it was
said to her --

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> \`The greater shall serve the less;'

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> according as it hath been written,
\`Jacob I did love, and Esau I did hate.'

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> What, then, shall we say? unrighteousness
\[is\] with God? let it not be!

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> for to Moses He saith, \`I will do
kindness to whom I do kindness, and I will have compassion on whom I
have compassion;'

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> so, then -- not of him who is willing,
nor of him who is running, but of God who is doing kindness:

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> for the Writing saith to Pharaoh -- \`For
this very thing I did raise thee up, that I might shew in thee My power,
and that My name might be declared in all the land;'

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> so, then, to whom He willeth, He doth
kindness, and to whom He willeth, He doth harden.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Thou wilt say, then, to me, \`Why yet
doth He find fault? for His counsel who hath resisted?'

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> nay, but, O man, who art thou that art
answering again to God? shall the thing formed say to Him who did form
\[it\], Why me didst thou make thus?

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> hath not the potter authority over the
clay, out of the same lump to make the one vessel to honour, and the one
to dishonour?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And if God, willing to shew the wrath and
to make known His power, did endure, in much long suffering, vessels of
wrath fitted for destruction,

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> and that He might make known the riches
of His glory on vessels of kindness, that He before prepared for glory,
whom also He did call -- us --

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> not only out of Jews, but also out of
nations,

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> as also in Hosea He saith, \`I will call
what \[is\] not My people -- My people; and her not beloved -- Beloved,

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> and it shall be -- in the place where it
was said to them, Ye \[are\] not My people; there they shall be called
sons of the living God.'

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Isaiah doth cry concerning Israel,
\`If the number of the sons of Israel may be as the sand of the sea, the
remnant shall be saved;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> for a matter He is finishing, and is
cutting short in righteousness, because a matter cut short will the Lord
do upon the land.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> and according as Isaiah saith before,
\`Except the Lord of Sabaoth did leave to us a seed, as Sodom we had
become, and as Gomorrah we had been made like.'

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> What, then, shall we say? that nations
who are not pursuing righteousness did attain to righteousness, and
righteousness that \[is\] of faith,

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> and Israel, pursuing a law of
righteousness, at a law of righteousness did not arrive;

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> wherefore? because -- not by faith, but
as by works of law; for they did stumble at the stone of stumbling,

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> according as it hath been written, \`Lo,
I place in Sion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence; and every
one who is believing thereon shall not be ashamed.'

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Brethren, the pleasure indeed of my
heart, and my supplication that \[is\] to God for Israel, is -- for
salvation;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> for I bear them testimony that they have
a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> for not knowing the righteousness of God,
and their own righteousness seeking to establish, to the righteousness
of God they did not submit.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For Christ is an end of law for
righteousness to every one who is believing,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> for Moses doth describe the righteousness
that \[is\] of the law, that, \`The man who did them shall live in
them,'

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and the righteousness of faith doth thus
speak: \`Thou mayest not say in thine heart, Who shall go up to the
heaven,' that is, Christ to bring down?

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> or, \`Who shall go down to the abyss,'
that is, Christ out of the dead to bring up.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But what doth it say? \`Nigh thee is the
saying -- in thy mouth, and in thy heart:' that is, the saying of the
faith, that we preach;

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> that if thou mayest confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and mayest believe in thy heart that God did raise
him out of the dead, thou shalt be saved,

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> for with the heart doth \[one\] believe
to righteousness, and with the mouth is confession made to salvation;

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> for the Writing saith, \`Every one who
is believing on him shall not be ashamed,'

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> for there is no difference between Jew
and Greek, for the same Lord of all \[is\] rich to all those calling
upon Him,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> for every one -- whoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord, he shall be saved.'

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> How then shall they call upon \[him\]
in whom they did not believe? and how shall they believe \[on him\] of
whom they did not hear? and how shall they hear apart from one
preaching?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> and how shall they preach, if they may
not be sent? according as it hath been written, \`How beautiful the feet
of those proclaiming good tidings of peace, of those proclaiming good
tidings of the good things!'

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> But they were not all obedient to the
good tidings, for Isaiah saith, \`Lord, who did give credence to our
report?'

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> so then the faith \[is\] by a report,
and the report through a saying of God,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> but I say, Did they not hear? yes,
indeed -- \`to all the earth their voice went forth, and to the ends of
the habitable world their sayings.'

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But I say, Did not Israel know? first
Moses saith, \`I will provoke you to jealousy by \[that which is\] not a
nation; by an unintelligent nation I will anger you,'

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> and Isaiah is very bold, and saith, \`I
was found by those not seeking Me; I became manifest to those not
inquiring after Me;'

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> and unto Israel He saith, \`All the day
I did stretch out My hands unto a people unbelieving and gainsaying.'

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I say, then, Did God cast away His
people? let it not be! for I also am an Israelite, of the seed of
Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin:

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> God did not cast away His people whom He
knew before; have ye not known -- in Elijah -- what the Writing saith?
how he doth plead with God concerning Israel, saying,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> \`Lord, Thy prophets they did kill, and
Thy altars they dug down, and I was left alone, and they seek my life;'

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> but what saith the divine answer to him?
\`I left to Myself seven thousand men, who did not bow a knee to Baal.'

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> So then also in the present time a
remnant according to the choice of grace there hath been;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and if by grace, no more of works,
otherwise the grace becometh no more grace; and if of works, it is no
more grace, otherwise the work is no more work.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> What then? What Israel doth seek after,
this it did not obtain, and the chosen did obtain, and the rest were
hardened,

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> according as it hath been written, \`God
gave to them a spirit of deep sleep, eyes not to see, and ears not to
hear,' -- unto this very day,

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> and David saith, \`Let their table become
for a snare, and for a trap, and for a stumbling-block, and for a
recompense to them;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> let their eyes be darkened -- not to
behold, and their back do Thou always bow down.'

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> I say, then, Did they stumble that they
might fall? let it not be! but by their fall the salvation \[is\] to the
nations, to arouse them to jealousy;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and if the fall of them \[is\] the
riches of a world, and the diminution of them the riches of nations, how
much more the fulness of them?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For to you I speak -- to the nations --
inasmuch as I am indeed an apostle of nations, my ministration I do
glorify;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> if by any means I shall arouse to
jealousy mine own flesh, and shall save some of them,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> for if the casting away of them \[is\]
a reconciliation of the world, what the reception -- if not life out of
the dead?

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> and if the first-fruit \[is\] holy, the
lump also; and if the root \[is\] holy, the branches also.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And if certain of the branches were
broken off, and thou, being a wild olive tree, wast graffed in among
them, and a fellow-partaker of the root and of the fatness of the olive
tree didst become --

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> do not boast against the branches; and
if thou dost boast, thou dost not bear the root, but the root thee!

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Thou wilt say, then, \`The branches
were broken off, that I might be graffed in;' right!

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> by unbelief they were broken off, and
thou hast stood by faith; be not high-minded, but be fearing;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> for if God the natural branches did not
spare -- lest perhaps He also shall not spare thee.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Lo, then, goodness and severity of God
-- upon those indeed who fell, severity; and upon thee, goodness, if
thou mayest remain in the goodness, otherwise, thou also shalt be cut
off.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And those also, if they may not remain
in unbelief, shall be graffed in, for God is able again to graff them
in;

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> for if thou, out of the olive tree,
wild by nature, wast cut out, and, contrary to nature, wast graffed into
a good olive tree, how much rather shall they, who \[are\] according to
nature, be graffed into their own olive tree?

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> For I do not wish you to be ignorant,
brethren, of this secret -- that ye may not be wise in your own conceits
-- that hardness in part to Israel hath happened till the fulness of the
nations may come in;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and so all Israel shall be saved,
according as it hath been written, \`There shall come forth out of Sion
he who is delivering, and he shall turn away impiety from Jacob,

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> and this to them \[is\] the covenant
from Me, when I may take away their sins.'

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> As regards, indeed, the good tidings,
\[they are\] enemies on your account; and as regards the choice --
beloved on account of the fathers;

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> for unrepented of \[are\] the gifts and
the calling of God;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> for as ye also once did not believe in
God, and now did find kindness by the unbelief of these:

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> so also these now did not believe, that
in your kindness they also may find kindness;

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> for God did shut up together the whole
to unbelief, that to the whole He might do kindness.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> O depth of riches, and wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable His judgments, and untraceable His
ways!

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> for who did know the mind of the Lord?
or who did become His counsellor?

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> or who did first give to Him, and it
shall be given back to him again?

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> because of Him, and through Him, and to
Him \[are\] the all things; to Him \[is\] the glory -- to the ages.
Amen.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> I call upon you, therefore, brethren,
through the compassions of God, to present your bodies a sacrifice --
living, sanctified, acceptable to God -- your intelligent service;

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> and be not conformed to this age, but be
transformed by the renewing of your mind, for your proving what \[is\]
the will of God -- the good, and acceptable, and perfect.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For I say, through the grace that was
given to me, to every one who is among you, not to think above what it
behoveth to think; but to think so as to think wisely, as to each God
did deal a measure of faith,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> for as in one body we have many members,
and all the members have not the same office,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> so we, the many, one body are in Christ,
and members each one of one another.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And having gifts, different according to
the grace that was given to us; whether prophecy -- \`According to the
proportion of faith!'

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> or ministration -- \`In the
ministration!' or he who is teaching -- \`In the teaching!'

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> or he who is exhorting -- \`In the
exhortation!' he who is sharing -- \`In simplicity!' he who is leading
-- \`In diligence?' he who is doing kindness -- \`In cheerfulness.'

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> The love unfeigned: abhorring the evil;
cleaving to the good;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> in the love of brethren, to one another
kindly affectioned: in the honour going before one another;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> in the diligence not slothful; in the
spirit fervent; the Lord serving;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> in the hope rejoicing; in the
tribulation enduring; in the prayer persevering;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> to the necessities of the saints
communicating; the hospitality pursuing.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Bless those persecuting you; bless, and
curse not;

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> to rejoice with the rejoicing, and to
weep with the weeping,

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> of the same mind one toward another,
not minding the high things, but with the lowly going along; become not
wise in your own conceit;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> giving back to no one evil for evil;
providing right things before all men.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> If possible -- so far as in you -- with
all men being in peace;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> not avenging yourselves, beloved, but
give place to the wrath, for it hath been written, \`Vengeance \[is\]
Mine,

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> I will recompense again, saith the
Lord;' if, then, thine enemy doth hunger, feed him; if he doth thirst,
give him drink; for this doing, coals of fire thou shalt heap upon his
head;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Be not overcome by the evil, but
overcome, in the good, the evil.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let every soul to the higher authorities
be subject, for there is no authority except from God, and the
authorities existing are appointed by God,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> so that he who is setting himself against
the authority, against God's ordinance hath resisted; and those
resisting, to themselves shall receive judgment.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> For those ruling are not a terror to the
good works, but to the evil; and dost thou wish not to be afraid of the
authority? that which is good be doing, and thou shalt have praise from
it,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> for of God it is a ministrant to thee for
good; and if that which is evil thou mayest do, be fearing, for not in
vain doth it bear the sword; for of God it is a ministrant, an avenger
for wrath to him who is doing that which is evil.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Wherefore it is necessary to be subject,
not only because of the wrath, but also because of the conscience,

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> for because of this also pay ye tribute;
for servants of God they are, on this very thing attending continually;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> render, therefore, to all \[their\] dues;
to whom tribute, the tribute; to whom custom, the custom; to whom fear,
the fear; to whom honour, the honour.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> To no one owe anything, except to love
one another; for he who is loving the other -- law he hath fulfilled,

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> for, \`Thou shalt not commit adultery,
Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false
testimony, Thou shalt not covet;' and if there is any other command, in
this word it is summed up, in this: \`Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself;'

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> the love to the neighbor doth work no
ill; the love, therefore, \[is\] the fulness of law.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And this, knowing the time, that for
us, the hour already \[is\] to be aroused out of sleep, for now nearer
\[is\] our salvation than when we did believe;

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> the night did advance, and the day came
nigh; let us lay aside, therefore, the works of the darkness, and let us
put on the armour of the light;

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> as in day-time, let us walk becomingly;
not in revellings and drunkennesses, not in chamberings and
lasciviousnesses, not in strife and emulation;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and for the flesh take no forethought -- for desires.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And him who is weak in the faith receive
ye -- not to determinations of reasonings;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> one doth believe that he may eat all
things -- and he who is weak doth eat herbs;

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> let not him who is eating despise him who
is not eating: and let not him who is not eating judge him who is
eating, for God did receive him.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Thou -- who art thou that art judging
another's domestic? to his own master he doth stand or fall; and he
shall be made to stand, for God is able to make him stand.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> One doth judge one day above another, and
another doth judge every day \[alike\]; let each in his own mind be
fully assured.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He who is regarding the day, to the Lord
he doth regard \[it\], and he who is not regarding the day, to the Lord
he doth not regard \[it\]. He who is eating, to the Lord he doth eat,
for he doth give thanks to God; and he who is not eating, to the Lord he
doth not eat, and doth give thanks to God.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For none of us to himself doth live, and
none to himself doth die;

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> for both, if we may live, to the Lord we
live; if also we may die, to the Lord we die; both then if we may live,
also if we may die, we are the Lord's;

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> for because of this Christ both died and
rose again, and lived again, that both of dead and of living he may be
Lord.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And thou, why dost thou judge thy
brother? or again, thou, why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we
shall all stand at the tribunal of the Christ;

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> for it hath been written, \`I live!
saith the Lord -- to Me bow shall every knee, and every tongue shall
confess to God;'

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> so, then, each of us concerning himself
shall give reckoning to God;

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> no longer, therefore, may we judge one
another, but this judge ye rather, not to put a stumbling-stone before
the brother, or an offence.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I have known, and am persuaded, in the
Lord Jesus, that nothing \[is\] unclean of itself, except to him who is
reckoning anything to be unclean -- to that one \[it is\] unclean;

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and if through victuals thy brother is
grieved, no more dost thou walk according to love; do not with thy
victuals destroy that one for whom Christ died.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Let not, then, your good be evil spoken
of,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> for the reign of God is not eating and
drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> for he who in these things is serving
the Christ, \[is\] acceptable to God and approved of men.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> So, then, the things of peace may we
pursue, and the things of building up one another;

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> for the sake of victuals cast not down
the work of God; all things, indeed, \[are\] pure, but evil \[is\] to
the man who is eating through stumbling.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Right \[it is\] not to eat flesh, nor
to drink wine, nor to \[do anything\] in which thy brother doth stumble,
or is made to fall, or is weak.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Thou hast faith! to thyself have \[it\]
before God; happy is he who is not judging himself in what he doth
approve,

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> and he who is making a difference, if
he may eat, hath been condemned, because \[it is\] not of faith; and all
that \[is\] not of faith is sin.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And we ought -- we who are strong -- to
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves;

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> for let each one of us please the
neighbor for good, unto edification,

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> for even the Christ did not please
himself, but, according as it hath been written, \`The reproaches of
those reproaching Thee fell upon me;'

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> for, as many things as were written
before, for our instruction were written before, that through the
endurance, and the exhortation of the Writings, we might have the hope.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And may the God of the endurance, and of
the exhortation, give to you to have the same mind toward one another,
according to Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> that with one accord -- with one mouth --
ye may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> wherefore receive ye one another,
according as also the Christ did receive us, to the glory of God.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And I say Jesus Christ to have become a
ministrant of circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises
to the fathers,

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and the nations for kindness to glorify
God, according as it hath been written, \`Because of this I will confess
to Thee among nations, and to Thy name I will sing praise,'

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> and again it saith, \`Rejoice ye
nations, with His people;'

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> and again, \`Praise the Lord, all ye
nations; and laud Him, all ye peoples;'

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> and again, Isaiah saith, \`There shall
be the root of Jesse, and he who is rising to rule nations -- upon him
shall nations hope;'

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> and the God of the hope shall fill you
with all joy and peace in the believing, for your abounding in the hope
in power of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And I am persuaded, my brethren -- I
myself also -- concerning you, that ye yourselves also are full of
goodness, having been filled with all knowledge, able also one another
to admonish;

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> and the more boldly I did write to you,
brethren, in part, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is
given to me by God,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> for my being a servant of Jesus Christ
to the nations, acting as priest in the good news of God, that the
offering up of the nations may become acceptable, sanctified by the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I have, then, a boasting in Christ
Jesus, in the things pertaining to God,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> for I will not dare to speak anything
of the things that Christ did not work through me, to obedience of
nations, by word and deed,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> in power of signs and wonders, in power
of the Spirit of God; so that I, from Jerusalem, and in a circle as far
as Illyricum, have fully preached the good news of the Christ;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> and so counting it honour to proclaim
good news, not where Christ was named -- that upon another's foundation
I might not build --

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> but according as it hath been written,
\`To whom it was not told concerning him, they shall see; and they who
have not heard, shall understand.'

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Wherefore, also, I was hindered many
times from coming unto you,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> and now, no longer having place in
these parts, and having a longing to come unto you for many years,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> when I may go on to Spain I will come
unto you, for I hope in going through, to see you, and by you to be set
forward thither, if of you first, in part, I shall be filled.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And, now, I go on to Jerusalem,
ministering to the saints;

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> for it pleased Macedonia and Achaia
well to make a certain contribution for the poor of the saints who
\[are\] in Jerusalem;

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> for it pleased well, and their debtors
they are, for if in their spiritual things the nations did participate,
they ought also, in the fleshly things, to minister to them.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> This, then, having finished, and having
sealed to them this fruit, I will return through you, to Spain;

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> and I have known that coming unto you
-- in the fulness of the blessing of the good news of Christ I shall
come.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And I call upon you, brethren, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the love of the Spirit, to strive
together with me in the prayers for me unto God,

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> that I may be delivered from those not
believing in Judea, and that my ministration, that \[is\] for Jerusalem,
may become acceptable to the saints;

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> that in joy I may come unto you,
through the will of God, and may be refreshed with you,

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> and the God of the peace \[be\] with
you all. Amen.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And I commend you to Phebe our sister --
being a ministrant of the assembly that \[is\] in Cenchrea --

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> that ye may receive her in the Lord, as
doth become saints, and may assist her in whatever matter she may have
need of you -- for she also became a leader of many, and of myself.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Salute Priscilla and Aquilas, my
fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus --

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> who for my life their own neck did lay
down, to whom not only I give thanks, but also all the assemblies of the
nations --

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> and the assembly at their house; salute
Epaenetus, my beloved, who is first-fruit of Achaia to Christ.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Salute Mary, who did labour much for us;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> salute Andronicus and Junias, my kindred,
and my fellow-captives, who are of note among the apostles, who also
have been in Christ before me.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Salute Amplias, my beloved in the Lord;

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> salute Arbanus, our fellow-workman in
Christ, and Stachys, my beloved;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> salute Apelles, the approved in Christ;
salute those of the \[household\] of Aristobulus;

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> salute Herodion, my kinsman; salute
those of the \[household\] of Narcissus, who are in the Lord;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> salute Tryphaena, and Tryphosa, who are
labouring in the Lord; salute Persis, the beloved, who did labour much
in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Salute Rufus, the choice one in the
Lord, and his mother and mine,

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas,
Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren with them;

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> salute Philologus, and Julias, Nereus,
and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints with them;

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> salute one another in a holy kiss; the
assemblies of Christ do salute you.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And I call upon you, brethren, to mark
those who the divisions and the stumbling-blocks, contrary to the
teaching that ye did learn, are causing, and turn ye away from them;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> for such our Lord Jesus Christ do not
serve, but their own belly; and through the good word and fair speech
they deceive the hearts of the harmless,

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> for your obedience did reach to all; I
rejoice, therefore, as regards you, and I wish you to be wise, indeed,
as to the good, and harmless as to the evil;

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> and the God of the peace shall bruise
the Adversary under your feet quickly; the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ \[be\] with you. Amen!

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Salute you do Timotheus, my
fellow-workman, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kindred;

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> I Tertius salute you (who wrote the
letter) in the Lord;

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> salute you doth Gaius, my host, and of
the whole assembly; salute you doth Erastus, the steward of the city,
and Quartus the brother,

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
\[be\] with you all. Amen.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And to Him who is able to establish
you, according to my good news, and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the secret, in the times of the ages
having been kept silent,

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> and now having been made manifest,
also, through prophetic writings, according to a command of the
age-during God, having been made known to all the nations for obedience
of faith --

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> to the only wise God, through Jesus
Christ, to him \[be\] glory to the ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians](co1)
