[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ecc)  [Next](isa) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Song of Solomon

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The Song of Songs, that \[is\] Solomon's.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Let him kiss me with kisses of his mouth,
For better \[are\] thy loves than wine.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> For fragrance \[are\] thy perfumes good.
Perfume emptied out -- thy name, Therefore have virgins loved thee!

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Draw me: after thee we run, The king hath
brought me into his inner chambers, We do joy and rejoice in thee, We
mention thy loves more than wine, Uprightly they have loved thee!

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Dark \[am\] I, and comely, daughters of
Jerusalem, As tents of Kedar, as curtains of Solomon.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Fear me not, because I \[am\] very dark,
Because the sun hath scorched me, The sons of my mother were angry with
me, They made me keeper of the vineyards, My vineyard -- my own -- I
have not kept.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Declare to me, thou whom my soul hath
loved, Where thou delightest, Where thou liest down at noon, For why am
I as one veiled, By the ranks of thy companions?

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If thou knowest not, O fair among women,
Get thee forth by the traces of the flock, And feed thy kids by the
shepherds' dwellings!

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> To my joyous one in chariots of Pharaoh, I
have compared thee, my friend,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Comely have been thy cheeks with
garlands, Thy neck with chains.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Garlands of gold we do make for thee,
With studs of silver!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> While the king \[is\] in his circle, My
spikenard hath given its fragrance.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> A bundle of myrrh \[is\] my beloved to
me, Between my breasts it lodgeth.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> A cluster of cypress \[is\] my beloved to
me, In the vineyards of En-Gedi!

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Lo, thou \[art\] fair, my friend, Lo,
thou \[art\] fair, thine eyes \[are\] doves!

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Lo, thou \[art\] fair, my love, yea,
pleasant, Yea, our couch \[is\] green,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The beams of our houses \[are\] cedars,
Our rafters \[are\] firs, I \[am\] a rose of Sharon, a lily of the
valleys!

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> As a lily among the thorns,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So \[is\] my friend among the daughters!

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> As a citron among trees of the forest, So
\[is\] my beloved among the sons, In his shade I delighted, and sat
down, And his fruit \[is\] sweet to my palate.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He hath brought me in unto a house of wine,
And his banner over me \[is\] love,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Sustain me with grape-cakes, Support me
with citrons, for I \[am\] sick with love.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> His left hand \[is\] under my head, And his
right doth embrace me.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I have adjured you, daughters of Jerusalem,
By the roes or by the hinds of the field, Stir not up nor wake the love
till she please!

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The voice of my beloved! lo, this -- he is
coming, Leaping on the mountains, skipping on the hills.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> My beloved \[is\] like to a roe, Or to a
young one of the harts. Lo, this -- he is standing behind our wall,
Looking from the windows, Blooming from the lattice.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> My beloved hath answered and said to me,
\`Rise up, my friend, my fair one, and come away,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For lo, the winter hath passed by, The
rain hath passed away -- it hath gone.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The flowers have appeared in the earth,
The time of the singing hath come, And the voice of the turtle was heard
in our land,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The fig-tree hath ripened her green figs,
And the sweet-smelling vines have given forth fragrance, Rise, come, my
friend, my fair one, yea, come away.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> My dove, in clefts of the rock, In a
secret place of the ascent, Cause me to see thine appearance, Cause me
to hear thy voice, For thy voice \[is\] sweet, and thy appearance
comely.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Seize ye for us foxes, Little foxes --
destroyers of vineyards, Even our sweet-smelling vineyards.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> My beloved \[is\] mine, and I \[am\] his,
Who is delighting among the lilies,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Till the day doth break forth, And the
shadows have fled away, Turn, be like, my beloved, To a roe, or to a
young one of the harts, On the mountains of separation!

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> On my couch by night, I sought him whom my
soul hath loved; I sought him, and I found him not!

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> -- Pray, let me rise, and go round the
city, In the streets and in the broad places, I seek him whom my soul
hath loved! -- I sought him, and I found him not.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The watchmen have found me, (Who are going
round about the city), \`Him whom my soul have loved saw ye?'

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But a little I passed on from them, Till I
found him whom my soul hath loved! I seized him, and let him not go,
Till I brought him in unto the house of my mother -- And the chamber of
her that conceived me.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> I have adjured you, daughters of Jerusalem,
By the roes or by the hinds of the field, Stir not up nor wake the love
till she please!

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Who \[is\] this coming up from the
wilderness, Like palm-trees of smoke, Perfumed \[with\] myrrh and
frankincense, From every powder of the merchant?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Lo, his couch, that \[is\] Solomon's, Sixty
mighty ones \[are\] around it, Of the mighty of Israel,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> All of them holding sword, taught of
battle, Each his sword by his thigh, for fear at night.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> A palanquin king Solomon made for himself,
Of the wood of Lebanon,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Its pillars he made of silver, Its bottom
of gold, its seat of purple, Its midst lined \[with\] love, By the
daughters of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Go forth, and look, ye daughters of Zion,
On king Solomon, with the crown, With which his mother crowned him, In
the day of his espousals, And in the day of the joy of his heart!

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Lo, thou \[art\] fair, my friend, lo, thou
\[art\] fair, Thine eyes \[are\] doves behind thy veil, Thy hair as a
row of the goats That have shone from mount Gilead,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Thy teeth as a row of the shorn ones That
have come up from the washing, For all of them are forming twins, And a
bereaved one is not among them.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> As a thread of scarlet \[are\] thy lips,
And thy speech \[is\] comely, As the work of the pomegranate \[is\] thy
temple behind thy veil,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> As the tower of David \[is\] thy neck,
built for an armoury, The chief of the shields are hung on it, All
shields of the mighty.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Thy two breasts \[are\] as two fawns, Twins
of a roe, that are feeding among lilies.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Till the day doth break forth, And the
shadows have fled away, I will get me unto the mountain of myrrh, And
unto the hill of frankincense.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Thou \[art\] all fair, my friend, And a
blemish there is not in thee. Come from Lebanon, O spouse,

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Come from Lebanon, come thou in. Look from
the top of Amana, From the top of Shenir and Hermon, From the
habitations of lions, From the mountains of leopards.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Thou hast emboldened me, my sister-spouse,
Emboldened me with one of thine eyes, With one chain of thy neck.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How wonderful have been thy loves, my
sister-spouse, How much better have been thy loves than wine, And the
fragrance of thy perfumes than all spices.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Thy lips drop honey, O spouse, Honey and
milk \[are\] under thy tongue, And the fragrance of thy garments \[Is\]
as the fragrance of Lebanon.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> A garden shut up \[is\] my sister-spouse,
A spring shut up -- a fountain sealed.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Thy shoots a paradise of pomegranates,
With precious fruits,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Cypresses with nard -- nard and saffron,
Cane and cinnamon, With all trees of frankincense, Myrrh and aloes, with
all chief spices.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> A fount of gardens, a well of living
waters, And flowings from Lebanon!

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Awake, O north wind, and come, O south,
Cause my garden to breathe forth, its spices let flow, Let my beloved
come to his garden, And eat its pleasant fruits!

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> I have come in to my garden, my
sister-spouse, I have plucked my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my
comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat, O friends,
drink, Yea, drink abundantly, O beloved ones!

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> I am sleeping, but my heart waketh: The
sound of my beloved knocking! \`Open to me, my sister, my friend, My
dove, my perfect one, For my head is filled \[with\] dew, My locks
\[with\] drops of the night.'

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have put off my coat, how do I put it on?
I have washed my feet, how do I defile them?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> My beloved sent his hand from the net-work,
And my bowels were moved for him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I rose to open to my beloved, And my hands
dropped myrrh, Yea, my fingers flowing myrrh, On the handles of the
lock.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I opened to my beloved, But my beloved
withdrew -- he passed on, My soul went forth when he spake, I sought
him, and found him not. I called him, and he answered me not.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The watchmen who go round about the city,
Found me, smote me, wounded me, Keepers of the walls lifted up my veil
from off me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> I have adjured you, daughters of Jerusalem,
If ye find my beloved -- What do ye tell him? that I \[am\] sick with
love!

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> What \[is\] thy beloved above \[any\]
beloved, O fair among women? What \[is\] thy beloved above \[any\]
beloved, That thus thou hast adjured us?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> My beloved \[is\] clear and ruddy,
Conspicuous above a myriad!

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> His head \[is\] pure gold -- fine gold,
His locks flowing, dark as a raven,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> His eyes as doves by streams of water,
Washing in milk, sitting in fulness.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> His cheeks as a bed of the spice, towers
of perfumes, His lips \[are\] lilies, dropping flowing myrrh,

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> His hands rings of gold, set with beryl,
His heart bright ivory, covered with sapphires,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> His limbs pillars of marble, Founded on
sockets of fine gold, His appearance as Lebanon, choice as the cedars.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> His mouth is sweetness -- and all of him
desirable, This \[is\] my beloved, and this my friend, O daughters of
Jerusalem!

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Whither hath thy beloved gone, O fair among
women? Whither hath thy beloved turned, And we seek him with thee?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> My beloved went down to his garden, To the
beds of the spice, To delight himself in the gardens, and to gather
lilies.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> I \[am\] my beloved's, and my beloved
\[is\] mine, Who is delighting himself among the lilies.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Fair \[art\] thou, my friend, as Tirzah,
Comely as Jerusalem, Awe-inspiring as bannered hosts.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Turn round thine eyes from before me,
Because they have made me proud. Thy hair \[is\] as a row of the goats,
That have shone from Gilead,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Thy teeth as a row of the lambs, That have
come up from the washing, Because all of them are forming twins, And a
bereaved one is not among them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> As the work of the pomegranate \[is\] thy
temple behind thy veil.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Sixty are queens, and eighty concubines,
And virgins without number.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> One is my dove, my perfect one, One she
\[is\] of her mother, The choice one she \[is\] of her that bare her,
Daughters saw, and pronounce her happy, Queens and concubines, and they
praise her.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> \`Who \[is\] this that is looking forth
as morning, Fair as the moon -- clear as the sun, Awe-inspiring as
bannered hosts?'

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Unto a garden of nuts I went down, To
look on the buds of the valley, To see whither the vine had flourished,
The pomegranates had blossomed --

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> I knew not my soul, It made me --
chariots of my people Nadib.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Return, return, O Shulammith! Return,
return, and we look upon thee. What do ye see in Shulammith?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> As the chorus of \`Mahanaim.' How beautiful
were thy feet with sandals, O daughter of Nadib. The turnings of thy
sides \[are\] as ornaments, Work of the hands of an artificer.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Thy waist \[is\] a basin of roundness, It
lacketh not the mixture, Thy body a heap of wheat, fenced with lilies,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Thy two breasts as two young ones, twins of
a roe,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Thy neck as a tower of the ivory, Thine
eyes pools in Heshbon, near the gate of Bath-Rabbim, Thy face as a tower
of Lebanon looking to Damascus,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thy head upon thee as Carmel, And the locks
of thy head as purple, The king is bound with the flowings!

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> How fair and how pleasant hast thou been, O
love, in delights.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> This thy stature hath been like to a palm,
And thy breasts to clusters.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> I said, \`Let me go up on the palm, Let me
lay hold on its boughs, Yea, let thy breasts be, I pray thee, as
clusters of the vine, And the fragrance of thy face as citrons,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And thy palate as the good wine --' Flowing
to my beloved in uprightness, Strengthening the lips of the aged!

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> I \[am\] my beloved's, and on me \[is\]
his desire.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Come, my beloved, we go forth to the
field,

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> We lodge in the villages, we go early to
the vineyards, We see if the vine hath flourished, The sweet
smelling-flower hath opened. The pomegranates have blossomed, There do I
give to thee my loves;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The mandrakes have given fragrance, And
at our openings all pleasant things, New, yea, old, my beloved, I laid
up for thee!

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Who doth make thee as a brother to me,
Sucking the breasts of my mother? I find thee without, I kiss thee, Yea,
they do not despise me,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I lead thee, I bring thee in unto my
mother's house, She doth teach me, I cause thee to drink of the perfumed
wine, Of the juice of my pomegranate,

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> His left hand \[is\] under my head, And his
right doth embrace me.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I have adjured you, daughters of Jerusalem,
How ye stir up, And how ye wake the love till she please!

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Who \[is\] this coming from the wilderness,
Hasting herself for her beloved? Under the citron-tree I have waked
thee, There did thy mother pledge thee, There she gave a pledge \[that\]
bare thee.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Set me as a seal on thy heart, as a seal on
thine arm, For strong as death is love, Sharp as Sheol is jealousy, Its
burnings \[are\] burnings of fire, a flame of Jah!

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Many waters are not able to quench the
love, And floods do not wash it away. If one give all the wealth of his
house for love, Treading down -- they tread upon it.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> We have a little sister, and breasts she
hath not, What do we do for our sister, In the day that it is told of
her?

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> If she is a wall, we build by her a palace
of silver. And if she is a door, We fashion by her board-work of cedar.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> I \[am\] a wall, and my breasts as
towers, Then I have been in his eyes as one finding peace.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Solomon hath a vineyard in Baal-Hamon, He
hath given the vineyard to keepers, Each bringeth for its fruit a
thousand silverlings;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> My vineyard -- my own -- is before me,
The thousand \[is\] for thee, O Solomon. And the two hundred for those
keeping its fruit. O dweller in gardens!

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The companions are attending to thy
voice, Cause me to hear. Flee, my beloved, and be like to a roe,

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Or to a young one of the harts on
mountains of spices!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah](isa)
