[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th2)  [Next](ti2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 1 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, according
to a command of God our Saviour, and of the Lord Jesus Christ our hope,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to Timotheus -- genuine child in faith:
Grace, kindness, peace, from God our Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> according as I did exhort thee to remain in
Ephesus -- I going on to Macedonia -- that thou mightest charge certain
not to teach any other thing,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> nor to give heed to fables and endless
genealogies, that cause questions rather than the building up of God
that is in faith: --

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the end of the charge is love out of a
pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> from which certain, having swerved, did
turn aside to vain discourse,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> willing to be teachers of law, not
understanding either the things they say, nor concerning what they
asseverate,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> and we have known that the law \[is\] good,
if any one may use it lawfully;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> having known this, that for a righteous man
law is not set, but for lawless and insubordinate persons, ungodly and
sinners, impious and profane, parricides and matricides, men-slayers,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> whoremongers, sodomites, men-stealers,
liars, perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that to sound
doctrine is adverse,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> according to the good news of the glory
of the blessed God, with which I was entrusted.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And I give thanks to him who enabled me
-- Christ Jesus our Lord -- that he did reckon me stedfast, having put
\[me\] to the ministration,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> who before was speaking evil, and
persecuting, and insulting, but I found kindness, because, being
ignorant, I did \[it\] in unbelief,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and exceedingly abound did the grace of
our Lord, with faith and love that \[is\] in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> stedfast \[is\] the word, and of all
acceptation worthy, that Christ Jesus came to the world to save sinners
-- first of whom I am;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> but because of this I found kindness,
that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a
pattern of those about to believe on him to life age-during:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> and to the King of the ages, the
incorruptible, invisible, only wise God, \[is\] honour and glory -- to
the ages of the ages! Amen.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> This charge I commit to thee, child
Timotheus, according to the prophesies that went before upon thee, that
thou mayest war in them the good warfare,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> having faith and a good conscience, which
certain having thrust away, concerning the faith did make shipwreck,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> of whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom
I did deliver to the Adversary, that they might be instructed not to
speak evil.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I exhort, then, first of all, there be made
supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings, for all men:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> for kings, and all who are in authority,
that a quiet and peaceable life we may lead in all piety and gravity,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> for this \[is\] right and acceptable before
God our Saviour,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> who doth will all men to be saved, and to
come to the full knowledge of the truth;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> for one \[is\] God, one also \[is\]
mediator of God and of men, the man Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who did give himself a ransom for all --
the testimony in its own times --

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> in regard to which I was set a preacher and
apostle -- truth I say in Christ, I do not lie -- a teacher of nations,
in faith and truth.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I wish, therefore, that men pray in every
place, lifting up kind hands, apart from anger and reasoning;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> in like manner also the women, in becoming
apparel, with modesty and sobriety to adorn themselves, not in braided
hair, or gold, or pearls, or garments of great price,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> but -- which becometh women professing
godly piety -- through good works.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Let a woman in quietness learn in all
subjection,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and a woman I do not suffer to teach, nor
to rule a husband, but to be in quietness,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> for Adam was first formed, then Eve,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and Adam was not deceived, but the woman,
having been deceived, into transgression came,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and she shall be saved through the
child-bearing, if they remain in faith, and love, and sanctification,
with sobriety.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Stedfast \[is\] the word: If any one the
oversight doth long for, a right work he desireth;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> it behoveth, therefore, the overseer to be
blameless, of one wife a husband, vigilant, sober, decent, a friend of
strangers, apt to teach,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> not given to wine, not a striker, not given
to filthy lucre, but gentle, not contentious, not a lover of money,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> his own house leading well, having children
in subjection with all gravity,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> (and if any one his own house \[how\] to
lead hath not known, how an assembly of God shall he take care of?)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> not a new convert, lest having been puffed
up he may fall to a judgment of the devil;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> and it behoveth him also to have a good
testimony from those without, that he may not fall into reproach and a
snare of the devil.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Ministrants -- in like manner grave, not
double-tongued, not given to much wine, not given to filthy lucre,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> having the secret of the faith in a pure
conscience,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and let these also first be proved, then
let them minister, being unblameable.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Women -- in like manner grave, not false
accusers, vigilant, faithful in all things.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Ministrants -- let them be of one wife
husbands; the children leading well, and their own houses,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> for those who did minister well a good
step to themselves do acquire, and much boldness in faith that \[is\] in
Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> These things I write to thee, hoping to
come unto thee soon,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and if I delay, that thou mayest know how
it behoveth \[thee\] to conduct thyself in the house of God, which is an
assembly of the living God -- a pillar and foundation of the truth,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> and, confessedly, great is the secret of
piety -- God was manifested in flesh, declared righteous in spirit, seen
by messengers, preached among nations, believed on in the world, taken
up in glory!

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the Spirit expressly speaketh, that in
latter times shall certain fall away from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits and teachings of demons,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> in hypocrisy speaking lies, being seared in
their own conscience,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> forbidding to marry -- to abstain from
meats that God created to be received with thanksgiving by those
believing and acknowledging the truth,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> because every creature of God \[is\] good,
and nothing \[is\] to be rejected, with thanksgiving being received,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> for it is sanctified through the word of
God and intercession.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> These things placing before the brethren,
thou shalt be a good ministrant of Jesus Christ, being nourished by the
words of the faith, and of the good teaching, which thou didst follow
after,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> and the profane and old women's fables
reject thou, and exercise thyself unto piety,

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> for the bodily exercise is unto little
profit, and the piety is to all things profitable, a promise having of
the life that now is, and of that which is coming;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> stedfast \[is\] the word, and of all
acceptation worthy;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for for this we both labour and are
reproached, because we hope on the living God, who is Saviour of all men
-- especially of those believing.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Charge these things, and teach;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> let no one despise thy youth, but a
pattern become thou of those believing in word, in behaviour, in love,
in spirit, in faith, in purity;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> till I come, give heed to the reading, to
the exhortation, to the teaching;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> be not careless of the gift in thee, that
was given thee through prophecy, with laying on of the hands of the
eldership;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> of these things be careful; in these
things be, that thy advancement may be manifest in all things;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> take heed to thyself, and to the
teaching; remain in them, for this thing doing, both thyself thou shalt
save, and those hearing thee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> An aged person thou mayest not rebuke, but
be entreating as a father; younger persons as brethren;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> aged women as mothers, younger ones as
sisters -- in all purity;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> honour widows who are really widows;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and if any widow have children or
grandchildren, let them learn first to their own house to show piety,
and to give back a recompense to the parents, for this is right and
acceptable before God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And she who is really a widow and desolate,
hath hoped upon God, and doth remain in the supplications and in the
prayers night and day,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> and she who is given to luxury, living --
hath died;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> and these things charge, that they may be
blameless;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> and if any one for his own -- and
especially for those of the household -- doth not provide, the faith he
hath denied, and than an unbeliever he is worse.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> A widow -- let her not be enrolled under
sixty years of age, having been a wife of one husband,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> in good works being testified to: if she
brought up children, if she entertained strangers, if saints' feet she
washed, if those in tribulation she relieved, if every good work she
followed after;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> and younger widows be refusing, for when
they may revel against the Christ, they wish to marry,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> having judgment, because the first faith
they did cast away,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and at the same time also, they learn
\[to be\] idle, going about the houses; and not only idle, but also
tattlers and busybodies, speaking the things they ought not;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I wish, therefore, younger ones to marry,
to bear children, to be mistress of the house, to give no occasion to
the opposer to reviling;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> for already certain did turn aside after
the Adversary.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any believing man or believing woman
have widows, let them relieve them, and let not the assembly be
burdened, that those really widows it may relieve.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> The well-leading elders of double honour
let them be counted worthy, especially those labouring in word and
teaching,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> for the Writing saith, \`An ox treading
out thou shalt not muzzle,' and \`Worthy \[is\] the workman of his
reward.'

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Against an elder an accusation receive
not, except upon two or three witnesses.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Those sinning, reprove before all, that
the others also may have fear;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> I testify fully, before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the choice messengers, that these things thou mayest
keep, without forejudging, doing nothing by partiality.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Be laying hands quickly on no one, nor be
having fellowship with sins of others; be keeping thyself pure;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> no longer be drinking water, but a little
wine be using, because of thy stomach and of thine often infirmities;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> of certain men the sins are manifest
beforehand, leading before to judgment, and certain also they follow
after;

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> in like manner also the right works are
manifest beforehand, and those that are otherwise are not able to be
hid.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> As many as are servants under a yoke, their
own masters worthy of all honour let them reckon, that the name of God
and the teaching may not be evil spoken of;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> and those having believing masters, let
them not slight \[them\], because they are brethren, but rather let them
serve, because they are stedfast and beloved, who of the benefit are
partaking. These things be teaching and exhorting;

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> if any one be teaching otherwise, and do
not consent to sound words -- those of our Lord Jesus Christ -- and to
the teaching according to piety,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting
about questions and word-striving, out of which doth come envy, strife,
evil-speakings, evil-surmisings,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> wranglings of men wholly corrupted in mind,
and destitute of the truth, supposing the piety to be gain; depart from
such;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> but it is great gain -- the piety with
contentment;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> for nothing did we bring into the world --
\[it is\] manifest that we are able to carry nothing out;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> but having food and raiment -- with these
we shall suffice ourselves;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> and those wishing to be rich, do fall into
temptation and a snare, and many desires, foolish and hurtful, that sink
men into ruin and destruction,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> for a root of all the evils is the love
of money, which certain longing for did go astray from the faith, and
themselves did pierce through with many sorrows;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and thou, O man of God, these things
flee, and pursue righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, meekness;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> be striving the good strife of the faith,
be laying hold on the life age-during, to which also thou wast called,
and didst profess the right profession before many witnesses.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I charge thee, before God, who is making
all things alive, and of Christ Jesus, who did testify before Pontius
Pilate the right profession,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> that thou keep the command unspotted,
unblameable, till the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> which in His own times He shall shew --
the blessed and only potentate, the King of the kings and Lord of the
lords,

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> who only is having immortality, dwelling
in light unapproachable, whom no one of men did see, nor is able to see,
to whom \[is\] honour and might age-during! Amen.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Those rich in the present age charge thou
not to be high-minded, nor to hope in the uncertainty of riches, but in
the living God, who is giving to us all things richly for enjoyment; --

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> to do good, to be rich in good works, to
be ready to impart, willing to communicate,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> treasuring up to themselves a right
foundation for the time to come, that they may lay hold on the life
age-during.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> O Timotheus, the thing entrusted guard
thou, avoiding the profane vain-words and opposition of the
falsely-named knowledge,

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> which certain professing -- concerning
the faith did swerve; the grace \[is\] with you. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy](ti2)
