[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti2)  [Next](plm) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Titus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of
Jesus Christ, according to the faith of the choice ones of God, and an
acknowledging of truth that \[is\] according to piety,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> upon hope of life age-during, which God,
who doth not lie, did promise before times of ages,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> (and He manifested in proper times His
word,) in preaching, which I was entrusted with, according to a charge
of God our Saviour,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> to Titus -- true child according to a
common faith: Grace, kindness, peace, from God the Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ our Saviour!

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For this cause left I thee in Crete, that
the things lacking thou mayest arrange, and mayest set down in every
city elders, as I did appoint to thee;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> if any one is blameless, of one wife a
husband, having children stedfast, not under accusation of riotous
living or insubordinate --

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> for it behoveth the overseer to be
blameless, as God's steward, not self-pleased, nor irascible, not given
to wine, not a striker, not given to filthy lucre;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> but a lover of strangers, a lover of good
men, sober-minded, righteous, kind, self-controlled,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> holding -- according to the teaching -- to
the stedfast word, that he may be able also to exhort in the sound
teaching, and the gainsayers to convict;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> for there are many both insubordinate,
vain-talkers, and mind-deceivers -- especially they of the circumcision
--

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> whose mouth it behoveth to stop, who
whole households do overturn, teaching what things it behoveth not, for
filthy lucre's sake.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> A certain one of them, a prophet of their
own, said -- \`Cretans! always liars, evil beasts, lazy bellies!'

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> this testimony is true; for which cause
convict them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> not giving heed to Jewish fables and
commands of men, turning themselves away from the truth;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> all things, indeed, \[are\] pure to the
pure, and to the defiled and unstedfast \[is\] nothing pure, but of them
defiled \[are\] even the mind and the conscience;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> God they profess to know, and in the
works they deny \[Him\], being abominable, and disobedient, and unto
every good work disapproved.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And thou -- be speaking what doth become
the sound teaching;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> aged men to be temperate, grave, sober,
sound in the faith, in the love, in the endurance;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> aged women, in like manner, in deportment
as doth become sacred persons, not false accusers, to much wine not
enslaved, of good things teachers,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> that they may make the young women
sober-minded, to be lovers of \[their\] husbands, lovers of \[their\]
children,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> sober, pure, keepers of \[their own\]
houses, good, subject to their own husbands, that the word of God may
not be evil spoken of.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The younger men, in like manner, be
exhorting to be sober-minded;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> concerning all things thyself showing a
pattern of good works; in the teaching uncorruptedness, gravity,
incorruptibility,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> discourse sound, irreprehensible, that he
who is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having nothing evil to say
concerning you.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Servants -- to their own masters \[are\] to
be subject, in all things to be well-pleasing, not gainsaying,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> not purloining, but showing all good
stedfastness, that the teaching of God our Saviour they may adorn in all
things.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For the saving grace of God was
manifested to all men,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> teaching us, that denying the impiety and
the worldly desires, soberly and righteously and piously we may live in
the present age,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> waiting for the blessed hope and
manifestation of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> who did give himself for us, that he
might ransom us from all lawlessness, and might purify to himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> these things be speaking, and exhorting,
and convicting, with all charge; let no one despise thee!

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Remind them to be subject to principalities
and authorities, to obey rule, unto every good work to be ready,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> of no one to speak evil, not to be
quarrelsome -- gentle, showing all meekness to all men,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for we were once -- also we -- thoughtless,
disobedient, led astray, serving desires and pleasures manifold, in
malice and envy living, odious -- hating one another;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and when the kindness and the love to men
of God our Saviour did appear

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> (not by works that \[are\] in righteousness
that we did but according to His kindness,) He did save us, through a
bathing of regeneration, and a renewing of the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> which He poured upon us richly, through
Jesus Christ our Saviour,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> that having been declared righteous by His
grace, heirs we may become according to the hope of life age-during.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Stedfast \[is\] the word; and concerning
these things I counsel thee to affirm fully, that they may be
thoughtful, to be leading in good works -- who have believed God; these
are the good and profitable things to men,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and foolish questions, and genealogies, and
contentions, and strivings about law, stand away from -- for they are
unprofitable and vain.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> A sectarian man, after a first and second
admonition be rejecting,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> having known that he hath been subverted
who \[is\] such, and doth sin, being self-condemned.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or
Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis, for there to winter
I have determined.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Zenas the lawyer and Apollos bring
diligently on their way, that nothing to them may be lacking,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> and let them learn -- ours also -- to be
leading in good works to the necessary uses, that they may not be
unfruitful.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Salute thee do all those with me; salute
those loving us in faith; the grace \[is\] with you all!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon](plm)
