[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms05)  [Next](jms07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### 4

### MAN AND THE DEMONS

#### ATTACK

WE may well believe, as we go through this material, that people pay
dearly for their superstitions. It is difficult, of course, to judge the
emotional tone, the intensity of the terror which the medieval Jew
experienced in braving such a demon-ridden world. Our sources are wholly
impersonal; writing of an introspective nature was altogether unknown.
We can only conjecture on the basis of the chance personal comments that
wormed their way quite incidentally into a literature which was
primarily legalistic and exegetical. It is significant, for instance,
that a homely little book like the Yiddish
*Brantspiegel*,[1](jms25.htm#an_4_1) intended for the intimate
instruction of womenfolk, a book which certainly came closer to the folk
psyche than did the more formal writing of the period, singled out as
the foremost dangers to life and limb demons, evil spirits, wild animals
and evil men. "All the while," ran the pious injunction, "that her
husband is away from home the good wife should pray to God that He guard
and protect him from all untoward events and dangers, whether they be
from demons or evil spirits, wild animals or evil men." From such
remarks in works of this type or in a book like *Sefer Ḥasidim*, in
which a homely folk quality prevails, and from the anecdotes which
frequently accompany them, it is apparent that no place, no time, and no
man was exempt from the fear and the danger of spirit attack. The most
compelling evidence lies, however, in the countless devices that were
employed to ward off this danger, measures that entered intimately and
often unconsciously into the least aspect of Jewish life during the
Middle Ages.

Yet we must not imagine that this dread was so overwhelmingly oppressive
as to paralyze man, whose adaptability has been his mightiest weapon in
the struggle for survival. The invisibility of the demons was their most
terrible attribute, but yet, as the Talmud

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

sagely observed, it is fortunate that we are blind to their presence,
for if we should see them swarming about us, we must collapse from sheer
terror.[2](jms25.htm#an_4_2) Like all the other dangers attending life,
always implicit in the play of nature's forces, but fully realized only
at rare and fragmentary intervals, man learned to take this one too in
his stride, to accept it into his consciousness of the world, build his
frail breastworks against it, and proceed about his affairs. Demons, in
the practical business of living, were just one more uncomfortable
feature of a far from easy life.

Occasional remarks seem to minimize the danger. Thus one writer informs
us, "They are more God-fearing than men are . and should you ask why
they do so much harm, they harm no one without good cause; if a man does
not provoke them . . . he need have no fear." Prime provocation
consisted in forcing them to do one's will, by means of conjurations,
amulets, and the like. This was the strongest practical argument against
demon-magic, and we hear it reiterated time and again—the man who enters
into dealings with evil spirits will not escape them unscathed. Again
there is the ingenious polemic according to which the non-monotheistic
faith of "two certain peoples" lays them peculiarly open to demonic
attack, "but unlike theirs is the portion of Jacob, who believe in the
one God." But the implacable enmity of the spirits toward all mankind
was an axiom of demon lore.[3](jms25.htm#an_4_3) Superstition supported
this belief with a wealth of instance. Many anecdotes tell of unprovoked
physical attacks by the spirits; the man who is dogged by ill-luck is
the special prey of demons; the etiology of folk-medicine was primarily
demonic. The harm done by ill-chosen words and curses was traced
ultimately to the demons, as was the working of the evil eye. Demons
were believed to be the active agents in malevolent sorcery. In these
ways did folk-belief express its conviction that most of the evil that
man suffered was the work of his mortal enemies.

Man was in constant peril. If he dared to promenade alone he took his
life in his hands. But the risk was greater outside the bounds of a
settled community, and the requirement to accompany a traveller part of
the way on his journey was explained on this score. "One should not turn
back until the wayfarer can no longer be seen," read the injunction; the
act of escorting him and keeping one's gaze fixed on his retreating
figure as long as possible represented a sort of symbolic extension of
civilization to keep him company and protect him from "the beings that
rule uninhabited places." Of similar import

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

was the charm recorded by Joseph Hahn; his father, it seems, would stick
a splinter from the city gate into his hatband whenever he left on a
journey. "No doubt it was a charm for protection," the son correctly
surmised. The community accompanied him on his travels by proxy. The
superstitious fear of interrupting a journey and returning home was no
doubt based on an analogous line of reason: the forces of the outside
world might thus be introduced into the home, and with them, ill-luck.
Therefore, "once a man has set out, if he has forgotten something, he
must not re-enter his house, but should stand outside and ask to have it
handed out to him."

Night time in particular is spirit time. When the mysterious dim of the
night settles over the earth the demons, dwellers in darkness, bestir
themselves. *Mazzikim* and *lilin*, *lutins* and *faes*, all flutter out
of their hiding places. Therefore, liquids left standing overnight must
not be drunk, nor should one drink from a well at night, for the demons
may have imbibed of them. Foods placed under a bed for safekeeping
during the night are undoubtedly contaminated by evil spirits; to
partake of them is to court trouble. Even a covering of iron (a potent
anti-demonic agent) is no security against nocturnal invasion. Similarly
garlic, or onions, or eggs which have been peeled and left overnight are
no longer fit for consumption.

In the natural order of things man should be tightly wrapped in his
bedclothes at night, or else engrossed in his studies. God's protection,
which rests over all creatures during the day, is man's safeguard when
the sun shines. But the man who reverses the natural regimen and devotes
his nights to some unsanctified labor, from him is God's protection
properly withdrawn. For night has been given to the spirits, but the day
is man's and God's. So we read, "If anyone goes out alone before
cock-crow his blood is on his own head." Even in the privacy of his own
home a man was hardly safe. "R. Jacob Mölln said that a man should
beware not to spend the night alone even in his bed-chamber; he himself
used to keep a boy beside him at night. One shouldn't walk through his
yard without a light, or, God forbid! the evil spirits will pounce upon
him. Human alertness avails nothing against them." A popular writer on
folk morality, attesting to the strength of this belief, essayed a word
of comfort: "When a man arises during the night to study, let him not
fear the demons; let him rather consider how many there are who travel
alone at night and suffer no harm. If he trust in God he may arise and
have no cause for fear." Enhancing the fear of demons at night

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

was the realization that man's vigilance is relaxed while he sleeps;
even more, the soul having left the body, that both body and soul are
peculiarly open to attack: "The body is like a house, the soul, its
inhabitant; when the tenant leaves his home there is no one to look
after it." Therefore most people fall sick at night, while they are
asleep. Indeed, R. Jacob Weil confessed, "When I prepare for my
afternoon nap I recite first the 'anti-demonic psalm'" for "all sleep is
dangerous because of the demons."[5](jms25.htm#an_4_5)

Great as the danger was every night of the week, on two nights
especially was it heightened—the eves of Wednesday and Saturday. At
these times hordes of peculiarly devastating spirits were let loose upon
the world. During the Talmudic period Friday night in particular was
considered an unhealthy time to be abroad alone, and the rabbis required
that no man be left behind in the synagogue to finish his prayers alone
after the congregation had concluded the service and gone home. For then
he must negotiate the distance to his home without a companion. Special
prayers were instituted for the *Ḥazan* to recite, so that the
congregation might be detained until its slowest member had caught up
with it. In the Middle Ages this fear of being left behind on Friday
night was not so pronounced. The commentators explained that the
Talmudic synagogues were situated in the fields, where the spirits
congregate, whereas medieval houses of worship were located in town, and
the late homegoer was not in pressing danger. Nevertheless some medieval
rabbis made it a practice to linger until the last man was through with
his prayers, in order to accompany him home, even pretending to be
engrossed in a book so that the laggard might not be
embarrassed.[6](jms25.htm#an_4_6)

#### CRISES

Eternal vigilance was the watchword; the evil spirits were everywhere,
impatiently awaiting the unguarded moment when they might seize one. But
at certain critical stages of life, when man's resistance was
undermined, or his attention was likely to have been distracted, or when
his extraordinary joy unduly excited the envy and animus of the spirit
world, the danger was heightened and the safeguards were correspondingly
strengthened. These were the moments in the life cycle "when man's star
is low": birth, illness, death, while marriage, man's happiest moment,
was an especially perilous one.[7](jms25.htm#an_4_7) These were the
moments of man's greatest vulnerability

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

when the struggle with the spirits grew intense. And just these were the
occasions selected by the sorcerer as most propitious for his sinister
work, the junctures when the curse and the evil eye took their greatest
toll.

The moment of birth was a crucial one for mother and infant; all the
evil forces of the natural and supernatural realms were concentrated
upon extinguishing the faint spark of life that hovered between the two.
Nor did the danger pass when the child was born. In Jewish belief the
eight days after birth were equally fraught with peril. (The period
varies among different peoples; in Germany, for instance, it ranged from
nine days to six weeks following delivery.) This period was usually
terminated by the initiatory rite, such as baptism or in Judaism, the
circumcision. Originally of a composite social and superstitious
character, circumcision came in Biblical times to assume a specifically
national, and in the view of the prophets, a spiritual significance. In
the succeeding period, with the development of clearly defined views
about heaven and hell, this rite acquired a new value, in addition to
the older ones. "God said to Abraham," according to the *Midrash*,
"'because of the merit of circumcision your descendants will be saved
from *Gehinnom*, for only the uncircumcised will descend thither.'" The
corollary of this belief, that uncircumcised Jews would have no "share
in the world to come" was exceedingly popular in the later periods, and
was often voiced in medieval writings. So strong an impression did it
make that in Geonic times there arose the custom of circumcising infants
who died before their eighth day, at the grave, and there giving them a
name. Because of the great importance attached to this rite it was
feared that the forces of evil would exert their utmost powers to
prevent its consummation. The night before the circumcision, therefore,
was held to be the most dangerous for the male
child.[8](jms25.htm#an_4_8)

The dangers that beset the bridal pair were attributable to the savage
envy and rage that man's joys aroused in the evil spirits, perhaps, too,
to their desire to frustrate the act that is responsible for the
propagation of human life. Gathering force throughout the period
preparatory to the wedding, these dangers assumed their highest
intensity on the bridal night and gradually tapered off
afterwards.[9](jms25.htm#an_4_9)

The especial susceptibility of the invalid—his ailment was probably
itself merely a symptom of demonic attack—was self-evident. The dying
man was pictured as surrounded by evil spirits waiting to pounce upon
him; therefore his attendants were cautioned to see

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

to it that his limbs did not project beyond his bed, or he would come
under the power of the demons. He was believed, too, to behold all
around him the spirits of the dead come to welcome him to their midst.
Death itself was caused by a spirit, or destroying angel. The widespread
belief in the Middle Ages that at the moment of death a struggle ensues
between the angels and the devil over the soul of the deceased was
paralleled in Jewish thought by the notion that the demons seek to gain
possession of the corpse while it is yet unburied. The corpse itself was
also an object of fear. The dead had entered the world of the spirits,
the soul hovered over its vacated shell, potentially capable of harming
those who came near. For this reason contact with the dead was to be
avoided, and the clothing of the deceased was not to be used again,
"because of the danger." Indeed, fear of the soul and the spirits, and
apprehension that the demons might do harm to the deceased, was the
explanation advanced for the prohibition to leave a corpse unburied
overnight. The sooner the body was out of the way the better for the
living and the dead. But the process of burial was not the least
perilous—the corpse was closely accompanied by a spirit retinue during
the procession to the grave, the cemetery was infested with spirits, the
journey home was made hazardous by the possibility that the spirits had
not been left behind, that the ghost itself was an unseen member of the
company. And when finally the funeral was over and the period of
mourning commenced the danger had not yet been entirely obviated, the
spirit of the deceased might still linger for a while about familiar
places. As Samter summed up this most fearful episode for the living and
the dead, "The dying man must be protected against evil spirits and all
sorts of magic, perhaps in the last analysis against death itself; the
corpse, on the other hand, brings the living into mortal danger, partly
through the enmity of the evil powers which cling to it yet a while,
partly through the desire of the soul to draw others along with it to
the beyond."[10](jms25.htm#an_4_10) The measures adopted to counteract
the dangers implicit in death and burial provided for every one of these
apprehensions.

#### SPIRIT POSSESSION

So long as the perpetual warfare between mankind and the demon world
remained in a sense objective, that is, man's problem was to fight off
attack from without, man, as we shall see, did not

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

necessarily occupy the losing side of the struggle. He had ready at hand
a host of magical weapons which could effectively protect him; he might
even acquire the mystical learning that would enable him to lord it over
his mortal enemies, bending them to his will. But the demons, too, were
not altogether resourceless, and when they had recourse to what we have
come to know in a more vital contemporary sphere of human conflict as
"boring from within," man's plight became desperate. Spirit possession
rendered the poor victim the physical "vessel" through which the demon
operated and only extreme measures could avail to free him from the
fiend.

This terrifying belief was especially widespread in later Jewish life.
Popularized by the Lurianic *Kabbalah* it became a characteristic
superstition of East-European Jewry. But it is found full-blown among
German Jews at a time when the Lurianic concept could not yet have
gained any wide popular acceptance. The initial appearance of a *dibbuk*
is in a story included in the *Ma‘aseh Book*,[11](jms25.htm#an_4_11)
which was first published in 1602, and which contains material whose
origin is considerably earlier than that date. In this story the spirit
which took possession of a young man was the spirit of one who in this
life had sinned egregiously, and which could therefore find no peace. It
had entered the youth's body after having been forced to flee its
previous abode, the body of a cow which was about to be slaughtered. It
is this form of the belief, possession by the restless spirit of a
deceased person, which gained such popularity in later times. In essence
this represents a version of the doctrine of the transmigration of
souls, *gilgul*, which the older Spanish *Kabbalah* developed.

In earlier times we find a purer form of the belief in the possibility
of spirit possession—a form familiar in Christian
legend[12](jms25.htm#an_4_12)—that is, that the demons proper may make
their homes in man's body. This view found its rationalization in the
legend that the demons, created on the eve of the Sabbath, are bodiless.
Since all creation is engaged in the quest for perfection, all things
striving to attain the next higher degree of being, the demons, too, are
perpetually seeking to acquire the body of man, their greatest desire
being for that of the scholar, the highest type of human. This is why
scholars in particular must be careful not to be out alone at night. But
just as woman, in herself imperfect, seeks perfection through union with
man, so the demons seek to unite themselves primarily with woman, who
represents the next degree of creation above them. This is why

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

women are more prone to sorcery than are men; the sorceress is a woman
through whom the demon that has possessed her operates, or one who
through close association with demons has acquired their malevolent
attributes.[13](jms25.htm#an_4_13)

Demons who have taken possession of a human body exercise such complete
control over it that the personality and the will of the victim are
extinguished. They can be expelled only by the most powerful exorcisms.
This was the method of liberation employed in the story from the
*Ma‘aseh Book* mentioned above. We have a most circumstantial account of
such a proceeding in Nikolsburg, in the year
1696,[14](jms25.htm#an_4_14) a date beyond the close of the period we
are studying, when the Lurianic ideas had already gained wide
popularity, but shedding light none the less on the procedure which was
universally employed. The spirit in this instance proved extremely
recalcitrant and was finally dislodged only upon its own conditions and
after repeated efforts by the rabbi and congregation.

#### INCUBUS AND SUCCUBUS

The need of the spirits to find completion in the body of man was also
utilized to explain the curious belief in sexual relations between man
and demon. That the demons propagate their own kind we have already
seen. It is to be expected that man's fertile imagination should lead
him to speculate on the possibility of an unnatural union between the
human and the spirit worlds, and upon the condition of the offspring of
such a union. Just as in antediluvian days "the sons of God saw the
daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives,
whomsoever they chose" (Gen. 6:2), so in the Middle Ages it was not
unknown for a lesser order of spirit beings to choose for themselves
earthly mates. The lore of the incubus and the succubus finds its
counterpart in medieval Jewish folklore.

The Jewish belief took its cue from the Midrashic legend about Adam's
siring a demonic brood, and the assertion of the *Zohar*, sourcebook for
all the mystic science of medieval Jewry, that even now the propagation
of the species continues by virtue of the union of men with spirits in
their sleep.[15](jms25.htm#an_4_15) As to the manner of such union, it
was generally agreed that man's nocturnal emissions often result from
the efforts of the demons to arouse his passions, and that these provide
the seed from which the hybrid offspring are
born.[16](jms25.htm#an_4_16) This takes place, of course, without man's
knowledge or volition; the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

spirits, lacking bodies, have no means of achieving physical union with
man.[17](jms25.htm#an_4_17) However, in the guise of man or woman a
demon may successfully pass itself off upon an unsuspecting human as a
being of his own kind, and thus achieve its
purpose.[18](jms25.htm#an_4_18)

As to the children of such a union, they retain an essentially demonic
nature, but in the kingdom of the spirits they rank very high indeed,
occupying the positions of rulership. This is one of the reasons why
demons are so avid for union with human beings.[19](jms25.htm#an_4_19)

This belief created some interesting moral and legal problems. Was a man
or woman who had been seduced by a demon to be regarded as an adulterer?
And if so, was such a woman to be "forbidden" to her husband? If, today,
the issue strikes us as grotesque it is only because we have lost faith
in the realities of the medieval world. Isaac b. Moses of Vienna, in the
thirteenth century, considered this question at length and solemnly
concluded that a person who had been seduced by a spirit was not to be
held guilty of fornication. In substantiation of his decision he
recalled a legend of a pious man who was sorely grieved because a demon
in human shape had enticed him into an indiscretion. The prophet Elijah
appeared to him and consoled him: since this was a demon he had
committed no offense. "If he had been guilty," R. Isaac deduced, "Elijah
would not have come to him, nor spoken with him, nor would he have
acquitted him." Three centuries later a Polish rabbi was consulted in
the case of a married woman who had had relations with a demon which
appeared to her once in the shape of her husband, and again in the
uniform of the local petty count. Was she to be considered an
adulteress? this rabbi was asked, and was she therefore to be
"forbidden" to her husband, since she might have had intercourse with
this demon of her free will? The judge absolved her of all guilt and
"permitted" her to her husband.[20](jms25.htm#an_4_20)

Finally, as a fitting climax to the story, we have the most unusual
spectacle of a lawsuit between the inhabitants of a house and the
demonic offspring of a former owner, a lawsuit argued by the contestants
in strictly legal fashion before a duly constituted court, called into
special sitting to hear the case. This occurred in Posen at the end of
the seventeenth century. The account bears extended retelling, both for
its intrinsic interest and for the light it sheds upon the beliefs of
that and the preceding centuries. In the main street of Posen there
stood a stone dwelling whose cellar was securely locked. One day a young
man forced his way into this cellar and was shortly after

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

found dead upon the threshold. Emboldened by this act the "outsiders,"
who had killed the intruder in their subterranean haunt, entered the
house itself and began to plague the inhabitants by casting ashes into
the pots of food cooking on the hearth, throwing things off the walls
and the furniture, breaking candlesticks, and similar pranks. Though
they did no harm to the persons of the inhabitants, these were so
distressed and frightened that they deserted the house. A great outcry
arose in Posen, but the measures taken by the local savants (including
the Jesuits) were not sufficiently potent to oust the interlopers, and
the foremost wonder-worker of the time, R. Joel *Baal Shem* of Zamosz,
was sent for. His powerful incantations succeeded in forcing the demons
to disclose their identity. They contended, however, that this house was
their property and demanded an opportunity to substantiate their case
before a court of law. R. Joel agreed, the court was convoked, and
before it a demon advocate, who could be heard but not seen, presented
his argument. We may still sense in this graphic account of the trial
the dramatic tenseness of the scene, the earnestness of the advocate's
plea, the solemn attentiveness of the three bowed gray heads on the
bench, the open-eyed wonder, spiced with a dash of terror, of the
audience. The argument ran in this wise: The former owner of the house
had had illicit relations with a female demon who, appearing to him as a
beautiful woman, had borne him children. In time his lawful wife
discovered his infidelity and consulted the great rabbi Sheftel, who
forced a confession from the guilty man, and obliged him, by means of an
amulet containing fearful holy names, to break off this union. Before
his death, however, the demon returned and prevailed upon him to leave
her and her offspring the cellar of his house for an inheritance. Now
that this man and his human heirs are all dead, contended the advocate,
we, his spirit children, remain his sole heirs and lay claim to this
house. The inhabitants of the house then presented their case: we
purchased this house at full value from its owner; you "outsiders" are
not called "seed of men" and therefore have no rights appertaining to
humans; besides, your mother forced this man to cohabit with her against
his will. Both sides here rested, the court retired for a consultation,
and returned to announce that its decision was against the "outsiders."
Their proper habitat is in waste places and deserts and not among men;
they can therefore have no share in this house. To make certain that the
decision was carried out R. Joel proceeded to deliver himself of his
most terrifying exorcisms,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

and succeeded in banishing the intruders from cellar as well as house,
to the forests and deserts where they belonged.[21](jms25.htm#an_4_21)

#### THE EVIL EYE

The "evil eye," one of the most widely feared manifestations of demonic
animus, is not always what the term implies; it comprehends two distinct
types of supernatural phenomena, only the first of which should properly
be so denoted.[22](jms25.htm#an_4_22) This superstition affirms that
certain baneful potencies are inherent in the "evil" eye itself, that
they are natural properties of such eyes. Not a few unfortunate men are
born *jettatori*, shedding rays of destruction about them with every
glance, frequently themselves unaware of their dread influence. Some
*jettatori* may be recognized by the peculiar and striking cast of their
eyes; others pass unnoticed until sad experience unmasks them. They are
to be found in all stations of life. Pope Pius IX, for one, was reputed
to be possessed of the evil eye, and the women, while kneeling for his
blessing as he passed, would make a counteracting sign under their
skirts. This belief arises from the natural reaction of simple people to
the arrestingly piercing and vital qualities that often illumine the
eyes of men of strong personality, and is a response just as much to the
personality as to the eye itself. There *are* baleful glances, just as
there are malevolent men, and the superstitious imagination tends to run
away with itself.

The second is the type the Germans denote with the words *berufen* or
*beschreien*. Its root is the pagan conviction that the gods and the
spirits are essentially man's adversaries, that they envy him his joys
and his triumphs, and spitefully harry him for the felicities they do
not share. "Just as hope never forsakes man in adversity, so fear is his
constant companion in good fortune, fear that it may desert him; he
apprehends equally the envy of the gods, and the envy of his
fellow-men—the evil eye." The attention of the spirit-world is cocked to
detect the least word or gesture of commendation. Demons are like men,
Menasseh b. Israel wrote; "when a man receives praise in the presence of
his enemy, the latter is filled with anger and reveals his discomfiture,
for envy consumes his heart like a raging fire, and he cannot contain
himself."[23](jms25.htm#an_4_23) A glance that expresses approbation is
as eloquent as a speech, and just as likely to arouse their malice. Such
words and glances, in themselves perhaps innocent, constitute the evil
eye, which brings swift persecution in its wake. We may say

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

that this belief is a hypostatization of the evil which man discerns in
invidiousness, a translation of a profound poetic truth into the
language of superstition.

Rabbinic Judaism was acquainted with both aspects of the evil
eye.[24](jms25.htm#an_4_24) Several rabbis of the Talmud were accredited
with the power to turn men into "a heap of bones" with a glance, or to
cause whatever their gaze fell upon to burst into flames. But the second
aspect was predominant. As has been pointed out by several scholars, the
*jettatura* pro*per se*ems to have been introduced into Jewish thought
by those Talmudic authorities who came under the influence of the
Babylonian environment. The Palestinian sources, and in particular the
*Mishna*, know the evil eye only as an expression of the moral powers of
envy and hatred. The Palestinian view prevailed in later

Jewish life, though the other was not unknown." In order to counteract
the "moral" version of the evil eye it has become customary over a very
wide area to append a prophylactic phrase, such as "May the Lord protect
thee," "no evil eye," "*Unbeschrieen*," to every laudatory remark.
Medieval Jewry pursued not only this practice, but also the equally
well-known device of expressing its approbation in highly unflattering
terms: "A man will call his handsome son 'Ethiop,' to avoid casting the
evil eye upon him," said Rashi. Any act or condition that in itself may
excite the envy of the spirits is subject to the evil eye; taking a
census or even estimating the size of a crowd, possession of wealth,
performing an act which is normally a source of pride or joy—all evoke
its pernicious effects. A father leading his child to school for the
first time took the precaution to screen him with his cloak. Members of
a family were reluctant to follow each other in reciting the blessings
over the *Torah* before a congregation. A double wedding in one
household, or indeed, any two simultaneous marriages were avoided for
this reason. Even animals and plants were subject to the evil eye; a man
who admired his neighbor's crop was suspected of casting the evil eye
upon it.[26](jms25.htm#an_4_26)

The early Jewish literature was little concerned with the explanation or
the theoretical basis of this phenomenon. Even in the Middle Ages
speculation on the subject was very much circumscribed, despite the
example set by classical and Christian students who devoted much thought
to the question whether fascination operates naturally or with the aid
of demons. Thomas Aquinas, for example, accepted the explanation that
"the eye is affected by the strong imagination

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

of the soul and then corrupts and poisons the atmosphere so that tender
bodies coming within its range may be injuriously affected." Of a
similar nature is the opinion of R. Judah Löw, who attained a great
reputation as the alleged creator of the *Golem* of Prague: "Know and
understand that the evil eye concentrates within itself the element of
fire," and so flashes forth destruction. On the other hand there is the
view of Menasseh b. Israel, previously cited, which reflects Christian
opinion, and is matched by the statement in *Sefer Ḥasidim*, "The angry
glance of a man's eye calls into being an evil angel who speedily takes
vengeance on the cause of his wrath." The same work rings in an
interesting innovation on this belief. There are glances that heal, as
others harm: "When a wicked man casts the evil eye upon someone, to do
him damage . . . a pious man must immediately counteract it by bestowing
upon the victim a glance that sheds beneficence. . . . Even if the first
man has not expressly uttered a curse, but has merely said, 'How nice
and plump that child is!' or has regarded him without saying anything,
the pious one should bless the child with a
glance."[27](jms25.htm#an_4_27) Protection against the evil eye was
essentially a matter of repelling the demons and evil spirits and
practically all the anti-demonic measures were effective safeguards.

#### WORDS AND CURSES

Gregory the Great, in his *Dialogues*, relates that a priest once
jocosely called out to his servant, "Come, devil, take off my shoes!"
whereupon his shoes were whisked off by an invisible force, and the poor
fellow was almost frightened out of his wits. Luckily he had the
presence of mind to shriek, "Hence! vile one, hence!" and saved himself
from further diabolic accommodation.[28](jms25.htm#an_4_28)

The Talmud put the matter succinctly: "One should never open his mouth
to Satan," that is, evil talk is nothing less than an invitation to the
demons. But this was a counsel of perfection, which men could do little
more than aspire to. Our speech is richly peppered with words whose
connotation is unpleasant; how open our mouths at all without letting
slip out such invitations to Satan? The danger is ever-present, but
human ingenuity has devised several means of getting around it. One of
these is the euphemism. One says "the enemies of Israel" instead of
"Israel," "my enemies" instead of "myself," and people are not addressed
directly, but in the third

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

person, when some unpleasant eventuality is mentioned. To lead the
demons astray, the true nature of a disease is hidden, as when the
ailment "mal malant" is known as "bon malant." The one subject of
conversation that is most ardently to be shunned, naturally, is death,
and so when Joseph, in Egypt, asked his brothers concerning the welfare
of their father and grandfather, they replied, "Thy servant, our father,
is well, he is yet alive," and Joseph understood at once that his
grandfather, Isaac, was dead. During the Middle Ages fear of publicly
proclaiming the news of a death was pronounced, and the custom of
pouring out the water in a home where a death had occurred was explained
and accepted as a mute announcement. To this day in Eastern European
villages, where the sexton calls worshipers to the morning service with
three knocks upon the door, he omits the last rap when a member of the
congregation has passed away overnight, the missing knock telling its
own somber story. Instead of saying "so and so is dead," one says "so
and so lives," and the cemetery is called "the house of life."
Similarly, references to mourning must be avoided. The "Great" treatise
on "Mourning" (*Ebel Rabatti*) has become the tractate "Rejoicing"
(*Semaḥot*), mourning formularies are entitled "The Book of Life," and
the concluding words of a rite connected with dreams, "Eat thy bread
with joy" (Eccl. 9:7), are transposed because the initials of the Hebrew
words spell "mourner." Again, news of a serious illness is withheld for
three days lest the spirits make a premature end of the invalid when
they hear people talking about his infirmity; the secret is not guarded
any longer, if the illness continues, for fear that the patient may be
deprived of the benefit of public prayer. When a person is sick one must
not gossip about his sins.[29](jms25.htm#an_4_29)

There is also a second method of cozening the spirits, namely, to
nullify the possible effect of a remark with such formal comments as
"God forbid," "may it not occur to you," "may God protect you," etc.
Similar phrases are in use all over the world.[30](jms25.htm#an_4_30)

If such simple devices impute to the spirits a degree of naiveté which
does little credit to their vaunted cunning as man's antagonists, the
explanation must be sought in man's unshakable belief in his own
superior intelligence. When he sets himself to the task none of God's
creatures is his peer in wisdom and shrewdness!

The medieval literature is full of warnings against "opening one's mouth
to Satan," but warnings do not suffice and the lesson is driven home by
frequent tales of the grievous consequences of such

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

incaution. When women gossip about an invalid in the presence of
children, the ailment is promptly visited upon the young ones; to scold
a boy with the word *meshummad* (apostate) is to foredoom him; a man who
said of his books "they are fit only to be burned" was privileged to
witness that fate befall them; another man who misrepresented the state
of his health was speedily stricken with disease. A scribe must not end
a page with an ominous phrase, nor a scholar his studies, nor should a
book be left open at such a place; one man who was so unwary as to
neglect this admonition and left his studies at the words "And satyrs
shall dance there" (Is. 13:21) awoke to find a demon disporting himself
in his chair. There are dozens of such anecdotes. And sometimes the
spirits performed holy labors too, as when they impressed upon R. Israel
Isserlein a due respect for the words of the Talmud. While conducting a
class he came across the plaint of a long-departed sufferer that
"Podagra is as painful as the thrust of a needle in live flesh" (*San*.
48b); himself afflicted with gout, and therefore an authority in his own
right, he took issue with this dictum. "We had not yet completed that
tractate," writes his Boswell, "when he let out a series of groans such
as I had never before heard from his lips, and neither before nor since
have I seen him in such excruciating pain. 'In the future,' said the
teacher, 'I'll put a bridle on my tongue.'"[31](jms25.htm#an_4_31)

Vows and curses were especially singled out in this connection. A vow,
let us say, sworn by the life of a child, is a serious matter, for at
the least sign of backsliding the spirits are delighted to exact the
penalty. And a curse is even more fraught with danger; it is a direct
invitation, nay, a command to the spirits to do their worst. According
to Jewish tradition, "the curse of a sage, even when undeserved, comes
to pass"; in fact, "even the curse of an ordinary person should not be
treated lightly." Demons are not the ones to draw invidious distinctions
between persons or motives. Among Christians, as among Jews, an
execration, whether seriously meant or not, was believed to bring dire
consequences in its wake. "Sprenger \[a German writer of the fifteenth
century\] tells us that if an impatient husband says to a pregnant wife,
'Devil take you!' the child will be subject to Satan; such children, he
says, are often seen; five nurses will not satisfy the appetite of one,
and yet they are miserably emaciated, while their weight is great."
Parallels are to be found aplenty in the Jewish sources. Malisons take
effect indiscriminately, sometimes on the curser, sometimes on the
cursed, or even on their children—and

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

in at least one instance we are informed that an innocent bystander paid
the price. This is why, *Sefer Ḥasidim* counsels, one should not live
among people given to cursing. "We know of many such cases," wrote one
man, "but we do not wish to burden the reader with them." Well he might
not, for his readers could have matched case for case. The power of the
curse extended even beyond the grave—the soul of the deceased was made
to suffer if his memory was reviled. It is on this basis that we can
comprehend the peculiar dread that attached to the formal rite of
excommunication which called down upon the head of the guilty one a most
terrifying catalogue of maledictions.[32](jms25.htm#an_4_32)

So strong was this fear that it was forbidden to repeat in direct
discourse an overheard conversation which had included a curse, for
however innocently spoken it might still take effect on the company
present. Even the imprecations in Holy Writ evoked dread; *Sefer
Ḥasidim* tells of a student who fell suddenly ill and died while
studying a portion of Jeremiah calling down bitter maledictions upon
Israel, and in the synagogue this superstition created a peculiar
problem. The weekly reading of the *Torah* involved from time to time
public recitation of such ominous selections, and the congregation
feared the spirits might interpret them as directed against its members.
For this reason communities were warned to make sure that the precentor
was universally acceptable and befriended, or these curses might descend
upon the heads of his enemies. Even so, individuals were hesitant about
ascending the pulpit to recite the blessings over these portions,
especially when Deut. 28 was read, for its malisons are penned in the
singular person and present tense. In one synagogue, it is reported, "on
a Sabbath on which the 'chapter of maledictions' was to be read, the
Scroll of the *Torah* was shamefully permitted to lie open for several
hours, because no member of the congregation was willing to come up to
the pulpit."[33](jms25.htm#an_4_33)

Some writers attributed the random effectiveness of curses to
astrological factors—"not all times are equal," they explained; at
intervals a man's star relaxes its vigilance, and a curse that is
uttered in his presence at that moment will find in him its victim. But
the pious *Brantspiegel* warned the irascible wife against scolding her
husband because "die *mazzikim* stehen un’ sehen das sie zornig is’ un’
shelt ihren mann un’ freuen sich un’ nehmen die *kelalot*
\[execrations\] un’ heben sie auf bis zu der zeit das Gott auf den
menschen zirnt. da brengen sie die *kelalot* auch un’ sie gehen selten
lehr aus.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

un’ es wird ihr selbert der nach leid." According to either view,
whether man's defenses be weakened by the defection of his star or the
anger of God, the executers of the curse are the
demons.[34](jms25.htm#an_4_34)

Since the consummation of a curse may remain temporarily in abeyance,
the threat hung over one's head like a poised sword. Some way out of
this dilemma was ardently desired, and a formula was devised to meet
this need:[35](jms25.htm#an_4_35) "With the consent of the heavenly and
earthly courts, of our sacred Torah, of the great and small Sanhedrins,
and of this holy congregation, we release N son of N from all the
curses, maledictions, oaths, vows . . . uttered in his home, or directed
against him or any member of his household, be they his own curses or
the curses of others against his person, or curses that he uttered
against others, unwarrantedly or deservedly, in a moment of wrath or
with malice prepense, intentionally or unintentionally, whatever their
occasion or character. With the consent of God and of His celestial and
terrestrial ménage, let them all be null and void, like unto a clay
vessel that has been shattered. . . ." Solemnly pronounced by the
religious authorities before the congregation, this formula provided the
necessary psychological relief—now that God Himself had taken a hand in
the matter the demons need no longer be feared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. The Spirits of the Dead](jms07)
