[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms12)  [Next](jms14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### 11

### THE WAR WITH THE SPIRITS

IT IS erroneous to assume that magic is practiced exclusively by
professionals, or that it represents always a conscious, deliberate act.
As Karl Goldmark once said, "Civilized people lose their religion
easily, but rarely their superstitions." There is an anecdote of a
well-known actress who, when asked by a zetetic reporter what was her
favorite superstition, replied, "Thank Heaven, I have none!"—and
unconsciously "knocked wood" as she spoke. How many of us still "knock
wood" when we hear or utter a word of praise, without in the least being
aware that we are repeating an age-old magical act whose purpose is to
distract or frighten away the jealous spirits? Fear of the supernatural
has been productive of the greatest number and variety of magical
protective devices; and just as the fear has vividly colored man's
consciousness of the universe, so these devices have become automatic
responses to it. In this sense magic was, and still is, an integral
pattern in the fabric of social usage, having influenced profoundly not
alone folk-habits, but equally as much religious ceremonial and rite.

#### RELIGIOUS DEFENSES

The methods of warding off the spirits fell into three general
categories: 1. to drive them away, or at least to render them powerless
by the application of certain approved means; 2. to buy them off with
gifts, to bribe them and thus conciliate them; 3. to deceive them by
disguising their intended victims, or by pretending that the situation
was other than it actually was. Each of these methods, and often two or
all three of them combined, was known and employed by Jews and even
found expression in special ceremonies which have become part and parcel
of Jewish ritual.

The first category comprised by far the greatest number and variety of
procedures. Foremost among these is the power of the

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

religious life to protect the individual. Piety and personal purity
constitute a coat of armor which no demon or magic can pierce. The merit
of one's ancestors also serves as a protection. From among the multitude
of anecdotes that point this moral, the following perhaps best
illustrates the apotropaic and remedial virtues of piety: A certain
righteous and pious Jew was about to die when a man came to him with a
story that his wife had been rendered barren by sorcery, and requested
that so soon as the righteous one enter heaven he repair to the throne
of God and beg Him to release her from the spell. The sage promised to
do so. Within the year the spell was removed and she bore a child. Not
only is the truly religious man himself secure, but his merit carries
sufficient weight up above to shed security upon his descendants and
friends. The man whose life had been devoted to a holy occupation
sometimes bore with him to the grave testimony of that fact, instanced
in the custom of burying with the performer of circumcisions the
foreskins which he had severed, "to drive away from him every demon and
destroyer." The practice of fashioning the coffin of a scholar out of
the table at which he had pursued his studies probably had a similar
purpose.[1](jms32.htm#an_11_1)

Various religious acts and occasions were believed to bring immunity
against the powers of evil. "Satan is powerless" on *Yom Kippur;* the
blowing of the *shofar* at the conclusion of the day "drives off evil
spirits" and confuses and confounds the devil. Indeed, the later
Kabbalists surrounded the ritual of *shofar* blowing on the High
Holydays with a series of Biblical readings whose inner mystical
significance and whose "names" furthered this end. Some held that on the
Sabbath "we need no other protection" than the merit of the day itself,
for "we are all engaged in fulfilling religious duties." On the basis of
the interpretation of a Biblical verse (Ex. 12:42) Passover, too, was
regarded as "a night of protection" from the demons. This belief aroused
an unwonted sense of security, and led to the suspension of certain
customary protective measures. It was permissible to employ even
numbers, such as the four cups of wine; the prayers recited before
retiring were very much abbreviated, passages intended to protect the
sleeper being omitted; the doors of houses and rooms were left unlocked
overnight as a mark of confidence; when the holiday fell on a Sabbath,
the evening prayers inserted in the service to enable late-comers to
catch up with the congregation were omitted; if a death occurred
immediately before

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Passover, when
water had already been drawn for the preparation of *Maẓẓot*, there were
some who held it unnecessary to pour this water out, for "it is a night
of protection" and the spirits can do no harm.[2](jms32.htm#an_11_2)

Study is a uniquely Jewish form of worship; one of the chief features of
the religious life is a scholarly regimen. Study therefore was another
form of protection. The Bible in itself possesses anti-demonic virtues,
as we have seen. The regular reading of the Bible in the synagogue
service was believed to protect Israel from the wiles of the devil. "So
long as Israel studies the *Torah* Satan has no power over them," and
therefore, it was explained, immediately upon the reading of the last
verse of Deuteronomy the first verse of Genesis is read, on the holiday
of "Rejoicing over the *Torah*," so that the rehearsal of God's law may
not be interrupted even for a moment, and Satan get his chance. It was
believed that a man should expire with "words of *Torah*" on his lips,
obviously not only as a passport to the heavenly regions, but also as a
safeguard on the road. The protective power of study was not limited to
the Bible, but extended to all works of Jewish religious import,
particularly the Talmud. There is a legend of two demons who were
frustrated in their attempts to attack a certain R. Benjamin because his
perpetual immersion in his studies rendered him immune. It was this
belief in the security of the scholar which gave rise to the notion that
the demons accept the challenge and are ever on the alert to distract
his attention from his studies and thus pierce his
guard.[3](jms32.htm#an_11_3)

As the most important single feature of worship we may expect to find
prayer singled out as especially powerful in this respect. The
destroying angels, among whom is included the angel of death, have no
power over those who have participated in the three daily prayer
services, or who have recited the prayer *Yoẓer Or*, the "Eighteen
Benedictions," or the grace after meals. As evidence of this fact
attention was called to the absence of the letter *peh* in the titles of
the services, and in the prayers mentioned, for this letter
distinguishes the names of the destroying angels; its absence implies
their absence, too.[4](jms32.htm#an_11_4)

When a man believes himself to be threatened by demons, or by magic of
one sort or another, an appeal to God should win him safety. In an
extremity he can resort to extemporaneous prayer. The most direct method
is recommended in dealing with a demon who unexpectedly confronts one:
"Don't run, but drop to the

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

ground before him; so long as you are prostrate he will not harm you;
and pray in the name of God that he do you no hurt." However, the
provident man fortified himself with one or another of the many
petitions especially composed for such needs—prayers which besought
protection against demons, illness, magic, the evil eye, the whole
catalogue of perils that beset the superstitious—prayers that
concentrated on only one of these dangers, or, more often, lashed out
against all of them together, in long-winded, iterative supplication.
The Kabbalists, toward the close of the period, were especially prolific
of such prayers. Already in the pages of the Talmud we read that "the
demons keep away from everyone who recites the *Shema‘* before
retiring." There grew up an increasingly elaborate scheme of prayer
around this nocturnal recitation of the *Shema‘*, to reinforce its
protective powers, and coupled with straightforward pleas for
deliverance from "the terrors that threaten by night" were potent
Biblical verses and Psalms, magic names, appeals to the angels, three-
and sevenfold repetitions, prayers with obscure mystical connotations,
etc. There was no attempt to disguise the purpose of this
prayer-service; it was frankly admitted time and again that "it exists
only because of the demons."

This night-prayer offers an interesting illustration of the tenacity of
magical and superstitious forms. One of its constituents invokes the
protection of the angels: "at my right Michael, at my left Gabriel,
before me Uriel, behind me Raphael." This is nothing more than a Jewish
version of the ancient Babylonian incantation, "Shamash before me,
behind me Sin, Nergal at my right, Ninib at my left," or, "May the good
Shedu go at my right, the good Lamassu at my left,"
etc.[5](jms32.htm#an_11_5) And across millennia and continents Ireland
provides us with a doggerel Catholic version:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*O! Holy Mary, mother mild,  
Look down on me, a little child,  
And when I sleep put near my bed  
The good Saint Joseph at my head,  
My guardian angel at my right  
To keep me good through all the night;  
Saint Brigid give me blessings sweet;  
Saint Patrick watch beside my feet.  
Be good to me O! mother mild,  
      Because I am a little child*.

</div>

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

While it is difficult to dissociate the religious from the superstitious
in such pious practices as fasting and charity, which as expiatory
measures served to avert the evil consequences of sin, there can be no
doubt that they were believed to exert a certain degree of compulsion
upon the supernatural powers. The words of Prov. 10:2, "Charity
delivereth from death," were reiterated with enough insistence to lead
one to believe that some degree of literalness attached to them. We read
that "God forgives all the sins of everyone who fasts on three
consecutive days and nights, four times a year, namely, before the tenth
of Tebet, before the seventeenth of Tamuz, before *Rosh Hashanah*, and
during the ten succeeding days of Penitence." In an unavailing effort to
avert assault during the First Crusade, the Jews of Trier, we are
informed, distributed almost all their possessions to the poor. This was
a fairly common practice in the Middle Ages, individuals sometimes
stripping themselves even of their clothes and giving them away, to gain
relief from serious illness and other afflictions. Private fasts and
almsgiving were recommended in a host of situations: before undertaking
a journey, to cure an ailment, to change one's luck, to remedy
barrenness, to counteract an omen of death, or an ominous dream, and so
on. Communal fasts were also decreed on occasion: for rain, when a
pogrom impended, when an unduly heavy tax burden had been laid upon the
community, etc.[6](jms32.htm#an_11_6)

#### MAGICAL DEFENSES

Of course, the most obvious means of protection was to post a guard over
the threatened individual. This was the purport of the warning against
going out at night unaccompanied. The well-known German-Jewish
institution of the *Wachnacht*, celebrated with feasting and prayer and
study all the night preceding a circumcision, constituted a close watch
against demonic attacks. Speaking of people whose condition renders them
an easy prey to the spirits, one writer says, "I have known many to
observe a meticulous watch over them, in particular over a pregnant
woman and a mourner, who are not left alone for a moment, and who are
not permitted to go out of doors unless accompanied by an adult or at
least by a child."[7](jms32.htm#an_11_7)

But a physical guard was not of itself warranted to relieve all fear,
and most often supernatural forces were set into operation. The demons
must be met on their own ground. Prominent among

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

the anti-demonic measures was the method of magic, the exorcism. All the
familiar devices were resorted to—invoking the angels and the holy
names, reciting Biblical verses, magical numbers, etc. Most potent among
the protective names was *Shaddai*, "Almighty." It was inscribed on the
outside of the *mezuzah;* the phylactery straps were so knotted that in
combination with the letter *shin* on the head-box they spelled it out;
it was uttered prior to departure on a journey; *Kohanim* (descendants
of the priestly caste), while offering the Priestly Benediction, spelled
it out with their fingers; one did the same to fend off an anticipated
assault by a thug; even the dead were afforded its protection, for in
some places the fingers of a corpse were bound in such a way as to form
the three letters of this name.'

The following spell was prescribed to expel demons from a place which
they were believed to infest: "Measure off the spot in the four cardinal
directions, and mark its borders with strings. Stretch another string
the length of the area, alongside one of the borders, and have ten men
carrying a Scroll of the Torah walk along this string to its end; then
move the string a trifle, so that their footprints will touch the
impressions made on the first line, and have them follow this second
line; repeat this until the entire area has been covered. On each line,
the *Torah* preceding them, they should recite the following: the
Priestly Benediction (Nu. 6: 24-26), the 'anti-demonic psalm' (Ps. 91),
Lev. 26:42, Ezek. 45:12, Deut. 11:12, Is. 62:4, Is. 45:18, Ps. 85:2, Ps.
67:2, Deut. 28:8. They must recite these on each line, and they must
tread the entire plot of ground thoroughly. When this has been done they
should say, 'With the consent of God, and with the consent of the
*Torah*, and of Israel, who guard it, may it be forbidden to any demon,
male or female, to invade this place from this time forth and forever.'"
Incantations and charms of this sort are to be found aplenty. Before
setting out on a journey it was a common practice to invoke the
protection of angels. To free a demoniac of his unwelcome visitant one
should "fill a new pot with freshly drawn water, pour in some olive oil,
and whisper Psalm 10 over it nine times, with the mystical names that
appertain to that Psalm, and then bathe the patient with the liquid."
Scriptural verses, universally employed against the evil eye, were
frequently recommended in Jewish literature for this purpose.
Outstanding among these verses were the Priestly Benediction and Gen.
49:22.[9](jms32.htm#an_11_9)

Furthermore, Jewish superstition was conversant with the fairly large
class of things and actions which have been universally credited

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

with anti-demonic virtues. Here a brief summary of the extensive
material may suffice.

Light was one of these protective agents, due, no doubt, to the
circumstance that demons shun the light, and also because of the
purificatory and expiatory virtues of fire, the source of light. In the
Talmud we read that "carrying a torch at night is as good as having a
companion (to keep the demons away), while walking by moonlight is
equivalent to having two companions." *Sefer Ḥasidim* advises that
"anyone who is threatened by demons and approaches fire before uttering
a word about it, will not be harmed nor die." This belief partly
explains the ubiquity of lights at religious and semi-religious
exercises, especially those associated with moments of crisis, although
it would be absurd to deny that lights were used also, and perhaps more
frequently, because of other significances, symbolic, ritual,
superstitious, attached to them.[10](jms32.htm#an_11_10)

Water is as potent a cleansing and piacular medium as fire, and
consequently it possesses similar protective virtues. If a man who has
been bitten by a snake reaches a stream first, the snake dies, but if
the snake gets there first, the man dies. Running water neutralizes a
magic act, and destroys the magical properties of things; it dispels
mirages created by demons, and drives off the spirits themselves. To bar
the demons from entering one's home, one must pour water, prepared
according to a magic recipe, over the threshold. Many prescriptions for
expelling a demon from a possessed person require bathing in water. It
was also a common ingredient of superstitious
medicaments.[11](jms32.htm#an_11_11)

The most powerful liquid, as we have seen, was supposed to be spittle,
especially the sputum of a fasting man. Therefore it was suggested that
one may protect himself in unclean places, which the spirits haunt, by
spitting three times, and even evil thoughts, which are the work of
demons, may be dispelled in the same way.[12](jms32.htm#an_11_12)

A form of frontal attack upon the spirits is practiced by some peoples,
who resort to throwing things or shooting into the air to drive them
off. While such practices were not altogether unknown among Jews, the
noise that usually accompanies warfare was substituted for the physical
encounter. In Talmudic times it was customary to rattle nuts in a jar to
scare away the demons that frequent privies, and a precautionary measure
against swallowing evil spirits along with some water was to strike the
vessel sharply before drinking. Medieval Germans believed that the crack
of a whip and the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

ringing of church bells have the same effect; on the *Polterabend*,
preceding a wedding, the demons that threatened bride and groom were
driven off by setting up a great clamor and breaking pottery; the same
custom is preserved in the "bellin’" that still accompanies a wedding in
the Kentucky mountains. Noise-making also figured at Jewish weddings as
a measure of protection, as we shall see.[13](jms32.htm#an_11_13)

As among other peoples, metals, and iron, in particular, were the most
frequently used anti-demonic objects. Eleazar of Worms suggests an
explanation which has been favored by modern students of superstition;
for protection against demons and witches one should strike a tool made
of "acier," he wrote, "for metals are the products of civilization," and
thus evidently antipathetic to the spirit masters of primitive pre-metal
society. However, this is only one of the explanations advanced
nowadays. The magic circle was to be drawn with a knife or sword; a
piece of iron suspended in water protects it against demonic
contamination during the *Tekufah;* iron was put into a hen's nest to
guard the chicks against suffocation and fright during a thunderstorm;
pregnant women kept a knife with them when alone; the key to the
synagogue was placed under the pillow of the dying
man.[14](jms32.htm#an_11_14)

Salt was another such substance which figured prominently in the
folklore of European peoples. Thus it was believed that salt is never
found at the witches’ Sabbat feast, and the Inquisitor and his
assistants at a witch-trial were warned to wear bags containing
consecrated salt for protection against the accused. Jewish folklore
credited salt with an equally high potency. In Ezek. 16:4 we learn that
new-born babes were rubbed with salt, a practice still current in the
Orient. According to medieval authorities, salt must be set on a table
before a meal is begun "because it protects one against Satan's
denunciations." The Kabbalists were more outspoken: "It drives off the
spirits," they wrote, "because it is the mathematical equivalent of
three <span class="smallcaps">yhvh</span>'s; therefore one should dip
the piece of bread over which the benediction is recited, three times
into salt." "After each meal eat some salt and you will not be harmed."
For this reason salt was used in many rites connected with birth,
marriage and death, and in medicine.[15](jms32.htm#an_11_15)

Very often salt and bread were jointly prescribed to defeat the
stratagems of spirits and magicians. When a witch assaults a man, he can
bring about her death by forcing her to give him some of her bread and
salt. Murderers ate bread and salt immediately after

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

their crime to prevent the return of their victim's spirit to wreak
vengeance upon them. Schudt reports that a Jewish woman advised him to
hang bread and salt on his daughter's neck to protect her from harm;
"she had done this to all her children and in consequence they had all
prospered." The common practice of bringing salt and bread into a new
home before moving in, usually explained as symbolic of the hope that
food may never be lacking there, was probably also in origin a means of
securing the house against the spirits.[16](jms32.htm#an_11_16)

Along with salt, sharp herbs and condiments in general have been widely
regarded as anti-demonic, and have had an important place in religious
rites of purification. This is not true, however, of Jewish practice to
any appreciable extent, though such ingredients were occasionally
prescribed in medicaments, where their power to expel spirits may have
been their recommendation, along with their more natural medicinal
properties.[17](jms32.htm#an_11_17)

Among the most widely used anti-demonic devices in Europe is the gesture
called "to fig" (in German, *die Feige weisen*, in French, *faire la
figue*, in Italian, *far la fica*, in Spanish, *hacer el higo*),
recognized as a sign of defiance and insult in ancient and modern times.
It is made by closing the fist and inserting the thumb between two
fingers. Its peculiarly obnoxious character, to men and spirits alike,
derives from the fact that it is meant as an obscene representation of
the sexual act. Menasseh b. Israel was correct both in his explanation
of the intent of this gesture, and his association of it with the
Talmudic recommendation that to protect oneself against the evil eye one
should place his right thumb in his left fist and his left thumb in his
right fist. While this gesture differs in form, its significance is the
same. In the Middle Ages, however, Jews were acquainted with the
authentic "fig": "If a demon confronts a man he should bend his thumb
between his fingers," or, more explicitly, "When a man encloses his
thumb in his fist he simulates a pregnant woman, and they \[the
spirits\] do not harm him." People who employed this gesture were warned
that it infuriates the demons at the same time that it renders them
harmless; therefore, a weak person, "especially one who is dangerously
ill," should forbear to use it, for the spirits may subsequently take
vengeance on him. Variations on this theme were also employed: For
safety on a journey one should place the little finger of the right hand
in the left fist and recite a charm formula. The fingers were used as
phallic symbols

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

to the same end, and we learn that a witch is transfixed when one raises
his index finger and thumb and recites the name "Uriel" seven times, or
that an "evil impulse" may be vanquished by pressing the thumbs on the
ground, repeating "Pipi" nine times, and
spitting.[18](jms32.htm#an_11_18)

#### STRATAGEM

These methods constitute the arsenal employed in the war against the
spirits—weapons of more or less direct attack. But strategy knows more
devious means of disarming a foe. The gift—or bribe, depending upon the
viewpoint—has been proven easily as effective in conciliating demons as
men. "If a sorcerer or a witch demands anything of you," we read in
*Sefer Ḥasidim*, "don't hesitate to give them a coin or two, so that
they shall not bewitch you, just as you would make a present to the
demons, or to a maniac, to forestall their doing you some harm." In
magic, as we have observed, the offering played a conspicuous and often
deliberate rôle. Countless customs among all peoples have cunningly
preserved the good-will offering to the spirits, so that to this day
Jews and non-Jews innocently continue to tender their gifts of peace to
the unseen powers. The harsh building-sacrifice, once universally
observed, which involved originally the immolation of a human being to
secure the stability and safety of a structure, was in time mitigated
into an animal sacrifice. Medieval Germans still felt the need of
protecting their homes by burying a fowl or an animal in its walls; I
know of no analogous Jewish practice during the Middle Ages.

Offerings to the spirits made their appearance in many guises. When a
beast or fowl upset a dish or some other utensil this was taken to be an
ill omen; one must kill the offending creature at once. The sacrifice of
the animal may appease the spirits. In a sense the offering represents a
substitute for the intended victim, which the spirits are ready to
accept even when it is proffered accidentally and not by design. "When
an angel is dispatched to take a man's life, if another born under the
same planetary influences chances to die, the first is spared." When the
angel of death comes to town the dogs are immediately aware of his
presence and freeze in their tracks; if a dog's master should push him
forward, the animal will drop dead; "the dog then serves as a substitute
for the man whom the angel of death has been sent to
kill."[19](jms32.htm#an_11_19)

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

A superstitious dread of unnatural behavior manifested itself in a
summary destruction of the offender. A cow which bore twins, or a hen
that laid two eggs in one day, was executed; a tree which produced fruit
twice in one year was cut down. In one instance, when a child was born
with two sets of teeth and a rudimentary tail, its life was barely saved
by the vigorous intercession of a "wise man." Although the Talmud
condemned the practice of killing a crowing hen as "heathenish
superstition," fear that this aberrant behavior betokened misfortune
persisted, and the unlucky fowl met a speedy death. It has been argued
that the references to this practice are merely a figurative expression
of the male conviction that woman should keep her place—if she attempts
to usurp her husband's authority she becomes dangerous. An Italian
proverb employs the same figure: *In quella casa non è mai pace, dove la
gallina canta ed il gallo tace*. But ingenious though this supposition
is, it pays little regard to the plain sense of the texts. There can be
no doubt that the practice was observed quite literally and that the
execution was regarded as a means of appeasing the powers that had
decreed the impending bad luck. The observation that "the hen's head is
chopped off at the threshold of the house" can indicate nothing else
than that it was an offering to the spirits.[20](jms32.htm#an_11_20)

The *Kapparah* rite is an interesting version of the famous "scapegoat"
offering, which occurs in various forms among many peoples. It was first
mentioned in early Geonic times, and probably originated toward the end
of the Talmudic period. The following account, quoted by Rashi from a
Geonic source, describes a form of this rite which was no longer
followed during the Middle Ages: two or three weeks before *Rosh
Hashanah* the head of the family planted beans in little baskets, one
for each member of the family; when these sprouted on the eve of the New
Year he would circle the head of each individual with his basket seven
times, saying, "This is in place of this person, this is his surrogate,
this is a substitute for him," and throw it into the river.

The procedure that prevailed in the Middle Ages, also mentioned in
Geonic writings, differed. It involved the slaughter of a cock for the
male, a hen for the female, on the eve of *Yom Kippur* (in Geonic times
a ram, or lamb, or goat might also be used), after the following ritual:
the fowl was passed three times around the head of the subject, while
various Biblical passages were recited; the announcement was then made,
"This fowl is my substitute, this is my surrogate,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

this is my atonement." Some old texts significantly add, "May it be
designated for death, and I for life." According to one account, after
the fowl was slaughtered, "the entrails were thrown on the roof for the
birds of heaven"; the usual procedure was to present the entire fowl to
the poor "as an act of charity in accordance with the words 'Charity
delivereth from death,'" but some of the rabbis frowned upon this method
of disposal, favoring rather the distribution of the money value of the
bird, "for when it is given to a poor man, he says to himself, that man
has transferred his sins to the cock, and I seem to him of so little
worth that he sends it to me." In Spain the rite did not meet with the
approval of several of the leading authorities. R. Solomon b. Adret
(thirteenth century), who stated specifically that it was observed
without objection in Germany, was himself poorly acquainted with it and
confused it with another local superstitious custom. The earliest
editions of the *Shulḥan ‘Aruch*, the authoritative law code of modern
Jewry, contain the opinion of its Palestinian author, Joseph Caro, that
this is "a silly custom" and its observance "should be checked"; under
the influence of the sixteenth-century Polish annotator, Moses Isserles,
the first words were eliminated from later editions. It is possible that
the rite was not observed in Angevin England, for the author of the only
code composed there introduced his description of it with the words, "I
have found in the *Seder of R. Amram* that . . .," implying that he was
not acquainted with it from his own experience.

The intent of the rite was to transfer the sins of the individual to the
fowl, and by offering this substitute to the supernatural powers save
oneself from the punishment decreed in heaven. The various features of
the ceremony accentuate its superstitious and even magical character.
Fowl are closely associated with the spirits in Jewish and non-Jewish
lore, and are the commonest oblation to them. The Hebrew term for
"rooster," *gever* (a word which, it should be noted, attained fairly
wide currency only in post-Talmudic times), also means "man," making the
one a palpable substitute for the other. The cock is employed to
represent a man, the hen, a woman, in many magic rites. The circles
which are described about the head of the individual, and the numbers
three and seven, are well-known magical elements. The words which
effectuate the substitution have all the earmarks of a typical
incantation. In the earlier texts the words "this is my atonement" are
not present; they were added later so that the initials of the Hebrew
terms might form the word

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Ḥatach*, "which
is the name of the angel appointed over this." The belief that evil
spirits roost on roofs occurs often (the Talmud places them under the
eaves), and many folk-customs, including the German, display instances
of placing offerings to the spirits on a roof. In view of this the
requirement that the entrails be thrown on a roof acquires special
significance. Thus analyzed there can be little doubt of the true
meaning of the rite, which is still observed today. It is probably the
most blatantly superstitious practice to have entered Jewish religious
usage, for where the significance of other such practices has long been
lost sight of, the purpose of this one is too apparent to escape even
the dullest wits. However little meaning the details of the rite may
convey to the uninformed, the substitution of fowl for man is
unescapable.[21](jms32.htm#an_11_21)

Not unrelated is the rite of *Tashlich*, observed on the first day of
*Rosh Hashanah*, which derived its name from the words of Micah 7:19,
"Thou wilt cast (*tashlich*) all their sins into the depths of the sea."
The first direct reference to it in its modern form is by R. Jacob Mölln
(Maharil, d. 1425), and the general impression has therefore been that
it originated not earlier than the fourteenth century, with the German
Jews. Professor Lauterbach, however, has shown that this ceremony
represents merely the latest version of a complex of superstitious
practices centering about the belief in the existence of spirits in
bodies of water, which reaches back to remote antiquity. Maharil's
comment is suggestive of a connection with the first form of the
*Kapparah* rite, for he speaks of people "throwing bread to the fish in
a river." This apparently was the essential feature of the ceremony, for
in later times *Tashlich* was postponed if the first day of the New Year
fell on a Sabbath, on the ground that carrying bread was a violation of
the Sabbath rules.

Whatever its origin, the explanations varied widely. Maharil viewed it
as a symbolic affirmation of faith: according to a Midrashic legend,
when Abraham was on his way to fulfill God's demand that he sacrifice
Isaac, Satan flung a swift-flowing stream across his path, but the
patriarch pressed forward, confident that God would respond to his plea
for aid. Mölln, then, stressed the mere act of visiting a river as
paramount, and in fact, opposed the practice of throwing crumbs into it.
Others suggested that since the limitless deep saw the beginning of
Creation, visiting a body of water on New Year was the most impressive
reminder of the Creator's might; or that man should emulate the river,
endlessly renewing

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

itself, forswear his evil ways and return home a new man; or that the
fish which devour the crumbs illustrate the plight of man, who is "as
the fishes that are taken in an evil net" (Eccl. 9:12), and arouse him
to repentance; or, again, that the fish, whose eyes never close,
symbolize the Guardian of Israel who slumbereth not. These explanations
only too patently evade the main issue, the bread offering to the
spirits. Under Kabbalistic influence an attempt was made to limit the
rite to shaking one's clothes at the river-side ("to dislodge the
*kelippot*," the clinging demons of sin) and reciting various prayers
and Biblical selections "whose secret significance is very profound."
What the popular conception of the purpose of this rite was may be
gleaned from the rabbinic animadversions against "those men, with as
little sense as a woman, who say, 'I am going to the river to shake off
my sins,' and grasping the edges of their garments shake them violently
and imagine that in this way they can slough off a whole year's
transgressions." However, it is with this meaning for the masses that
the ceremony has survived.[22](jms32.htm#an_11_22)

Less formal food offerings were also fairly common. The Talmud cites the
opinion of R. Eleazar b. Pedat: "He who leaves crumbs on the table is to
be regarded as a worshiper of heathen gods," and from the discussion it
would appear that not only "crumbs" but sometimes whole loaves were set
on the table at the conclusion of a meal. Other usages of the same
nature were popular in Talmudic times; try as they might the rabbis
could not root them out. They compromised by forbidding the leaving or
scattering of food "that may spoil," thus accepting the practices but
obscuring their purpose. In the Middle Ages the Talmudic custom was
sedulously observed; crumbs, "but not morsels of bread," were left on
the table, the explanation offered being that this was a symbolic
expression of hospitality to the wayfarer and the needy. Still we find
that on certain occasions, notably on the eve of a circumcision, a table
was set especially for the delectation of the spirits.

On Friday nights, too, a loaf of bread and a cup of wine were set aside
during the meal or left standing overnight. Some advanced the dubious
rationalization that this was "in commemoration of the manna" which fell
in double portion on the eve of the Sabbath, but there were rabbis who
saw through the shallow evasion and did not hesitate to categorize it as
"setting a table for the demons." Yet it continued to be done, sometimes
with the frank admission that "it extends fullness of blessing over the
entire week." During the Passover

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Seder* a cup of
wine is filled expressly for the Prophet Elijah, who is believed to
visit every Jewish home on that occasion, and the door is opened for him
to enter—this time the offering is to a good spirit, rather than an evil
one. But during the same service there is a late custom, which arose in
German-Jewish circles, to pour out a drop of wine at the mention of each
of the ten plagues, possibly to placate the evil spirits, who may be
impelled by the reference to so many disasters to visit some of them
upon the celebrants. Israel Isserlein's biographer wrote of him, "He
always spilled some of the water from his cup before drinking," thus
observing a universal Jewish custom going back to Talmudic times. The
explanation then given was that the water might have been contaminated
by a demon —but obviously merely spilling some of it doesn't purify it
all. The intention was to induce the demon to neutralize the possible
ill effect of the water by making him a libation.

On Saturday evening, during the *Habdalah* ceremony which marks the
beginning of the new week, another libation was offered to the spirits,
as part of the ritual. Some of the wine was poured upon the ground "as a
good omen for the entire week, to symbolize good fortune and blessing,"
for was it not written in the Talmud, "A man in whose home wine does not
flow like water is not among the truly blessed"? This custom was not
mentioned earlier than the Geonic period; the Talmudic support was
wholly arbitrary, for the plain sense of the words is the reverse of the
interpretation here given them. The Talmud speaks of overflowing wine
not as a symbol of blessing to come, but as a token of blessings already
enjoyed. The Geonim admitted that the custom was not altogether
respectable when they included it among a list of superstitious
practices. Centuries later we come across a recognition of its true
significance which shows the retentiveness of the popular memory. Moses
Mat in the sixteenth century wrote that this practice is intended to
"give their portion to the company of Korah," namely, to the powers of
evil. And that portion was not inconsiderable. As one rabbi in Silesia
remarked, "If I had the wine that is poured upon the ground in Austria
during *Habdalah* it would suffice to quench my thirst for a whole
year!" This custom of pouring out some wine over which a blessing had
been recited, which appears again in the wedding ceremony, may have been
considered by some people not as an offering to the spirits, but as a
means of driving them off. Christians in those days believed that
consecrated water had such power, and Jews may

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

also have believed that the wine of the "cup of blessing" would have the
same effect.[23](jms32.htm#an_11_23)

The final weapon in the anti-demonic strategy is that of deceit. It
figures prominently in the initiation, marriage and burial rites of
primitive peoples and not a few examples have been collected from
European folk-customs. Medieval Jews, however, resorted to this device
only rarely. Apart from several instances connected with birth and
marriage, to be cited later, it was most commonly employed in changing
an invalid's name so that the spirits who might be charged with
effecting his death would be unable to locate him. This deception was
also practiced by individuals who had suffered a run of bad luck; just
as criminals adopt aliases to evade the police, so medieval Jews
embraced new names to give their spirit harriers the slip. Changing
one's residence, or moving out of a city altogether, was another way of
confusing and eluding the demons; this remedy was suggested to people
whose fortune had soured, to couples whose children died young, to men
who had lost their peace of mind through the operation of love
charms.[24](jms32.htm#an_11_24)

#### BIRTH, MARRIAGE AND DEATH

Birth, marriage, illness, death—these were the moments when a pall
descended upon man—not only upon the individuals directly involved, but
upon all those who were in their vicinity. It was in such moments that
the whole battery of anti-demonic weapons was trained upon man's mortal
enemies, that we find a massing of all those superstitious devices which
from time immemorial have been accredited with potency to counteract
magic, curses, the evil eye, to cure disease, to shatter the onslaught
of the evil spirits.

A brief enumeration of the customs associated in Jewish life with these
critical moments, which display either singly or in combination the
anti-demonic measures described, may astound many Jews familiar with
some of them as a respectable part of Jewish ceremonial. The Jewish
propensity for re-interpreting ineradicable primitive usages and
endowing them with religious values has successfully masked their true
significance, at least in the western world. In Eastern Europe and in
the Orient, where more primitive attitudes still prevail among the
masses, an awareness of the real import of such customs still persists,
albeit along with a doctrinal acceptance of the

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

rationalizations which the rabbinic purifiers of Judaism have
promulgated. This was the case during the Middle Ages—most teachers
struggled valiantly to uproot the superstitious ideas, if not the actual
practices with which they were associated, but many comments reveal the
ineffectuality of their efforts. Not all of these practices were
employed collectively, nor were they of equal moment; the selection
varied from place to place and from time to time, often according to
individual predilection, and was frequently accompanied by the recital
of Biblical verses, amulets, etc.

##### Birth

1\. The woman in childbirth was closely guarded; men were stationed in
the house who prayed for her and her child, and recited various Psalms
that were believed to be effective against the spirits. They were
warned, however, on no account "to gossip about any sins that she might
have committed." After the birth of her child she was not permitted to
stir out of the house alone until after the
circumcision.[25](jms32.htm#an_11_25)

2\. The Scroll of the *Torah* and phylacteries were placed on her bed,
or at least brought to the door of her room.[26](jms32.htm#an_11_26)

3\. Candles were lit in her behalf.[27](jms32.htm#an_11_27)

4\. During the last days prior to delivery she would keep a knife with
her when she was alone. According to a late report, which probably
reflects an earlier usage, the key to the synagogue was placed in her
hand during labor; in isolated country places and villages where there
was no synagogue the key to a church was borrowed for this
purpose.[28](jms32.htm#an_11_28)

5\. A circle was drawn around the lying-in bed, and a magical
inscription (reading "Sanvi, Sansanvi, Semangelaf, Adam and Eve, barring
Lilit") was chalked upon the walls or door of the
room.[29](jms32.htm#an_11_29)

6\. I know of no record of an actual offering to the spirits at this
time, though it was customary among the Germans, and occurs in Oriental
Jewries. However, a prime protective amulet bore the figures of fowl,
which may be taken to have been a refinement of an earlier
offering.[30](jms32.htm#an_11_30)

7\. It was suggested, to ease labor pains, that a woman should wear an
article of her husband's clothing, such as his doublet, trousers, or
belt.[31](jms32.htm#an_11_31)

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

##### Circumcision

1\. The rite itself must be considered as in some degree a measure of
protection against the forces of evil. It is significant that the
heightened danger which threatens both mother and infant during the
eight days prior to the operation subsides immediately afterward.
Circumcision ushers the child into the community of Israel and at the
same time evokes the guardianship of the powers of good. Certain
incidental usages illustrate the potency attributed to circumcision. A
Geonic source is cited as authority for this practice: the bloody
foreskin was placed in a bowl containing water and spices, and each
member of the congregation, as he left the synagogue (where the rite
used to be performed), would bathe his hands and face. A late work
suggests, as a "wonderful charm," that during the days preceding the
rite the foreskin of a child previously circumcised be put into the
mouth of the infant who is about to undergo the operation. In a
thirteenth-century manuscript we read: "Why was it ordained that the
cloth \[upon which the circumciser wipes his blood-stained hands and
mouth\] be hung at the door of the synagogue \[during and after the
operation\]? My uncle, Ephraim of Bonn, said that the sages explained it
thus: Israel was redeemed from Egypt because of a double blood merit,
the blood of the Paschal lamb and the blood of circumcision; and Israel
'shall take of the blood and put it on the lintel' of their houses (cf.
Ex. 12:7) as a token that the Destroyer shall not have power over their
homes, to do them harm. . . ."[32](jms32.htm#an_11_32)

2\. The child was very carefully guarded during these eight critical
days.[33](jms32.htm#an_11_33)

3\. "The essence of protection is to remain awake nights and study
*Torah* until the circumcision." The writer might have added, and to
recite mystical prayers and Psalms, for these were included in the
vigils. This should be done "particularly on the night before the
circumcision, because the spirits are most incensed then," or, as
another writer put it, "because Satan strives to harm the child and to
prevent it from experiencing the religious rite of circumcision, for he
is very much provoked that Jews should keep the commandment by whose
merit they are saved from *Gehinnom*." This is the *Wachnacht*, during
which an unremitting watch was maintained over the child, eked out with
prayers and study. The occasion of a circumcision was celebrated in
ancient times with a feast on the night before,

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

or on the day of the performance of the rite. In the Middle Ages both
feasts were observed, or rather the one was begun in the evening and
continued on the following day. The special *Wachnacht* custom developed
out of this. How early this happened we cannot say; the references to it
go back no further than the sixteenth century, and the name itself was
not used until later. One sixteenth-century writer did record that in
Elsass the name used was *Gitot Nacht* while in other parts of Germany
and in Metz it was called *Wazinacht*, but these transliterations are
not very helpful. They have been variously interpreted as *Gottesnacht*
and *Weizennacht*, as French and German versions of *Wachnacht*, and as
*Güets Nacht* and *Waizen-Nacht*. Whichever of these translations may be
correct, the suggestion of Güdemann that the terms signify *Spuknacht*
may be accepted as essentially faithful to the temper of the
observance.[34](jms32.htm#an_11_34)

4\. It was customary, in some places, "to set a table with varieties of
food on the night before the circumcision, with the explanation that
they are doing this for the child's star" (or "to bring him good luck")
. The rabbis pointed out that this was nothing else than an offering to
the spirits.[35](jms32.htm#an_11_35)

5\. The custom of setting aside a chair for the Prophet Elijah during
the circumcision goes back to early times, and was connected with a
legend that God had rewarded the prophet for his zealous defense of this
rite with the promise that he would be present at every circumcision. In
origin, this custom was of a piece with the offering to the spirits, to
bribe the evil ones, and to entertain the good ones, and is analogous to
similar practices among the Romans. It was not merely a symbolic
gesture; something of Elijah's presence was actually believed to inhabit
his chair. During the Middle Ages it was customary for the assembled
guests to rise before the ceremony, and to greet the unseen visitor with
the words, "Blessed be he that cometh."[36](jms32.htm#an_11_36)

6\. "This also is a protective measure," we read: "the house should be
full of light" on the days before the circumcision, and candles were lit
in profusion, especially while the circumcision was being performed. The
purpose was not to obtain light, for the rite was performed during the
daytime. The variety of explanations indicates uncertainty about the
real reason, or a desire to obscure it. "The commandment is a lamp and
the *Torah* is light" (Prov. 6:23) was cited as Scriptural basis for the
practice; or it was explained as "an expression of rejoicing and honor";
or again, as a notice to

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jewish passersby
that the ceremony was in progress, originating in an ancient
proscription against circumcisions which consequently had to be
performed in secret. In more recent times it was customary to light
thirteen candles, ostensibly to correspond with the thirteen occurrences
of the word "covenant" (*berit*) in the Biblical chapter (Gen. 17) which
speaks of circumcision, or with the thirteen tribes (including the
half-tribes of Ephraim and Menasseh), or with the twelve tribes plus one
for the child, this last candle being permitted to burn itself
out.[37](jms32.htm#an_11_37)

7\. The *Hollekreisch*, which has already been described, was a measure
to drive off evil spirits during the ceremony of naming the child, by
shouting and tossing the infant in the air.[38](jms32.htm#an_11_38)

##### Marriage

1\. Both bride and groom (in some places only the groom) fasted on the
wedding day. A variety of far-fetched explanations was offered for this
custom; one, which attained the height of absurdity, was that the groom
might not be suspected of inebriety during the
ceremony![39](jms32.htm#an_11_39)

2\. The groom was escorted from his home to the synagogue by attendants;
"just as a king is surrounded by his guards, so the attendants surround
the groom," was the significant parallel. Sometimes the entire
congregation accompanied him. For a while before and after the wedding
the groom was forbidden to venture out-of-doors
alone.[40](jms32.htm#an_11_40)

3\. The wedding procession, in broad daylight, was preceded by young men
bearing lighted torches or candles, which were sometimes thrown into the
air. Loud and often discordant music characterized the
procession.[41](jms32.htm#an_11_41)

4\. The custom of breaking a glass at the wedding, which, according to
some, goes back to Talmudic times, was a regular feature of the medieval
ceremony. The groom would step on the glass, or dash it on the ground,
or shatter it against the north wall. The explanations generally account
for this practice as a token of sadness which should leaven all
rejoicings, or more commonly after the fourteenth century, as a sign of
mourning for the destruction of Jerusalem; but some of the very rabbis
who advanced these explanations were aware of their artificiality. There
are indications that the real purpose of the custom had not been
forgotten, as in the comment that it was

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

intended "to give the accuser \[Satan\] his due." The demons were
believed to come from the north, and therefore the detail that the glass
was thrown against the north wall has special significance in this
connection. The custom combined an attempt to frighten off the demons
with noise, and a direct attack upon them.[42](jms32.htm#an_11_42)

5\. The wedding ceremony contained several instances of presenting
gift-offerings to the spirits. Some of the wine over which the marriage
blessings had been recited was poured on the ground. A special feature
of this practice, mentioned in one source, namely, to scatter the wine
over the entire house, may perhaps be accounted for as due to the belief
that the "wine of blessing" drives away the demons. In Talmudic times it
was customary to strew food, such as wine and oil, parched corn and
nuts, fish and meats, before the bridal pair; during the Middle Ages the
practice usually was limited to scattering grains of wheat over and
around them, just as we do today with rice. In some places gold coins
were mingled with the wheat; in others, salt was scattered over the
couple. The Talmudic custom of carrying a hen and rooster before the
bride and groom was transmuted in the Middle Ages to flinging a pair of
fowl over their heads. The commonest explanation of these practices was
that they were symbols of fertility and prosperity. But as Samter has
shown after a study of similar usages all over the world, such fertility
symbols are at bottom offerings to the spirits to gain their good-will.
The presence of the gold coins, which may be viewed either as bribes, or
as an anti-demonic use of metal, and of salt, which certainly was
intended to drive away the demons, emphasizes the general nature of
these customs.[43](jms32.htm#an_11_43)

6\. An effort was made to introduce a note of mourning into the
ceremony, ostensibly over the destruction of Jerusalem. Bride and groom
wore white shoes, ashes or dust was strewn upon the heads of both, or of
the groom alone, or a strip of black cloth was wound around their heads,
they were clothed in funereal garb, the bride wearing a shroud called a
*sarganes*, the groom, a hooded cloak, or *mitron*, "as mourners do in
the Rhineland." The custom of crying and wailing at weddings has
remained prevalent to this day, especially among the Jews of Eastern
Europe and the Orient. The real purpose of all this doubtless, was to
delude the demons into imagining it was a sorrowful and not a joyous
occasion, and thus to avoid arousing their envy and
hatred.[44](jms32.htm#an_11_44)

7\. During the ceremony the groom's *mitron*, or his prayer-shawl,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

was spread over the head of the bride, and immediately after the wedding
he "placed in her bosom" his doublet, girdle and cap. These may have
been vestiges of an ancient exchange of clothes between the two, a
custom frequently encountered among other peoples. The widespread custom
of covering the bride's face with a veil, which prevailed throughout the
Middle Ages, was originally intended to hide her from the
spirits.[45](jms32.htm#an_11_45)

8\. In some places the groom carried a piece of iron in his pocket
during the ceremony. Toward the end of the Middle Ages it became
customary to march the bride three times around her mate, apparently a
version of the magic circle. And finally, to point the moral, no sooner
was the ceremony over than "they would rush the groom off to the wedding
chamber before the bride, by way of rejoicing." A strange "way of
rejoicing" indeed! The mad dash was only to get him to the bridal
chamber before the demons, recovering from the bombardment to which they
had been subjected, prevented him from enjoying his newly won connubial
happiness.[46](jms32.htm#an_11_46)

##### Death

The same motifs are repeated in the customs connected with death. A
dying man was on no account to be left alone. Mystical prayers were
prescribed to be read in his presence, notably the prayer *Ana Bekoaḥ*,
which contains an acrostic of the powerful 42-letter name of God.
Candles were lit beside his bed, quite frankly, "to drive away the
demons." It was suggested that a loaf of bread be placed beside him "to
straighten his limbs," in other words, to ease his final moments.
Chicken feathers, no doubt because of the relationship that existed
between demons and this fowl, were believed to prolong the death-agony,
and therefore bedding containing such feathers was removed from beneath
the dying man. Such practices were intended to repel the demons, who, in
their struggle for the body of the departing one, were held responsible
for the anguish that he suffered. But death itself is the work of spirit
forces, and the very measures that oblige the demons to keep their
distance, and thus make death easier, have the same effect upon the
angel of death, and upon the soul preparing timidly for its exit from
the body, and therefore delay the end. This was undoubtedly in the mind
of many folk who resorted to these measures. However, believing that
death is an inherent phase of life, and that it is decreed

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

by God, the rabbis strongly opposed such efforts to delay its coming.
Thus, they forbade shouting at a dying man, or engaging in any noisy
occupation, such as chopping wood, for noise prevents the soul from
leaving the body. Similarly, salt delays death, and one should not put
any upon the dying man's tongue for that purpose; but it was permissible
to remove salt if it had coagulated upon his tongue. It was also
customary to place the key to the synagogue under his head, though this
too was forbidden by the authorities.[47](jms32.htm#an_11_47)

THE CORPSE. The rules for preparing the corpse for burial were compiled
in early post-Talmudic times, and comprise practices such as closing the
eyes, placing metal or salt on the body, setting a light at its head,
etc., which were undoubtedly originally intended to confound the spirits
and the ghost of the deceased, both of which the survivors feared. While
it was forbidden to place a Scroll of the *Torah* on the coffin, as
seems to have been done at times, it could be set near the body. The
Talmud lamely explained the watch over the corpse as intended to protect
it from rodents and other such marauders, but later writers confessed
that it was meant as a protection against attack from the spirit world.
A ritual of study and prayer for this watch was developed during the
Middle Ages. The Polish Kabbalist, Isaiah Horowitz, wrote, "I have
received a tradition that those who watch the corpse from the moment of
death until it is covered with earth should gather around it so closely
that not a breath of 'outside' \[a term often applied to demons\] air
can seep past their guard; they should constantly repeat this prayer
without an instant's pause, even a thousand times"; the prayer is the
acrostic of the 42-letter name of God. Another late medieval custom was
to march seven times around the corpse and to recite "certain Biblical
selections which drive away the spirits so that they may not seize the
body." The belief that a clenched fist, the "fig," is anathema to
demons, led to the practice of bending the fingers of a corpse so that
even in the grave their depredations might be forestalled. The rabbis
inveighed against this "heathenish" custom, and insisted that the
fingers must be straightened out before burial, but the practice
persisted. In later times it was modified and the fingers were bent in
such a way as to form the name *Shaddai*, again arousing rabbinic
displeasure. Finally, those who had prepared the corpse for burial were
instructed to wash in salt and water, and to beware even of turning over
the board upon which the body had lain lest

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

they incite the ire of the deceased and "some one die within three
days." 48

BURIAL. Funeral rites reflect in a dozen ways the ever-present fear of
the supernatural, temporarily heightened as the demons and the ghost of
the deceased hover in uncomfortable proximity to the living. Several
times the warning is repeated not to set a coffin containing a corpse on
top of another, and not to leave a grave open overnight, "or someone
will assuredly die in a few days"; one source has it "within nine days."
The numeral is indicative of the cause of apprehension; the spirits are
touchy about such things, and make speedy reprisal. This explanation is
not given in the sources, but as an illustration of the tenacious
popular awareness of the purposes of superstitious acts I may note that
in recent times, among Russian Jews, when a grave had been dug and was
not used promptly, it was filled in overnight and a rooster was buried
in it![49](jms32.htm#an_11_49)

1\. The custom of pouring out all the water in and near a house in which
a death has occurred is not mentioned in Jewish sources earlier than the
thirteenth century, and is evidently a medieval innovation. It was
observed by Christians in Germany and France at a still earlier date,
and was no doubt borrowed from them. The Jewish practice, which does not
follow the more usual and simpler procedure of pouring water across the
threshold after the corpse has been removed, to bar the way to the
homesick ghost, is susceptible of several explanations. In Christian
France, where the same custom existed, these three explanations were
offered in the fifteenth century: the soul of the deceased might drown
if all the vessels were not emptied; the water reflects the struggle
between the soul and the demons, which human eyes may not behold; the
soul bathes in it thrice before leaving for the other world, and it may
not therefore be used.

The contemporaneous Jewish explanations differed: spilling the water
constitutes a silent annunciation of a death, which it is dangerous to
mention aloud; the angel of death, who according to Talmudic legend
fulfills his mission with a sword steeped in poison, might let a drop of
the deadly fluid fall into the water, and thus render it unfit to drink.
The fact that all the water in and near the house was spilled exposes
the first explanation as an obvious rationalization; the second sounds
more "realistic," according to medieval standards. In modern times Jews
in Eastern Europe set a glass of water and a towel beside the bed of a
dying man so that the angel

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

of death may cleanse his sword and wipe it. But this same custom also
prevails among non-Jews, their explanation being that the soul bathes
and dries itself before departing on its long journey. This is the
likeliest interpretation not only of this late custom, but of the
earlier one also; it emerges quite explicitly from the many examples of
this and related practices which scholars have collected from all over
the world. Fear that the immersion of the soul would contaminate the
water for the living was responsible for *all* of it being poured out,
to make sure the danger was averted. Even food prepared with water was
suspect. Interestingly, a sixteenth-century Inquisitorial "Edict of
Faith" posited the following as an unmistakable mark of Marranism
(adherence to Judaism while professing Christianity): "Pouring water
from jars and pitchers when someone has died, believing that the soul of
such persons will come and bathe in the water."

We must recognize, however, that such customs are rarely simple in their
motivation and meaning, but rather come in time to represent a
perplexing maze of folk-notions. This usage was observed for any or all
of the reasons advanced—or for none at all, except the apprehension that
something terrible would happen if it weren't. There is a possibility,
even, that the water was also intended as a libation to the spirits or
to the soul of the deceased, for "if one who is about to drink water and
has already said the blessings, hears that someone has died in town, he
should sip a little and pour out the balance." And yet this provision
may merely be the result of a desire to maintain the custom, without
understanding its meaning, under special circumstances, namely, when a
blessing, which requires that some of the water be drunk, has been said.
So complex do the motives behind these observances become that it is
well-nigh impossible to single them out with any assurance. It may be of
interest to recall that we have in English a colloquial expression which
commemorates this widespread custom of pouring out liquids—when a person
dies we say he has "kicked the bucket"![50](jms32.htm#an_11_50)

2\. There was considerable difference of opinion in Talmudic and
medieval literature as to whether mourners should precede or follow the
coffin out of the house. The view that "no man should go out first" was
predicated on the belief that "the spirits roam the universe to learn
what is decreed above concerning the living," and beholding a condemned
sinner before their attention is absorbed by the coffin and its
occupant, may pounce upon him. More simply,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

the demons await the exit of the corpse, but are prepared to seize a
living victim if he makes his appearance first. It was generally agreed,
moreover, that women should walk apart from men in the procession,
because the spirits display a marked partiality for womankind; "the
angel of death and Satan dance before them," it was explained, or,
again, "the spirits of uncleanness cling to them." This caution was
observed especially on the return from the cemetery, and "in Worms the
men turn their faces to the wall when the women walk by" on their way
home.[51](jms32.htm#an_11_51)

3\. On the way to the cemetery, and after the body had been interred, it
was customary, at least toward the end of our period, to recite the
"anti-demonic psalm" a number of times, "to drive away the demons."
Shabbetai, the son of Isaiah Horowitz, instructed his sons in his
testament, "While my body is being lowered into the grave have seven
pious and learned men repeat Psalm 91 seven
times."[52](jms32.htm#an_11_52)

4\. The custom of tearing up some grass and earth, after the conclusion
of the funeral rites, and tossing it behind one's back, cannot be traced
earlier than the eleventh century. Eliezer b. Nathan, in the twelfth
century, did not know, or pretended not to know, the origin of this
usage; he introduced his explanation with the words "it seems to me,"
and went on to base it on three Biblical verses, Ps. 103:14, Ps. 72:16,
and Job 2: 12, which speak of earth, grass, and sprinkling dust upon
one's head as a token of sorrow. Later writers, citing this explanation,
describe the action as an expression of faith in the resurrection of the
dead. Eleventh-century rabbis, quoted in later works, said it was done
in order "to mark a separation between the mourners and death." But in
the thirteenth century one writer, Samson b. Ẓadok, indicated that its
real purpose was not altogether forgotten. "This is the reason why they
throw it behind and not in front," he wrote: "I read in a *Midrash* that
the soul accompanies the body of the deceased to the grave, and is
unable to leave that spot until it receives permission from the
congregation; throwing the earth and grass behind one is a sign that the
permission is granted, meaning, in effect, 'Go in peace.'" We have here
undoubtedly a borrowed custom. It is met with in medieval Germany and
France, where along with the general belief that throwing things to the
rear repulses the demons who lurk at one's back, there are specific
instances of this device being used after a funeral to drive away the
spirits, or the soul itself, which may follow the mourners home. The
superstitious intent of this usage is enhanced by the fact that a
manuscript source

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

dating from the thirteenth century mentions that the action is to be
repeated three times. It was this custom that was responsible for a
charge of magic levelled against the Jews of Paris in the twelfth
century; luckily R. Moses b. Yeḥiel demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the king that it was not intended "to cast a magic spell over the
Gentiles, to kill them," but to signify the Jew's belief in the
resurrection, and averted a disastrous outcome to this venture in
Gentile superstition.[53](jms32.htm#an_11_53)

5\. In Talmudic and Geonic times, it was customary for the funeral
procession, on its return from the cemetery, to stop and sit down seven
times. Although several medieval authorities maintained that this
practice had been dispensed with altogether, it persisted in some
places, seven or three sittings being observed. Toward the end of our
period these halts were coupled with the recitation of Ps. 91 to verse
11, which comprises seven words, one word of that verse being added at
each stop. It was frankly admitted that this was intended to confuse and
shake off "the evil spirits which follow them home." After the service
the chief mourners passed between a double line of people and were then
escorted home by the entire company.[54](jms32.htm#an_11_54)

6\. The custom of washing the hands after a funeral is very widespread;
it seems to have made its way into Judaism in the early post-Talmudic
period, and was generally observed during the Middle Ages. Before
entering their homes all those who had visited the cemetery bathed their
hands, and some, their eyes and face also. In certain mystical circles
the lavation was performed three times. Efforts were made to find a
Biblical precedent for this act, but along with such pious endeavors
there was a general admission that it was done "to dispel the spirits of
uncleanness" which cling to one's person, these being "the demons that
follow them home."[55](jms32.htm#an_11_55)

7\. Mourning rites were most stringent during the seven days after
interment, when the soul was believed to suffer intense agony on being
parted from the body, and to wander disconsolately back and forth
between its former home and the grave. (The earlier distinction between
a three- and a seven-day stage of mourning found no practical expression
in the Middle Ages.) The ensuing periods of a month and a year
represented a gradual weaning away of the soul from the body, and a
commensurate easing of the mourning rites. Many of the observances and
customs which applied during the first period indicate a desire to
protect the mourners against the

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

soul of the departed, and also a suspicion that the mourners themselves
are or may be contaminated by contact with the spirit world. Thus,
people forbore to drink out of a glass that had been used by a mourner,
or to borrow anything from him during the seven-day period. The mourners
were forbidden to leave their homes, except on the Sabbath and holidays,
when, in some communities, they were escorted to the synagogue by the
members of the congregation. Yet there are instances of refusal to
permit mourners to join in the synagogal service, even on the High
Holydays, and some would deny mourners the privilege of officiating at
services throughout an entire year after their bereavement. It was
customary to keep a candle burning in the death chamber during the week
after burial; one report has it that each night of the week a small wax
candle and a cup of water and salt were set on the spot where the head
of the deceased lay when he died. "When I read my account of this custom
to R. Israel Isserlein," wrote Joseph b. Moses, his disciple, "he
shrugged his shoulders, but he didn't tell me to cross it out." The
practice of "wrapping the head" in a mourning cloth was perhaps
originally intended to disguise the mourners; if so, its significance
was lost sight of in the Middle Ages, when we find that in some places
it was dropped altogether "because the Gentiles laugh at us," while in
the Rhineland it led to the adoption of a distinctive mourning costume
with a cowl, the *mitron*. Of similar import were the customs of letting
the hair and beard grow, of changing one's seat in the synagogue, and
the like.[56](jms32.htm#an_11_56)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. Nature and Man](jms14)
