[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms18)  [Next](jms20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

### APPENDIX I

### THE FORMATION OF MAGICAL NAMES

Whence came the multitude of new names that made its way into Jewish
mysticism toward the end of the Geonic period and during the Middle
Ages? Was it concocted out of pure fancy, or did it bear any discernible
relation to the names already in use? Can we discover any method behind
the mad luxuriousness of thirteenth-century invention? The material
itself, as often as not, defies analysis; so many terms are obviously
corrupted beyond all hope of restoration; many of the names actually
look impossible, as though the scribe or typesetter had simply jumbled
together a group of letters and dared the reader to make sense of them.
It not seldom happens that the same name is written in two or three
different forms in one and the same recipe. Gaster noted that the
copyist of the text of *The Sword of Moses* which he published, "gives
in many places what are intended to be different
readings";[1](jms38.htm#an_a1_1) the same is true of medieval
manuscripts which I have examined. The lack of consistency in the names
in a work like *Sefer Raziel* is exasperating—not only do varying forms
of one name appear from page to page, but the same angel often bears so
many aliases that one cannot keep up with him.

It is possible, however, to establish a set of rules according to which
most of these names were created, so that we may observe the process at
work even when the results in particular cases conform none too closely
to our expectations. These rules were originally formulated in the
Talmudic period and were extended and elaborated during the Middle Ages.

1\. Following the model of such traditional angel names as Gabriel,
Raphael, Michael, a large proportion of the new names was constructed of
a root term and a theophorous suffix, el (God) being the commonest, with
*yah*, *yahu* and other such particles of names of God also occurring
often. The first part represented the characteristic attribute or
function of the new angel. *Sefer Raziel* set down this principle in
these terms: "The angels are named in accordance with the special
activities over which they are appointed, as Raziel, who transmitted the
mysteries (*raz*) to Adam; Yarḥiel, who rules

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

the moon (*yeraḥ*); Kochbiel, who governs the stars (*kochab*), etc."
According to a later writer, "The names of the angels change constantly
to conform with the missions to which they have been temporarily
assigned, for the particular mission determines the name at the
time."[2](jms38.htm#an_a1_2)

2\. Another method widely employed involved the manipulation of
traditionally received divine names or particles of these names: a. by
combining them and alternating their component letters, such as
‏יאהדונהי‎, which comprises ‏יהוה אדני‎; b. by combining a name with a
word representing an attribute: ‏שקדחזי‎ is ‏שדי חזק‎; the letters here
are merely jumbled together; c. by dropping letters from, or adding new
ones to such names, like the ‏אני והו‎ mentioned in the Talmud, which
some scholars take to be shortened forms of ‏אדני יהוה‎, or the
Tetragrammaton plus inserted letters which may explain ‏יכה
יוסה‎;[3](jms38.htm#an_a1_3) d. by transposing the letters of these
names, e.g. ‏אדני‎ may assume 24 forms: ‏דאני‎, ‏אנדי‎, etc.

Other methods frequently applied were originally created to facilitate
the allegorical and mystical interpretation of the Bible. According to
the mystical view the entire *Torah* is made up of holy names which have
been so skilfully secreted among the letters of the text that only an
expert can ferret them out.[4](jms38.htm#an_a1_4) These systems provided
the means of educing new names from the text of the Bible by a series of
permutations, combinations and substitutions.

3\. The simplest of these methods comprised merely the displacement of
the letters of a word, so that the first word of the Bible, ‏בראשית‎,
might become ‏שתיברא‎ or ‏אשרבית‎, etc.; letters were lifted out of a
text; the words of a text were split up into three-letter units; words
were read backwards, etc.

4\. NOTARIKON[5](jms38.htm#an_a1_5)—originally this was employed as a
method of abbreviation, to compose a word from the initial or final
letters of several (*e.g.*, ‏שאו מרום עיניכם‎ \[Is. 40:20\]= ‏שמע‎, or
‏ברא אלהים לעשות‎ \[Gen. 2:3\]= ‏אמת‎), or to decompose one word into
several (*e.g.*, ‏אדם‎ = ‏אדם דוד משיח‎, or ‏אפר דם מרה‎, ‏פרדם‎ = ‏פשט
רמן דרוש סוד‎) for purposes of anagogic homiletics. This method was
later used to create some of the most important names in the entire
mystical catalogue. One of these names,[6](jms38.htm#an_a1_6) guaranteed
to protect its user against all weapons, is ‏יהמהיה‎, which on
examination turns out to be nothing more than an acrostic of the
concluding letters of the first six (Hebrew) words of Ex. 15:11, "Who is
like unto Thee among the mighty, O Lord?" The famous

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

name Agla (‏אגלא‎), whose awesome powers were set in operation even more
often by Christian magicians than by Jews, is generally assumed to be
composed of the first letters of the words, "Thou art mighty for ever, O
Lord!" (from the second benediction of the ‘Amidah) . That Christians
who employed it understood the principle of its formation, if not its
original source, is indicated by the fact that in Germany these four
letters, inscribed on wooden platters which were then believed to be
capable of extinguishing fires, were read as the initials of
"Allmächtiger Gott, lösch’ aus!" The interpretation, no doubt, varied
with the use. One medieval Jewish writer traced this name to the initial
letters of the four verses, Gen. 49:8-11.[7](jms38.htm#an_a1_7) Whether
so or not in this particular case, the method of joining letters from
various verses was widely used. The book *Shimmush Tehillim*, which
assigns magical potencies to the Psalms, created a host of fantastic
names from letters chosen more or less at random from each Psalm; for
instance, the name that is hidden in Ps. 4 is *Yhyh*, made up of the
final letters of verses 2, 3, g and 6; in Ps. 1 it is *Alḥd*, which
consists of the initials of the first words in verses 1 and 4, the last
letter of the last word in verse 3, and the second letter of the sixth
word in verse 6. It is likely that there *was* a method to this madness,
but if so it wholly escapes us now. The possibilities of combination
were, of course, unlimited. The most celebrated example of this method
is the use to which Ex. 14:19-21 was put to form the 72-particle name of
God.

5\. GEMATRIA[8](jms38.htm#an_a1_8)—The letters of the Hebrew alphabet
also serve as numerals: ‏א‎ = 1, ‏ב‎ = 2, ‏ג‎ = 3, etc. *Gematria* was a
process of creating equivalences from the numerical values of words, and
provided an ingenious method of reading novel and unexpected meanings
into a text: ‏רדו‎ (Gen. 42:12) =210 = the years of Egyptian bondage;
‏זנושנתם‎ (Deut. 4:25) =852=the duration of the Jewish state; etc. That
Metatron is the demiurge was proved by the fact that numerically both
Metatron and Shaddai equal 314. Sometimes only the simple units were
employed (‏מספר קטן‎) so that ‏י‎ (10) and ‏ק‎ (100) were counted as 1,
‏כ‎ (20) and ‏ר‎ (200) were 2, etc. By this means it was possible to
prove mathematically that *God* is solely *good* and the *first* of all
beings, for ‏יהוה‎ = 1(0) + 5 + 6 + 5=17; ‏טוב‎ = 9 + 6 + 2 = 17; and
‏ראשון‎ = 2(00) + 1+ 3(00) + 6 + 5(0) = 17.

This method was very popular and was elaborated in the course of time
until it became an exercise in higher mathematics, which no

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

doubt possessed intrinsic interest for its devotees in addition to its
practical utility in interpreting the Bible—and in creating new names.
Seven ways of figuring numerical values have been
distinguished:[9](jms38.htm#an_a1_9) a. simple addition: ‏א‎, ‏ב‎, ‏ג‎ =
1, 2, 3 = 6; b. the sum of the letters plus, for the word: ‏אבג‎ =6 + 1;
c. the sum of the letters plus the number of letters in the word: ‏אבג‎
= 6 + 3. Sometimes b. and c. were joined, so that ‏אבג‎ =6 + 1 + 3; d.
addition of the values of the names of the letters: ‏א‎ = ‏אלף‎ = 111,
‏ב‎ = ‏בית‎ = 412, etc. Thus "Hear O Israel" is equated with the final
"One" of the verse (‏אחד‎ = 111 + 408 + 434 = 953 which is the
equivalent of ‏שמע ישראל‎, 410 + 541 + 2 = 953); e. addition of the
cardinal numbers: ‏א‎ = ‏אחד‎ =13, ‏ב‎ = ‏שנים‎ =400, ‏ג‎ = ‏שלשה‎ =635,
etc. By a combination of d. and e. we get ‏י‎ = ‏יוד‎ = 20 = ‏עשרים‎
=620 = ‏כתר‎, therefore the letter *yod* represents the "crown" of
glory; f. adding the values of all the letters in the alphabet that
precede each letter of the word: ‏אהיה‎ = 1 + 15 + 55 + 15 = 86; g.
adding the squares of the numerical values: ‏אחד‎ =1 + 64 + 16 = 81.
Once the numerical value of a Biblical word or verse, selected as
especially significant for one reason or another, was arrived at, any
number of words adding up to the same total could be concocted, and by
their very obscurity and the "mystery" inherent in their character as
epitomes of important Biblical statements could achieve the status of
potent magical "names."

6\. TEMURAH[10](jms38.htm#an_a1_10)—substitution or permutation,
transposing the letters of a word (as in 2. above) or more frequently,
replacing them with artificial equivalents obtained from one or another
of a group of formal anagrams. Six of these proved the most popular:

a\. By folding the alphabet in the center we get

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|------|
| ‏כ‎ | ‏י‎ | ‏ט‎ | ‏ח‎ | ‏ז‎ | ‏ו‎ | ‏ה‎ | ‏ד‎ | ‏ג‎ | ‏ב‎ | ‏א‎  |
| ‏ל‎ | ‏מ‎ | ‏נ‎ | ‏ס‎ | ‏ע‎ | ‏פ‎ | ‏צ‎ | ‏ק‎ | ‏ר‎ | ‏ש‎ | ‏ת‎. |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Corresponding
letters on the upper and lower lines may be substituted for each other.

b\. Reversing the lower line gives us

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|------|
| ‏כ‎ | ‏י‎ | ‏ט‎ | ‏ח‎ | ‏ז‎ | ‏ו‎ | ‏ה‎ | ‏ד‎ | ‏ג‎ | ‏ב‎ | ‏א‎  |
| ‏ת‎ | ‏ש‎ | ‏ר‎ | ‏ק‎ | ‏צ‎ | ‏פ‎ | ‏ע‎ | ‏ס‎ | ‏נ‎ | ‏מ‎ | ‏ל‎. |

</div>

c\.

<div align="center">

|       |     |     |     |     |     |       |     |     |     |     |     |       |     |     |     |      |
|-------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-------|-----|-----|-----|------|
| (‏ך‎) | ‏ת‎ | ‏ש‎ | ‏ר‎ | ‏ק‎ |     | (‏נ‎) | ‏מ‎ | ‏ל‎ | ‏כ‎ | ‏י‎ |     | (‏ה‎) | ‏ד‎ | ‏ג‎ | ‏ב‎ | ‏א‎  |
| (‏ך‎) | ‏ם‎ | ‏ן‎ | ‏ף‎ | ‏ץ‎ |     | (‏נ‎) | ‏ס‎ | ‏ע‎ | ‏פ‎ | ‏צ‎ |     | (‏ה‎) | ‏ו‎ | ‏ז‎ | ‏ח‎ | ‏ט‎. |

</div>

 

These three groups are respectively the combinations equalling 10,

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 100 and 1000. The
five final letters (in the third group) have here their ancient
numerical values, 500 to 900.

d\.

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |     |      |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|------|
| ‏ז‎ | ‏ו‎ | ‏ה‎ | ‏ד‎ | ‏ג‎ | ‏ב‎ | ‏א‎  |
| ‏נ‎ | ‏מ‎ | ‏ל‎ | ‏כ‎ | ‏י‎ | ‏ט‎ | ‏ח‎  |
| ‏ש‎ | ‏ר‎ | ‏ק‎ | ‏צ‎ | ‏פ‎ | ‏ע‎ | ‏ס‎. |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The alphabet is
divided into three equal parts, the last letter, ‏ת‎, not being used.
Any one of the three letters in each column may be substituted for
another.

e\.

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|------|
| ‏ט‎ | ‏ח‎ | ‏ז‎ | ‏ו‎ | ‏ה‎ | ‏ד‎ | ‏ג‎ | ‏ב‎ | ‏א‎  |
| ‏צ‎ | ‏פ‎ | ‏ע‎ | ‏ס‎ | ‏נ‎ | ‏מ‎ | ‏ל‎ | ‏כ‎ | ‏י‎  |
| ‏ץ‎ | ‏ף‎ | ‏ן‎ | ‏ם‎ | ‏ך‎ | ‏ת‎ | ‏ש‎ | ‏ר‎ | ‏ק‎. |

</div>

as in d. with the final letters included; these final letters, for
purposes of *Gematria*, are here also given their ancient numerical
values, as in c.

f\. Each letter in a word is replaced by the letter immediately
succeeding it in the alphabet: ‏ב‎ for ‏א‎, ‏ג‎ for ‏ב‎, ‏ד‎ for ‏ג‎,
etc.

While the above alphabetical permutations are those most frequently
employed, they by no means exhaust the possibilities. The
fourteenth-century manuscript *Sefer Gematriaot*[11](jms38.htm#an_a1_11)
lists sixteen of them, and C. D. Ginsburg gives 24 in his work on the
*Kabbalah*. Some Kabbalists went so far as to substitute for the letters
of a word others resembling them in form, *e.g.*, ‏א‎ = ‏יוי‎, ‏ה‎ =
‏דו‎, etc., and gave consonantal significance even to vowel points in
this game.

It should be noted that several of these alphabets were often applied to
one word or sentence in conjunction, as when the name Shaddai (‏שדי‎)
was derived from the first verse of Genesis as follows: the ‏שׁ‎ is the
equivalent of ‏ב‎ (‏בראשית‎) by method a, the ‏ד‎ comes from ‏ה‎
(‏אלהים‎) by f, the ‏י‎ from ‏ש‎ (‏השמים‎) by b.[12](jms38.htm#an_a1_12)
While this, of course, was a forced reading of the name into the verse,
these alphabets were also used for creative purposes; the Tetragrammaton
(‏יהוה‎) appears as ‏מצפץ‎ (a), or ‏כוזו‎ (f), or ‏שצפצ‎ (b), etc. The
possible number of permutations and substitutions is endless, and when
we realize that all of these methods, *Notarikon*, *Gematria* and
*Temurah* (the three were usually lumped together as *Gematria* during
the Middle Ages), may be used together, the possibilities are
breath-taking. Is it any wonder that so many of these names defy
unriddling?

7\. Finally, words from foreign languages, names of pagan deities, even
terms from the Latin liturgy, were transliterated into Hebrew, and in
this guise became potent tools in the magician's hands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II. Ms. *Sefer Gematriaot*, On Gems](jms20)
