[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms16)  [Next](jms18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

### 15

### DREAMS

#### THE DREAM IN HUMAN AFFAIRS

IN THE long pre-Freudian centuries, before the mystery of the dream was
reduced to all too human terms, when men still listened for the voice of
God in the still of the night, dreams played a greater rôle in shaping
ideas and actions and careers than it is easy for us today to believe.
If we have come to look upon these nocturnal visions as the products of
experience, we have simply reversed the older, though not yet altogether
discarded, view which made of them initiators of experience. The
supernatural world communicated with man through the dream, and spoke
words of counsel and command which he felt impelled to heed. Galen, in
148 C.E., at the age of seventeen, turned to the study of medicine
because of a dream; in 1244 Ludwig IX took up the cross for a like
compelling reason. How many such instances might be adduced to indicate
the vital decisions that turned upon such a motive!

The dream was not less potent an incentive in Jewish life; for instance,
at about the time of Ludwig's venture, Moses of Coucy wrote, "At the
beginning of the sixth millennium \[1240 C.E.\] there came to me the
command in a dream vision, 'Arise, compose a book of religious
instruction in two parts!'" which was the genesis of his *Semag*. Two
centuries later, a certain Gershon b. Hiskiya, who was in prison in
France, was led by a dream to write a book on medicine. Two centuries
later again a dream prompted the composition of Menasseh b. Israel's
*Nishmat Ḥayim*.[1](jms36.htm#an_15_1)

Even legal and ritual problems of some moment were decided at the
instance of "the master of dreams." The very day on which the Tosafist,
Efraim b. Isaac of Regensburg, permitted the consumption of sturgeon as
a *kosher* fish he was obliged to reverse himself because in a dream
"they" had made clear to him that he was in

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

error. R. Meir of Rothenburg admitted that a dream had caused him to
change his opinion in a matter affecting wages, despite contrary
precedents, the rulings of his French colleagues, and his own previous
decisions. In fact, there lived in the thirteenth century a man, Jacob
Halevi of Marvège, who gathered in a volume a series of responsa which
had been handed down to him in dreams, relative to such ritual issues as
shaving the beard and cutting the hair, how and when *tefillin* should
be worn, when certain blessings should be recited, whether milk foods
may be eaten after meat, ritual slaughter, etc.—matters that can seem
trivial only to those who are insensitive to the demands which an ardent
piety makes upon devout people. He did not limit himself to these
questions; sometimes his queries were in a lighter vein. It is reported
that he once asked "the master of dreams" whether Jesus and Mary are
hinted at in the Bible, and received the reply that the words "the
foreign gods of the land" (Deut. 31:16) are mathematically equivalent to
those two names. It is a pity that he didn't convey to us the reply to
his question as to how soon the Messianic era may be expected. Others,
too, merited heavenly edification. In the same century an anonymous
writer asserted that dreams had cleared up many difficulties in
Maimonides’ *Guide* for quite a few puzzled students, and Isaac b. Moses
of Vienna, who was very much concerned about the correct spelling of the
name "Akiba" had that too straightened out for him by the obliging
"master of dreams." Heaven was more co-operative in those days than it
is today.[2](jms36.htm#an_15_2)

The dream thus constituted a very real factor in medieval life—even the
line that separated physical reality from the more tenuous spirit world
which was supposed to rule dreamland was not too precisely and
permanently drawn. In Havre, in 1637, the city court declared a child
legitimate when the mother swore that her husband, missing for four
years, had embraced her in a dream. To such fantastic lengths Jewish
belief did not go. Yet a vow or a decree of excommunication pronounced
in a dream was held to be real and binding, even more so than one
uttered during waking hours, for the latter could be voided before a
court of three men, while the former required a full congregation of
ten, the idea being that since the deity had somehow been involved in
the dream action, only a *minyan*, over which the *Shechinah* presided,
had the power to release the dreamer.[3](jms36.htm#an_15_3)

But the greatest force that the dream exerted was as a prognostication

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

of, and guide to, the future. In this conviction the leaders of Church
and Synagogue were at one; Thomas Aquinas found himself in the company
of the rabbis of the Talmud and the Middle Ages. "Dreams are a sixtieth
part of prophecy" ran an old adage; the mathematics may have been
correct once upon a time, but since the gift of prophecy had been
withdrawn from the world, the proportion must be raised considerably to
do justice to the medieval view. It was in dreams that the supernatural
world communicated directly with the natural; its knowledge of the
future could most readily be transmitted to men through this medium.
"Not a thing transpires on earth," wrote one authority on the subject,
"without having first been announced in a dream." Another wrote,
"Nothing happens to a man, good or ill, before he has beheld some
intimation of it in a dream." How seriously this dictum was taken we may
judge from an anecdote: a man dreamed that he would marry a certain
woman, but when he sought to fulfill his destiny, she refused him. Now
he *was* in a dilemma; if he married someone else, which he was quite
ready to do, it would be tantamount to dooming his wife to an untimely
death, for his dream must undoubtedly come true. Though "the sage" whom
he approached with his problem quoted Talmud to refute Talmud: "dreams
neither raise nor lower," that is, "disregard them and follow your own
inclination," it was no easy matter to convince him that he need not
wait until his dream-mate changed her mind. Instances of this sort could
be cited in great number. And the reports of dreams that came true are
legion. After relating one such true dream which R. Israel Isserlein
had, his biographer wrote, "And I know many more dreams of his that came
to pass." There are still many people who can testify in a like vein
concerning themselves or their friends. Solomon Almoli, in his *Pitron
Ḥalomot* ("The Interpretation of Dreams"), proved logically that this
was no superstition. Jews and Gentiles agree, he wrote, that portents
occur during waking hours; there can be no doubting that they come from
God, for they show themselves in time to be veracious intimations of the
future. Nor can one for a moment question God's power to introduce them
into our dreams. Indeed they can the more readily appear at night
because "then our physical energies are weakened and the mental
strengthened." After this compelling argument it was hardly necessary to
adduce, as he did, "proofs" from Gentile literature and from Jewish, as
well as on rational and sensational grounds.'

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

#### WHERE DREAMS COME FROM

Not all dreams were of supernatural origin nor possessed equal
significance. Corresponding to a variety of causes, various types of
dreams commanded respect in differing degrees.

It was recognized that many, if not most, dreams are produced by
physical stimuli. Heavy, rich foods "cause a vapor to rise into the
brain" which during the night disposes itself in fantastic images.
Physical needs and desires, or sensations, such as heat and cold,
experienced during sleep, similarly affect the mind, so that one's
dreams bear a close relation to one's physical state. Menasseh b. Israel
wrote, "When one is overheated at night he may dream that he is warming
himself before a fire, or enjoying a hot bath; if he is cold, he dreams
of ice and sleet and snow." Such dreams are unworthy of attention, they
"speak folly" and are "vain and idle conceits."[5](jms36.htm#an_15_5)

Another common source of dreams are man's thoughts during the day. "When
a man concentrates on certain ideas for a long time, the power of
thought to conjure up definite images remains active at night." Dreams
that can be traced back to such a cause are no more credible than the
first category. But another sort of dream, produced by "the vigor of the
soul" (*ḥozek hanefesh*), merits consideration on the part of the
dreamer, for it is a "prophecy in miniature." Menaḥem Ẓiyuni described
the process thus: "The imaginative faculty refashions at night the
perceptions which have been impressed upon one's fancy during the day;
during sleep when the senses are idle, this faculty overpowers him so
that the vision seems as real as though he were beholding it in
actuality. Such a dream is reliable in proportion to the vividness of
his powers of analogy; it comes to him without his having thought of its
subject matter at all, which, in fact, is often quite unconventional.
These dreams constitute the 'miniature prophecy' of which the rabbis
said that it is bestowed particularly upon imbeciles and infants,
because they are not graced with intelligence and their apperceptive
powers are undeveloped. Therefore what the imagination makes of sense
perceptions during waking hours is clearly visioned while asleep, for it
conceives of things that are true and that come to
pass."[6](jms36.htm#an_15_6) The psychology of dreams as expounded by
Ẓiyuni has a modern ring; it was not his own, however, for he confessed
that he had cribbed it from non-Jewish "theologians." Apparently the
unexpressed theory behind this dissertation is one we have met before,
namely, that the

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

soul, untrammelled by the physical universe and left to its own
resources, possesses the power to apprehend the future.

What is probably the most primitive and universal theory is also met
with in Jewish dream-lore. While the body is asleep, the spirit, or
soul, leaves its corporeal prison and wanders over the face of the
earth, reporting back its experiences to the sleepless mind. When one
dreams of meeting a friend who is far distant, it is the souls of the
two, annihilating space, which have made contact. Some men, of a higher
spiritual capacity, behold these visions clearly and well defined; for
most men they are confused and obscure. We dream of the dead because
their immortal souls are still capable of haunting the earth and meeting
ours. "But animals have no soul, therefore a man cannot dream of an
animal that has died or has been slaughtered." Reports of the dead
appearing in dreams are numerous. The teacher and father-in-law of
Eliezer b. Nathan, R. Eliakim b. Joseph, visited him one night to
correct a misconception which had led to an erroneous ritual decision;
R. Meir of Rothenburg once helped an earnest student, who had never met
him in life, to unravel a badly snarled Talmudic passage; Rashi
disclosed to his grandson Samuel the correct pronunciation of the
Tetragrammaton; according to the popular legend, on the third night
after he had been tortured to death, R. Amnon of Mainz appeared in a
dream to his teacher, R. Kalonymos b. Meshullam, and dictated the solemn
*Unetanneh Tokef* hymn which he had composed while writhing in pain.
These are a few of the more notable visitations. Visions of the lot that
deceased ancestors are enjoying, whether in Paradise or *Gehinnom*,
disclosures of hidden treasure, exhortations to repay debts contracted
by the visitant, such is the burden of most dreams about the
dead.[7](jms36.htm#an_15_7)

Those dreams, then, that derive from natural causes, physical or mental,
are not the stuff out of which the shape of time to come can be
pre-constructed. Dreams that result from the peregrinations of the soul
may or may not be thus useful, depending upon the presence of the one
factor that stamps them as truly portentous, the supernatural. All
really significant dreams come ultimately from God. (In practice, of
course, the definition worked the other way around—those dreams which
the expert branded as significant were *ipso facto* God-born.) A
Talmudic sage quoted God's assurance, "Although I have hidden my face
from Israel, I will communicate

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

with him through dreams." Such direct communication was in effect during
the Middle Ages, as well as in ancient times, according to some writers.
Menasseh b. Israel distinguished two degrees of deistic dream
inspiration: the first, vouchsafed to all men alike, he termed
"providential," the product of God's solicitude for His creatures. Such
dreams are devoted to the minor concerns of human existence; evil men
are warned against the deeds they ponder during the day, good men
receive mildly prophetic or admonitory visions. He testified that he
himself had had such dreams foretelling the death of acquaintances,
which came true. The imagery and symbolism of these dreams is usually
beyond the comprehension of the ordinary man. The second degree is the
"prophetic," in which direct communion with God is experienced only by
rare, blessed spirits.[8](jms36.htm#an_15_8)

Most of the medieval writers who discussed the subject, however,
inclined toward the view that God-sent visions are transmitted through
the intermediacy of angels. Sometimes we read of an angel especially
appointed over this department, "the master" or "dispenser of dreams,"
sometimes it is the *memuneh*, man's deputy angel, who molds his
sleeping thoughts to apprise him of the will of God. At times this angel
does nothing more than direct the drama of man's waking thoughts on the
stage of his dream, and "since not all thoughts are true, not all dreams
are true." But when the angel introduces his own plot onto the stage,
the vision assuredly has some peculiar and significant
meaning.[9](jms36.htm#an_15_9)

There is still a further possibility—the dream may be the work of a
demon. As *Sefer Ḥasidim* says, "When a man suddenly beholds in his
sleep a woman with whom he has never had relations, and whom he may not
even have consciously desired, such a dream is caused by a demon or
spirit. . . . The demon does not actually penetrate his thoughts but
whispers into the depths of his aural cavity," The demons seem to be
responsible mainly for dreams of passion, though there are cases in
which it is impossible to determine whether an evil spirit or an angel
is to be held accountable.[10](jms36.htm#an_15_10)

#### "DREAMS FOLLOW THEIR INTERPRETATION"

The cardinal feature of portentous dreams, as we have observed, is
obscurity. Graphically, "What is shown a man in a dream is as

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

though he were to find himself in the midst of a strange people whose
tongue he doesn't understand, so that they can only suggest things to
each other in sign language, as one does with a deaf person." And just
as today it requires a trained psychoanalyst to decode the dream cipher,
so in the past the dream was taken to an expert to be read aright. The
basic principle had been laid down in the Talmud: "All dreams follow
their interpretation," that is, as the dream is interpreted, so will it
come to pass. Indeed the Talmud went a step further to the logical
corollary of this principle: "An uninterpreted dream is like an unread
letter," having neither good nor evil implication, as though it had
never been experienced. The rabbis sought to give recognition in these
statements to the psychological impact of a favorable or unfavorable
prediction, and were subtly implying that it might be best not to seek
the meaning of a dream. But, in Talmudic times and later, these words
were taken literally. The wise followed the better counsel, and
refrained from courting trouble—"One should not relate his dream to any
man, and especially not his wife," *Sefer Ḥasidim* advised, for so long
as it was his own secret its effect upon his career remained nil. Those
who could contain their curiosity, however, were few. The *Gemara* tells
a tale of one man who got several different interpretations of his
dream—and all came true. But *Maḥzor Vitry* specified that the first
interpretation is binding on the dream, and this became the generally
accepted rule.[11](jms36.htm#an_15_11)

The author of a widely read dream book, Solomon Almoli, refused to
accept the Talmudic view, for, he argued, it would destroy the whole
science of dream interpretation. If it were so, one need either not
bother about dreams altogether, or secure only favorable
interpretations. It is impossible that God's will, disclosed in a dream,
can be nullified by such naïve methods. We may ascribe this denial of
the traditional view to professional jealousy, but in effect the
tradition did no harm to the interpreter's business.

There was some difference of opinion as to the qualifications of the
dream expert. Some maintained that his skill must be innate—his star
must have determined at his birth that this should be his forte. This
was the reply that Jacob Halevi of Marvège received when he put the
question to "the dispenser of dreams." But Almoli would have none of
this. If it were a matter of fate, he wrote, some people would be
infallible interpreters, and there were none such. Skill in this field
is the result only of intensive training. Some interpreters

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

rely upon dream books and can decipher particular dreams, but the true
expert is one who has high intelligence, and an understanding of the
principles of the science. He must know how to evaluate the
circumstances and environment of the dreamer, and to differentiate the
fine shades of meaning of dream symbolism, to reject the inconsequential
elements of the dream and to single out those that are significant.
Amateurs can only blunder upon the true meanings. A typical professional
point of view!

Along with their reputed skill as magicians, Jews owned a high
reputation as dream interpreters and were sought out by Christians for
this purpose. Because of the tradition that "dreams follow the
interpretation" it was feared that the Jewish expert might be held
responsible in heaven if he translated the dream of his Christian client
in terms of Christian worship—he might be the cause of his client's
"sin" in pursuing Christian practices. For instance, if he told a priest
that his dream signified that he was destined to become a bishop, the
priest would apply himself more assiduously than ever to his clerical
duties. But the ready rejoinder was to the effect that the Christian
would continue in his error regardless of the dream, so the interpreter
was really not accountable. "Even though the expert refuses to interpret
the dream," it will come true, it was admitted, with the reservation,
however, that if a Jew's dream points to some evil act the interpreter
should not disclose it, for "one who tells a Jew that his dream
signifies that he will sin is to be regarded as causing him to
sin."[12](jms36.htm#an_15_12)

The general public was acquainted with the professional methods through
a host of dream books, many of them attributed to Joseph or Daniel.
These books, popular among Christians, Jews, and Mohammedans, had much
in common, and were in essence versions in different tongues of a common
fund of tradition. One such book, already mentioned, the *Pitron
Ḥalomot* of Solomon b. Jacob Almoli, first published in Salonica about
1515 (under the title *Mefasher Ḥalmin*), republished in Constantinople
in 1518 and 1551, in Cracow in 1576, and many times after, was the
outstanding Jewish work on the subject. Almoli was a Turkish Jew, who
flourished at the beginning of the sixteenth century; he collated all
the older Jewish material, and made extensive use of the non-Jewish,
admitting his indebtedness to the *Gemara*, to Hai Gaon, to works
ascribed to Rashi, Joseph, Daniel, as well as to translations from
non-Jewish sources. Among those he quoted were Ibn Sinna, Ibn Roshd,
Aristotle

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

and Plato. Though his book was written toward the end of the period it
represents the information current throughout the earlier centuries.
Some of the passages on dreams in the German-Jewish literature, in
Eleazar of Worms's *Ḥochmat HaNefesh*, for example, or in the manuscript
work *Eẓ Ḥayim*, by Jacob b. Judah Hazan of London, both
thirteenth-century writers, display a close affinity with Almoli's later
compilation. We have no such extended work from Northern Europe, but
there can be no doubt that German Jews were acquainted with most of the
subject matter which Almoli presented. His book became very popular and
in 1694 was translated into Yiddish, in which form it still has a wide
circulation among the Jewish masses.[13](jms36.htm#an_15_13)

Since this work contains the only systematic organization of the
material, it may not be amiss to summarize it here. It is divided into
three parts, the first dealing with the classification of dreams and the
general principles of interpretation, the second constituting a full
glossary of dream symbols, the third devoted to an elucidation of the
methods of counteracting the effects of ominous dreams. Part I comprises
eight "gates": 1. defining the dream and its various types; 2. whether
or not to rely on dreams; 3. distinguishing between reliable and
unreliable dreams; 4. describing the customary and the extraordinary
elements of dreams; 5. three basic principles which the interpreter must
follow; 6. the interpretation must take into account the client's
profession or trade, and his circumstances; 7. whether or not the
interpretation is the determining factor in the effect of a dream,
containing a "great investigation" into this subject; 8. the time when
dreams may be expected to materialize. Part II contains five "gates": 1.
divided into five sections, on the symbolism of inanimate matter; 2.
five sections, on flora; 3. six sections, on fauna; 4. four sections, on
humans; 5. three sections, on "higher beings," such as "the planets and
stars, thunder, and books"! A perusal of Part II leaves one wondering
what natural phenomena Almoli could possibly have neglected; he was
careful to include all the derivatives, such as objects made of wood and
metals, etc., wine and oil, eggs and honey and cheese and milk, cooked
dishes, clothing. Part III, consisting of three "gates," discusses the
"dream-fast" and the ritual devices of "turning a dream to good" and
"releasing" one from the effects of a dream. Almoli covered the field
thoroughly; his erudition explains his scorn of those who would rely on
the stars, or on a hastily digested smattering of data to qualify as
experts.[14](jms36.htm#an_15_14)

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

#### THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION

The Bible offers several classic examples of dream interpretation,
symbolical in the case of Pharaoh's dreams, allegorical in that of
Nebuchadnezzar. In Talmudic times puns often provided the key, *e.g.*,
dreaming that something will occur in the month of Nisan means one will
suffer no temptation (*nissayon*). If the dream could be brought into
connection with some Biblical verse, that verse indicated its
significance, *e.g.*, to behold a camel (*gamal*) means that the
dreamer's death has been decreed in heaven, but he will be delivered
from his fate, because Gen. 46:4, in which the words *gam ‘aloh* occur,
contains the reassuring promise, "I will go down with thee into Egypt,
and I will also surely bring thee up again." During the Middle Ages
these methods remained in use, but the most favored was to interpret by
analogies, or by antitheses. Very often the association is obscure,
though it no doubt derives from one of these methods or from an ancient,
well-authenticated tradition. It is interesting to notice how frequently
the interpretations of dreams in Christian sources correspond with the
Jewish.[15](jms36.htm#an_15_15)

The following excerpts from thirteenth-century Jewish
works[16](jms36.htm#an_15_16) provide some idea of the manner of
interpretation. From *Eẓ Ḥayim:* "All liquids are of good omen, except
wine, if the dreamer is an uncultured person; all fruits are auspicious,
except the date, and all vegetables, except turnip-heads, but the root
indicates wealth; . . . wheat signifies peace; barley, atonement for
sins; laden vines, his wife will not miscarry; white grapes are a good
omen; black grapes in season are good, but out of season they indicate
he will soon be praying for mercy; . . . a white horse is a good omen; a
red horse is bad, he will be hounded and pursued; a donkey, he may be
confident of salvation; . . . if he dreams he has lost his property, an
inheritance will soon come his way; . . . if he is on a roof he will
achieve greatness; if he is descending, he will be humbled"; etc.
Eleazar of Worms offers these: if a man dreams he has a pain in one eye,
a brother will fall ill; in both eyes, two brothers will be ill; if a
tooth falls out, a son or some relative will die; if he sees a king, or
a groom, or a wedding ceremony, or any celebration, he will soon be a
mourner; dividing meat indicates a quarrel; fire in an oven signifies
evil events; snow in summer, a fire; a vineyard, his wife is or will be
pregnant; grapes, he will be blessed with a child; carrying a bird or a
fish in his bosom means his wife will bear a child; if an

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

unmarried person has this dream, he will soon be wedded; a group of
people partaking of delicacies indicates they will all have cause to
weep; an angel in the moon means war; a snake-bite indicates prosperity;
and so on.

It will be more instructive, however, to examine the principles by which
the interpreter made his decisions.[17](jms36.htm#an_15_17) It was first
necessary to evaluate the credibility of the dream, which required a
study of the stars, of the dreamer's character, of the foods he had
consumed before retiring, both in their planetary relationships and
their potentiality for inducing *spiritus* in the body, and his thoughts
on the preceding days. The day of the month and the week, the hour, the
land in which the dream was beheld also help to determine the degree of
reliance which is to be placed upon it. Similarly, if the dream images
are clear and vivid and leave the dreamer moved or agitated, the dream
is trustworthy. If the dream leaves little impression, it may be
disregarded. One of the rules frequently advanced is that a dream which
occurs in the early night, before the process of digestion has started,
either has no significance or concerns the past; a dream which comes in
the middle of the night, while the food is being digested, may or may
not have importance; but most dreams that occur in the early morning,
when the process of digestion has been completed, come true.

Similar criteria were employed to determine how long a period may elapse
before the dream comes to pass. A man's character, for instance, helps
decide this, for the righteous person is forewarned long before an event
is to occur so that he may have ample time to prepare for it, while the
wicked are not given much warning. The general rule is that most dreams
are speedily realized, usually on the same or the next day; occasionally
realization of a dream may be delayed, but never longer than twenty-two
years (this is based on a Talmudic remark) .

As to the actual process of interpretation, there is no substitute for a
knowledge of the dream language, Almoli writes, but there is one rule
that must constantly be kept in mind, namely, that the same symbol may
have different connotations for different men. As an example he cites
the case of a man who dreamed that his horse was able to negotiate a
turbulent stream only with great effort. If the dreamer is a scholar,
then the horse signifies wisdom, and the dream indicates that his
learning will carry him successfully through some very difficult
situations; if he is not a scholar, the horse means

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

strength, and the dream implies that he will be engaged in a physical
struggle from which he will emerge victorious. Quick-wittedness has
always been the fortune-teller's most precious endowment.

#### DREAM DIVINATION

The gold that the fates pour into a man's lap serves only to whet his
greed. The effort to induce divinatory dreams succeeded upon the
realization that dreams could be put to such a use. Saul tried, and
failed. If countless others failed too, inevitably there were some who
could claim success, and "nothing succeeds like success," especially in
the field of magic. In Talmudic and Geonic times the techniques of
asking a "dream question" were familiar to everyone. During the Middle
Ages this proved a popular form of divination, though it hardly met with
the approval of the religious authorities. *Sefer Ḥasidim* contains the
statement, "If a man decides, I will put a 'dream question' to find out
which good wife I shall take, he will never be successful," yet the same
work tells of a pious Jew who asked the prince of dreams "who will sit
beside him in Paradise? And they showed him a young man in a distant
land." An interesting anecdote concerns a man who inquired how long he
would live and received the reply in French, *mil ans*, which he
interpreted literally, but his life was ended at eighty, for *mil* in
Hebrew transliteration equals eighty. One of the questions put by Jacob
Halevi of Marvège was whether it is proper "to invoke, by means of the
42-letter name of God, the angels who are appointed over learning and
wealth and victory and favor," and the reply came, "Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord of Hosts, and He Himself will provide all your needs." As we
have seen, Jacob Halevi solved many ritual and legal problems in this
way, and the fourteenth-century R. Jacob b. Moses Mölln (Maharil), or
his father, resorted to the same device to resolve at least one ritual
question.[18](jms36.htm#an_15_18)

In consonance with the prevailing conception of the origin of dreams,
two agencies were mainly invoked to serve divinatory purposes: the dead,
and the spirits generally or the genius of dreams in particular. As we
have noted, one way of ensuring a nocturnal visit from the beyond was to
make a dying man take an oath that after his death he would return and
answer any questions put to him. Or two friends might make a mutual vow
that the first to die would come back in a dream to paint for the other
a picture of the next

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

world. Such practices were common among Christians as well as among
Jews, as this verse from Hans Vintler's *Blumen der Tugend* (1411)
discloses:[19](jms36.htm#an_15_19)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*So send denn ettliche  
wenn sy sechend ain liche  
so raunent sy dem totten zu  
und sprechend 'kum morgen fru  
und sag mir, wie es dir dort gee*.*'*

</div>

Another course was to stretch oneself on the grave of a pious man and
beseech him to answer one's questions in a dream. There is a story of a
young student who adopted this procedure to learn whether certain
ascetic practices he wished to adopt would be considered sinful or
meritorious in heaven; that night the deceased came to him and carried
him off to Paradise where he beheld the rewards that would be showered
on him for his piety.[20](jms36.htm#an_15_20)

The dead, however, were not always willing to obey the summons of the
living, and in such a case force could be applied. This required the
services of a professional sorcerer. A woman who was on bad terms with
her son died without leaving a will disclosing the hiding place of her
money. The son employed a sorceress to wring her secret from her. The
woman "performed her sorceries with a knife" and then went to sleep,
whereupon a demon appeared to her in a dream with the knife piercing his
heart. She refused to be moved by his entreaties and extract the blade
until he produced the information she sought. He returned with the
mother and forced her to reveal her secret. The son got the money, but a
few nights later his mother came to him in a dream and apprised him of
the price he would have to pay: "In proportion to the suffering you
brought upon me by your vile act will reverses and torments be heaped
upon you."[21](jms36.htm#an_15_21)

On the other hand, angels and spirits could be invoked to appear in
dreams by the usual methods. Jacob Halevi who, it is reported, induced
his divinatory dreams by putting himself in a trance, used a simple
request: "Oh, supreme king, great, mighty and revered God, guardian of
the covenant and fount of grace for Thy followers, preserve Thy covenant
and Thy grace for us, and command Thy holy angels who are appointed over
the replies to 'dream questions' to give a true and a proper answer,
unqualified and specific, to the question which I shall ask before Thy
glory," etc. It is interesting that sometimes the answer came that in
heaven itself there was a

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

division of opinion, which, by a strange coincidence, usually
corresponded with a like division among the rabbis here on earth; and
sometimes the first reply that Jacob received was unsatisfactory, so
that he had to repeat his question two and three times, insisting upon a
clearer response. Certain Biblical selections were also useful toward
this end. Ps. 23 and 42, each recited seven times with its "names," were
guaranteed to produce dream replies. If one writes Deut. 29:28 and its
"names" on his hand and sleeps with that hand under his head the angel
of dreams will favor him.[22](jms36.htm#an_15_22)

Direct invocation of angels was also resorted to, with the usual
preliminary rites of ritual cleansing and fasting. One simple invocation
runs as follows: "'I conjure you, Duma, prince of dreams, in the name of
the Almighty God, that you come to me this night and answer my question.
And when you wish to indicate good or evil, show me for evil: priests
and churches, wells, cisterns, caves and graves; but for a favorable
sign show me: schools, synagogues, open books and scholars studying
them; and let me not forget the apparition.' Then go to sleep. But speak
to no man concerning this. It should be done only on Sunday night, and
only in urgent matters. Do not make sport of this!" *Sefer Raziel* has a
much longer charm, heavily weighted with angel names, which concludes
with a series of Biblical quotations. The same work contains other
prescriptions for a "dream question"; one advises writing a name upon
"ruled parchment" and placing it under one's head after reciting a
spell; another, "tested and tried," suggests washing the hands
thoroughly and anointing the left hand with "water of lilies," after
which an invocation is to be written on it, then, "sleep on your right
side, and you will see and be astounded!" Still another prescribes a
more complicated procedure: secure two white doves and slaughter them
with a two-edged copper knife, one edge for each dove, extract their
viscera, knead them together with three shekels of wine, some fine
frankincense and some pure honey into a thick paste, and cut it into
small cakes; on the three days preceding the new moon, before sunrise,
perform the prescribed purificatory rites, put on a white garment but no
shoes, and burn some of these cakes on the hearth, while reciting the
names of the angels who are in charge of the new month; on the third day
let the house fill with smoke, lie down on the floor, recite the angel
names and then sleep. "And the angels will appear and tell and reveal
everything you may ask, in a clear vision, not in parables. You need
have no fear."[23](jms36.htm#an_15_23)

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

#### NEUTRALIZING OMINOUS DREAMS

Since unfavorable as well as favorable dreams come true, and the event
therefore came to be regarded as the consequence of the dream, it was
believed that if one could somehow nullify the dream itself in advance
its effects would be obviated. Thus, in the prayers to be recited at
night before retiring there is a specific request to "save us from evil
dreams," while some writers make it a point to note that some of the
Biblical verses included in these prayers, such as Cant. 3:7-8, and Nu.
6:24.-26, "have the property of counteracting evil dreams" (the first
because it speaks of "threescore mighty men" gathered about a bed, the
second because it contains sixty letters—and a dream is "one sixtieth
part of prophecy"), and that Ps. 128, also part of these prayers,
contains references to vines and olives, which, according to the Talmud,
are favorable dream symbols. Indeed there arose toward the end of the
medieval period the custom of boldly announcing before going to bed, in
the manner of "to whom it may concern," "I hereby proclaim that whatever
unpropitious dream I may have this night, I shall not tomorrow observe
the customary fast," which declaration, we are assured, "is a preventive
of evil dreams, but, God forbid! should one nevertheless behold such a
dream, he must on no account fast, or the angels of dreams will be very
much provoked."[24](jms36.htm#an_15_24)

Once the dream has been experienced, however, other means must be
adopted to forestall its consequences. As in the case of an illness, a
dream may be sold and its effect transferred to the purchaser. An
instance of such a transaction is recounted in *Sefer Ḥasidim*, with
perhaps a sly dig at the interpreter who had no faith in his own
interpretation; a certain Gentile who had dreamt he was riding a red
horse was overwhelmed with despair when the interpreter told him this
presaged his imminent death. The interpreter offered to purchase the
dream "for the price of a drink," a proposal which his client accepted
with alacrity. The next day the interpreter was dead—though the narrator
does not consider that the drink rather than the dream may have been
responsible for his sudden demise. Again we learn that a literal acting
out of the dream may destroy its symbolic significance. When a person
who is married dreams he is carrying a bird in his bosom, this signifies
the birth of a child, but if the bird flies away it portends disaster.
To save himself he should fast and distribute charity among the poor,
the customary procedure, but he

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

should also place a fowl in his bosom, a cock if the dreamer is a man, a
hen for a woman, and then permit it to fly off. Now that the dream has
been scrupulously enacted, the apprehensive dreamer may breathe easily
again. Still a third method is to recite, immediately upon waking, a
Biblical verse suggested by the dream, which contains a promise of good.
If one dreams of a well, he should say, "And there Isaac's servants
digged a well" (Gen. 26:25); of a river, "Behold I will extend peace to
her like a river" (Is. 66:12); of a bird, "As birds flying so will the
Lord of hosts protect Jerusalem" (Is. 31:5); of a dog, "Against any of
the children of Israel shall not a dog whet his tongue" (Ex. 11:7); of a
mountain, "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of the
messenger of good tidings" (Is. 52:7); of a *shofar*, "In that day a
great *shofar* shall be blown" (Is. 27:13); of a bullock, "His firstling
bullock, majesty is his" (Deut. 33:17); of a lion, "The lion hath
roared, who will not fear?" (Amos 3:8); of shaving, "Joseph shaved
himself and changed his raiment and came in unto Pharaoh" (Gen. 41:14);
and so on.[25](jms36.htm#an_15_25)

The most widely used methods of counteracting the effect of a bad dream,
the "dream fast" and the rite of "turning a dream to good," were
instituted in Talmudic times. These, coupled with the usual expiatory
acts of prayer, charity and repentance, were held to be effective
devices, and were observed not alone by the common people but also by
some of the outstanding rabbis of the Middle Ages, such as Meir b.
Baruch of Rothenburg and Israel Isserlein. Indeed they came to be
regarded as the inevitable sequel of every bad dream, and of every dream
whose significance was in doubt, so that their observance became almost
automatic, though their true purpose was never lost sight of. They are
observed by some pious Jews even in this day. A third device, the
"release" from an obligation incurred in a dream, such as a vow or an
excommunication, has already been described.

The Talmudic basis of the *Ta‘anit Ḥalom*, the "dream fast," is the
following passage: "Rab said, 'Fasting is as effective against evil
dreams as fire against shavings;' R. Ḥisda added, 'One must fast on the
same day on which the dream occurred;' and R. Joseph added, 'Even on the
Sabbath.'" These dicta raised three issues, concerning the first and
second of which there was fairly general agreement. Fasting, the
accepted rite of penitence and expiation, was believed to carry great
weight with the heavenly council. The dream constitutes not a final and
irrevocable judgment, but rather a warning of impending doom, which may
be postponed and perhaps altogether negated by

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

pious deeds and a righteous life, of which the fast was the first
instalment. "It seems to me," wrote Almoli, "that this fast is to be
regarded practically as an obligation upon the dreamer, and not as a
voluntary act which he need not observe if he so pleases." We may judge
how important it was considered by the fact that even on those occasions
when fasts were forbidden an exception was made in favor of the *Ta‘anit
Ḥalom*. During the month of Nisan, for instance, when even the
*Jahrzeit* fast in commemoration of the death of a father or mother was
not permitted, this "dream fast" was the only one allowed. And not only
the dreamer felt bound to observe this fast, but if his dream seemed to
carry an ominous message for a second party, that person too observed
it.[28](jms36.htm#an_15_28)

The requirement that the fast must follow the dream on the same day was
explained on the ground that the adverse decree might be intended for
immediate execution; or, as one writer put it, each day has its own
angels who are charged with carrying out the heavenly decisions. A delay
of even one day may make the fast ineffective. Any other voluntary fast
but the *Ta‘anit Ḥalom* may be postponed.[27](jms36.htm#an_15_27)

The only difficulty was with regard to the observance of this fast on
the Sabbath and on holidays. Some medieval rabbis felt that R. Joseph
had gone too far in his endorsement of what was essentially a
superstitious practice, though it had introduced a religious element
into the belief concerning dreams. They did not state their objection,
originally voiced by R. Kalonymos (in the twelfth century) and often
repeated, in so many words, but got around the Talmudist's opinion with
the qualification that "nowadays one should not observe the *Ta‘anit
Ḥalom* on the Sabbath, because we are no longer expert in the
interpretation of dreams." The subterfuge was no more successful than if
they had roundly denounced the institution or expressly forbidden it on
the Sabbath without apologies. As it was they left a convenient breach
through which the more superstitious could clamber. Obviously Jews were
still dream experts, so far as the masses were concerned. Maharil wisely
wrote, "It is better that a man fast on the Sabbath because of a dream,
than that his heart be troubled; he'll derive more pleasure from the
fast than from his food." Others tried to soften the objection to the
Sabbath fast by offering minor concessions. R. Meir permitted it if the
same dream had been repeated three nights in succession, while some
harked back to a tradition associated with the name of Hai Gaon, who had
allowed it after three particularly ominous dreams, namely, if one
beheld a *Torah* scroll

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

burning, or the conclusion of the *Yom Kippur* service, or his teeth or
the beams of his house falling. The list was, as may be expected,
extended; dreaming of any part of the *Yom Kippur* service, of reading
in the *Torah*, of getting married, of being kissed by a deceased
person, equally warranted a fast on any occasion. But Isaiah Horowitz,
the sixteenth-century Polish mystic, who himself "usually advised people
not to fast on the Sabbath," admitted, "I have known many people to make
light of these restrictions, and fast on the Sabbath whenever their
spirits were depressed by a dream."[28](jms36.htm#an_15_28)

To appreciate the full moment of this dream fast we must further
consider that it entailed a *second day's fast* immediately after, to
atone for the desecration of the holyday—two days of fasting in
succession! This duplicate fast was scrupulously kept. True, sometimes
permission was granted to infirm or sick people to postpone it, if a
double fast might prove too arduous for them. But otherwise there were
no slackers. And to bring home more sharply the high regard in which
this remedy for ill-omened dreams was held by the people, they did not
refrain from observing it even on *Rosh Hashanah*, if necessary, when a
*Ta‘anit Ḥalom* on the first day of the holyday entailed not only
fasting on the next day also, but on both days of *Rosh Hashanah* in
every succeeding year! (If, however, occasion for fasting arose on the
second day, then only that day's fast was repeated annually.) Nor did
they hesitate to keep this fast on the eve of *Yom Kippur*, the most
trying day in the Jewish calendar. It required great faith, indeed, to
produce such stanch devotion![29](jms36.htm#an_15_29)

When the fast was completed, the final remedy was resorted to, the
*Hatavat Ḥalom*, the rite of transforming an ominous dream into a
favorable one. As recorded in the Talmud, it was performed as follows:
The dreamer gathered three friends and said to them, "I have beheld a
good dream!" and they responded, "Verily, it is good, and may it be
good, and may God make it good." This was repeated seven times (but,
following the precedent attributed to the twelfth-century rabbi Isaac b.
Samuel the Elder, the number of repetitions was reduced to three, "the
usual number of times an incantation is recited," as later writers
explained) . Then the dreamer recited three verses in which the word "to
overturn" appears (Ps. 30:12, Jer. 31:12, Deut. 23:6), three verses
containing the word "redeem" (Ps. 55:19, Is. 35:10, I Sam. 14:45), and
three which speak of "peace" (Is. 57:19, I Chr. 12:18, I Sam. 25:6) .
This prescription was followed in the Middle Ages, and was extended to
include Hab. 3:2,

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ps. 121, Nu.
6:22-27, Ps. 16: 11, concluding with the words of Ecc. 9:7, "Go thy way,
eat thy bread in peace." To avoid the slightest unlucky intimation,
moreover, the order of these last words was altered, for their initials
spell the word *avel*, "mourner." If the purport of the dream had been
forgotten, the Talmud provided a prayer which was warranted to ensure
that no harm would befall the dreamer.[30](jms36.htm#an_15_30) Thus
fortified he could throw off the oppressive weight of his dream and "eat
his bread in peace"—until another night visited another evil vision upon
him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. Astrology](jms18)
