[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](edu02)  [Next](edu04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

# CHAPTER III.

MISHNA *I*.: All objects that defile within the tent are, according to
R. Dohssa b. Horkinoss, clean when they were brought into the house
after having been divided in smaller parts; but the sages declare them
unclean. How so? If one touches or carries two pieces of a carcass each
of the size of half an olive, or touches of a corpse the size of a half
an olive (and his body covers such a size) and such a size shelters him,
or he covers as much as two halves of an olive, or only of a half an
olive but is roofed by such a size, R. Dohssa b. Horkinass declares him
clean and the sages declare him unclean. But if he touches the size of
half an olive while another thing covers both him and of a corpse the
size of half an olive (or he covers such size and another thing covers
him and such a size), he is clean (also according to the sages). R.
Mair, however, said: Also herein the sages and R. Dohssa differ as
above. (They declare) that all combine to render unclean except touching
with carrying, and carrying with roofing. This is the rule: What bears
one and the same name is index of uncleanness, two different names is
one of cleanness. (All the Mishna is explained in third chapter of Tract
Oholoth (Tents).

MISHNA *II*.: Food consisting of sundry parts does not, according to R.
Dohssa b. Horkinass, combine (to the measure of an egg), while according
to the sages it does so. R. Dohssa holds that it is allowed to exchange
second tithe for uncoined money, while according to the sages it is not.
Finally, he holds that it suffices to bathe one's hands to be allowed to
touch the sin-cleansing water, while the sages say that (in this case)
with the uncleanness of his hands the entire body is unclean.

MISHNA *III*.: The interior of a melon, as well as the peel strips of a
colewort is as terumah allowed to laymen (non-priests), so R. Dohssa,
while the sages do not allow it. He further holds that it is only then
obligatory to separate the first-cut wool of five shorn sheep when each
of them furnishes one and a half mana worth of wool, while in the
opinion of the sages

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

even when the wool of the five sheep is however little. (Is further
explained in Tract Chulin, Chapter XI.)

MISHNA *IV*.: According to R. Dohssa, all mats are getting unclean only
when touched by a corpse, but according to the sages, also by (mere)
pressure. He says further that all woven work remains clean except a
girdle, but according to the sages all are subject to defilement,
except, however, those of the wool-traders.

MISHNA *V*.: A sling whose handle is embroidered is subject to
defilement. But if it is of leather R. Dohass declares it clean, and the
sages, unclean. If its finger-hole has been severed from it, it is
clean, but also is unclean if only its end is severed.

MISHNA *VI*.: The wife (of a priest) that was in captivity is, according
to R. Dohssa, allowed to eat terumah, while the sages say: There is a
difference between one captive and another. How so? If she says: I was
in captivity, but am clean, she may eat, for the mouth that prohibits
also allows, but if her captivity is attested by witnesses and she
asserts thereupon to be clean, she is not allowed to eat. (Explained in
Tract Kethuboth, Chapter II.)

MISHNA *VII*.: There are four doubtful cases where R. Jehoshua declares
the thing unclean and the sages, clean--viz.: (*a*) while the unclean is
standing the clean one is passing, or (*b*) *vice versa*; (*c*) when
something unclean is in the private ground, while something clean in the
public grounds, or (*d*) *vice versa*, in which cases it is doubtful
whether or not one touched, roofed, or was moved by, the other. (Tract
Taharoth, Chapter II.)

MISHNA *VIII*.: Three things are declared unclean by R. Zadok and clean
by the sages--viz.: (*a*) The exchanger's nail; (*b*) the trunk of the
bean-grinders, and (*c*) the screw of the stone sun-clock. (Kelim,
Chapter XII.)

MISHNA *IX*: Four things are held unclean by R. Gamaliel and clean by
the sages: (*a*) The cover of a metallic basket used in households;
(*b*) the handle of a (bathing) scraper; (*c*) the unfinished metallic
vessels, and (*d*) a board broken in two (equal) parts; in the
last-named case, however, if the parts be unequal, the sages concur with
R. Gamaliel in that the bigger part is unclean and the smaller, clean.
(Ibid., ibid., Mishna VI.)

MISHNA *X*: In the decision of the following three R. Gamaliel is as
rigorous as Beth Shamai: It is not allowed: (*a*) to keep warm on a
holiday cooked food for Sabbath; (*b*) to put

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

together the parts of a chandelier on a [holiday](errata.htm#50), and
(*c*) to bake (on a holiday) big loaves of bread, but only small ones.
He said: During all the time they were baking in my father's house only
thin loaves, and he was answered: We can make no conclusion from your
father's house, who have always been rigorous to themselves, but lenient
to all others, allowing them to bake not only big loaves but even big
cakes on coal.

MISHNA *XI*.: In the following three things, however, his decisions are
lenient: It is allowed (*a*) to sweep (on holidays) between the
bedsteads; (*b*) to put upon coals the fumigation, and (*c)* to roast a
prepared kid on the first Easter evening, all which the sages forbid.

MISHNA *XII*.: Three things R. Elazar b. Azaria allows and the sages
forbid: (*a*) His cow was allowed to walk out (on Sabbath) with the
strap between her horns; (*b*) he allows to curry the cattle on
holidays, and (*c*) to grind pepper in hand-mills adapted thereto. R.
Jehudah maintains that point sub (*b*) is not allowable, as one could
while currying make a sore, but allows to do it with a wooden comb,
while the sages forbid both. (The last two Mishnas are explained in
Tract Beitzah.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](edu04)
