[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](edu05)  [Next](edu07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

MISHNA *I*.: R. Jehudah b. Baba attested five cases. Girls underage are
made to express their refusal; a woman is allowed to remarry on the
testimony of one witness; in Jerusalem a cock that had killed a person
was stoned; wine only forty days old was brought upon the altar as a
drink-offering; and finally, the daily morning sacrifice was (once)
offered at the fourth hour (in the morning).

MISHNA *II*.: R. Jehoshua and R. Nehunia b. Elinathan of the Babylonian
village attested that an organ (even if not an olive big) of the dead is
defiling, as against R. Eliezar, who asserts that the sages taught thus
only in reference to an organ of alive body; and the others rejoined: Is
it not an inference *a fortiori*--viz.: since the organ of a live body
which latter is clean is, if severed, unclean, so much the more so that
of a dead body, which latter is of itself unclean? His answer was: And
yet the sages taught so only in respect of an organ of a live body.
According to others the answer was this: The uncleanness of the living
is more extensive than that of the dead, for the living (who has a
running issue) renders all that he lies or sits on capable of defiling
man as well as garments, and all that rests above him, by his exhalation
capable of defiling food and beverage, all which the dead does not.

MISHNA *III*.: Flesh of the size of an olive severed from an organ
dismembered from a living (person) is unclean according to R. Eliezar,
but clean according to R. Jehoshua and Nehunia. On the other hand, a
bone the size of a barley-corn severed from said organ R. Nehunia
declares unclean, and R. Jehoshua with R. Eliezar, clean. R. Eliezar was
then asked: What prompts you to vindicate the former decision? He
replied: We find that a severed live organ is regarded as a whole
corpse; hence, as from a dead severed flesh of the size of an olive is
unclean, severed flesh of such size from the living must be unclean,
too! I, therefore, base my decision on this analogy. Whereupon it was
rejoined: While you justly declare unclean flesh of an olive size
severed from a corpse, for a barley-corn-sized bone of a, corpse

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

is likewise unclean, you commit yourself to a discrepancy in your
decision regarding the flesh and the bone of a severed organ of a living
body respectively, whereby your analogy is annihilated! Similarly was R.
Nehunia asked to base his view, which he did by a like analogy, thus: We
find that a severed organ of the living is like an entire corpse and a
barley-corn-sized bone of the latter is unclean, whence my decision.
Whereupon he was answered: If you justly declare unclean so small a bone
severed from a corpse by reason of holding unclean flesh the size of an
olive severed from a corpse, you cannot on this basis declare unclean a
bone the size of a barley-corn severed from the dismembered organ of a
living body, since you hold clean the flesh even of an olive-size
severed therefrom!

R. Eliezar was then asked: Why have you divided your views? Declare
either both unclean or both clean? And he, answered: The uncleanness of
the flesh is more extensive than that of the bones, because the flesh of
carcasses and reptiles is defiling while bones of these are not. Another
explanation according to others: An organ that has yet enough of its
flesh on causes uncleanness through touching, carrying or sheltering it,
and remains yet unclean even if it misses some of its flesh, while if
some of its bone is wanting it is clean.

R. Nehunia was asked: Why have you divided your views? Declare either
both unclean or both clean? And he answered: The uncleanness of bones is
more extensive than that of flesh, for flesh severed from the living
body is clean, while the organ, if severed from it in its natural state,
is unclean. Another explanation: Flesh the size of an olive defiles by
being touched, carried or sheltered, in like manner do bones defile in
their majority; if some of the flesh misses it is clean none the less,
if some of the majority of the bones lacks it is still unclean by touch
and carriage, though not by shelter. Or thus: All the flesh of a corpse
is clean when it does not all in all measure the size of an olive, while
the greater part of its body or of its bones are unclean even when they
do not make up a quarter of a Kab.

R. Jehoshua answered the question as to why he decides in both cases
"clean," thus: The analogy between the dead and the living does not hold
good, for to the former apply the requisite of majority, quarter-Kab,
and spoonful of decomposed stuff, while to the living all this does not
apply.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](edu07)
