[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](edu07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda
Zara, and Horioth*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

# CHAPTER VIII.

MISHNA *I*.: R. Jehoshua b. Bathyra attested that the blood of carcasses
is clean. R. Simeon b. Bathyra attested that the ashes of the
sin-cleansing red cow, if touched even in part by an unclean one, become
all unclean; to which R. Aqiba added that he who has bathed for
cleansing himself (and hence is not yet wholly clean) renders improper
the whole of the holy flour, the frankincense, the incense and the coal
on touching them only in part.

MISHNA *II*.: R. Jehudah b. Baba and R. Jehudah the priest attested that
an (orphaned) Israel-daughter married under age to a priest is entitled
to eat terumah soon after she was led under the canopy, though before
cohabitation. R. Jose the priest and R. Zecharia the son of a butcher
related the following: It happened that a small girl had been kidnapped
by the heathens of Ashkalon; her kinfolks wanted to reject her from the
family notwithstanding the assurance of the witnesses that she was not
hiding with anybody nor dishonored, and the sages interfered, saying: If
you believe her witnesses that she was kidnapped, there is no reason for
you not to believe that she was not hiding with anybody nor dishonored;
on the other hand, if you distrust the latter part, don't believe the
former, either.

MISHNA *III*.: R. Jehoshua and R. Jehudah b. Bathyra attested that the
widow of a priest of a doubtful pedigree may yet marry a priest, that
such a doubtful family may enquire after the purity or impurity of its
members, in order to separate itself from, or to approach them.
Thereupon remarked R. Simeon b. Gamaliel: We accept your attestation,
but what shall we do now that R. Johanan b. Zakkai has decreed not to
call any jury on this point? The priests will surely follow you when a
case of separation, but not when such of approaching, is concerned!

MISHNA *IV*.: R. Jose b. Joezer, the man of Zereda, attested that the
locust *Ail Kamza* is allowed, that all liquids in the slaughter-house
of the temple are not subject to defilement,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and finally that only he is unclean who has surely touched a corpse. He
received on this account the name, Jose the allower.

MISHNA *V*.: R. Aqiba attested in the name of Nehemia from Beth D'lee,
that the testimony of one witness suffices to allow a woman to remarry.
R. Jehoshua attested that regarding bones found in the wood-barn (of the
women's courtyard in the temple) which are yet unclean, the sages say:
Pick them out singly, bone by bone, and all remains clean.

MISHNA *VI*.: Said R. Eliezar: I heard that when the central hall of the
temple was being built, curtains were put up before both the hall and
the courtyards, with the difference, however, that in the former the
wall was built outside, while in the latter inside, of the curtains. R.
Jehoshua said: I heard that it is allowed to offer sacrifices also when
there is no temple, that the all-holiest offerings may be eaten also
when there is no curtain; that leniently-holy offerings as well as
second tithe may be eaten even if there be no city walls (around
Jerusalem), for the first consecration has rendered her (the city) holy
for her times as well as for all time to come.

MISHNA [*VII*.](errata.htm#52): R. Jehoshua said: I have it by tradition
from R. Johanan b. Zakkai, who heard it in direct line from his teacher,
to be a Halakha from Sinai to Moses that Elijah is not coming in the
future to declare certain families clean or unclean, to separate or to
reconcile them, but to remove those who were reconciled by force, and to
bring together those who were segregated by force. A family of the name
Bethz'repha was across the Jordan, excluded by a certain Ben Zion with
the use of force; another family (of impure blood) was in the same
manner accepted by the same Ben Zion. It is to declare cases of this
kind clean or unclean, to remove or to accept that Elijah is coming. R.
Jehudah says: Only to accept, but not to remove. R. Simeon says: His
mission is only to settle certain disputes. The sages, however, say: His
advent will have for its purpose not the removing or accepting of the
mentioned cases but the establishing of peace in the world, for it is
written \[Malachi, iii. 23, 24\]: "Behold, I send unto you the prophet
Elijah. . . . and he shall turn back the heart of the fathers to the
children, and the heart of the children to their fathers."

END OF TRACT EDUYOTH AND OF VOLUME XVII.

 
