[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03020)  [Next](sbe03022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK V. THE THÂI *K*IÂ.

THIS Book also belongs to the class of 'Lessons or Instructions,' and is
called 'the Thâi *K*iâ,' because the Instructions were addressed to the
young monarch so named. It is divided into three sections or parts. Î
Yin finds the young sovereign disobedient to his counsels, and proceeds
to a high-handed measure. He removes him from his palace and companions,
and keeps him in a sort of easy confinement, near the grave of his
grandfather, all the period of mourning; and Thâi *K*iâ becomes
sincerely penitent and virtuous. This is related in the first section.
In the second, Î Yin brings the king back with honour to Po, to
undertake the duties of the government, and congratulates him on his
reformation, The king responds suitably, and asks the minister to
continue to afford him his counsels, which the other at once proceeds to
do. The third section is all occupied with further and important
counsels.

#### Section 1.

I. The king, on succeeding to the throne, did not follow (the advice of)
Â-hăng <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_105). (Â-hăng or.md) Î Yin

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

then made the following writing <span
id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_106.md):--'The former king kept his eye
continually on the bright requirements of Heaven, and so he maintained
the worship of the spirits of heaven and earth, of those presiding over
the land and the grain, and of those of the ancestral temple;--all with
a sincere reverence.\* Heaven took notice of his virtue, and caused its
great appointment to light on him, that he should soothe and
tranquillize the myriad regions.\* I, Yin, then gave my assistance to my
sovereign in the settlement of the people; and thus it is that you, O
heir-king, have received the great inheritance. I have seen it myself in
Hsiâ with its western capital <span id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_107.md),
that when its rulers went through a prosperous course to the end, their
ministers also did the same, and afterwards, when their successors could
not attain to such a consummation, neither did their ministers. Take
warning, O heir-king. Reverently use your sovereignty. If you do not
play the sovereign, as the name requires, you will disgrace your
grandfather.'

2\. The king would not think (of these words), nor listen to them. On
this Î Yin said, 'The former king, before it was light, sought to have
large and clear views, and then sat waiting for the dawn (to carry them
into practice). He (also) sought on every side for men of ability and
virtue, to instruct and guide his posterity. Do not frustrate his charge
(to me), and bring on yourself your own overthrow. Be careful to strive
after the virtue

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of self-restraint, and cherish far-reaching plans. Be like the forester,
who, when he has adjusted the spring, goes to examine the end of the
arrow, whether it be placed according to rule, and then lets I go;
reverently determine your aim, and follow the ways of your grandfather.
Thus I shall be delighted, and be able to show to all ages that I have
discharged my trust.'

3\. The king was not yet able to change (his course). Yin said (to
himself), 'This is (real) unrighteousness, and is becoming by practice
(a second) nature. I cannot bear to be near (so) disobedient (a person).
I will build (a place) in the palace at Thung <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_108.md), where he can be in silence near (the
grave of) the former king. This will be a lesson which will keep him
from going astray all his life.' The king went (accordingly) to the
palace at Thung, and dwelt during the period of mourning. In the end he
became sincerely virtuous.

#### Section 2.

1\. On the first day of the twelfth month of his third year, Î Yin
escorted the young king in the royal cap and robes back to Po. (At the
same time) he made the following writing:--

'Without the sovereign, the people cannot have that guidance which is
necessary to (the comfort of) their lives; without the people, the
sovereign would have no sway over the four quarters (of the kingdom).

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Great Heaven has
graciously favoured the House of Shang, and granted to you, O young
king, at last to become virtuous.\* This is indeed a blessing that will
extend without limit to ten thousand generations.'

2\. The king did obeisance with his face to his hands and his head to
the ground, saying, 'I, the little child, was without understanding of
what was virtuous, and was making myself one of the unworthy. By my
desires I was setting at nought all rules of conduct, and violating by
my self-indulgence all rules of propriety, and the result must have been
speedy ruin to my person. Calamities sent by Heaven may be avoided, but
from calamities brought on by one's self there is no escape." Heretofore
I turned my back on the instructions of you, my tutor and guardian;--my
beginning has been marked by incompetency. Let me still rely on your
correcting and preserving virtue, keeping this in view that my end may
be good!"

3\. Î Yin did obeisance with his face to his hands and his head on the
ground, and said, 'To cultivate his person, and by being sincerely
virtuous, bring (all) below to harmonious concord with him; this is the
work of the intelligent sovereign. The former king was kind to the
distressed and suffering, as if they were his children, and the people
submitted to his commands,--all with sincere delight. Even in the states
of the neighbouring princes, (the people) said, "We are waiting for our
sovereign; when our sovereign comes, we shall not suffer the punishments
(that we, now do)."

'O king, zealously cultivate your virtue. Regard (the example of) your
meritorious grandfather. At no time allow yourself in pleasure and
idleness. In

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

worshipping your ancestors, think how you can prove your filial piety;\*
in receiving your ministers, think how you can show yourself respectful;
in looking to what is distant. Try to get clear views; have your ears
ever open to lessons of virtue;--then shall I acknowledge (and respond
to) the excellence of your majesty with an untiring (devotion to your
service).

#### Section 3.

1\. Î Yin again made an announcement to the king, saying, 'Oh! Heaven
has no (partial) affection;--only to those who are reverent does it show
affection.\* The people are not constant to those whom they
cherish;--they cherish (only) him who is benevolent. The spirits do not
always accept the sacrifices that are offered to them;--they accept only
the sacrifices of the sincere.\* A place of difficulty is the
Heaven-(conferred) seat. When there are (those) virtues, good government
is realized; when they are not, disorder comes. To maintain the same
principles as those who secured good government will surely lead to
prosperity; to pursue the courses of disorder will surely lead to ruin.
He who at last, as at first, is careful as to whom and what he follows
is a truly intelligent sovereign. The former king was always zealous in
the reverent cultivation of his virtue, so that he was the fellow of
God <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_109.md).\* Now O king, you have
entered on the inheritance of his excellent line;--fix your inspection
on him.'

2\. '(Your course must be) as when in ascending

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

high you begin from where it is low, and when in travelling far you
begin from where it is near. Do not slight the occupations of the
people;--think of their difficulties. Do not yield to a feeling of
repose on your throne;--think of its perils. Be careful for the end at.
the beginning. When you hear words that are distasteful to your mind,
you must enquire whether they be not right; when you hear words that
accord with your own views, you must enquire whether they be not
contrary to what is right. Oh! what attainment can be made without
anxious thought? what achievement can be made without earnest effort?
Let the One man be greatly good, and the myriad regions will be
rectified by him.'

3\. When the sovereign does not with disputatious words throw the old
rules of government into confusion, and the minister does not, for
favour and gain, continue in an office whose work is done,--then the
country will lastingly and surely enjoy happiness.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[95:1](sbe03021.htm#fr_109.md) Â-hăng, it is said
by Sze-mâ *Kh*ien, was the name of Î. Others make it the title of the
chief minister under the dynasty of Shang, = 'the Support and
Steelyard,' 'the Buttress and Director.'

<span id="fn_106"></span>[96:1](sbe03021.htm#fr_110.md) This is the first
direct statement in the Shû of a communication made in writing.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[96:2](sbe03021.htm#fr_111.md) An-yî, the capital
of Hsiâ, might be described as 'western,' from the standpoint of Po.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[97:1](sbe03021.htm#fr_112.md) Thung was the place
where Thang's tomb was; probably in the present district of Yung-ho,
department of Phû-*k*âu, Shan-hsî. The site or supposed site of the
grave there was washed away in an overflow of the Fân river under the
Yüan dynasty, and a stone coffin was removed to another position, near
which a royal tomb has been built.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[99:1](sbe03021.htm#fr_113.md) This phrase is
used, as here, with reference to the virtue of a sovereign, making him
as it were the mate of God, ruling on earth as He rules above; and with
reference to the honours paid to a departed sovereign, when he is
associated with God in the great sacrificial services.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI. The Common Possession of Pure Virtue](sbe03022.md)
