[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03031)  [Next](sbe03033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK V. THE HOUNDS OF LÜ.

Lü was the name of one of the rude tribes of the west, lying beyond the
provinces of *K*âu. Its situation cannot be more exactly defined. Its
people, in compliment, to king Wû, and impressed by a sense of his
growing power, sent to him some of their hounds, and he having received
them, or intimated that be would do so, the Grand-Guardian remonstrated
with him, showing that to receive such animals would be contrary to
precedent, dangerous to the virtue of the sovereign, and was not the way
to deal with outlying tribes and nations. The Grand-Guardian, it is
supposed, was the duke of Shâo, author of the Announcement which forms
the twelfth Book of this Part. The Book is one of the 'Instructions' of
the Shû.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

1\. After the conquest of Shang, the way being open to the nine tribes
of the Î <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_158) and the eight of the
Man <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_158), the western tribe of Lü sent
as tribute some of its hounds, on which the Grand-Guardian made 'the
Hounds of Lü,' by way of instruction to the king.

2\. He said, 'Oh! the intelligent kings paid careful attention to their
virtue, and the wild tribes on every side acknowledged subjection to
them. The nearer and the more remote all presented the productions of
their countries,--in robes, food, and vessels for use. The kings then
displayed the things thus drawn forth by their virtue, (distributing
them) to the (princes of the) states of different surnames from their
own, (to encourage them) not to neglect their duties. The (more)
precious things and pieces of jade they distributed among their uncles
in charge of states, thereby increasing their attachment (to the
throne). The recipients did not despise the things, but saw in them the
power of virtue.

'Complete virtue allows no contemptuous familiarity. When (a ruler)
treats superior men with such familiarity, he cannot get them to give
him all their hearts; when he so treats inferior men, he cannot get them
to put forth for him all their strength. Let him keep from being in
bondage to his cars and eyes, and strive to be correct in all his
measures. By trifling intercourse with men, he ruins his virtue; by
finding his amusement in things (of mere pleasure),

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

he ruins his aims. His aims should repose in what is right; he should
listen to words (also) in their relation to what is right.

'When he does not do what is unprofitable to the injury of what is
profitable, his merit can be completed. When he does not value strange
things to the contemning things that are useful, his people will be able
to supply (all that he needs). (Even) dogs and horses that are not
native to his country he will not keep. Fine birds and strange animals
be will not nourish in his state. When he does not look on foreign
things as precious, foreigners will come to him; when it is real worth
that is precious to him, (his own) people near at hand will be in a
state of repose.

'Oh! early and late never be but earnest. If you do not attend jealously
to your small actions, the result will be to affect your virtue in great
matters;--in raising a mound of nine fathoms, the work may be unfinished
for want of one basket (of earth). If you really pursue this course
(which I indicate), the people will preserve their possessions, and the
throne will descend from generation to generation.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[150:1](sbe03032.htm#fr_163) By 'the nine Î and
eight Man' we are to understand generally the barbarous tribes lying
round the China of *K*âu. Those tribes are variously enumerated in the
ancient. books. Generally the Î are assigned to the east, the *Z*ung to
the west the Tî to the north, and the Man to the south.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI. The Metal-Bound Coffer](sbe03033)
