[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03051)  [Next](sbe03053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

### BOOK XXV. THE KÜN-YÂ.

ACCORDING to the note in the Preface to the Shû, the charge delivered in
this Book to *K*ün-yâ, or possibly 'the prince Yâ,' was by king Mû; and
its dictum is not challenged by any Chinese critic. The reign of king
*Kh*âo, who succeeded to Khang, is thus passed over in the documents of
the Shû. Mû was the son and successor of *Kh*âo, and reigned from B.C.
1001 to 947.

*K*ün-yâ's surname is not known. He is here appointed to be Minister of
Instruction, and as it is intimated that his father and grandfather had
been in the same office, it is conjectured that he was the grandson of
the earl of *Z*ui, who was Minister of Instruction at the beginning of
the reign of king Khang.

The Book is short, speaking of the duties of the office, and stimulating
Yâ to the discharge of them by considerations drawn from the merits of
his forefathers, and the services which he would render to the dynasty
and his sovereign.

1\. The king spoke to the following effect: 'Oh! *K*ün-yâ, your
grandfather and your father, one after the other, with a true loyalty
and honesty, laboured in the service of the royal House, accomplishing a
merit that was recorded on the grand banner <span
id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_285). I, the little child, have become
charged by inheritance with the line of government transmitted from Wăn
and Wû, from *Kh*ăng and Khang; I also keep thinking of their ministers
who aided them in the good government of the kingdom; the trembling
anxiety of my mind makes me feel as if I were treading on a tiger's
tail, or walking upon spring ice. I now give you charge to assist me;

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

be as my limbs to me, as my heart and backbone. Continue their old
service, and do not disgrace your grandfather and father.

'Diffuse widely (the knowledge of) the five invariable relations (of
society), and reverently seek to produce a harmonious observance of the
duties belonging to them among the people. If you are correct in your
own person, none will dare to be but correct. The minds of the people
cannot attain to the right mean (of duty);--they must be guided by your
attaining to it. In the heat and rains of summer, the inferior people
may be described as murmuring and sighing. And so it is with them in the
great cold of winter. How great are their hardships! Think of their
hardships in order to seek to promote their ease; and the people will be
tranquil. Oh! how great and splendid were the plans of king Wăn! How
greatly were they carried out by the energy of king Wû! All in principle
correct, and deficient in nothing, they are for the help and guidance of
us their descendants. Do you with reverence and wisdom carry out your
instructions, enabling me to honour and follow the example of my
(immediate) predecessors, and to respond to and display the bright
decree conferred on Wăn and Wû;--so shall you be the mate of your
by-gone fathers.'

2\. The king spoke to the following effect: '*K*ün-yâ, do you take for
your rule the lessons afforded by the courses of your excellent fathers.
The good or the bad order of the people depends on this. You will thus
follow the practice of your grandfather and father, and make the good
government of your sovereign illustrious.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_285"></span>[250:1](sbe03052.htm#fr_296) The grand banner
was borne aloft when the king went to sacrifice. There were figures of
the sun and moon on it, and dragons lying along its breadth, one over
the other, head above tail. The names of meritorious ministers were
inscribed on it during their lifetime, preparatory to their sharing in
the sacrifices of the ancestral temple after their death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXVI. The Charge to *Kh*iung](sbe03053)
