[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03012)  [Next](sbe03014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

## PART III. THE BOOKS OF HSIÂ.

### BOOK I. THE TRIBUTE OF YÜ.

HSIÂ is the dynastic designation under which Yü and his descendants held
the throne for 439 years (B.C. 2205-1767). On the conclusion of his
labours, according to what was the universally accepted tradition in the
*K*âu period, Yü was appointed by Yâo to be earl of Hsiâ, a small
principality in Ho-nan, identified with the present Yü-*k*âu, department
Khâi-făng, which thus still retains the name of Yü.

It has been repeatedly said in the Introduction that the Tribute of Yü
describes what was done before the death of Yâo. The reason why it got
its place as the first of the Books of Hsiâ was, no doubt, because the
merit set forth in it was the ground of Yü's advancement to the throne.

Altogether the Books of Hsiâ are properly no more than three;--a fact
which shows that in so early a period the duty of the recorder was
little exercised, or that the destruction of its monuments in the course
of time was nearly complete. We may assume that it was in consequence of
both of these things that, when the collection of the Shû was made, only
three documents of Hsiâ were found, to go into it.

The word 'Tribute' in the name of this first Book is not to be
understood only in the sense of a contribution paid by one nation to
another in acknowledgment of subjection, but also as the contribution of
revenue paid by subjects to their proper ruler. The term, moreover,
gives a very inadequate idea of the contents, which describe generally
the labours of Yü in remedying the disasters occasioned by the
inundation with which he had to cope, and how he then defined the
boundaries of the different provinces, made other important territorial
divisions, and determined the quality of the soil in each province, and
the proportion of revenue it should pay, with other particulars. The
Book, if we could fully credit it, would be a sort of domesday book of
China in the twenty-third century

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> B.C., in the
compass of a few pages. In the classification of the Books of the Shû
according to their subject-matter, this is rightly considered as a
Canon. The first section of it is divided into one short introductory
chapter, and nine others, each containing the account of one province.

#### Section 1.

1\. Yü divided the land. Following the course of the hills, he cut down
the trees. He determined the highest hills and largest rivers (in the
several regions).

2\. With respect to *K*î *K*âu <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_76.md), he
did his work at Hû-khâu, and took effective measures at (the mountains)
Liang and Khî. Having repaired the works on Thâi-yüan, he proceeded on
to the south of (mount) Yo. He was successful with his labours on
Tan-hwâi, and went on to the cross-flowing stream of *K*ang.

The soil of this province was whitish and mellow. Its contribution of
revenue was the highest of the highest class, with some proportion of
the second. Its fields were the average of the middle class.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

The (waters of the) Hăng and Wei were brought to their proper channels,
and Tâ-lü was made capable of cultivation.

The wild people of the islands (brought) dresses of skins (i.e. fur
dresses); keeping close on the right to the rocks of *K*ieh, they
entered the Ho.

3\. Between the Kî and the Ho was Yen *K*âu <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_77.md).

The nine branches of the Ho were made to keep their proper channels.
Lêi-hsiâ was made a marsh, in which (the waters of) the Yung and the Ȝü
were united. The mulberry grounds were made fit for silkworms, and then
(the people) came down from the heights, and occupied the grounds
(below).

The soil of this province was blackish and rich; the grass in it was
luxuriant, and the trees grew high. Its fields were the lowest of the
middle class. Its contribution of revenue was fixed at what would just
be deemed the correct amount; but it was not required from it, as from
the other provinces, till after it had been cultivated for thirteen
years. Its articles of tribute were varnish and silk, and, in baskets,
woven ornamental fabrics.

They floated along the *K*î and Thâ, and so reached the Ho.

4\. The sea and (mount) Tâi were the boundaries of *Kh*ing *K*âu <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_78.md).

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

(The territory of) Yü-î was defined; and the Wei and Ȝze were made to
keep their (old) channels.

Its soil was whitish and rich. Along the shore of the sea were wide
tracts of salt land. Its fields were the lowest of the first class, and
its contribution of revenue the highest of the second. Its articles of
tribute were salt, fine cloth of dolichos fibre, productions of the sea
of various kinds; with silk, hemp, lead, pine trees, and strange stones,
from the valleys of Tâi. The wild people of Lâi were taught tillage and
pasturage, and brought in their baskets the silk from the mountain
mulberry tree.

They floated along the Wăn, and so reached the *K*î.

5\. The sea, mount Tâi, and the Hwâi were (the boundaries of) Hsü
*K*âu <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_79.md).

The Hwâi and the Î (rivers) were regulated. The (hills) Mang and Yü were
made fit for cultivation. (The waters of) Tâ-yeh were confined (so as to
form

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

a marsh); and (the tract of) Tung-yüan was successfully brought under
management.

The soil of this province was red, clayey, and rich. Its grass and trees
grew more and more bushy. Its fields were the second of the highest
class; its contribution of revenue was the average of the second. Its
articles of tribute were--earth of five different colours, variegated
pheasants from the valleys of mount Yü, the solitary dryandra from the
south of mount Yî, and the sounding-stones that (seemed to) float on the
(banks of the) Sze. The wild tribes about the Hwâi brought oyster-pearls
and fish, and their baskets full of deep azure and other silken fabrics,
chequered and pure white.

They floated along the Hwâi and the Sze, and so reached the Ho.

6\. The Hwâi and the sea formed (the boundaries of) Yang *K*âu <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_80.md).

The (lake of) Phăng-lî was confined to its proper limits, and the
sun-birds (= the wild geese) had places

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

to settle on. The three *K*iang were led to enter the sea, and it became
possible to still the marsh of *K*ăn. The bamboos, small and large, then
spread about; the grass grew thin and long, and the trees rose high; the
soil was miry.

The fields of this province were the lowest of the lowest class; its
contribution of revenue was the highest of the lowest class, with a
proportion of the class above. Its articles of tribute were gold,
silver, and copper; yâo and khwăn stones; bamboos, small and large;
(elephants') teeth, hides, feathers, hair, and timber. The wild people
of the islands brought garments of grass, with silks woven in
shell-patterns in their baskets. Their bundles contained small oranges
and pummeloes,--rendered when specially required.

They followed the course of the *K*iang and the sea, and so reached the
Hwâi and the Sze.

7\. (Mount) *K*ing and the south of (mount) Hăng formed (the boundaries
of) *K*ing *K*âu <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_81.md).

The *K*iang and the Han pursued their (common) course to the sea, as if
they were hastening to court. The nine *K*iang were brought into
complete order. The Tho and *Kh*ien (streams) were conducted by

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

their proper channels. The land in (the marsh of) Yün (became visible),
and (the marsh of) Măng was made capable of cultivation.

The soil of this province was miry. Its fields were the average of the
middle class; and its contribution of revenue was the lowest of the
highest class. Its articles of tribute were feathers, hair, (elephants')
teeth, and hides; gold, silver, and copper; *kh*un trees, wood for bows,
cedars, and cypresses; grindstones, whetstones, flint stones to make
arrow-heads, and cinnabar; and the *kh*ün and lû bamboos, with the hû
tree, (all good for making arrows)--of which the Three Regions were able
to contribute the best specimens. The three-ribbed-rush was sent in
bundles, put into cases. The baskets were filled with silken fabrics,
azure and deep purple, and with strings of pearls that were not quite
round. From the (country of the) nine *K*iang, the great tortoise was
presented when specially required (and found).

They floated down the *K*iang, the Tho, the *Kh*ien, and the Han, and
crossed (the country) to the Lo, whence they reached the most southern
part of the Ho.

8\. The *K*ing (mountain) and the Ho were (the boundaries of) Yü
*K*âu <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_82.md).

The Î, the Lo, the *Kh*an, and the *K*ien were conducted to the Ho. The
(marsh of) Yung-po was

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

confined within its proper limits. The (waters of that of) Ko were led
to (the marsh of) Mang-*k*û.

The soil of this province was mellow; in the lower parts it was (in some
places) rich, and (in others) dark and thin. Its fields were the highest
of the middle class; and its contribution of revenue was the average of
the highest class, with a proportion of the very highest. Its articles
of tribute were varnish, hemp, fine cloth of dolichos fibre, and the
bœhmerea. The baskets were full of chequered silks, and of fine floss
silk. Stones for polishing sounding-stones were rendered when required.

They floated along the Lo, and so reached the Ho.

9\. The south of (mount) Hwâ and the Blackwater, were (the boundaries
of) Liang *K*âu <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_83.md).

The (hills) Min and Po were made capable of cultivation. The Tho and
*Kh*ien streams were conducted by their proper channels. Sacrifices were
offered to (the hills) Ȝhâi and Mâng on the regulation (of the country
about them).\* (The country of) the wild tribes about the Ho was
successfully operated on.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

The soil of this province was greenish and light. Its fields were the
highest of the lowest class; and its contribution of revenue was the
average of the lowest class, with proportions of the rates immediately
above and below. Its articles of tribute, were--the best gold, iron,
silver, steel, flint stones to make arrow-heads, and sounding-stones;
with the skins of bears, foxes, and jackals, and (nets) woven of their
hair.

From (the hill of) Hsî-*kh*ing they came by the course of the Hwan;
floated along the *Kh*ien, and then crossed (the country) to the Mien;
passed to the Wei, and (finally) ferried across the Ho.

10\. The Black-water and western Ho were (the boundaries of) Yung
*K*âu <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_84.md).

The Weak-water was conducted westwards. The King was led to mingle its
waters with those of the Wei. The *Kh*î and the *Kh*ü were next led in a
similar way (to the Wei), and the waters of the Fêng found the same
receptacle.

(The mountains) *K*ing and *Kh*î were sacrificed to.\* (Those of)
*K*ung-nan and *Kh*un-wû (were also regulated), and (all the way) on to
Niâo-shû. Successful measures could now be taken with the plains and
swamps, even to (the marsh of) *K*û-yeh. (The country of) San-wei was
made habitable, and the (affairs of the) people of San-miâo were greatly
arranged.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

The soil of the province was yellow and mellow. Its fields were the
highest of the highest class, and its contribution of revenue the lowest
of the second. Its articles of tribute were the *kh*iû jade and the lin,
and (the stones called) lang-kan.

Past *K*î-shih they floated on to Lung-măn on the western Ho. They then
met on the north of the Wei (with the tribute-bearers from other
quarters)

Hair-cloth and skins (were brought from) Khwăn-lun, Hsî-*k*ih, and
*Kh*ü-sâu;--the wild tribes of the West (all) coming to (submit to Yü's)
arrangements.

#### Section 2.

The division of the Book into two sections is a convenient arrangement,
but modern, and not always followed. The former section gives a view of
Yü's labours in each particular province. This gives a general view of
the mountain ranges of the country, and of the principal streams; going
on to other labours, subsequently, as was seen in the Introduction,
ascribed to Yü,--his conferring lands and surnames, and dividing the
whole territory into five domains. The contents are divided into five
chapters:--the first, describing the mountains; the second, describing
the rivers; the third, containing a summary of all the labours of Yü
thus far mentioned; the fourth, relating his other labours; and the
fifth, celebrating Yü's fame, and the completion of his work.

1\. (Yü) surveyed and described (the hills), beginning with *Kh*ien and
*Kh*î, and proceeding to mount *K*ing; then, crossing the Ho, Hû-khâu,
and Leî-shâu, going on to Thâi-yo. (After these came) Tî-*k*û and
Hsî-khăng, from which he went on to Wang-wû; (then there were) Thâi-hang
and Mount Hăng, from which he proceeded to the rocks of *K*ieh, where he
reached the sea.

(South of the Ho, he surveyed) Hsî-*kh*ing, *K*û-yü,

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

and Niâo-shû, going on to Thâi-hwâ; (then) Hsiung-*R*, Wâi-fang, and
Thung-pâi, from which he proceeded to Pei-wei.

He surveyed and described Po-*kh*ung, going on to (the other) mount
*K*ing; and Nêi-fang, from which he went on to Tâ-pieh.

(He did the same with) the south of mount Min, and went on mount Hăng.
Then crossing the nine *K*iang, he proceeded to the plain of Fû-*kh*ien.

2\. He traced the Weak-water as far as the Ho-lî (mountains), from which
its superfluous waters went away among the moving sands.

He traced the Black-water as far as San-wei, from which it (went away
to) enter the southern sea.

He traced the Ho from *K*î-shih as far as Lung-măn; and thence,
southwards, to the north of (mount) Hwâ; eastward then to Tî-*kh*û;
eastward (again) to the ford of Măng; eastward (still) to the junction
of the Lo; and then on to Tâ-pei. (From this the course was) northwards,
past the Kiang-water, on to Tâ-lü; north from which the river was
divided, and became the nine Ho, which united again, and formed the
Meeting Ho, when they entered the sea.

From Po-*kh*ung he traced the Yang, which, flowing eastwards, became the
Han. Farther east it became the water of Ȝhang-lang; and after passing
the three Dykes, it went on to Tâ-pieh, southwards from which it entered
the *K*iang. Eastward still, and whirling on, it formed the marsh of
Phăng-lî; and from that its eastern flow was the northern *K*iang, as
which it entered the sea.

From mount Min he traced the *K*iang, which, branching off to the east,
formed the Tho; eastward again, it reached the Lî, passed the nine
*K*iang, and

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

went on to Tung-ling; then flowing east, and winding to the north, it
joined (the Han) with its eddying movements. From that its eastern flow
was the middle *K*iang, as which it entered the sea.

He traced the Yen water, which, flowing eastward, became the *K*î, and
entered the Ho. (Thereafter) it flowed out, and became the Yung (marsh).
Eastward, it issued forth on the north of Thâo-*kh*iû, and flowed
farther east to (the marsh of) Ko; then it went north-east, and united
with the Wăn; thence it went north, and (finally) entered the sea on the
east.

He traced the Hwâi from the hill of Thung-pâî. Flowing east, it united
with the Sze and the Î, and (still) with an eastward course entered the
sea.

He traced the Wei from (the hill) Niâo-shû-thung-hsüeh. Flowing
eastward, it united with the Fêng, and eastwards again with the *K*ing.
Farther east still, it passed the *Kh*î and the *Kh*ü, and entered the
Ho.

He traced the Lo from (the hill) Hsiung-*R*. Flowing to the north-east,
it united with the *K*ien and the *Kh*an, and eastwards still with the
Î. Then on the north-east it entered the Ho.

3\. (Thus), throughout the nine provinces a similar order was
effected:--the grounds along the waters were everywhere made habitable;
the hills were cleared of their superfluous wood and sacrificed to;\*
the sources of the rivers were cleared; the marshes were well banked;
and access to the capital was secured for all within the four seas.

The six magazines (of material wealth) were fully attended to; the
different parts of the country were subjected to an exact comparison, so
that contribution

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

of revenue could be carefully adjusted according to their resources.
(The fields) were all classified with reference to the three characters
of the soil; and the revenues for the Middle Region were established.

4\. He conferred lands and surnames. (He said), 'Let me set the example
of a reverent attention to my virtue, and none will act contrary to my
conduct, Five hundred It formed the Domain of the Sovereign. From the
first hundred they brought as revenue the whole plant of the grain; from
the second, the cars, with a portion of the stalk; from the third, the
straw, but the people had to perform various services; from the fourth,
the grain in the husk; and from the fifth, the grain cleaned.

Five hundred lî (beyond) constituted the Domain of the Nobles. The first
hundred lî was occupied by the cities and lands of the (sovereign's)
high ministers and great officers; the second, by the principalities of
the barons; and the (other) three hundred, by the various other princes.

Five hundred lî (still beyond) formed the Peace-securing Domain. In the
first three hundred, they cultivated the lessons of learning and moral
duties; in the other two, they showed the energies of war and defence.

Five hundred lî (remoter still) formed the Domain of Restraint. The
(first) three hundred were occupied by the tribes of the Î; the (other)
two hundred, by criminals undergoing the lesser banishment.

Five hundred lî (the most remote) constituted the Wild Domain. The
(first) three hundred were

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

occupied by the tribes of the Man; the (other) two hundred, by criminals
undergoing the greater banishment.

5\. On the east, reaching to the sea; on the west, extending to the
moving sands; to the utmost limits of the north and south:--his fame and
influence filled up (all within) the four seas. Yü presented the
dark-coloured symbol of his rank, and announced the completion of his
work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[64:1](sbe03013.htm#fr_78.md) *K*î *K*âu embraced
the present provinces of Shan-hsî, *K*ih-lî, the three most northern
departments of Ho-nan, and the western portion of Liâo-tung. It had the
Ho--what we call the Yellow river--on three sides of it. On the west was
all that part of the Ho which forms the dividing line between Shen-hsî
and Shan-hsî. At the south-western corner of Shan-hsî, the Ho turns to
the east: and in Yü's time it flowed eastwards to about the place where
*K*ih-lî, Shan-tung, and Ho-nan all touch, forming the southern boundary
of *K*î *K*âu. Thence it ran north and east, till its waters entered the
present gulph of *K*ih-lî, forming, so far, the eastern boundary of the
province. The northern boundary must be left undefined.

It would be foreign to the object of the present publication of the Shû,
and take too much space, to give notes on the details of Yü's operations
in *K*î *K*âu and the other provinces.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[65:1](sbe03013.htm#fr_79.md) Yen *K*âu was a small
province, having the Ho on the north, the *K*î on the south, the gulph
of *K*ih-lî on the east, and Yü *K*âu, Yü's seventh province, on the
west. It embraced the department of Tâ-ming, with portions of those of
Ho-*k*ien and Thien-*k*ing, in *K*ih-lî, and the department of
Tung-*kh*ang, with portions of those of *K*î-nan and Yen-*k*âu, in
Shan-tung.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[65:2](sbe03013.htm#fr_80.md) *Kh*ing *K*âu, having
mount Tâi and Hsü *K*âu (the next province) on the west and south, Yen
*K*âu and the sea on the north-west and the north, and the sea on the
east and south, <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> would be still smaller
than Yen *K*âu, and contain the three departments of *Kh*ing-*k*âu,
Lâi-*k*âu, and Têng-*k*âu, with the western portion of that of *K*î-nan,
in Shan-tung. From the text we should never suppose that it passed
across the sea which washes the north and east of Shan-tung, and
extended indefinitely into Liâo-tung and Corla. This, however, is the
view of many Chinese geographers.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[66:1](sbe03013.htm#fr_81.md) The western boundary
of Hsü *K*âu, which is not given in the text, was Yü *K*âu, and part of
*Kh*ing *K*âu. It embraced the present department of Hsü-*k*âu, the six
districts--Thâo-yüan, *Kh*ing-ho, An-tung, Hsü-*kh*ien, Sui-ning, and
Kan-yü, department of Hwâi-an, with Phei *K*âu and Hâi *K*âu,--all in
*K*iang-sû; the whole of Yen-*k*âu department, Tung-phing *K*âu and the
south of Phing-yin district, in the department of Thâi-an, the
department of Î-*k*âu, and portions of those of *K*î-nan and
*Kh*ing-*k*âu,--all in Shan-tung; with the four districts Hwâi-yüan,
Wû-ho, Hung, and Ling-pî, department of Făng-yang, with Sze *K*âu and
Hsü *K*âu,--all in An-hui.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[67:1](sbe03013.htm#fr_82.md) The Hwâi was the
boundary of Yang *K*âu on the north, and we naturally suppose that the
other boundary mentioned, the sea, should be referred to the south of
the province. If it were really so, Yang *K*âu must have extended along
the coast as far as Cochin-China, and not a few Chinese scholars argue
that it did so. But that no southern boundary of the province is
mentioned may rather be taken as proving that when this Book was
compiled, the country south of the *K*iang--the present Yang-ȝze--was
unknown.

Along the greater part of its course, the province was conterminous on
the west with *K*ing *K*âu, and in the north-west with Yü *K*âu. We may
safely assign to it the greater portion of An-hui, and a part of the
department of Hwang-*k*âu, in Hû-pei. All this would be the northern
portion of the province. How far it extended southwards into *K*ê-kiang
and *K*iang-hsî, it is impossible to say.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[68:1](sbe03013.htm#fr_83.md) Mount *K*ing, which
bounded *K*ing *K*âu on the north, is in the department of Hsiang-yang,
Hû-pei, and is called the southern *K*ing, to distinguish it from
another mountain of the same name farther north in Yung *K*âu. Mount
Hăng, its southern boundary, is 'the southern mountain of the Canon of
Shun in Hăng-*k*âu department, Hû-nan. Yang *K*âu was on the east, and
the country on the west was almost unknown. *K*ing *K*âu contained the
greater portion of the present provinces of Hû-pei and Hû-nan, and parts
also of Kwei-*k*âu and Sze-*kh*üan. Some geographers also extend it on
the south into Kwang-tung and Kwang-hsî, which is very unlikely.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[69:1](sbe03013.htm#fr_84.md) Yü *K*âu was the
central one of Yü's nine divisions of the country, and was conterminous,
for a greater or less distance, with all of them, excepting *Kh*ing
*K*âu, which lay off in the east by itself. It embraced most of the
present. Ho-nan, stretching also into the east and south, so as to
comprehend parts of Shan-tung and Hû-pei.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[70:1](sbe03013.htm#fr_85.md) Liang *K*âu was an
extensive province, and it is a remarkable fact that neither the
dominions of the Shang nor the *K*âu dynasty, which followed Hsiâ,
included it. Portions of it were embraced in the Yü and Yung provinces
of *K*âu, but the greater part was considered as wild, savage territory,
beyond the limits of the Middle Kingdom. It is difficult to believe that
the great Yü operated upon it, as this chapter would seem to indicate.
The Hwâ at its north-eastern corner is the western mountain of Shun. The
Black-water, or 'the *K*iang of the Golden Sands,' is. identified with
the present Lû. The province extended over most of the present
Sze-*kh*üan, with parts of Shen-hsî and Kan-sû. I can hardly believe, as
many do, that it extended far into Yün-nan and Kwei-*k*âu.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[71:1](sbe03013.htm#fr_86.md) The Black-water,
which was the western boundary of Yung *K*âu, was a different river from
that which, with the same name, ran along the south of Liang *K*âu. Yung
*K*âu was probably the largest of Yü's provinces, embracing nearly all
the present provinces of Shen-hsî and Kan-sû, and extending indefinitely
northwards to the Desert.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II. The Speech At Kan](sbe03014.md)
