[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03197.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

## CHAPTER XVIII.

## FILIAL PIETY IN MOURNING FOR PARENTS.

The Master said, 'When a filial son is mourning for a parent, he wails,
but not with a prolonged sobbing; in the movements of ceremony he pays
no attention to his appearance; his words are without elegance of
phrase; he cannot bear to wear fine clothes; when he bears music, he
feels no delight; when he eats a delicacy, he is not conscious of its
flavour:--such is the nature of grief and sorrow.

'After three days he may partake of food; for thus the people are taught
that the living should not be injured on account of the dead, and that
emaciation must not be carried to the extinction of life:--such is the
rule of the sages. The period of mourning does not go beyond three
years, to show the people that it must have an end.

'An inner and outer coffin are made; the grave-clothes also are put on,
and the shroud; and (the body) is lifted (into the coffin). The
sacrificial vessels, round and square, are (regularly) set forth, and
(the sight of them) fills (the mourners) with (fresh) distress <span
id="fr_698"></span>[1](#fn_678.md). The women beat their breasts, and the
men stamp with their feet, wailing and weeping, while they sorrowfully
escort the coffin to the grave. They consult the tortoise-shell to
determine the grave and the ground about it, and

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

there they lay the body in peace. They prepare the ancestral temple (to
receive the tablet of the departed), and there present offerings to the
disembodied spirit. In spring and autumn they offer sacrifices, thinking
of the deceased as the seasons come round.

'The services of love and reverence to parents when alive, and those of
grief and sorrow to them when dead:--these completely discharge the
fundamental duty of living men. The righteous claims of life and death
are all satisfied, and the filial son's service of his parents is
completed.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_678"></span>[487:1](sbe03198.htm#fr_698.md) These vessels were
arranged every day by the coffin, while it continued in the house, after
the corpse was put into it, The practice was a serving of the dead as
the living had been served. It is not thought necessary to give any
details as to the other different rites of mourning which are mentioned.
They will be found, with others, in the translations from the Lî *K*î.

The above is the Classic of Filial Piety, as published by the emperor
Hsüan in A.D. 722, with the headings then prefixed to the eighteen
chapters. Subsequently, in the eleventh century, Sze-mâ Kwang (A.D.
1009-1086), a famous statesman and historian, published what he thought
was the more ancient text of the Classic in twenty-two chapters, with
'Explanations' by himself, without indicating, however, the different
chapters, and of course without headings to them. This work is commonly
published along with an 'Exposition' of his views, by Fan Ȝû-yü, one of
his contemporaries and friends. The differences between his text and
that of the Thang emperor are insignificant. He gives, however, one
additional chapter, which would be the nineteenth of his arrangement. It
is as follows:--'Inside the smaller doors leading to the inner
apartments are to be found all the rules (of government). There is awe
for the father, and also for the elder brother. Wife and children,
servants and concubines are like the common people, serfs, and
underlings.'
