[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03059)  [Next](sbe03061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### THE SHIH BEFORE CONFUCIUS, AND WHAT, IF ANY, WERE HIS LABOURS UPON IT.

<span class="margnote">Statement of Sze-mâ *Kh*ien.</span>

1\. Sze-mâ *Kh*ien, in his memoir of Confucius, says:--'The old poems
amounted to more than 3000. Confucius removed those which were only
repetitions of others, and selected those which would be serviceable for
the inculcation of propriety and righteousness. Ascending as high as
Hsieh and Hâu-*k*î, and descending through the prosperous eras of Yin
and Kâu to the times of decadence under kings Yû and Lî, he selected in
all 305 pieces, which he sang over to his lute, to bring them into
accordance with the musical style of the Shâo, the Wû, the Yâ, and the
Făng.'

<span class="margnote">The writer of the Records of the Sui
Dynasty.</span>

In the History of the Classical Books in the Records of the Sui Dynasty
(A.D.589 to 618), it is said:--'When royal benign rule ceased, and poems
were no more collected, *K*ih, the Grand Music-Master of Lû, arranged in
order those that were existing, and made a copy of them. Then Confucius
expurgated them; and going up to the Shang dynasty, and coming down to
the state of Lû, he compiled altogether 300 pieces.'

<span class="margnote">Opinion of *K*û Hsî.</span>

*K*û Hsî, whose own standard work on the Shih appeared in A.D. 1178,
declined to express himself positively on the expurgation of the odes,
but summed up his view of what Confucius did for them in the following
words:--'Royal methods had ceased, and poems were no more collected.
Those which were extant were full of errors, and wanting in arrangement.
When Confucius returned from Wei to Lû, he brought with him the odes
that he had gotten in other states, and digested them, along with those
that were to be found in Lû, into a collection of 300 pieces.'

<span class="margnote">View of the author.</span>

I have not been able to find evidence sustaining these

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

representations, and must adopt the view that, before the birth of
Confucius, the Book of Poetry existed, substantially the same as it was
at his death, and that while he may have somewhat altered the
arrangement of its Books and pieces, the service which he rendered to it
was not that of compilation, but the impulse to study it which he
communicated to his disciples.

<span class="margnote">Groundlessness of Khien's statement.</span>

2\. If we place *Kh*ien's composition of the memoir of Confucius in B.C.
100, nearly four hundred years will have elapsed between the death of
the sage and any statement to the effect that he expurgated previously
existing poems, or compiled the. collection that we now have; and no
writer in the interval affirmed or implied any such things. The further
statement in the Sui Records about the Music-Master of Lû is also
without any earlier confirmation. But independently of these
considerations, there is ample evidence to prove, first, that the poems
current before Confucius were not by any means so numerous as *Kh*ien
says, and, secondly, that the collection of 300 pieces or thereabouts,
digested under the same divisions as in the present classic, existed
before the sage's time.

3\. i. It would not be surprising, if, floating about and current among
the people of China in the sixth century before our era, there had been
more than 3000 pieces of poetry. The marvel is that such was not the
case. But in the Narratives of the States, a work of the *K*âu dynasty,
and ascribed by many to Ȝo *Kh*iû-ming, there occur quotations from
thirty-one poems, made by statesmen and others, all anterior to
Confucius; and of those poems there are not more than two which are not
in the present classic. Even of those two, one is an ode of it quoted
under another name. Further, in the Ȝo *K*wan, certainly the work of
*Kh*iû-ming, we have quotations from not fewer than 219 poems, of which
only thirteen are not found in the classic. Thus of 250 poems current in
China before the supposed compilation of the Shih, 236 are found in it,
and only fourteen are absent. To use the words of *K*âo Yî, a scholar of
the present dynasty, 'If the poems existing in

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Confucius' time
had been more than 3000, the quotations of poems now lost in these two
works should have been ten times as numerous as the quotations from the
305 pieces said to have been preserved by him, whereas they are only
between a twenty-first and twenty-second part of the existing pieces.
This is sufficient to show that *Kh*ien's statement is not worthy of
credit.'

ii\. Of the existence of the Book of Poetry before Confucius, digested
in four Parts, and much in the same order as at present, there may be
advanced the following proofs:--

First. There is the passage in the Official Book of *K*âu, quoted and
discussed in the last paragraph of the preceding chapter. We have in it
a distinct reference to poems, many centuries before the sage, arranged
and classified in the same way as those of the existing Shih. Our Shih,
no doubt, was then in the process of formation.

Second. Lî the ninth piece of the sixth decade of the Shih, Part II, an
ode assigned to the time of king Yû, B.C. 78, to 771, we. have the
words,

'They sing the Yâ and the Nan,  
Dancing to their flutes without error.'

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So early,
therefore, as the eighth century B.C. there was a collection of poems,
of which some bore the name of the Nan, which there is much reason to
suppose were the *K*âu Nan and the Shâo Nan, forming the first two Books
of the first Part of the present Shih; and of which others bore the name
of the Yâ, being, probably, the earlier pieces that now compose a large
portion of the second and third Parts.

Third. In the narratives of Ȝo *Kh*iû-ming, under the twenty-ninth year
of duke Hsiang, B.C. 544, when Confucius was only seven or eight years
old, we have an account of a visit to the court of Lû by an envoy from
Wû, an eminent statesman of the time, and a man of great learning. We
are told that as he wished to hear the music of *K*âu, which he could do
better in Lû than in any other state, they sang to him the odes of the
*K*âu Nan and the Shâo Nan; those of Phei, Yung, and Wei; of the Royal
Domain; of Kăng; of *Kh*î; of Pin; of *Kh*in; of Wei; of

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thang; of *Kh*ăn;
of Kwei; and of *Ȝh*âo. They sang to, him also the odes of the Minor Yâ
and the Greater Yâ; and they sang finally the pieces of the Sung. We
have thus, existing in the boyhood of Confucius, what we may call the
present Book of Poetry, with its Fang, its Yâ, and its Sung. The only
difference discernible is slight,--in the order in which the Books of
the Făng followed one another.

Fourth. We may appeal in this matter to the words of Confucius himself.
Twice in the Analects he speaks of the Shih as a collection consisting
of 300 pieces <span id="fr_318"></span>[1](#fn_306). That work not being
made on any principle of chronological order, we cannot positively
assign those sayings to any particular years of Confucius' life; but it
is, I may say, the unanimous opinion of Chinese critics that they were
spoken before the time to which Khien and *K*û Hsî refer his special
labour on the Book of Poetry.

To my own mind the evidence that has been adduced is decisive on the
points which I specified. The Shih, arranged very much as we now have
it, was current in China before the time of Confucius, and its pieces
were in the mouths of statesmen and scholars, constantly quoted by them
on festive and other occasions. Poems not included in it there doubtless
were, but they were comparatively few. Confucius may have made a copy
for the use of himself and his disciples; but it does not appear that he
rejected any pieces which had been previously received into the
collection, or admitted any which had not previously found a place in
it.

<span class="margnote">What Confucius did for the Shih.</span>

4\. The question now arises of what Confucius did for the Shih, if,
indeed, he did anything at all. The only thing from which we can hazard
an opinion on the point we have from himself. In the Analects, IX, xiv,
he tells us:--'I returned from Wei to Lû, and then the music was
reformed, and the pieces in

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

the Yâ and the Sung received their proper places.' The return from Wei
to Lû took place only five years before the sage's death. He ceased from
that time to take an active part in political affairs, and solaced
himself with music, the study of the ancient literature of his nation,
the writing of 'the Spring and Autumn,' and familiar intercourse with
those of his disciples who still kept around him. He reformed the
music,--that to which the pieces of the Shih were sung; but wherein the
reformation consisted we cannot tell. And he gave to the pieces of the
Yâ and the Sung their proper places. The present order of the Books in
the Făng, slightly differing from what was common in his boyhood, may
have now been determined by him. More than this we cannot say.

While we cannot discover, therefore, any peculiar and important labours
of Confucius on the Shih, and we have it now, as will be shown in the
next chapter, substantially as he found it already compiled to his hand,
the subsequent preservation of it may reasonably be attributed to the
admiration which he expressed for it, and the enthusiasm for it with
which he sought to inspire his disciples. It was one of the themes on
which he delighted to converse with them <span
id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_307). He taught that it is from the poems
that the mind receives its best stimulus <span
id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_308). A man ignorant of them was, in his
opinion, like one who stands with his face towards a wall, limited in
his view, and unable to advance <span id="fr_321"></span>[3](#fn_309).
Of the two things that his son could specify as enjoined on him by the
sage, the first was that he should learn the odes <span
id="fr_322"></span>[4](#fn_310). In this way Confucius, probably,
contributed largely to the subsequent preservation of the Shih, the
preservation of the tablets on which the odes were inscribed, and the
preservation of it in the memory of all who venerated his authority, and
looked up to him as their master.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_306"></span>[283:1](sbe03060.htm#fr_318) In stating that
the odes were 300, Confucius probably preferred to use the round number.
There are, as I said in the 'former chapter, altogether 305 pieces,
which is the number given by Sze-mâ *Kh*ien. There are also the titles
of six others. It is contended by *K*û Hsî and many other scholars that
these titles were only the names of tunes. More likely is the view that
the text of the pieces so styled was lost after Confucius' death.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[284:1](sbe03060.htm#fr_319) Analects, VII,
xvii.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[284:2](sbe03060.htm#fr_320) Analects, VIII,
viii, XVII, ix.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[284:3](sbe03060.htm#fr_321) Analects, XVII, x.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[284:4](sbe03060.htm#fr_322) Analects, XVI,
xiii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Shih From the Time of Confucius Till the General
Acknowledgment of the Present Text](sbe03061)
