[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03013)  [Next](sbe03015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK II. THE SPEECH AT KAN.

WITH this Book there commence the documents of the Shû that may be
regarded, as I have said in the Introduction, as contemporaneous with
the events which they describe. It is the first of the 'Speeches,' which
form one class of the documents of the classic.

The text does not say who the king mentioned in it was, but the
prevalent tradition has always been that he was *Kh*î, the son and
successor of Yü. Its place between the Tribute of Yü and the next Book
belonging to the reign of Thâi Khang, *Kh*î's son, corroborates this
view.

Kan is taken as the name of a place in the southern border of the
principality of Hû, with the lord of which *Kh*î fought. The name of Hû
itself still remains in the district so called of the department Hsî-an,
in Shen-hsî.

The king, about to engage in battle with a rebellious vassal, assembles
his generals and troops, and addresses them. He declares obscurely the
grounds of the expedition which he had undertaken, and concludes by
stimulating the soldiers to the display of courage and observance of
order by promises of reward and threats of punishment.

There was a great battle at Kan. (Previous to it), the king called
together the six nobles, (the leaders of his six hosts), and said, 'Ah!
all ye who

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

are engaged in my six hosts, I have a solemn announcement to make to
you.

'The lord of Hû wildly wastes and despises the five elements (that
regulate the seasons), and has idly abandoned the three acknowledged
commencements of the year <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_85). On this
account Heaven is about to destroy him, and bring to an end his
appointment (to Hû); and I am now reverently executing the punishment
appointed by Heaven.\*

If you, (the archers) on the left <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_86),
do not do your work on the left, it will be a disregard of my orders. If
you, (the spearmen) on the right <span id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_86), do
not do your work on the right, it will be a disregard of my orders. If
you, charioteers <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_86), do not observe the
rules for the management of your horses, it will be a disregard of my
orders. You who obey my orders, shall be rewarded before (the spirits
of) my ancestors; and you who disobey my orders, shall be put to death
before the altar of the spirits of the land, and I will also put to
death your children.'\*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[77:1](sbe03014.htm#fr_87) The crimes of the
lord of Hû are here very obscurely stated. With regard to the second of
them, we know that Hsiâ commenced its year with the first month of
spring, Shang a month earlier, and *K*âu about mid-winter. It was
understood that every dynasty should fix a new month for the beginning
of the year, and the dynasty of *Kh*in actually carried its first month
back into our November. If the lord of Hû claimed to begin the year with
another month than that which Yü had fixed, be was refusing submission
to the new dynasty. No doubt, the object of the expedition was to put
down a dangerous rival.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[77:2](sbe03014.htm#fr_90) The chariots were the
principal part of an ancient Chinese army; it is long before we read of
cavalry. A war-chariot generally carried three. The driver was in the
centre; on his left was an archer, and a spearman occupied the place on
his right. They all wore mail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III. The Songs of the Five Sons](sbe03015)
