[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03033)  [Next](sbe03035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK VII. THE GREAT ANNOUNCEMENT.

THIS 'Great Announcement' was called forth by the emergency referred to
in the second chapter of the last Book. The prefatory notice says, 'When
king Wû had deceased, the three overseers and the wild tribes of the
Hwâi rebelled. The duke of *K*âu acted as minister for king *Kh*ăng, and
having purposed to make an end of the House of Yin (or Shang), he made
'the Great Announcement.' Such was the occasion on which the Book was
composed. The young king speaks in it the words and sentiments of the
duke of *K*âu; and hence the style in which it commences, 'The king
speaks to the following effect.'

The young sovereign speaks of the responsibility lying on him to
maintain the kingdom gained by the virtues and prowess of his father,
and of the senseless movements of the House of Shang to regain its
supremacy. He complains of the reluctance of many of the princes and
high officers to second him in putting down revolt, and proclaims with
painful reiteration the support and assurances of success which he has
received from the divining shell. His traitorous uncles, who were
confederate with the son of the tyrant of Shang, are only alluded to.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

1\. The king speaks to the following effect:--'Ho! I make a great
announcement to you, (the princes of) the many states, and to you, the
managers of my affairs.--We are unpitied, and Heaven sends down
calamities on our House, without the least intermission <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_168).\* It greatly occupies my thoughts that
I, so very young, have inherited this illimitable patrimony with its
destinies and domains. I cannot display wisdom and lead the people to
prosperity; and how much less should I be able to reach the knowledge of
the decree of Heaven!\* Yes, I who am but a little child am in the
position of one who has to go through a deep water;--I must go and seek
where I can cross over. I must diffuse the elegant institutions of my
predecessor and display the appointment which he received (from
Heaven);--so shall I not be forgetful of his great work. Nor shall I
dare to restrain the majesty of Heaven in sending down its inflictions
(on the criminals) <span id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_169).'\*

2\. 'The Tranquillizing king <span id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_170) left
to me the great precious tortoise-shell, to bring into connexion with me
the intelligence of Heaven. I divined by it, and it told me that there
would be great trouble in the region of the west <span
id="fr_176"></span>[4](#fn_171) and that the western people would not be
still <span id="fr_177"></span>[4](#fn_171).\* Accordingly we have these
senseless movements. Small and reduced as Yin

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

now is, (its prince) greatly dares to take in hand its (broken) line.
Though Heaven sent down its terrors (on his House), yet knowing of the
evils in our kingdom, and that the people are not tranquil, he says, "I
will recover (my patrimony);" and so (he wishes to) make our *K*âu a
border territory again.

'One day there was a senseless movement, and the day after, ten men of
worth appeared among the people, to help me to go forward to restore
tranquillity and perpetuate the plans (of my father) <span
id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_172). The great business I am engaging in
will (thus) have a successful issue. I have divined (also) by the
tortoise-shell, and always got a favourable response.\* Therefore I tell
you, the princes of my friendly states, and you, the directors of
departments, my officers, and the managers of my affairs,--I have
obtained a favourable reply to my divinations. I will go forward with
you from all the states, and punish those vagabond and transported
ministers of Yin.'

3\. '(But) you the princes of the various states, and you the various
officers and managers of my affairs, all retort on me, saying, "The
hardships will be great, and that the people are nut quiet has its
source really in the king's palace and in the mansions of the princes in
that (rebellious) state <span id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_173). We little
ones, and the old and reverend men as well, think the expedition
ill-advised;--why does your Majesty not go contrary to the divinations?"
I, in my youth, (also) think continually of these hardships, and say,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Alas! these
senseless movements will deplorably afflict the wifeless men and widows!
But I am the servant of Heaven, which has assigned me this great task,
and laid the hard duty on my person.\* I therefore, the young one, do
not pity myself; and it would be right in you, the many officers, the
directors of departments, and the managers of my affairs, to comfort me,
saying, "Do not be distressed with sorrow. We shall surely complete the
plans of your Tranquillizing father."

'Yes, I, the little child, dare not disregard the Charge of God <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_174).\* Heaven, favourable to the
Tranquillizing king, gave such prosperity to our small country of *K*âu.
The Tranquillizing king divined and acted accordingly, and so he calmly
received his (great) appointment. Now when Heaven is (evidently) aiding
the people, how much more should we follow the indications of the shell!
Oh! the clearly intimated will of Heaven is to be feared:--it is to help
my great inheritance

4\. The king says, 'You, who are the old ministers, are fully able to
remember the past; you know how great was the toil of the Tranquillizing
king. Where Heaven (now) shuts up (our path) and distresses us, is the
place where I must accomplish my work; I dare not but do my utmost to
complete the plans of the Tranquillizing king. It is on this account
that I use such efforts to remove the doubts and carry forward the
inclinations of the princes of my friendly states. And Heaven assists me
with sincere expressions (of sympathy), which I have ascertained among

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

the people;--how dare I but aim at the completion of the work formerly
begun by the Tranquillizer? Heaven, moreover, is thus toiling and
distressing the people;--it is as if they were suffering from disease;
how dare I allow (the appointment) which my predecessor, the
Tranquillizer, received, to be without its happy fulfilment?'\*

The king says, 'Formerly, at the initiation of this expedition, I spoke
of its difficulties, and thought of them daily. But when a deceased
father, (wishing) to build a house, had laid out the plan, if his son be
unwilling to raise up the hall, how much less will he be willing to
complete the roof! Or if the father had broken up the ground, and his
son be unwilling to sow the seed, how much less will he be willing to
reap the crop! In such a case could the father, (who had himself) been
so reverently attentive (to his objects), have been willing to say, "I
have a son who will not abandon his patrimony?" How dare I therefore but
use all my powers to give a happy settlement to the great charge
entrusted to the Tranquillizing king? If among the friends of an elder
brother or a deceased father there be those who attack his son, will the
elders of the people encourage (the attacker, and not (come to the)
rescue?'

5\. The king says, 'Oh! take heart, ye princes of the various states,
and ye managers of my affairs. The enlightening of the country was from
the wise, even from the ten men <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_175)
who obeyed and knew the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

charge of God,\* and the real assistance given by Heaven. At that time
none of you presumed to change the rules (prescribed by the
Tranquillizing king). And now when Heaven is sending down calamity on
the country of *K*âu, and the authors of these great distresses (make it
appear on a grand scale as if) the inmates of a house were mutually to
attack one another, you are without any knowledge that the decree of
Heaven is not to be changed!\*

'I ever think and say, Heaven in destroying Yin was doing husbandman's
work <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_176);--how dare I but complete the
work on my fields? Heaven will thereby show its favour to my
predecessor, the Tranquillizer. How should I be all for the oracle of
divination, and presume not to follow (your advice)?\* I am following
the Tranquillizer, whose purpose embraced all within the limits of the
land. How much more must I proceed, when the divinations are all
favourable! It is on these accounts that I make this expedition in force
to the east. There is no mistake about the decree of Heaven. The
indications given by the tortoise-shell are all to the same effect.'\*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[157:1](sbe03034.htm#fr_173) With reference,
probably, to the early death of his father, and the revolt that followed
quickly upon it.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[157:2](sbe03034.htm#fr_174) The duke had made
up his mind that he would deal stern justice even on his own brothers.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[157:3](sbe03034.htm#fr_175) King Wû.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[157:4](sbe03034.htm#fr_177) The troubles arose
in the east, and not in the west. We do not know the facts in the state
of the kingdom sufficiently to explain every difficulty in these Books,
Perhaps the oracular response had been purposely ambiguous.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[158:1](sbe03034.htm#fr_178) Who these 'ten men
of worth' were, we do not know, nor the circumstances in which they came
forward to help the government.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[158:2](sbe03034.htm#fr_179) Here is an
allusion, as plain as the duke could permit himself to make, to the
complicity of his brothers in the existing troubles.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[159:1](sbe03034.htm#fr_180) Probably the
charge understood to be conveyed by the result of the divinations spoken
of above.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[160:1](sbe03034.htm#fr_181) 'The ten men' here
can hardly be the 'ten men of worth' above in the second chapter. We
must find them rather in the 'ten virtuous men, one in heart and one in
practice, capable of good,' mentioned by king Wû, in the second Part of
the Great Declaration.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[161:1](sbe03034.htm#fr_182) That is, thorough
work,--clearing the ground of weeds, and not letting their roots remain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII. The Charge to the Count of Wei](sbe03035)
