[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03025)  [Next](sbe03027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

### BOOK X. THE CHIEF OF THE WEST'S CONQUEST OF LÎ.

THE reigns of seven more kings of Yin or Shang have passed, and this
Book brings us to the time of *K*âu-hsin or Shâu, its last sovereign,
B.C. 1154-1123. The House of *K*âu begins to come to the front, for 'the
Chief of the West' was one of the acknowledged founders of the *K*âu
dynasty;--whether *Kh*ang, known as king Wăn, or his son Fâ, known as
king Wû, is uncertain. *Kh*ang's father, the duke of *K*âu in the
present department of Făng-hsiang, Shen-hsî, had been appointed Chief of
the West, that is, of all the western portion of the kingdom, embracing
Yü's provinces of Yung, Liang, and *K*ing. The same jurisdiction
descended to his son and grandson. The state of Lî, the conquest of
which is mentioned, was in the present department of Lû-an, Shan-hsî,
within the royal domain, so that the Chief of the West was no longer
confining himself to the west, but threatening the king himself.

Ȝû Î, a loyal officer, bears of the conquest of Lî, and hurries away to
inform the king and warn him of the danger threatening the dynasty
through his evil conduct. The kin gives no heed to his remonstrances,
and Ȝû Î retires, sighing over the ruin, which he sees is not to be
averted.

The Book is classed, it would be hard to tell why, among the
'Announcements.'

The Chief of the West having subdued Lî, Ȝû Î was afraid, and hastened
to report it to the king.

He said, 'Son of Heaven, Heaven is bringing to an end the dynasty of
Yin;\* the wisest men and the shell of the great tortoise do not presume
to know anything fortunate for it.\* It is not that the former kings do
not aid us, the men of this later time but by your dissoluteness and
sport you are bringing on the end yourself. On this account Heaven has
cast us off, and there are no good harvests to supply us with food.\*
Men have no regard to their

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

heavenly nature, and pay no obedience to the statutes (of the kingdom).
(Yea), our people now all wish (the dynasty) to perish, saying, "Why
does not Heaven send down its indignation? Why does not (some one with)
its great appointment make his appearance? What has the present king to
do with us?"'

The king said, 'Oh! was not my birth in accordance with the appointment
of Heaven (in favour of my House)?' (On this) Ȝû Î returned (to his own
city), and said, 'Your, crimes, which are many, are registered above,
and can you still appeal to the appointment of Heaven in your favour?\*
Yin will perish very shortly. As to all your deeds, can they but bring
ruin on your country?'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XI. The Count of Wei](sbe03027.md)
