[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03144)  [Next](sbe03146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

#### ODE 2. THE YÎ.

#### CONTAINING VARIOUS COUNSELS WHICH DUKE WÛ OF WEI MADE TO ADMONISH HIMSELF, WHEN HE WAS OVER HIS NINETIETH YEAR; ESPECIALLY ON THE DUTY OF A RULER TO BE CAREFUL OF HIS OUTWARD DEMEANOUR, FEELING THAT HE IS EVER UNDER THE INSPECTION OF SPIRITUAL BEINGS, AND TO RECEIVE WITH DOCILITY INSTRUCTIONS DELIVERED TO HIM.

The sixth ode in the seventh decade of the Minor Odes of the Kingdom is
attributed to the same duke of Wei as this; and the two bear traces of
having proceeded from the same writer. The external authorities for
assigning this piece to duke Wû are the statement of the preface and an
article in the 'Narratives of the States,' a work already referred to as
belonging to the period of the *K*âu dynasty. That article relates how
Wû, at the age of ninety-five, insisted on all his ministers and
officers being instant, in season and out of season, to admonish him on
his conduct, and that 'he made the warnings in the Î to admonish
himself.' The Î is understood to be only another name for this Yî. Thus
the speaker throughout the piece is Wû, and 'the young Son,' whom he
sometimes addresses, is himself also. The conception of the writer in
taking such a method to admonish himself, and give forth the lessons of
his long life, is very remarkable; and the execution of it is
successful.

Outward demeanour, cautious and grave, Is an indication of the (inward)
virtue. People have the saying, 'There is no wise man who is not (also)
stupid.' The stupidity of the ordinary man Is determined by his
(natural) defects. The stupidity of the wise man Is from his doing
violence (to his proper character).

What is most powerful is the being the man <span
id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_557);--

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In all quarters
(of the state) men are influenced by it. To an upright virtuous conduct
All in the four quarters of the state render obedient homage. With great
counsels and determinate orders, With far-reaching plans and timely
announcements, And with reverent care of his outward demeanour, One will
become the pattern of the people.

As for the circumstances of the present time, You are bent on error and
confusion in your government. Your virtue is subverted; You are besotted
by drink <span id="fr_578"></span>[1](#fn_558). Although you thus pursue
nothing but pleasure, How is it you do not think of your relation to the
past, And do not widely study the former kings, That you might hold fast
their wise laws?

Shall not those whom great Heaven does not approve of, Surely as the
waters flow from a spring, Sink down together in ruin? Rise early and go
to bed late, Sprinkle and sweep your courtyard;--So as to be a pattern
to the people <span id="fr_579"></span>[2](#fn_559). Have in good order
your chariots and horses, Your bows and arrows, and (other) weapons of
war;--To be prepared for warlike action, To keep at a distance (the
hordes of) the south.

Perfect what concerns your officers and people;

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Be careful of your
duties as a prince (of the kingdom). To be prepared for unforeseen
dangers, Be cautious of what you say; Be reverentially careful of your
outward behaviour; In all things be mild and correct. A flaw in a mace
of white jade May be ground away; But for a flaw in speech Nothing can
be done.

Do not speak lightly; your words are your own <span
id="fr_580"></span>[1](#fn_560). Do not say, 'This is of little
importance; No one can hold my tongue for me.' Words are not to be cast
away. Every word finds its answer; Every good deed has its recompense.
If you are gracious among your friends, And to the people, as if they
were you: children, Your descendants will continue in unbroken line, And
all the people will surely be obedient to you.

Looked at in friendly intercourse with superior men, You make your
countenance harmonious and mild; Anxious not to do anything wrong.
Looked at in your chamber, You ought to be equally free from shame
before the light which shines in. Do not say, 'This place is not public;
No one can see me here.' The approaches of spiritual beings Cannot be
calculated beforehand; But the more should they not be slighted <span
id="fr_581"></span>[2](#fn_561).

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

O prince, let your practice of virtue Be entirely good and admirable.
Watch well over your behaviour, And allow nothing wrong in your
demeanour. Committing no excess, doing nothing injurious, There are few
who will not in such a case take you for their pattern. When one throws
to me a peach, I return to him a plum <span
id="fr_582"></span>[1](#fn_562). To look for horns on a young ram Will
only weary you, my son <span id="fr_583"></span>[2](#fn_563).

The tough and elastic wood Can be fitted with the silken string <span
id="fr_584"></span>[3](#fn_564). The mild and respectful man Possesses
the foundation of virtue. There is a wise man;--I tell him good words,
And he yields to them the practice of docile virtue. There is a stupid
man;--He says on the contrary that my words are not true:--So different
are people's minds.

Oh! my son, When you did not know what was good, and what was not good,
Not only did I lead you by the hand, But I showed the difference between
them by appealing to instances. Not (only) did I charge you face to
face, But I held you by the ear <span id="fr_585"></span>[4](#fn_565).
And still perhaps you do not know, Although you have held a son in your
arms. If people be not self-sufficient, Who comes to a late maturity
after early instruction?

Great Heaven is very intelligent, And I pass,

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

my life without pleasure. When I see you so dark and stupid, My heart is
full of pain. I taught you with assiduous repetition, And you listened
to me with contempt. You would not consider me as your teacher, But
regarded me as troublesome. Still perhaps you do not know;--But you are
very old.

Oh! my son, I have told you the old ways. Hear and follow my
counsels:--Then shall you have no cause for great regret. Heaven is now
inflicting calamities, And is destroying the state. My illustrations are
not taken from things remote:--Great Heaven makes no mistakes. If you go
on to deteriorate in your virtue, You will bring the people to great
distress.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_557"></span>[413:1](sbe03145.htm#fr_577) Wû writes as the
marquis of Wei, the ruler of a state; but what he says is susceptible of
universal application. In every smaller sphere, and in the largest,
'being the man,' displaying, that is, the proper qualities of humanity,
will be appreciated and felt.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[414:1](sbe03145.htm#fr_578) Han Ying (who has
been mentioned in the Introduction) says that Wû made the sixth ode of
the seventh decade of the former Part against drunkenness, when he was
repenting of his own giving way to that vice. His mention of the habit
here, at the age of ninety-five, must be understood as a warning to
other rulers.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[414:2](sbe03145.htm#fr_579) Line 3 describes
things important to the cultivation of one's self; and line 4, things
important to the regulation of one's family. They may seem unimportant,
it is said,. as compared with the defence of the state, spoken of in the
last four lines of the stanza; but the ruler ought not to neglect them.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[415:1](sbe03145.htm#fr_580) And therefore
every one is himself responsible for his words.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[415:2](sbe03145.htm#fr_581) *K*û Hsî says that
from the fourth line this stanza only speaks of the constant care there
should be in watching over one's thoughts; but in saying so, be
overlooks the consideration by which such watchful care is enforced.
Compare what is said of king Wăn in the third stanza of the sixth ode of
the first decade. King Wăn and duke Wû were both influenced by the
consideration that their inmost thoughts, even when 'unseen by men,'
were open to the inspection of spiritual beings.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[416:1](sbe03145.htm#fr_582) That is, every
deed, in fact, meets with its recompense.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[416:2](sbe03145.htm#fr_583) See the conclusion
of duke Wû's ode against drunkenness. Horns grow as the young ram grows.
Effects must not be expected where there have not been the conditions
from which they naturally spring.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[416:3](sbe03145.htm#fr_584) Such wood is the
proper material for a bow.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[416:4](sbe03145.htm#fr_585) That is, to secure
your attention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 3, Stanzas 1, 2, 3, 4, And 7. The Sang *Z*âu](sbe03146)
