[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03119)  [Next](sbe03121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 5. THE KHÛ *ȜH*ZE.

#### SACRIFICIAL AND FESTAL SERVICES IN THE ANCESTRAL TEMPLE; AND THEIR CONNEXION WITH ATTENTION TO HUSBANDRY.

See the remarks on the Services of the Ancestral Temple, pp.
[300](sbe03063.htm#page_300), 301.

Thick grew the tribulus (on the ground), But they cleared away its
thorny bushes. Why did they this of old? That we might plant our millet
and sacrificial millet; That our millet might be abundant, And our
sacrificial millet luxuriant. When our barns are full, And our stacks
can be counted by tens of myriads, We proceed to make spirits and
prepared grain, For offerings and sacrifice. We seat the representatives
of the dead, and urge them to eat <span
id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_437):--Thus seeking to increase our bright
happiness.

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

With correct and reverent deportment, The bulls and rams all pure, We
proceed to the winter and autumnal sacrifices. Some flay (the victims);
some cook (their flesh); Some arrange (the meat); some adjust (the
pieces of it). The officer of prayer sacrifices inside the temple
gate <span id="fr_453"></span>[1](#fn_438), And all the sacrificial
service is complete and brilliant. Grandly come our progenitors; Their
spirits happily enjoy the offerings; Their filial descendant receives
blessing:--They will reward him with great happiness, With myriads of
years, life without end.

They attend to the furnaces with reverence; They prepare the trays,
which are very large; Some for the roast meat, some for the broiled.
Wives presiding are still and reverent <span
id="fr_454"></span>[2](#fn_439), Preparing the numerous (smaller)
dishes. The guests and visitors <span id="fr_455"></span>[3](#fn_440)
Present the cup all round <span id="fr_456"></span>[4](#fn_441). Every
form is according to rule; Every smile and word are as they should be.
The spirits quietly come, And respond

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

with great blessings,--Myriads of years as the (fitting) reward.

We are very much exhausted, And have performed every ceremony without
error. The able officer of prayer announces (the will of the
spirits) <span id="fr_457"></span>[1](#fn_442). And goes to the filial
descendant to convey it <span id="fr_458"></span>[1](#fn_442):--Fragrant
has been your filial sacrifice, And the spirits have enjoyed your
spirits and viands. They confer on you a hundred blessings; Each as it
is desired, Each as sure as law. You have been exact and expeditious;
You have been correct and careful; They will ever confer on you the
choicest favours, In myriads and tens of myriads.'

The ceremonies having thus been completed, And the bells and drums
having given their warning <span id="fr_459"></span>[2](#fn_443), The
filial descendant goes to his place <span
id="fr_460"></span>[3](#fn_444), And the able officer of prayer makes
his announcement, 'The spirits have drunk to the full.' The great
representatives of the dead then rise, And the bells and drums escort
their withdrawal, (On which) the spirits tranquilly return (to whence
they came) <span id="fr_461"></span>[4](#fn_445). All the servants, and
the presiding wives, Remove (the trays and dishes) without delay. The

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (sacrificer's)
uncles and cousins All repair to the private feast <span
id="fr_462"></span>[1](#fn_446).

The musicians all go in to perform, And give their soothing aid at the
second blessing <span id="fr_463"></span>[2](#fn_447). Your <span
id="fr_464"></span>[3](#fn_448) viands are set forth; There is no
dissatisfaction, but all feel happy. They drink to the full, and eat to
the full; Great and small, they bow their heads., (saying), 'The spirits
enjoyed your spirits and viands, And will cause you to live long. Your
sacrifices, all in their seasons, Are completely discharged by you. May
your sons and your grandsons Never fail to perpetuate these services!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_437"></span>[365:1](sbe03120.htm#fr_452) The poet hurries
on to describe the sacrifices in progress. The persons selected to
personate the departed were necessarily inferior in rank to the
principal sacrificer, yet for the time they were superior to him. This
circumstance, it was supposed, would make them feel uncomfortable; and
therefore, as soon as they appeared in the temple, the director of the
ceremonies instructed the sacrificer to ask them to be seated, and to
place them at ease; after which they were urged to take some
refreshment.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[366:1](sbe03120.htm#fr_453) The Kû, who is
mentioned here, was evidently an officer, 'one who makes or recites
prayers.' The sacrifice he is said to offer was, probably, a libation,
the pouring out fragrant spirits, as a part of the general service, and
likely to attract the hovering spirits of the departed, on their
approach to the temple. Hence his act was performed just inside the
gate.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[366:2](sbe03120.htm#fr_454) 'Wives presiding,'
i.e. the wife of the sacrificer, the principal in the service, and other
ladies of the harem. The dishes under their care, the smaller dishes,
would be those containing sauces, cakes, condiments, &c.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[366:3](sbe03120.htm#fr_455) 'The guests and
visitors' would be nobles and officers of different surnames from the
sacrificer, chosen by divination to take part in the sacrificial
service.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[366:4](sbe03120.htm#fr_456) 'Present the cup
all round' describes the ceremonies of drinking, which took place
between the guests and visitors, the representatives of the dead, and
the sacrificer.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[367:1](sbe03120.htm#fr_458) The officer of
prayer had in the first place obtained, or professed to have obtained,
this answer of the progenitors from their personators.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[367:2](sbe03120.htm#fr_459) The music now
announced that the sacrificial service in the temple was ended.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[367:3](sbe03120.htm#fr_460) The sacrificer, or
principal in the service, now left the place which he had occupied,
descended from the hall, and took his position at the foot of the steps
on the east,--the place appropriate to him in dismissing his guests.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[367:4](sbe03120.htm#fr_461) Where did they
return to? According to *K*âng Hsüan, 'To heaven.'

<span id="fn_446"></span>[368:1](sbe03120.htm#fr_462) These uncles and
cousins were all present at the sacrifice, and of the same surname as
the principal. The feast to them was to show his peculiar affection for
his relatives.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[368:2](sbe03120.htm#fr_463) The feast was
given in the apartment of the temple behind the hall where the sacrifice
had been performed, so that the musicians are represented as going in to
continue at the feast the music they had discoursed at the sacrifice.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[368:3](sbe03120.htm#fr_464) The transition to
the second person here is a difficulty. We can hardly make the speech,
made by some one of the guests on behalf of all the others, commence
here. We must come to the conclusion that the ode was written, in
compliment to the sacrificer, by one of the relatives who shared in the
feast; and so here he addresses him directly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 6. The Hsin Nan Shan](sbe03121)
