[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03179)  [Next](sbe03181.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION.

In preparing the translation of the Hsiâo King for the present work, I
have made frequent reference to four earlier translations.

Two of them were made by myself;--the one about thirty years ago, simply
as an exercise for my own improvement in Chinese; the other four years
ago, when I was anxious to understand fully the Confucian teaching on
the subject of Filial Piety, but without reference to my earlier
version.

The third is a translation in the fourth volume of the Chinese
Repository, pp. 345-353 (1835), for the accuracy of which much cannot be
said. Very few notes are appended to it. The fourth is in the 'Mémoires
concernant les Chinois' (Paris, 1779), being part of a long treatise on
the 'Ancient and Modern Doctrine of the Chinese about Filial Piety,' by
P. Cibot. In a preliminary notice to his version of our classic, he
says:--'P. Noël formerly translated the Hsiâo King into Latin. Our
translation will necessarily be different from his. He laboured on the
old text, and we on the new, which the scholars of the Imperial College
have adopted. Besides this, he has

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

launched out into paraphrase, and we have made it our business to
present the text in French such as it is in Chinese.' I have not been
able to refer to P. Noël's translation in preparing that now given to
the public; but I had his work before me when writing out my earliest
version. The difference between the old and modern texts is too slight
to affect the character of translations of them, but P. Noël's version
is decidedly periphrastic. The title of his work is:--'SINENSIS IMPERII
LIBRI CLASSICI SEX, nimirum Adultorum Schola, Immutabile Medium, Liber
sententiarum, Mencius, Filialis Observantia, Parvulorum Schola, e Sinico
idiomate in Latinum traducti à P. Fr. Noël, S.J. (Prague, 1711).' The
present version, I believe, gives the text in English, such as it is in
Chinese, more accurately and closely than P. Cibot's does in French.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Scope and Meaning of the Treatise](sbe03181.md)
