[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03041)  [Next](sbe03043.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XV. AGAINST LUXURIOUS EASE.

THE name of this Book is taken from two characters in the first sentence
of it, which are the key-note of the whole. It is classified among the
'Instructions' of the Shû, and was addressed to king *Kh*ăng by the duke
of *K*âu soon after he had resigned the administration of the government
into his hands.

There are six pauses in the course of the address, which is resumed
always with 'The duke of Kâu said, "Oh."' This suggests a division into
seven chapters.

In the first, the duke suggests to the king to find a rule for himself
in the laborious toils that devolve on the husbandman. In the second, he
refers to the long reigns of three of the Yin sovereigns,

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

and the short reigns of others, as illustrating how the blessing of
Heaven rests on the diligent monarch. In the third, the example of their
own kings, Thâi, *K*î, and Wan, is adduced with the same object. In the
fourth, the duke addresses the king directly, and exhorts him to follow
the pattern of king Wăn, and flee from that of *K*âu-hsin. In the fifth,
he stimulates him, by reference to ancient precedents, to adopt his
counsels, and shows the evil effect that will follow if he refuse to do
so. In the sixth, he shows him, by the cases of the good kings of Yin
and of king Wăn, how he should have regard to the opinions of the common
people, and gird himself to diligence. The seventh chapter is a single
admonition that the king should lay what had been said to heart.

1\. The duke of *K*âu said, 'Oh! the superior man rests in this,--that
he will indulge in no luxurious ease. He first understands how the
painful toil of sowing and reaping conducts to ease, and thus he
understands how the lower people depend on this toil (for their
support). I have observed among the lower people, that where the parents
have diligently laboured in sowing and reaping, their sons (often) do
not understand this painful toil, but abandon themselves to ease, and to
village Slang, and become quite disorderly. Or where they do not do so,
they (still) throw contempt on their parents, saying, "Those old people
have heard nothing and know nothing."'

2\. The duke of *K*âu said, 'Oh! I have heard that aforetime *K*ung
Ȝung, one of the kings of Yin <span id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_215.md), was
grave, humble, reverential, and timorously cautious. He measured himself
with reference to. the decree of Heaven, and cherished a reverent
apprehension in governing the people, not daring

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

to indulge in useless ease.\* It was thus that he enjoyed the throne
seventy and five years. If we come to the time of Kâo Ȝung <span
id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_216.md), he toiled at first away from the court,
and was among the lower people <span id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_217.md).
When he came to the throne, and occupied the mourning shed, it may be
said that he did not speak for three years. (Afterwards) he was (still
inclined) not to speak; but when he did speak, his words were full of
harmonious (wisdom). He did not dare to indulge in useless ease, but
admirably and tranquilly presided over the regions of Yin, till
throughout them all, small and great, there was not a single murmur. It
was thus that he enjoyed the throne fifty and nine years. In the case of
Ȝû-*k*iâ <span id="fr_225"></span>[3](#fn_218.md), he refused to be king
unrighteously, and was at first one of the lower people. When he came to
the throne, he knew on what they must depend (for their support), and
was able to exercise a protecting kindness towards their masses, and did
not dare to treat with contempt the wifeless men and widows. Thus it was
that he enjoyed the throne thirty and three years. The kings that arose
after these, from their birth enjoyed ease. Enjoying ease from their
birth, they did not know the painful toil of sowing and reaping, and had
not heard of the hard labours of the lower people. They sought for
nothing but excessive pleasure; and so not one of them had long life.
They (reigned) for ten years,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

for seven or eight, for five or six, or perhaps (only) for three or
four.'

3\. The duke of *K*âu said, 'Oh! there likewise were king Thâi and king
*K*î of our own *K*âu, who were humble and reverentially cautious. King
Wăn dressed meanly, and gave himself to the work of tranquillization and
to that of husbandry. Admirably mild and beautifully humble, he
cherished and protected the inferior people, and showed a fostering
kindness to the wifeless men and widows. From morning to mid-day, and
from mid-day to sundown, he did not allow himself leisure to eat;--thus
seeking to secure the happy harmony of the myriads of the people. King
Wăn did not dare to go to excess in his excursions or his hunting, and
from the various states he would receive only the correct amount of
contribution. The appointment (of Heaven) came to him in the middle of
his life <span id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_219.md), and he enjoyed the
throne for fifty years.'\*

4\. The duke of *K*âu said, 'Oh! from this time forward, do you who have
succeeded to the throne imitate Wăn's avoiding of excess in his
sight-seeing, his indulgence in ease, his excursions, his hunting; and
from the myriads of the people receive only the correct amount of
contribution. Do not allow yourself the leisure to say, "To-day I will
indulge in pleasure." This would not be holding out a lesson to the
people, nor the way to secure the favour of Heaven. Men will on the
contrary be prompt to imitate you and practise evil. Become not like

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shâu the king of
Yin, who went quite astray, and, became abandoned to drunkenness.'

5\. The duke of *K*âu said, 'Oh! I have heard it said that, in the case
of the ancients, (their ministers) warned and admonished them, protected
and loved them, taught and instructed them; and among the people there
was hardly one who would impose on them by extravagant language or
deceiving tricks. If you will not listen to this (and profit by it),
your ministers will imitate you, and so the correct laws of the former
kings, both small and great, will be changed and disordered. The people,
blaming you, will disobey and rebel in their hearts;--yea, they will
curse you with their mouths.'

6\. The duke of *K*âu said, 'Oh! those kings of Yin,--*K*ung Ȝung, Kâo
Ȝung, and Ȝû-*k*iâ, with king Wăn of our *K*âu,--these four men carried
their knowledge into practice. If it was told them, "The lower people
murmur against you and revile you," then they paid great and reverent
attention to their conduct; and with reference to the faults imputed to
them they said, "Our faults are really so," thus not simply shrinking
from the cherishing of anger. If you will not listen to this (and profit
by it), when men with extravagant language and deceptive tricks say to
you, "The lower people are murmuring against you and reviling you," you
will believe them. Doing this, you will not be always thinking of your
princely duties, and will not cultivate a large and generous heart, You
will confusedly punish the guiltless, and put the innocent to death.
There will be a general murmuring, which will be concentrated upon your
person.'

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

7\. The duke of *K*âu said, 'Oh! let the king, who has succeeded to the
throne, make a study of these things.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_215"></span>[201:1](sbe03042.htm#fr_222.md) *K*ung Ȝung was
the sacrificial title of Thâi-wû, the seventh of the kings of Shang or
Yin, who reigned B.C. 1637-1563.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[202:1](sbe03042.htm#fr_223.md) Kâo Ȝung was the
sacrificial title of Wû-ting, the nineteenth sovereign of the Yin line,
who reigned B.C. 1324-1266. He has already appeared in the 8th and 9th
Books of Part IV.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[202:2](sbe03042.htm#fr_224.md) Compare Part IV,
viii, sect. 3, ch. 1.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[202:3](sbe03042.htm#fr_225.md) Ȝû-*k*iâ was the
twenty-first of the Yin sovereigns, and reigned B.C. 1258-1226.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[203:1](sbe03042.htm#fr_226.md) This can only be
understood of Wăn's succeeding to his father as duke of *K*âu and chief
of the West in B.C. 1185. He died in 1135, leaving it to his son Wû to
overthrow the dynasty of Shang.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XVI. The Prince Shih](sbe03043.md)
