[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hsiao)  [Next](sbe03178) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

## INTRODUCTION.

### CHAPTER 1.

#### THE NAME OF THE CLASSIC; ITS EXISTENCE BEFORE THE HAN DYNASTY; ITS CONTENTS, AND BY WHOM IT WAS WRITTEN.

<span class="margnote">Meaning of the character Hsiâo.</span>

1\. The Chinese character pronounced Hsiâo, which we translate by
'Filial Piety,' and which may also perform the part of an adjective,
'filial,' of a verb, 'to be filial,' or of an adverb, 'filially,' is one
of the composite characters whose meaning is suggested by the meanings
of their constituent parts combined together. It is made up of two
others,--One signifying 'an old man' or 'old age,' and beneath it the
character signifying 'a son.' It thus, according to the Shwo Wăn, the
oldest Chinese dictionary (A.D. 100), presents to the eye 'a son bearing
up an old man,' that is, a child supporting his parent. Hsiâo also
enters as their phonetical element into at least twenty other
characters, so that it must be put down as of very early formation. The
character King has been explained in the Introduction to the Shû King,
[p. 2](sbe03004.htm#page_2); and the title, Hsiâo King, means 'the
Classic of Filial Piety.'

<span class="margnote">Was the treatise called the Hsiâo King by
Confucius?</span>

2\. Many Chinese critics contend that this brief treatise was thus
designated by Confucius himself, and that it received the distinction of
being styled a King before

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

any of the older and more important classics. For the preservation of
the text as we now have it, we are indebted to Hsüan Ȝung (A.D.
713-755), one of the emperors of the Thang dynasty. In the preface to
his commentary on it there occurs this sentence:--'The Master said, "My
aim is seen in the *Kh*un *Kh*iû; my (rule of) conduct is in the Hsiâo
King."' The imperial author quotes the saying, as if it were universally
acknowledged to have come from the sage. It is found at a much earlier
date in the preface of Ho Hsiû (A.D. 129-182) to his commentary on the
*Kh*un *Kh*iû as transmitted and annotated by Kung-yang. The industry of
scholars has traced it still farther back, and in a more extended form,
to a work called Hsiâo King Kü-ming Küeh,--a production, probably, of
the first century of our era, or of the century before it. It was one of
a class of writings on the classical books, full of mysterious and
useless speculations, that never took rank among the acknowledged
expositions. Most of them soon disappeared, but this subsisted down to
the Sui dynasty (A.D. 581-618), for there was a copy of it then in the
Imperial Library. It is now lost, but a few passages of it have been
collected from quotations in the Han writers. Among them is this:
'Confucius said, "If you wish to see my aim in dispensing praise or
blame to the feudal lords, it is to be found in the *Kh*un *Kh*iû; the
courses by which I would exalt the social relations are in the Hsiâo
King."' The words thus ascribed to Confucius were condensed, it is
supposed, into the form in which we have them,--first from Ho Hsiû, and
afterwards from the emperor Hsüan Ȝung. Whether they were really used by
the sage or not, they were attributed to him as early as the beginning
of our Christian era, and it was then believed that he had given to our
classic the honourable name of a King.

<span class="margnote">The Hsiâo King existed before the Han
dynasty.</span>

3\. But the existence of the Hsiâo King can be traced several hundred
years farther back;--to within less than a century after the death of
Confucius. Sze-mâ *Kh*ien, in his history of the House of Wei, one of
the three marquisates into which the

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

great state of Kin was broken up in the fifth century B. C., tells us
that the marquis Wan received, in B. C. 407, the classical books from Pû
Ȝze-hsiâ, and mentions the names of two other disciples of Confucius,
with whom he was on intimate terms of friendship, There remains the
title of a commentary on the Hsiâo King by this marquis Wan; and the
book was existing in the time of Ȝhâi Yung (A.D. 133-192), who gives a
short extract from it in one of his treatises.

<span class="margnote">The contents of the classic, and by whom it was
written.</span>

4\. The recovery of our classic after the fires of *Kh*in will be
related in the next chapter. Assuming here that it was recovered, we
look into it, and find a conversation, or memoranda, perhaps, of several
conversations, between Confucius and his disciple Ȝang-ȝze. The latter,
however, is little more than a listener, to whom the sage delivers his
views on Filial Piety in its various relations. There are two recensions
of the text;--one in eighteen chapters., and the other in twenty-two. As
edited in eighteen chapters, each of them has a very brief descriptive
beading. I have given this in the subjoined translation, but the
headings cannot be traced back beyond the commentary of the emperor
Hsüan.

The saying attributed by Ho Hsiû and others to Confucius would seem to
indicate that he had himself composed the work, but the reader of it
sees at once that it could not have proceeded from him. Nor do the style
and method of the treatise suggest a view which has bad many
advocates,--that it was written by Ȝang-ȝze, under the direction of the
master. There is no reason, however, why we should not accept the still
more common account,--that the Hsiâo came from the school of Ȝang-ȝze.
To use the words of Hû Yin, an author of the first half of our twelfth
century:--'The Classic of Filial Piety was not made by Ȝang-ȝze himself.
When he retired from his conversation (or conversations) with .*K*ung-nî
on the subject of Filial Piety, be repeated to the disciples of his own
school what (the master) had said, and they classified the sayings, and
formed the treatise.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sbe03178)
