[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03028)  [Next](sbe03030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

### BOOK II. THE SPEECH AT MÛ.

IT is the morning of the day of battle, for which the king has prepared
his host by the three speeches of the last Book. Once more he addresses
his confederate princes, his officers, and his men. He sets forth more
briefly the intolerable wickedness of Shâu, and instructs and warns his
troops how they are to behave in the fight.

Mû was in the south of the present district of *Kh*î, department
Wei-hui, Ho-nan, a tract of open country stretching into the district of
*K*î, and at no great distance from the capital of Shâu.

1\. The time was the grey dawn of the day *K*iâ-ȝze. On that morning the
king came to the open country of Mû, in the borders of Shang, and
addressed his army. In his left hand he carried a battle-axe yellow with
gold, and in his right he held a white ensign, which he waved, saying,
'Far are ye come, ye men of the western regions!' He added, 'Ah! ye
hereditary rulers of my friendly states; ye managers of affairs,--the
Ministers of Instruction, of War, and of Works; the great officers
subordinate to these, and the many other officers; the master of my
body-guards; the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds; and ye,
O men of Yung, Shû, Kiang, Mâo, Wei, Lû, Phang, and Pho <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_132.md), lift up your lances, join your shields,
raise your spears:--I have a speech to make.'

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

2\. The king (then) said, 'The ancients have said, "The hen does not
announce the morning. The crowing of a hen in the morning (indicates)
the subversion of the family." Now Shâu, the king of Shang, follows only
the words of his wife. In his blindness he has neglected the sacrifices
which he ought to offer, and makes no response (for the favours that he
has received);\* he has also cast off his paternal and maternal
relations, not treating them properly. They are only the vagabonds from
all quarters, loaded with crimes, whom he honours and exalts, whom he
employs and trusts, making them great officers and high nobles, so that
they can tyrannize over the people, and exercise their villainies in the
cities of Shang.

'Now, I, Fâ, am simply executing, respectfully the punishment appointed
by Heaven.\* In to-day's business do not advance more than six or seven
steps, and then stop and adjust your ranks;--my brave men, be energetic!
Do not exceed four blows, five blows, six blows, or seven blows, and
then stop and adjust your ranks;--my brave men, be energetic! Display a
martial bearing. Be like tigers and panthers, like bears and grisly
bears, (here) in the borders of Shang. Do not rush on those who fly (to
us in submission), but receive them to serve our western land;--my brave
men, be energetic! If you be not energetic (in all these matters), you
will bring destruction on yourselves.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[131:1](sbe03029.htm#fr_136.md) These are the
names of eight different tribes or confederations of tribes of the south
and west. We are to look for their sites in Sze-*kh*üan, Yün-nan, and
Hû-pei. They were, no doubt, an important portion of Wû's army, but only
as auxiliaries. It is too much to ascribe, as some have done, the
overthrow of Shang to an irruption of barbarous people from the west.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III. The Successful Completion of the War](sbe03030.md)
