[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03052)  [Next](sbe03054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

### BOOK XXVI. THE CHARGE TO *KH*IUNG.

THE charge recorded here, like that in the last Book, is assigned to
king Mû. It was delivered on the appointment of a *Kh*iung or
Po-*kh*iung (that is, the eldest *Kh*iung, the eldest brother in his
family,) to be High Chamberlain. Of this *Kh*iung we know nothing, more
than we learn from the Shû. He was no high dignitary of state. That the
charge to him found a place in the Shû, we are told, shows how important
it was thought that men in the lowest positions, yet coming into contact
with the sovereign, should possess correct principles and an earnest
desire for his progress in intelligence and virtue.

King Mû represents himself as conscious of his own incompetencies, and
impressed with a sense of the high duties devolving on him. His
predecessors, much superior to himself, were yet greatly indebted to the
aid of the officers about them;--how much more must this be the case
with him!

He proceeds to appoint *Kh*iung to be the High Chamberlain, telling him
how he should guide correctly all the other servants about the royal
person, so that none but good influences should be near to act upon the
king;--telling him also the manner of men whom he should employ, and the
care he should exercise in the selection of them.

The king spoke to the following effect:--'Po-*kh*iung, I come short in
virtue, and have succeeded to the former kings, to occupy the great
throne. I am fearful, and conscious of the peril (of my position). I
rise at midnight, and think how I can avoid falling into errors.
Formerly Wăn and Wû were endowed with all intelligence, august and sage,
while their ministers, small and great, all cherished loyalty and
goodness. Their servants, charioteers, chamberlains, and followers were
all men of correctness; morning and evening waiting on their sovereign's
wishes, or supplying his deficiencies. (Those kings), going out and
coming in, rising up and sitting

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

down, were thus made reverent. Their every warning or command was good.
The people yielded a reverent obedience, and the myriad regions were all
happy. But I, the One man, am destitute of goodness, and really depend
on the officers who have places about me to help my deficiencies,
applying the line to my faults, and exhibiting my errors, thus
correcting my bad heart, and enabling me to be the successor of my
meritorious predecessors.

'Now I appoint you to be High Chamberlain, to see that all the officers
in your department and my personal attendants are upright and correct,
that they strive to promote the virtue of their sovereign, and together
supply my deficiencies. Be careful in selecting your officers. Do not
employ men of artful speech and insinuating looks, men whose likes and
dislikes are ruled by mine, one-sided men and flatterers; but employ
good men. When these household officers are correct, the sovereign will
be correct; when they are flatterers, the sovereign will consider
himself a sage. His virtue or his want of it equally depends on them.
Cultivate no intimacy with flatterers, nor get them to do duty for me as
my ears and eyes;--they will lead their sovereign to disregard the
statutes of the former kings. If you choose the men not for their
personal goodness, but for the sake of their bribes, their offices will
be made of no effect, your great want of reverence for your sovereign
will be apparent, and I will hold you guilty.'

The king said, 'Oh! be reverent! Ever help your sovereign to follow the
regular laws of duty (which he should exemplify).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXVII. The Marquis of Lü on Punishments](sbe03054)
