[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03186)  [Next](sbe03188) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER VII.

## FILIAL PIETY IN RELATION TO THE THREE POWERS <span id="fr_669"></span>[2](#fn_649).

The disciple Ȝăng said, 'Immense indeed is the greatness of filial
piety!' The Master replied <span id="fr_670"></span>[3](#fn_650),

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

'Yes, filial piety is the constant (method) of Heaven, the righteousness
of Earth, and the practical duty of Man <span
id="fr_671"></span>[1](#fn_651). Heaven and earth invariably pursue the
course (that may be thus described), and the people take it as their
pattern. (The ancient kings) imitated the brilliant luminaries of
heaven, and acted. in accordance with the (varying) advantages afforded
by earth, so that they were in accord with all under heaven; and in
consequence their teachings, without being severe, were successful, and
their government, without being rigorous, secured perfect order.

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

'The ancient kings, seeing how their teachings <span
id="fr_672"></span>[1](#fn_652) could transform the people, set before
them therefore an example of the most extended love, and none of the
people neglected their parents; they set forth to them (the nature of)
virtue and righteousness, and the people roused themselves to the
practice of them; they went before them with reverence and yielding
courtesy, and the people had no contentions; they led them on by the
rules of propriety and by music, and the people were harmonious and
benignant; they showed them what they loved and what they disliked, and
the people understood their prohibitions.

'It is said in the Book of Poetry <span id="fr_673"></span>[2](#fn_653),

"Awe-inspiring are you, O Grand-Master Yin,  
And the people all look up to you."'

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_649"></span>[472:2](sbe03187.htm#fr_669) 'The Three Powers'
is a phrase which is first found in two of the Appendixes to the Yî
King, denoting Heaven, Earth, and Man, as the three great agents or
agencies in nature, or the circle of being.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[472:3](sbe03187.htm#fr_670) The whole of the
reply of Confucius here, down to 'the advantages afforded by earth,' is
found in a narrative in the Ȝo *K*wan, under the twenty-fifth year of
duke *Kh*âo (B.C. 517), with the important difference that the discourse
is there about 'ceremonies,' and not about filial piety. Plainly, it is
an interpolation in the Hsiâo, and is rightly thrown out by Kû and Wû
*Kh*ăng. To my own mind it was a relief to find that the passage was not
genuine, and had not come from Confucius. The discourse in the Ȝo
*K*wan, which is quite lengthy, these sentences being only the
commencement <span id="page_473">p. 473</span> of it, is more than
sufficiently fanciful; but it is conceivable that what is here
predicated of filial piety might be spoken of ceremonies, while I never
could see what it could have to do with filial piety, or filial piety
with it. After the long discourse in the Ȝo *K*wan one of the
interlocutors in it exclaims, 'Immense, indeed, is the greatness of
ceremonies!'--the same terms with which Ȝăng-ȝze is made to commence
this chapter, saving that we have 'ceremonies' instead of 'filial
piety.' There can be no doubt that the passage is interpolated; and yet
the first part of it is quoted by Pan Kû (in our first century), in a
note to Liû Hin's Catalogue, and also in the Amplification of the First
Precept of the Khang-hsî Sacred Edict (in our eighteenth century). Pan
Kû may not have been sufficiently acquainted with the Ȝo *K*wan to
detect the forgery; that Chinese scholars should still quote the
description as applicable to filial piety shows how liable they are to
be carried away by fine-sounding terms and mysterious utterances.

P. Cibot gives a correct translation of the first part in a note, but
adds that it carries the sense of the text much too high, and would
bring it into collision with the prejudices of the west, and he has
preferred to hold to the more common explanation:--'Ce qu’est la
régularité des monuments des astres pour le firmament, la fertilité des
campagnes pour la terre, la Piété Filiale l’est constamment pour les
peuples!'

<span id="fn_651"></span>[473:1](sbe03187.htm#fr_671) An amusing
translation of this sentence is found in Samuel Johnson's 'Oriental
Religions, China,' p. 208, beginning, 'Filial Piety is the Book of
Heaven!' Mr. Johnson does not say where he got this version.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[474:1](sbe03187.htm#fr_672) Sze-mâ Kwang
changes the character for 'teachings' here into that for 'filial piety.'
There is no external evidence for such a reading; and the texture of the
whole treatise is so loose that we cannot insist on internal evidence.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[474:2](sbe03187.htm#fr_673) See the Shih, II,
iv, ode 7, stanza i.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Filial Piety in Government](sbe03188)
