[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03143)  [Next](sbe03145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Third Decade, or that of Tang.

#### ODE 1. THE TANG.

#### WARNINGS, SUPPOSED TO BE ADDRESSED TO KING LÎ, ON THE ISSUES OF THE COURSE WHICH HE WAS PURSUING, SHOWING THAT THE MISERIES OF THE TIME AND THE IMMINENT DANGER OF RUIN WERE TO BE ATTRIBUTED, NOT TO HEAVEN, BUT TO HIMSELF AND HIS MINISTERS.

This ode, like the ninth of the second decade, is attributed to duke Mû
of Shâo. The structure of the piece is peculiar, for, after the first
stanza, we have king Wăn introduced delivering a series of warnings to
*K*âu-hsin, the last king of the Shang dynasty. They are put into Wăn's
mouth, in the hope that Lî, if, indeed, he was the monarch whom the
writer had in view, would transfer the figure of *K*âu-hsin to himself,
and alter his course so as to avoid a similar ruin.

How vast is God, The ruler of men below! How arrayed in terrors is God,
With many things irregular in his ordinations. Heaven gave birth to the
multitudes of the people, But the nature it confers is not to be
depended on. All are (good)

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

at first, But few prove themselves to be so at the last <span
id="fr_574"></span>[1](#fn_554).

King Wăn said, 'Alas! Alas! you sovereign of Shang, That you should have
such violently oppressive ministers, That you should have such
extortionate exactors, That you should have them in offices, That you
should have them in the conduct of affairs! "Heaven made them with their
insolent dispositions;" But it is you who employ them, and give them
strength.'

King Wăn said, 'Alas! Alas! you (sovereign of) Yin-shang, You ought to
employ such as are good, But (you employ instead) violent oppressors,
who cause many dissatisfactions. They respond to you with baseless
stories, And (thus) robbers and thieves are in your court. Hence come
oaths and curses, Without limit, without end.'

King Wăn said, 'Alas! Alas! you (sovereign of) Yin-shang, You show a
strong fierce will in the centre of the kingdom, And consider the
contracting of enmities a proof of virtue. All-unintelligent are you. Of
your (proper) virtue, And so, you have no (good) men behind you, nor by
your side. Without any intelligence of your (proper) virtue, You have no
(good) intimate adviser or minister.'

King Wăn said, 'Alas! Alas! you (sovereign of) Yin-shang, It is not
Heaven that flushes your face with spirits, So that you follow what is
evil and imitate it. You go wrong in all your conduct; You make no
distinction between the light and the

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

darkness; But amid clamour and shouting, You turn the day into
night <span id="fr_575"></span>[1](#fn_555).'

King Wăn said, 'Alas! Alas! you (sovereign of) Yin-shang, (All round
you) is like the noise of cicadas, Or like the bubbling of boiling soup.
Affairs, great and small, are approaching to ruin, And still you (and
your creatures) go on in this course. Indignation is rife against you
here in the Middle Kingdom, And extends to the demon regions <span
id="fr_576"></span>[2](#fn_556).'

King Wăn said, 'Alas! Alas! you (sovereign of) Yin-shang, It is not God
that has caused this evil time, But it arises from Yin's not using the
old (ways). Although you have not old experienced men, There are still
the ancient statutes and laws. But you will not listen to them, And so
your great appointment is being overthrown.'

King Wăn said, 'Alas! Alas! you (sovereign of) Shang, People have a
saying, "When a tree falls utterly, While its branches and leaves are
yet uninjured, It must first have been uprooted." The beacon of Yin is
not far distant;--It is in the age of the (last) sovereign of Hsiâ.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_554"></span>[411:1](sbe03144.htm#fr_574) The meaning seems
to be that, whatever miseries might prevail, and be ignorantly ascribed
to God, they were in reality owing to men's neglect of the law of Heaven
inscribed on their hearts.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[412:1](sbe03144.htm#fr_575) We speak of
'turning night into day.' The tyrant of Shang turned day into night,
Excesses, generally committed in darkness, were by him done openly.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[412:2](sbe03144.htm#fr_576) These 'demon
regions' are understood to mean the seat of the Turkic tribes to the
north of China, known from the earliest times by various names-'The hill
*Z*ung,' 'the northern Lî,' 'the Hsien-yun,' &c. Towards the beginning
of our era, they were called Hsiung-nû, from which, perhaps, came the
name Huns; and some centuries later, Thû-*k*üeh (Thuh-*k*üeh), from
which came Turk. We are told in the Yî, under the diagram *K*î-*k*î,
that Kâo Ȝung (B.C. 1324-1266) conducted an expedition against the demon
regions, and in three years subdued them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 2. The Yî](sbe03145)
