[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03063)  [Next](sbe03065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

### I. THE SACRIFICIAL ODES OF SHANG.

THESE Odes of Shang constitute the last Book in the ordinary editions of
the Shih. I put them here in the first place, because they are the
oldest pieces in the collection. There are only five of them.

The sovereigns of the dynasty of Shang who occupied the throne from B.C.
1766 to 1123. They traced their lineage to Hsieh, appears in the Shû as
Minister of Instruction to Shun. By Yâo or by Shun, Hsieh was invested
with the principality of Shang, corresponding to the small department
which is so named in Shen-hsî. Fourteenth in descent from him came
Thien-Yî, better known as *Kh*ăng Thang, or Thang the Successful, who
dethroned the last descendant of the line of Hsiâ, and became the
founder of a new dynasty. We meet with him first at a considerable
distance from the ancestral fief (which, however, gave name to the
dynasty), having as his capital the southern Po, which seems correctly
referred to the present district of Shang-*kh*iû, in the department of
Kwei-teh, Ho-nan. Among the twenty-seven sovereigns who followed Thang,
there were three especially distinguished:--Thâi *K*iâ, his grandson and
successor (B.C. 1753 to 1721), who received the title of Thai Ȝung; Thai
Mâu (B.C. 1637 to 1563), canonized as *K*ung Ȝung; and Wû-ting (B.C.
1324 to 1266), known as Kâo Ȝung. The shrines of these three sovereigns
and that of Thang retained their places in the ancestral temple ever
after they were first set up and if all the sacrificial odes of the
dynasty had been preserved, most of them would have been in praise of
one or other of the four. But it so happened that at least all the odes
of which Thai Ȝung was the subject were lost; and of the others we have
only the small portion that has been mentioned above.

Of how it is that we have even these, we have the following account in
the Narratives of the States, compiled, probably, by a contemporary of
Confucius. The count of Wei was made duke of Sung by king Wû of *K*âu,
as related in the Shû, V, viii, there to continue the sacrifices of the
House of Shang; but the government of Sung fell subsequently into
disorder, and the memorials of the dynasty were lost. In the time of
duke Tâi (B.C. 799 to 766), one of his ministers, *K*ăng-khâo, an
ancestor of Confucius, received from the Grand Music-Master at the court
of *K*âu twelve

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

of the sacrificial odes of Shang with which he returned to Sung, where
they were used in sacrificing to the old Shang kings. It is supposed
that seven of these were lost subsequently, before the collection of the
Shih was formed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 1. The Nâ](sbe03065)
