[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03126)  [Next](sbe03128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

## III. THE MAJOR ODES OF THE KINGDOM.

## PIECES AND STANZAS ILLUSTRATING THE RELIGIOUS VIEWS AND PRACTICES OF THE WRITERS AND THEIR TIMES.

### The First Decade, or that of Wăn Wang.

#### ODE 1. THE WĂN WANG.

#### CELEBRATING KING WĂN, DEAD AND ALIVE, AS THE FOUNDER OF THE DYNASTY OF *K*ÂU, SHOWING HOW HIS VIRTUES DREW TO HIM THE FAVOURING REGARD OF HEAVEN OR GOD, AND MADE HIM A BRIGHT PATTERN TO HIS DESCENDANTS AND THEIR MINISTERS.

The composition of this and the other pieces of this decade is
attributed to the duke of *K*âu, king Wăn's son, and was intended by him
for the benefit of his nephew, the young king *Kh*ăng. Wăn, it must be
borne in mind, was never actually king of China. He laid the foundations
of the kingly power, which was established by his son king Wû, and
consolidated by the duke of *K*âu. The title of king was given to him
and to others by the duke, according to the view of filial piety, that
has been referred to on p. 299.

King Wăn is on high. Oh! bright is he in heaven. Although *K*âu was an
old country, The (favouring) appointment lighted on it recently <span
id="fr_489"></span>[1](#fn_472). Illustrious was the House of *K*âu, And
the

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

appointment of God came at the proper season. King Wăn ascends and
descends On the left and the right of God <span
id="fr_490"></span>[1](#fn_473).

Full of earnest activity was king Wăn, And his fame is without end. The
gifts (of God) to *K*âu Extend to the descendants of king Wăn, In the
direct line and the collateral branches for a hundred generations <span
id="fr_491"></span>[2](#fn_474). All the officers of *K*âu Shall (also)
be illustrious from age to age.

They shall be illustrious from age to age, Zealously and reverently
pursuing their plans. Admirable are the many officers, Born in this
royal kingdom. The royal kingdom is able to produce them, The supporters
of (the House of) *K*âu. Numerous is the array of officers, And by them
king Wăn enjoys his repose.

Profound was king Wăn; Oh! continuous and bright was his feeling of
reverence. Great is the appointment of Heaven! There were the
descendants of (the sovereigns of) Shang <span
id="fr_492"></span>[3](#fn_475)--The descendants of the sovereigns of
Shang Were in number more

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

than hundreds of thousands. But when God gave the command, They became
subject to *K*âu.

They became subject to *K*âu, (For) the appointment of Heaven is not
unchangeable. The officers of Yin, admirable and alert, Assist at the
libations in our capital <span id="fr_493"></span>[1](#fn_476). They
assist at those libations, Always wearing the hatchet-figures on their
lower garments and their peculiar cap <span
id="fr_494"></span>[2](#fn_477). O ye loyal ministers of the king, Ever
think of your ancestor!

Ever think of your ancestor, Cultivating your virtue, Always seeking to
accord with the will (of Heaven):--So shall you be seeking for much
happiness, Before Yin lost the multitudes, (Its kings) were the
correlates of God <span id="fr_495"></span>[3](#fn_478). Look to Yin as
a beacon; The great appointment is not easily preserved.

The appointment is not easily (preserved):--Do not cause your own
extinction. Display and make bright your righteousness and fame, And
look at (the fate of) Yin in the light of Heaven. The doings of high
Heaven Have neither sound nor

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

smell <span id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_479). Take your pattern from king
Wăn, And the myriad regions will repose confidence in you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_472"></span>[377:1](sbe03127.htm#fr_489) The family of
*K*âu, according to its traditions, was very ancient, but it did not.
occupy the territory of *K*âu, from which it subsequently took its name,
till B.C. 1326; and it was not till the time of Wăn (B.C. 1231 to 1135)
that the divine purpose concerning its supremacy in the kingdom was
fully manifested.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[378:1](sbe03127.htm#fr_490) According to *K*û
Hsî, the first and last two lines of this stanza are to be taken of the
spirit of Wăn in heaven. Attempts have been made to explain them
otherwise, or rather to explain them away. But language could not more
expressly intimate the existence of a supreme personal God, and the
continued existence of the human spirit.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[378:2](sbe03127.htm#fr_491) The text,
literally, is, 'The root and the branches:' the root (and stem) denoting
the eldest sons, by the recognised queen, succeeding to the throne; and
the branches, the other sons by the queen and concubines. The former
would grow up directly from the root; and the latter, the chief nobles
of the kingdom, would constitute the branches of the great Kâu tree.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[378:3](sbe03127.htm#fr_492) The Shang or Yin
dynasty of kings superseded by *K*âu.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[379:1](sbe03127.htm#fr_493) These officers of
Yin would be the descendants of the Yin kings and of their principal
nobles, scions likewise of the, Yin stock. They would assist, at the
court of *K*âu, at the services in the ancestral temple, which began
with a libation of fragrant spirits to bring down the spirits of the
departed.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[379:2](sbe03127.htm#fr_494) These, differing
from the dress worn by the representatives of the ruling House, were
still worn by the officers of Yin or Shang, by way of honour, and also
by way of warning.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[379:3](sbe03127.htm#fr_495) There was God in
heaven hating none, desiring the good of all the people; there were the
sovereigns on earth, God's vicegerents, maintained by him so long as
they carried out in their government his purpose of good.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[380:1](sbe03127.htm#fr_496) These two lines
are quoted in the last paragraph of the Doctrine of the Mean, as
representing the ideal of perfect virtue. They are indicative of Power,
operating silently, and not to be perceived by the senses, but
resistless in its operations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 2. The Tâ Ming](sbe03128)
