[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03068)  [Next](sbe03070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 5. THE YIN WÛ.

#### CELEBRATING THE WAR OF WÛ-TING AGAINST *K*ING-*KH*Û, ITS SUCCESS, AND THE GENERAL HAPPINESS AND VIRTUE OF HIS REIGN;--MADE, PROBABLY, WHEN A SPECIAL AND PERMANENT TEMPLE WAS BUILT FOR HIM AS THE 'HIGH AND HONOURED' KING OF SHANG.

The concluding lines indicate that the temple was made on the occasion
which I thus assign to it. After Wû-ting's death, his spirit-tablet
would be shrined in the ancestral temple, and he would have his share in
the seasonal sacrifices; but several reigns would elapse before there
was any necessity to make any other arrangement, so that his tablet
should not be removed, and his share in the sacrifices not be
discontinued. Hence the composition of the piece has been referred to
the time of Tî-yî, the last but one of the kings of Shang.

Rapid was the warlike energy of (our king of) Yin, And vigorously did he
attack *K*ing-*Kh*û <span id="fr_352"></span>[3](#fn_340).

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Boldly he entered
its dangerous passes, And brought the multitudes of *K*ing together,
Till the country was reduced under complete restraint: Such was the
fitting achievement of the descendant of Thang!

'Ye people,' (he said), 'of *K*ing-*Kh*û, Dwell in the southern part of
my kingdom. Formerly, in the time of Thang the Successful, Even from the
*K*iang of Tî <span id="fr_353"></span>[1](#fn_341), They dared not but
come with their offerings; (Their chiefs) dared not but come to seek
acknowledgment <span id="fr_354"></span>[2](#fn_342):--Such is the
regular rule of Shang.'

Heaven had given their appointments (to the princes), But where their
capitals, had been assigned within the sphere of the labours of Yü, For
the business of every year they appeared before our king <span
id="fr_355"></span>[3](#fn_343), (Saying), 'Do not punish nor reprove
us; We have not been remiss in our husbandry.'

When Heaven by its will is inspecting (the kingdom), The lower people
are to be feared. (Our king) showed no partiality (in rewarding), no
excess (in punishing); He dared not to allow himself in indolence:--So
was his appointment (established)}

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

over the states, And he made his happiness grandly secure.

The capital of Shang was full of order, The model for all parts of the
kingdom. Glorious was (the king's) fame; Brilliant his energy. Long
lived he and enjoyed tranquillity, And so he preserves us, his
descendants.

We ascended the hill of *K*ing <span id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_344),
Where the pines and cypresses grew symmetrical. We cut them down and
conveyed them here; We reverently hewed them square. Long are the
projecting beams of pine; Large are the many pillars. The temple was
completed,--the tranquil abode (of the martial king of Yin).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_340"></span>[311:3](sbe03069.htm#fr_352) *K*ing, or *Kh*û,
or *K*ing-*Kh*û, as the two names are combined here, was a large and
powerful half-savage state, having its capital in the present Wû-pei. So
far as evidence goes, we should say, but for this ode, that the name of
*Kh*û was not in use till long after the Shang dynasty. The name *K*ing
appears several times in 'the Spring and Autumn' in the annals of duke
*K*wang (B.C. 693 to 662), and then it gives place to the name *Kh*û in
the first year of duke Hsî (B.C. 659), and subsequently disappears
itself altogether. In consequence of this some critics make this piece
out to have been composed under the *K*âu dynasty. The point cannot be
fully cleared up; but on the whole I accept the words of the ode as
sufficient proof against the silence of other documents.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[312:1](sbe03069.htm#fr_353) The Tî *K*iang, or
*K*iang of Tî, still existed in the time of the Han dynasty, occupying
portions of the present Kan-sû.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[312:2](sbe03069.htm#fr_354) The chiefs of the
wild tribes, lying beyond the nine provinces of the kingdom, were
required to present themselves once in their lifetime at the royal
court. The rule, in normal periods, was for each chief to appear
immediately after he had succeeded to the headship of his tribe.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[312:3](sbe03069.htm#fr_355) The feudal lords
had to appear at court every year. They did so, we may suppose, at the
court of Wû-ting, the more so because of his subjugation of
*K*ing-*Kh*û.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[313:1](sbe03069.htm#fr_356) See on the last
line but two of ode 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 1. The *Kh*ing Miâo](sbe03070)
