[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03110)  [Next](sbe03112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 9. THE SHIH YÜEH *K*IH *K*IÂO.

#### THE LAMENTATION OF AN OFFICER OVER THE PRODIGIES CELESTIAL AND TERRESTRIAL, ESPECIALLY AN ECLIPSE OF THE SUN, THAT WERE BETOKENING THE RUIN OF *K*ÂU. HE SETS FORTH WHAT HE CONSIDERED TO BE THE TRUE CAUSES OF THE PREVAILING MISERY, WHICH WAS BY NO MEANS TO BE CHARGED ON HEAVEN.

Attention is called in the Introduction, [p.
296](sbe03062.htm#page_296), to the date of the solar eclipse mentioned
in this piece.

At the conjunction (of the sun and moon) in the tenth month, On the
first day of the moon, which was hsin-mâo, The sun was eclipsed, A thing
of very evil omen. Before, the moon became small, And now the sun became
small. Henceforth the lower people Will be in a very deplorable case.

The sun and moon announce evil, Not keeping to their proper paths.
Throughout the kingdom there is no (proper) government, Because the good
are not employed. For the moon to be eclipsed Is but an ordinary matter.
Now that the sun has been eclipsed,--How bad it is!

Grandly flashes the lightning of the thunder. There is a want of rest, a
want of good. The streams all bubble up and overflow. The crags on the
hill-tops fall down. High banks become valleys; Deep valleys become
hills. Alas for the men of this time! How does (the king) not stop these
things?

Hwang-fû is the President; Fan is the Minister

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

of Instruction; *K*iâ-po is the (chief) Administrator; *K*ung-yün is the
chief Cook; Ȝâu is the Recorder of the Interior; Khwei is Master of the
Horse; Yü is Captain of the Guards; And the beautiful wife blazes, now
in possession of her place <span id="fr_434"></span>[1](#fn_420).

This Hwang-fû Will not acknowledge that he is acting. out of season. But
why does he call us to move, Without coming and consulting with us? He
has removed our walls and roofs; And our fields are all either a marsh
or a moor. He says, 'I am not injuring you; The laws require that thus
it should be.'

Hwang-fû is very wise; He has built a great city for himself in Hsiang.
He chose three men as his ministers, All of them possessed of great
wealth. He could not bring himself to leave a single minister, Who might
guard our king. He (also) selected those who had chariots and horses, To
go and reside in Hsiang <span id="fr_435"></span>[2](#fn_421).

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

I have exerted myself to discharge my service, And do not dare to make a
report of my toils. Without crime or offence of any kind, Slanderous
mouths are loud against me. (But) the calamities of the lower people Do
not come down from Heaven. A multitude of (fair) words, and hatred
behind the back;--The earnest, strong pursuit of this is from men.

Distant far is my village, And my dissatisfaction is great. In other
quarters there is ease, And I dwell here, alone and sorrowful. Everybody
is going into retirement, And I alone dare not seek rest. The ordinances
of Heaven are inexplicable, But I will not dare to follow my friends,
and leave my post.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_420"></span>[356:1](sbe03111.htm#fr_434) We do not know
anything from history of the ministers of Yû mentioned in this stanza.
Hwang-fû appears to have been the leading minister of the government at
the time when the ode was written, and, as appears from the next two
stanzas, was very crafty, oppressive, and selfishly ambitious. The
mention of 'the chief Cook' among the high ministers appears strange;
but we shall find that functionary mentioned in another ode; and from
history it appears that 'the Cook,' at the royal and feudal courts,
sometimes played an important part during the times of *K*âu. 'The
beautiful wife,' no doubt, was the well-known Sze of Pâo, raised by king
Yû from her position as one of his concubines to be his queen, and whose
insane folly and ambition led to her husband's death, and great and
disastrous changes in the kingdom.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[356:2](sbe03111.htm#fr_435) Hsiang was a
district of the royal domain, in the present district of Măng,
department of Hwâi-*kh*ing, Ho-nan. It had been assigned to Hwang-fû,
and he was establishing himself there, without any loyal regard to the
king. As a noble in the royal domain, <span id="page_357">p. 357</span>
he was entitled only to two ministers, but he had appointed three as in
one of the feudal states, encouraging, moreover, the resort to himself
of the wealthy and powerful, while the court was left weak and
unprotected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 10, Stanzas 1 And 3. The Yü Wû *K*ăng](sbe03112)
