[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03174)  [Next](hsiao) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 1, STANZA 8. THE KHÎ YÜEH.

#### DESCRIBING LIFE IN PIN IN THE OLDEN TIME; THE PROVIDENT ARRANGEMENTS THERE TO SECURE THE CONSTANT SUPPLY OF FOOD AND RAIMENT,--WHATEVER WAS NECESSARY FOR THE SUPPORT AND COMFORT OF THE PEOPLE.

If the piece was made, as the Chinese critics all suppose, by the duke
of *K*âu, we must still suppose that he writes in the person of an old
farmer or yeoman of Pin. The picture which it gives of the manners of
the Chinese people, their thrifty,

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

full of interest; but it is not till we come to the concluding stanza
that we find anything bearing on their religious practices.

In the days of (our) second month, they hew out the ice with harmonious
blows <span id="fr_643"></span>[1](#fn_623); And in those of (our) third
month, they convey it to the ice-houses, (Which they open) in those of
(our) fourth, early in the morning A lamb having been offered in
sacrifice with scallions <span id="fr_644"></span>[2](#fn_624). In the
ninth month, it is cold, with frost. In the tenth month, they sweep
clean their stack-sites. (Taking) the two bottles of spirits to be
offered to their ruler, And having killed their lambs and sheep, They go
to his hall, And raising

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

the cup of rhinoceros horn, Wish him long life,--that he may live for
ever <span id="fr_645"></span>[1](#fn_625).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_623"></span>[445:1](sbe03175.htm#fr_643) They went for the
ice to the deep recesses of the hills, and wherever it was to be found
in the best condition.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[445:2](sbe03175.htm#fr_644) It is said in the
last chapter of 'the Great Learning,' that 'the family which keeps its
stores of ice does not rear cattle or sheep,' meaning that the possessor
of an ice-house must be supposed to be very wealthy, and above the
necessity of increasing his means in the way described. Probably, the
having ice-houses by high ministers and heads of clans was an innovation
on the earlier custom, according to which such a distinction was proper
only to the king, or the princes of states, on whom it devolved as I the
fathers of the people,' to impart from their stores in the hot season as
might be necessary. The third and fourth lines of this stanza are to be
understood of what was done by the orders of the ruler of the tribe of
*K*âu in Pin. In the Official Book of *K*âu, Part 1, ch. 5, we have a
description of the duties of 'the Providers of Ice,' and the same
subject is treated in the sixth Book of 'the Record of Rites,' sections
2 and 6. The ice having been collected and stored in winter, the
ice-houses were solemnly opened in the spring. A sacrifice was offered
to 'the Ruler of Cold, the Spirit of the Ice' and of the first ice
brought forth an offering was set out in the apartment behind the
principal hall of the ancestral temple. A sacrifice to the same Ruler of
Cold, it is said, had also been offered when the ice began to be
collected. The ceremony may be taken as an illustration of the manner in
which religious services entered into the life of the ancient Chinese.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[446:1](sbe03175.htm#fr_645) The custom
described in the five concluding lines is mentioned to show the good and
loyal feeling of the people of Pin towards their chief Having finished
all the agricultural labours of the year, and being now prepared to
enjoy the results of their industry, the first thing they do is to
hasten to the hall of their ruler, and ask him to share in their joy,
and express their loyal wishes for his happiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](hsiao)
