[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03029)  [Next](sbe03031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

### BOOK III. THE SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF THE WAR.

I HAVE divided this Book into three chapters:--one, consisting of brief
historical notes of the commencement and close of Wû's expedition; a
second, giving the address (or a part of it) delivered by Wû to his
nobles and officers on occasion, we may suppose, of their recognition of
him as king, and his confirming some of them in their old states or
appointments, and giving new ones to others; the third again historical,
and relating several incidents of the battle between Wû and Shâu, and
going on to subsequent events and important governmental measures of the
new dynasty.

Most Chinese critics hold that portions of the Book are lost, and that
the paragraphs of it are, besides, erroneously arranged. In what
division of the documents of the Shû it should be classified, it is not
easy to say. It is more like a 'Canon' than anything else.

1\. In the first month, the day *Z*ăn-*kh*ăn immediately followed the
end of the moon's waning. The next day was Kwei-*k*î, when the king, in
the morning, marched from *K*âu <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_133) to
attack and punish Shang. In the fourth month, at the first appearance of
the moon, the king came from Shang to Făng <span
id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_134), when he hushed all the movements of
war, and proceeded to cultivate the arts of peace. He sent back his
horses to the south of mount Hwâ,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

and let loose his oxen in the open country of Thâo-lin <span
id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_135), showing to all under heaven that he
would not use them (again).

On the day Ting-Wei, he sacrificed in the ancestral temple of *K*âu,
when (the princes) of the royal domain, and of the Tien, Hâu, and Wei
domains, all hurried about, carrying the dishes." The third day after
was Kăng-hsü, when he presented a burnt-offering to Heaven, and
worshipped towards the hills and rivers, solemnly announcing the
successful completion of the war.\*

After the moon began to wane, the hereditary princes of the various
states, and all the officers, received their appointments from
*K*âu <span id="fr_140"></span>[2](#fn_136).

2\. The king spoke to the following effect:--'Oh! ye host of princes,
the first of our kings <span id="fr_141"></span>[3](#fn_137) founded his
state, and commenced (the enlargement of) its territory. Kung Liû, <span
id="fr_142"></span>[4](#fn_138) was able to consolidate the services of
his predecessor. But it was the king Thâi who laid the foundations of
the royal inheritance. The king *K*î was diligent for the royal House;
and my deceased father, king Wăn, completed his merit, and grandly
received the appointment

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

of Heaven, to soothe the regions of our great land.\* The great states
feared his strength; the small states thought fondly of his virtue. In
nine years, however, the whole kingdom was not united under his rule,
and it fell to me, the little child, to carry out his will.

'Detesting the crimes of Shang, I announced to great Heaven and the
sovereign Earth, to the famous hill I and the great river <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_139) by which I passed, saying, "I, Fâ, the
principled, king of *K*âu by a long descent, am about to administer a
great correction to Shang. Shâu, the present king of Shang, is without
principle, cruel and destructive to the creatures of Heaven, injurious
and tyrannical to the multitudes of the people, lord of all the
vagabonds under heaven, who collect about him as fish in the deep, and
beasts in the prairie. I, the little child, having obtained (the help
of) virtuous men, presume reverently to comply with (the will of) God,
and make an end of his disorderly ways.\* Our flowery, and great land,
and the tribes of the south and north, equally follow and consent with
me. Reverently obeying the determinate counsel of Heaven, I pursue my
punitive work to the east, to give tranquillity to its men and women.
They meet me with their baskets full of dark-coloured and yellow silks,
thereby showing (the virtues) of us, the kings of *K*âu. Heaven's
favours stir them up, so that they come with their allegiance to our
great state of *K*âu. And now, ye spirits, grant me your aid, that I may
relieve the millions of the people, and nothing turn out to your
shame."'\*

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

3\. On the day Wû-wû, the army crossed the ford of Mâng, and on Kwei-hâi
it was drawn up in array in the borders of Shang, waiting for the
gracious decision of Heaven. On *K*iâ-ȝze, at early dawn, Shâu led
forward his troops, (looking) like a forest, and assembled them in the
wild of Mû. But they offered no opposition to our army. Those in the
front inverted their spears, and attacked those behind them, till they
fled; and the blood flowed till it floated the pestles of the mortars.
Thus did (king Wû) once don his armour, and the kingdom was grandly
settled. He overturned the (existing) rule of Shang, and made government
resume its old course. He delivered the count of *Kh*î from prison, and
raised a mound over the grave of Pî-kan. He bowed forward to the
cross-bar of his carriage at the gate of Shang Yung's village <span
id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_140). He dispersed the treasures of the Stag
Tower <span id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_141), and distributed the grain
of *K*ü-*kh*iâo <span id="fr_146"></span>[3](#fn_142), thus conferring
great gifts on all within the four seas, so that the people joyfully
submitted to him.

He arranged the nobles in five orders <span
id="fr_147"></span>[4](#fn_143), assigning the territories to them
according to a threefold

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

scale <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_144). He gave offices only to the
worthy, and employments only to the able. He attached great importance
to the people's being taught the duties of the five relations of
society, and to measures for ensuring a sufficient supply of food,
attention to the rites of mourning, and to sacrifices.\* He showed the
reality of his truthfulness, and proved clearly his righteousness. He
honoured virtue, and rewarded merit. Then he had only to let his robes
fall down, and fold his hands, and the kingdom was orderly ruled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[133:1](sbe03030.htm#fr_137) *K*âu is,
probably, Wû's capital, called Hâo, about ten miles south of the present
district city of *Kh*ang-an, and not quite so far from his father's
capital of Făng. The river Făng ran between them.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[133:2](sbe03030.htm#fr_138) In Făng there was
the ancestral temple of the lords of *K*âu, and thither from the capital
of Shang, Wû now repaired for the purpose of sacrificing.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[134:1](sbe03030.htm#fr_139) The country about
the hill of Mû-niû or Khwâ-fû, in the southeast of the present
department of Thung-*k*âu. Thâo-lin may be translated 'Peach-forest.'

<span id="fn_136"></span>[134:2](sbe03030.htm#fr_140) The new dynasty of
*K*âu was now fully inaugurated.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[134:3](sbe03030.htm#fr_141) By 'the first of
our kings,' we must understand *Kh*î, Shun's Minister of Agriculture;
and his state was that of Thâi.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[134:4](sbe03030.htm#fr_142) Kung Lîu, perhaps
'duke Lîu,' appears in Pin, the present Pin Kâu of Shen-hsî, about the
beginning of the eighteenth century B.C., reviving the fallen fortunes
of the House of Khî. History is then silent about the family for more
than four centuries, when we find Than-fû, called here 'king Thâi,'
founding the state of *K*âu.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[135:1](sbe03030.htm#fr_143) Probably mount Hwâ
and the Ho.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[136:1](sbe03030.htm#fr_144) Shang Yung must
have been some worthy in disgrace with Shâu, and living in the
retirement of his village.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[136:2](sbe03030.htm#fr_145) The Stag Tower was
the name of a place in the present department of Wei-hui, Ho-nan, where
Shâu had accumulated great treasures. He fled to it after his defeat,
and burned himself to death; but it would appear he had not succeeded in
consuming at the same time all his wealth.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[136:3](sbe03030.htm#fr_146) *K*ü-*kh*iâo was
in the present district of *Kh*ü-*k*âu, department Kwang-phing,
*K*ih-lî, where Shâu had collected great stores of grain.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[136:4](sbe03030.htm#fr_147) Dukes, marquises,
earls, counts, and barons.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[137:1](sbe03030.htm#fr_148) Dukes and
marquises had the same amount of territory assigned to them, and counts
and barons also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV. The Great Plan](sbe03031)
