[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03016)  [Next](sbe03018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

## PART IV. THE BOOKS OF SHANG.

### BOOK I. THE SPEECH OF THANG.

SHANG was the name under which the dynasty that superseded Hsiâ (B.C.
1766) held the kingdom for fully 300 years. Yin then began to be used as
well as Shang, and the dynasty was called indifferently Shang or Yin,
and sometimes Yin-Shang by a combination of the two names. The ruling
House traced its origin into the remote times of antiquity, through
Hsieh, whose appointment by Shun to be Minister of Instruction is
related in the Canon of Shun. For his services Hsieh was invested with
the principality of Shang, corresponding to the present small department
of the same name in Shen-hsî. From Hsieh to Thang, the founder of the
dynasty, there are reckoned fourteen generations, and we find Thang,
when he first becomes prominent in history, a long way from the
ancestral fief, in 'the southern Po,' corresponding to the present
district of Shang-*kh*iû, department Kwei-teh, Ho-nan. The tide of the
dynasty, however, was derived from the original Shang.

There were in the Shû, when the collection was formed, thirty-one
documents of Shang in forty Books, of which only eleven remain in
seventeen Books, two of them containing each three parts or sections.
The Speech of Thang, that is now the first Book in the Part, was
originally only the sixth. Thang was the destination of the hero whose
surname, dating from Hsieh, was Ȝze, and name Lî. Thang may be
translated, 'the Glorious One.' His common style in history is as
*Kh*ăng Thang, 'Thang the Completer,' or 'Thang the Successful.'

He had summoned his people to take the field with him against Kieh, the
cruel and doomed sovereign of Hsiâ, and finding them backward to the
enterprise, he sets forth in this Book his reasons for attacking the
tyrant, argues against their reluctance, using in the end both promises
and threats to induce them to obey his orders.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

The king said, 'Come, ye multitudes of the people., listen all to my
words. It is not I, the little child <span
id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_95), who dare to undertake a rebellious
enterprise; but for the many crimes of the sovereign of Hsiâ, Heaven has
given the charge to destroy him.\*

'Now, ye multitudes, you are saying, "Our prince does not compassionate
us, but (is calling us) away from our husbandry to attack and punish
Hsiâ." I have indeed heard (these) words of you all; (but) the sovereign
of Hsiâ is guilty, and. as I fear God, I dare not but punish him.\*

'Now you are saying, "What are the crimes of Hsiâ to us?" The king of
Hsiâ in every way exhausts the strength of his people, and exercises
oppression in the cities of Hsiâ. His multitudes are become entirely
indifferent (to his service), and feel no bond of union'(to him). They
are saying, "When wilt thou, O sun, expire? We will all perish with
thee <span id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_96)." Such is the course of (the
sovereign) of Hsiâ, and now I must go (and punish him).

Assist, I pray you, me, the One man, to carry out the punishment
appointed by Heaven. I will greatly reward you. On no account disbelieve
me;--will not eat my words. If you do not obey the words which I have
thus spoken to you, I will put

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

your children to death with you;--you shall find no forgiveness.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_95"></span>[85:1](sbe03017.htm#fr_99) 'The little child' is
a designation used humbly of themselves by the kings of Shang and *K*âu.
It is given also to them and others by such great ministers as Î Yin and
the duke of *K*âu.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[85:2](sbe03017.htm#fr_100) *K*ieh, it is said,
had on one occasion, when told of the danger he was incurring by his
cruelties, pointed to the sun, and said that as surely as the sun was in
the heavens, so firm was he on the throne.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II. The Announcement of *K*ung-hui](sbe03018)
