[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03100)  [Next](sbe03102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III. THE PRAISE ODES OF LÛ.

IT is not according to the truth of things to class the Sung of Lû among
the sacrificial odes, and I do not call them such. *K*û Hsî says:--'King
*Kh*ăng, because of the great services rendered by the duke of *K*âu,
granted to Po-*kh*in, (the duke's eldest son, and first marquis of Lû),
the privilege of using the royal ceremonies and music, in consequence of
which Lû had its Sung, which were sung to the music in its ancestral
temple. Afterwards, they made in Lû other odes in praise of their
rulers,

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

which they also called Sung.' In this way it is endeavoured to account
for there being such pieces in this part of the Shih as the four in this
division of it. Confucius, it is thought, found them in Lû, bearing the
name of Sung, and so he classed them with the true sacrificial odes,
bearing that designation. If we were to admit, contrary to the evidence
in the case, that the Shih was compiled by Confucius, this explanation
of the place, of the Sung of Lû in this Part would not be complimentary
to his discrimination.

Whether such a privilege as Kû states was really granted to the first
marquis of Lû, is a point very much controverted. Many contend that the
royal ceremonies were usurped in the state,--in the time of duke Hsî
(B.C. 659 to 627). But if this should be conceded, it would not affect
the application to the odes in this division of the name of Sung. They
are totally unlike the Sung of Shang and of *K*âu. It has often been
asked why there are no Făng of Lû in the first Part of the Shih. The
pieces here are really the Făng of Lû, and may be compared especially
with the Făng of Pin.

Lû was one of the states in the east, having its capital in *Kh*ü-fâu,
which is still the name of a district in the department of Yen-*k*âu,
Shan-tung. According to *K*û, king *Kh*ăng invested the duke of *K*âu's
eldest son with the territory. According to Sze-ma *Kh*ien, the duke of
*K*âu was himself appointed marquis of Lû; but being unable to go there
in consequence of his duties at the royal court, he sent his son
instead. After the expiration of his 'regency, the territory was largely
augmented, but he still remained in *K*âu.

I pass over the first two odes, which have no claim to a place among
'sacred texts.' And only in one stanza of the third is there the
expression of a religious sentiment. I give it entire, however.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 3. The Phan Shui](sbe03102.md)
