[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03027)  [Next](sbe03029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

## PART V. THE BOOKS OF *K*ÂU.

### BOOK I. THE GREAT DECLARATION.

*K*ÂU is the dynastic designation under which king Wû and his
descendants possessed the throne from B. C. 1122 to 256, a period of 861
years. They traced their lineage up to *Kh*î, who was Minister of
Agriculture under Shun. He was invested with the principality of Thâi,
the present district of Fû-făng, department of Făng-hsiang, Shen-hsî.
Long afterwards Than-fû, claiming to be one of his descendants, appears
in B.C. 1326, founding the state of *K*âu, near mount *Kh*î, in the same
department of Făng-hsiang. This Than-fû was the great-grandfather of
king Wû. The family surname was *K*î.

When the collection of the Shû was complete, it contained thirty-eight
different documents of the *K*âu dynasty, of which twenty-eight remain,
twenty of them being of undisputed genuineness.

This first Book, 'the Great Declaration,' is one of the contested
portions; and there is another form of it, that takes the place of this
in some editions. It has appeared in the Introduction that the received
text of the Shû was formed with care, and that everything of importance
in the challenged Books is to be found in quotations from them, while
the collection was complete, that have been gathered up by the industry
of scholars.

King Wû, having at last taken the field against *K*âu-hsin, the tyrant
of Shang, made three speeches to his officers and men, setting forth the
reasons for his enterprise, and urging them to exert themselves with him
in the cause of humanity and Heaven. They are brought together, and
constitute 'the Great Declaration.'

'In the first Part,' says a Chinese critic,' king Wû addresses himself
to the princes and nobles of inferior rank; in the second, to their
hosts; and in the third, to his officers. The ruling idea in the first
is the duty of the sovereign,--What he ought to be

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

and to do; with this it begins and ends. There is not the same
continuity of thought in the second, brut the will and purpose of Heaven
is the principal thing insisted on. The last Part shows the difference
between the good sovereign and the bad, and touches on the consent that
there is between Heaven and men. There is throughout an unsparing
exhibition of the wickedness of *K*âu-hsin.

#### Section 1.

In the spring of the thirteenth year <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_122) there was a great assembly at
Mâng-*k*ing <span id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_123). The king said, 'Ah!
ye hereditary rulers of my friendly states, and all ye my officers,
managers of my affairs, hearken clearly to my declaration.

'Heaven and earth is the parent of all creatures; and of all creatures
man is the most highly endowed.\* The sincerely intelligent (among men)
becomes the great sovereign; and the great sovereign is the parent of
the people. But now, Shâu, the king of Shang, does not reverence Heaven
above, and inflicts calamities on the people below.\* Abandoned to
drunkenness and reckless in lust, he has dared to exercise cruel
oppression. He has extended the punishment of offenders to all their
relatives. He has put men into offices on the hereditary principle. He
has made it his pursuit to have palaces, towers, pavilions, embankments,
ponds, and all other extravagances, to the most painful injury of you,
the myriads of the people. He has burned and roasted the loyal and good.
He has ripped up pregnant

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

women. Great Heaven was moved with indignation, and charged my deceased
father Wăn to display its terrors; but (he died) before the work was
completed.\*

'On this account, I, Fâ, the little child, have by means of you, the
hereditary rulers of my friendly states, contemplated the government of
Shang; but Shâu has no repentant heart. He sits squatting on his heels,
not serving God nor the spirits of heaven and earth, neglecting also the
temple of his ancestors, and not sacrificing in it.\* The victims and
the vessels of millet all become the prey of wicked robbers, and still
he says, "The people are mine; the (heavenly) appointment is mine,"
never trying to correct his contemptuous mind.\*

'Heaven, for the help of the inferior people, made for them rulers, and
made for them instructors, that they might be able to be aiding to God,
and secure the tranquillity of the four quarters (of the kingdom). In
regard to who are criminals and who are not, how dare I give any
allowance to my own wishes?\*

'"Where the strength is the same, measure the virtue of the parties;
where the virtue is the same, measure their righteousness." Shâu has
hundreds of thousands and myriads of officers, but they have hundreds of
thousands and myriads of minds; I have (but) three thousand officers,
but they have one mind. The iniquity of Shang is full. Heaven gives
command to destroy it. If I did not obey Heaven, my iniquity would be as
great.\*

'I, the little child, early and late am filled with apprehensions. I
have received the command of my deceased father Wăn; I have offered
special sacrifice to God; I have performed the due services

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

to the great earth; and I lead the multitude of you to execute the
punishment appointed by Heaven.\* Heaven compassionates the people. What
the people desire, Heaven will be found to give effect to.\* Do you aid
me, the One man, to cleanse for ever (all within) the four seas. Now is
the time!--It should not be lost.'

#### Section 2.

On (the day) Wû-wû <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_124), the king
halted on the north of the Ho. Men all the princes with their hosts were
assembled, the king reviewed the hosts, and made the following
declaration:--'Oh! ye multitudes of the west, hearken all to my words.

'I have heard that the good man, doing good, finds the day insufficient;
and that the evil man, doing evil, also finds the day insufficient. Now
Shâu, the king of Shang, with strength pursues his lawless way. He has
driven away the timeworn sires, and cultivates intimacies with wicked
men. Dissolute, intemperate, reckless, oppressive, his ministers have
become assimilated to him; and they form combinations and contract
animosities, and depend on their power to exterminate one another. The
innocent cry to Heaven. The odour of such a state is felt on high.\*

'Heaven loves the people, and the sovereign should reverently carry out
(this mind of) Heaven. Kieh, the sovereign of Hsiâ, would not follow the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

example of Heaven, but sent forth his poisonous injuries through the
states of the kingdom:--Heaven therefore gave its aid to Thang the
Successful, and charged him to make an end of the appointment of Hsiâ.\*
But the crimes of Shâu exceed those of *K*ieh. He has degraded from
office the greatly good man <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_125); he
has behaved with cruel tyranny to his reprover and helper <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_126). He says that with him is the
appointment of Heaven; he says that a reverent care of his conduct is
not worth observing; he says that sacrifice is of no use; he says that
tyranny is no harm.\* The beacon for him to look to was not far off;--it
was that king of Hsiâ. It would seem that Heaven is going by means of me
to rule the people. My dreams coincide with my divinations; the
auspicious omen is double.\* My attack on Shang must succeed.

'Shâu has hundreds of thousands and millions of ordinary men, divided in
heart and, divided in practice;--I have of ministers, able to govern,
ten men <span id="fr_131"></span>[3](#fn_127), one in heart and one in
practice. Though he has his nearest relatives with him, they are not
like my virtuous men. Heaven sees as my people see; Heaven hears as my
people hear.\* The people are blaming me, the One man, for my delay;--I
must now go forward. My military prowess is displayed, and I enter his
territories to take the wicked tyrant. My punishment (of evil) will be
great, and more glorious than that executed by Thang. Rouse ye,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

my heroes! Do not think that he is not to be feared;--better think that
he cannot be withstood. (His) people stand in trembling awe of him, as
if the horns were falling from their heads. Oh! unite your energies,
unite your hearts;--so shall you forthwith surely accomplish the work,
to last for all ages!'

#### Section 3.

The time was on the morrow, when the king went round his six hosts in
state, and made a clear declaration to all his officers. He said, 'Oh I
my valiant men of the west, from Heaven are the illustrious courses of
duty, of which the (several) requirements are quite plain. And now
Shang, the king of Shang, treats with contemptuous slight the five
regular (virtues), and abandons himself to wild idleness and
irreverence. He has cut himself off from Heaven, and brought enmity
between himself and the people.

He cut through the leg-bones of those who were wading, in the
morning <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_128); he cut out the heart of
the worthy man <span id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_129). By the use of his
power, killing, and murdering, he has poisoned and sickened all within
the four seas. His honours and confidence are given to the villainous
and bad. He has driven from him his instructors and guardians. He has
thrown to the winds the statutes and penal laws. He has imprisoned and
enslaved the upright officer <span id="fr_134"></span>[3](#fn_130). He
neglects the sacrifices to heaven and earth. He

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

has discontinued the offerings in the ancestral temple. He makes
contrivances of wonderful device and extraordinary cunning to please his
wife <span id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_131).--God will no longer indulge
him, but with a curse is sending down on him this ruin.\* Do ye with
untiring zeal support me, the One man, reverently to execute the
punishment appointed by Heaven. The ancients have said, "He who soothes
us is our sovereign; he who oppresses us is our enemy." This solitary
fellow Shâu, having exercised great tyranny, is your perpetual enemy.
(It is said again), "In planting (a man's) virtue, strive to make it
great; in putting away (a man's) wickedness, strive to do it from the
roots." Here I, the little child, by the powerful help of you, all my
officers, will utterly exterminate your enemy. Do you, all my officers,
march forward with determined boldness to sustain your prince. Where
there is much merit, there shall be large reward; where you do not so
advance, there shall be conspicuous disgrace.

'Oh! (the virtue of) my deceased father Wan was like the shining of the
sun and moon. His brightness extended over the four quarters of the
land, and shone signally in the western region. Hence it is that our
*K*âu has received (the allegiance of) many states. If I subdue Shâu, it
will not be from my prowess but from the faultless (virtue of) my
deceased father Wan. If Shâu subdue me, it will not be from any fault of
my deceased father Wan, but because I, the little child, am not good.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[125:1](sbe03028.htm#fr_126) The thirteenth
year is reckoned from king Wû's succeeding to his father as 'the Chief
of the West.'

<span id="fn_123"></span>[125:2](sbe03028.htm#fr_127) Mâng-*k*ing, or
'the Ford of Mâng,' is still the name of an district in the department
of Ho-nan, Ho-nan.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[127:1](sbe03028.htm#fr_128) In Book iii we are
told that Wû commenced his march to attack *K*âu-hsin, on Kwei-*k*î, the
2nd day of the moon. Calculating on to the day Wû-wû, we find that it
was the 28th day of the same moon.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[128:1](sbe03028.htm#fr_129) The count of Wei.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[128:2](sbe03028.htm#fr_130) Pî-kan.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128:3](sbe03028.htm#fr_131) Confucius tells
us, in the Analects, VIII, xx, that one of these ten was a woman; but
whether the lady was Wû's wife or mother is disputed.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129:1](sbe03028.htm#fr_132) This was in
winter. Observing some people then wading through a stream, *K*âu-hsin
caused their legs to be cut through at the shank-bone, that he might see
their marrow.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[129:2](sbe03028.htm#fr_133) Pî-kan.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[129:3](sbe03028.htm#fr_134) The count of
*Kh*î; see Book iv.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[130:1](sbe03028.htm#fr_135) The notorious
Tâ-*k*î, the accounts of whose shameless wickedness and atrocious
cruelties almost exceed belief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II. The Speech At Mû](sbe03029)
