[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03054)  [Next](sbe03056.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

### BOOK XXVIII.

### THE CHARGE TO THE MARQUIS WĂN.

THE king to whom this charge is ascribed was Phing (B.C. 770-719).
Between him and Mû there was thus a period of fully two centuries, of
which no documents are, or ever were, in the collection of the Shû. The
time was occupied by seven reigns, the last of which was that of Nieh,
known as king Yû, a worthless ruler, and besotted in his attachment to a
female favourite, called Pâo-sze. For her sake he degraded his queen,
and sent their son, Î-*kh*iû, to the court of the lord of Shan, her
father, 'to learn good manners.' The lord of Shan called in the
assistance of some barbarian tribes, by which the capital was sacked,
and the king slain; and with him ended the sway of 'the Western *K*âu.'
Several of the feudal princes went to the assistance of the royal House,
drove away the barbarians, brought back Î-*kh*iû from Shăn, and hailed
him as king. He is known as king Phing, 'the Tranquillizer,' His first
measure was to transfer the capital from the ruins of Hâo to Lo, thus
fulfilling at length, but under disastrous circumstances, the wishes of
the duke of *K*âu; and from this time (B.C. 770) dates the history of
'the Eastern *K*âu.'

Among king Phing's early measures was the rewarding the feudal lords to
whom he owed his throne. The marquis of *K*in was one of them. His name
was *Kh*iû, and that of Î-ho, by which he is called in the text, is
taken as his 'style,' or, designation assumed by him on his marriage.
Wăn, 'the Accomplished,' was his sacrificial title. The lords of *K*in
were descended from king Wû's son, Yü, who was appointed marquis of
Thang, corresponding to the present department of Thâi-yüan, in
Shan-hsî. The name of Thang was afterwards changed into *K*in. The state
became in course of time one of the largest and most powerful in the
kingdom.

The charge in this Book is understood to be in connexion with Wan's
appointment to be president or chief of several of the other princes.
The king begins by celebrating the virtues and happy times of kings Wăn
and Wû, and the services rendered by the worthy ministers of subsequent
reigns. He contrasts with this the misery and distraction of his own
times, deploring his want of wise counsellors and helpers, and praising
the

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

marquis for the services which he had rendered. He then concludes with
the special charge by which be would reward the prince's merit in the
past, and stimulate him to greater exertions in the future.

1\. The king spoke to the following effect:--Uncle Î-ho, how illustrious
were Wăn and Wû! Carefully did they make their virtue brilliant, till it
rose brightly on high, and the fame of it was widely diffused here
below. Therefore God caused his favouring decree to light upon king
Wăn.\* There were ministers also (thereafter), who aided and
illustriously served their sovereigns, following and carrying out their
plans, great and small, so that my fathers sat tranquilly on the throne.

'Oh! an object of pity am I, who am (but as) a little child. just as I
have succeeded to the throne, Heaven has severely chastised me.\*
Through the interruption of the (royal) bounties that ceased to descend
to the inferior people, the invading barbarous tribes of the west have
greatly (injured) our kingdom. Moreover, among the managers of my
affairs there are none of age and experience and distinguished ability
in their offices. I am (thus) unequal (to the difficulties of my
position), and say to myself, "My grand-uncles and uncles, you ought to
compassionate my case." Oh! if there were those who could establish
their merit in behalf of me, the One man, I might long enjoy repose upon
the throne.

'Uncle Î-ho, you render still more glorious your illustrious ancestor.
You were the first to imitate the example of Wăn and Wû, collecting (the
scattered powers), and continuing (the all but broken line of) your
sovereign, Your filial piety goes back

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

to your accomplished ancestor, (and is equal to his.) You have done much
to repair my (losses), and defend me in my difficulties, and of you,
being such, I am full of admiration.'

2\. The king said, 'Uncle Î-ho, return home, survey your multitudes, and
tranquillize your state. I reward you with a jar of spirits, distilled
from the black millet, and flavoured with odoriferous herbs <span
id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_298.md), with a red bow, and a hundred red
arrows <span id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_299.md); with a black bow, and a
hundred black arrows; and with four horses. Go, my uncle. Show kindness
to those that are far off, and help those who are near at hand; cherish
and secure the repose of the inferior people; do not idly seek your
ease; exercise an inspection and (benign) compassion in your capital
(and all your borders);--thus completing your illustrious virtue.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_298"></span>[267:1](sbe03055.htm#fr_310.md) Compare king
*Kh*ăng's gift to the duke of *K*âu, in the Announcement concerning Lo,
ch. 6.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[267:2](sbe03055.htm#fr_311.md) The conferring on
a prince of a bow and arrows, invested him with the power of punishing
throughout the states within his jurisdiction all who were disobedient
to the royal commands, but not of taking life without first reporting to
the court. The gift was also a tribute to the merit of the receiver. See
the Book of Poetry, II, iii, ode 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXIX. The Speech at Pî](sbe03056.md)
