[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03136)  [Next](sbe03138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 2. THE HSIN WEI.

#### A FESTAL ODE, CELEBRATING SOME ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY THE KING TO HIS RELATIVES, WITH THE TRIAL OF ARCHERY AFTER THE FEAST; CELEBRATING ESPECIALLY THE HONOUR DONE ON SUCH OCCASIONS TO THE AGED.

This ode is given here, because it is commonly taken as a prelude to the
next. *K*û Hsî interprets it of the feast, given by, the

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

king, at the close of the sacrifice in the ancestral temple, to the
princes of his own surname. There are difficulties in the interpretation
of the piece on this view, which, however, is to be preferred to any
other.

In thick patches are those rushes, Springing by the way-side:--Let not
the cattle and sheep trample them. Anon they will grow up; anon they
will be completely formed, With their leaves soft and glossy <span
id="fr_562"></span>[1](#fn_542). Closely related are brethren; Let none
be absent, let all be near. For some there are mats spread; For some
there are given stools <span id="fr_563"></span>[2](#fn_543).

The mats are spread, and a second one above; The stools are given, and
there are plenty of servants. (The guests) are pledged, and they pledge
(the host) in return; He rinses the cups (and refills them, but the
guests) put them down, Sauces and pickles are brought in, With roasted
meat and broiled. Excellent provisions there are of tripe and palates;
With singing to lutes, and with drums.

The ornamented bows are strong, And the four arrows are all balanced.
They discharge the arrows, and all hit, And the guests are arranged
according to their skill. The ornamented bows are drawn to the full, And
the arrows are grasped in the hand. They go straight to the mark as if
planted

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

in it, And the guests are arranged according to the humble propriety of
their behaviour.

The distant descendant presides over the feast; His sweet spirits are
strong. He fills their cups from a large vase, And prays for the hoary
old (among his guests):--That with hoary age and wrinkled back, They may
lead on one another (to virtue), and support one another (in it); That
so their old age may be blessed, And their bright happiness ever
increased.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_542"></span>[400:1](sbe03137.htm#fr_562) In the rushes
growing up densely from a common root we have an emblem of brothers all
sprung from the same ancestor; and in the plants developing. so finely,
when preserved from injury, an emblem of the happy fellowships of
consanguinity, when nothing is allowed to interfere with mutual
confidence and good, feeling.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[400:2](sbe03137.htm#fr_563) In a previous note
I have said that chairs and tables had not come into use in those early
times. Guests sat and feasts were spread on mats on the floor; for the
aged, however, stools were. placed on which they could lean forward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 3. The *K*î Ȝui](sbe03138)
