[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03017)  [Next](sbe03019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK II. THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF *K*UNG-HUI

This Book is the first of the 'Announcements,' which form a large class
of the documents in the Shû. They are distinguished from the Speeches,
as being made in a general assembly, or published, for the information
of all, whereas the Speeches were made to an army.

*K*ung-hui, of an old family, whose surname was *Z*ăn, with its seat in
the territory of Hsieh, corresponding to the present district of Thang,
department Yen-*k*âu, Shan-tung, was a minister of Thang. Thang has been
successful against *K*ieh, and dethroned him, but is haunted by some
feeling of remorse, and afraid that what he has done may be appealed to
in future ages as an apology for rebellion. This gives occasion to the
Announcement, in which *K*ung-hui vindicates the proceeding of the king,
showing, first, that he had only obeyed the guidance of Heaven, and,
then, that men consented with Heaven in the matter. He concludes with
various counsels addressed to the king.

1\. When Thang the Successful was keeping *K*ieh in banishment in
Nan-*kh*âo <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_97.md), he had a feeling of
shame on account of his conduct, and said, 'I am afraid that in future
ages men will fill their mouths with me, (as an apology for their
rebellious proceedings.)'

2\. On this *K*ung-hui made the following announcement: 'Oh! Heaven
gives birth to the people with (such) desires. that without a ruler they
must fall into all disorders; and Heaven again gives birth

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

to the man of intelligence to regulate them.\* The sovereign of Hsiâ had
his virtue all-obscured, and the people were (as if they had fallen)
amid mire and (burning) charcoal. Heaven hereupon gifted (our) king with
valour and prudence, to serve as a sign and director to the myriad
regions, and to continue the old ways of Yü. You are now (only)
following the proper course, honouring and obeying the appointment of
Heaven. The king of Hsiâ was an offender, falsely and calumniously
alleging the sanction of supreme Heaven, to spread abroad his commands
among the people. On this account God viewed him with disapprobation,
caused our Shang to receive his appointment, and employed (you) to
enlighten the multitudes (of the people).'

3\. 'Contemners of the worthy and parasites of the powerful,--many such
followers he had indeed: (but) from the first our country was to the
sovereign of Hsiâ like weeds among the springing corn, and blasted
grains among the good. (Our people), great and small, were in constant
apprehension, fearful though they were guilty of no crime. How much more
was this the case, when our (prince's) virtues became a theme (eagerly)
listened to! Our king did not approach to (dissolute) music and women;
he did not seek to accumulate property and wealth. To great virtue he
gave great offices, and to great merit great rewards. He employed others
as if (their excellences) were his own; he was not slow to change his
errors. Rightly indulgent and rightly benevolent, from the display, (of
such virtue), confidence was reposed in him by the millions of the
people.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

'When the earl of Ko <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_98.md) showed his
enmity to the provision-carriers, the work of punishment began with Ko.
When it went on in the east, the wild tribes of the west murmured; when
it went on in the south, those of the north murmured:--they said, "Why
does he make us alone the last?" To whatever people he went, they
congratulated one another in their families, saying, "We have waited for
our prince; our prince is come, and we revive." The people's honouring
our Shang is a thing of long existence.'

4\. 'Show favour to the able and right-principled (among the princes),
and aid the virtuous; distinguish the loyal, and let the good have free
course. Absorb the weak, and punish the wilfully blind; take their
states from the disorderly, and deal summarily with those going to ruin.
When you (thus) accelerate the end of what is (of itself) ready to
perish, and strengthen what is itself strong to live, how will the
states all flourish! When (a sovereign's) virtue is daily being renewed,
he is cherished throughout the myriad regions; when his mind is full
(only) of himself, he is abandoned by the nine branches of his kindred.
Exert yourself, O king, to make your virtue (still more) illustrious,
and set up (the standard of) the Mean before the people. Order your
affairs

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

by righteousness; order your heart by propriety;--so shall you transmit
a grand example to posterity. I have heard the saying, "He who finds
instructors for himself, comes to the supreme dominion; he who says that
others are not equal to himself, comes to ruin. He who likes to put
questions, becomes enlarged; he who uses only his own views, becomes
smaller (than he was)." Oh! he who would take care for the end must be
attentive to the beginning. There is establishment for the observers of
propriety, and overthrow for the blinded and wantonly indifferent. To
revere and honour the path prescribed by Heaven is the way ever to
preserve the favouring appointment of Heaven.'\*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[86:1](sbe03018.htm#fr_101.md) Nan-*kh*âo is
identified with the present district of *Kh*âo, department Lû-*k*âu,
An-hui.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[88:1](sbe03018.htm#fr_102.md) Ko was a
principality corresponding to the present district of Ning-ling,
department of Kwei-teh, Ho-nan. It was thus near the southern Po, which
belonged to Thang. Mencius tells us (III, ii, ch. 3) that Thang sent a
multitude of his people to assist the farmers of Ko, about the poor
produce of which their chief had lamented to him. That chief, however,
instead of showing any gratitude, surprised and robbed those who were
carrying provisions from Po to the labourers in the field, and committed
various atrocities upon them. This aroused Thang's indignation, and he
made him the .first object of his punitive justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III. The Announcement of Thang](sbe03019.md)
