[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03039)  [Next](sbe03041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XIII.

### THE ANNOUNCEMENT CONCERNING LO.

THE matters recorded in this Book are all connected, more or less nearly
with Lo, the new capital, the arrangements for the building of which are
related at the commencement of the last Book. According to the summary
of the contents given by the commentator Ȝhâi *Kh*ăn, 'The arrangements
for the building having been made, the duke of *K*âu sent a messenger to
inform the king of the result of his divinations. The historiographer
recorded this as the Announcement about Lo, and at the same time related
a dialogue between the king and his minister, and how the king charged
the duke to remain at Lo, and conduct the government of it.' Passing
over the commencing paragraph, which I have repeated here from the ninth
Book 'Ȝhâi divides all the rest into seven chapters. Ch. 1 contains the
duke's message concerning his divinations; and the next gives the king's
reply. Ch. 3 is occupied with instructions to the king about the
measures which he should pursue on taking up his residence at Lo. In ch.
4, the king charges the duke to remain at Lo, and undertake its
government. In ch. 5, the duke responds, and accepts the charge,
dwelling on the duties which the king and himself would have to perform.
Ch. 6 relates the action of the duke in reference to a message and gift
from the king intended for his. special honour. In ch. 7, the
historiographer writes of sacrifices offered by the king in Lo, and a
proclamation that he issued, and tells how long the duke continued in
his government;--showing how the duke began the city and, completed it,
and how king *Kh*ăng, after offering the sacrifices and inaugurating the
government, returned to Hâo, and did not, after all, make his capital at
Lo.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

Many critics make much to do about the want of historical order in the
Book, and suppose that portions have been lost, and other portions
transposed; but the Book may be explained without resorting to so
violent a supposition.

\[In the third month, when the moon began to wane, the duke of *K*âu
commenced the foundations and proceeded to build the new great city of
Lo of the eastern states. The people from every quarter assembled in
great harmony. From the Hâu, Tien, Nan, Ȝhâi, and Wei domains, the
various officers stimulated this harmony of the people, and introduced
them to the business that was to be done for *K*âu. The duke encouraged
all to diligence, and made a great announcement about the performance
(of the works) <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_198).\]

1\. The duke of *K*âu did obeisance with his hands to his head and his
head to the ground <span id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_199), saying
'Herewith I report (the execution of my commission) to my son my
intelligent sovereign. The king appeared as if he would not presume to
be present at Heaven's founding here the appointment (of our dynasty),
and fixing it, whereupon I followed the (Grand-)Guardian, and made a
great survey of this eastern region, hoping to found the place where he
should become the intelligent sovereign of the people. On the day
Yî-mâo, I came in the morning to this capital of Lo. I (first) divined
by the shell concerning (the ground about) the Lî-water on the north of
the Ho. I then divined concerning the east of the *K*ien-water, and the
west of the *Kh*an, when the (ground near the) Lo was indicated. Again I

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

divined concerning the east of the *Kh*an-water when the (ground near
the) Lo was also indicated. I (now) send a messenger with a map, and to
present the (result of the) divinations.'\*

2\. The king did obeisance with his hands to his head and his head to
the ground, saying, 'The duke did not presume not to acknowledge
reverently the favour of Heaven, and has surveyed the locality where our
*K*âu may respond to that favour. Having settled the locality, he has
sent his messenger to show me the divinations, favourable and always
auspicious. We two must together sustain the responsibility. He has made
provision for me (and my successors), for myriads and tens of myriads of
years, there reverently to acknowledge the favour of Heaven.\* With my
hands, to my head and my head to the ground, (I receive) his instructive
words.'

3\. The duke of *K*âu said <span id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_200), 'Let
the king at first employ the ceremonies of Yin, and sacrifice in the new
city,\* doing everything in an orderly way, but without display. I will
marshal all the officers to attend you from *K*âu, merely saying that
probably there will be business to be done (in sacrificing). Let the
king instantly issue an order to the effect that the most meritorious
(ministers) shall have the first place in the sacrifices; and let him
also say in an order, "You, in whose behalf the above order is issued,
must give me your assistance with sincere earnestness." Truly display
the record of merits, for

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

it is you who must in everything teach the officers. My young son, can
you indulge partiality? Eschew it, my young son. (If you do not), the
consequence hereafter will be like a fire, which, a spark at first,
blazes up, and by and by cannot be extinguished. Let your observance of
the constant rules of right, and your soothing measures be like mine.
Take only the officers that are in Kâu with you to the new city, and
make them there join their (old) associates, with intelligent vigour
establishing their merit, and with a generous largeness (of soul)
completing (the public manners);--so shall you obtain an endless fame.'

The duke said, 'Yes, young as you are, be it yours to complete (the work
of your predecessors). Cultivate (the spirit of) reverence, and you will
know who among the princes (sincerely) present their offerings to you,
and who do not. In connexion with those offerings there are man),
observances. If the observances are not equal to the articles, it must
be held that there is no offering. When there is no service of the will
in the offerings (of the princes), all the people will then say, "We
need not (be troubled about) our offerings," and affairs will be
disturbed by errors and usurpations.

'Do you, my young son, manifest everywhere my unwearied diligence, and
listen to my instructions to you how to help the people to observe the
constant rules of right. If you do not bestir yourself in these things,
you will not be of long continuance. If you sincerely and fully carry
out the course of your Directing father, and follow exactly my example,
there will be no venturing to disregard your orders. Go, and be
reverent. Henceforth I will study

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

husbandry <span id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_201). There do you generously
rule our people, and there is no distance from which they will not come
to you.'

4\. The king spoke to this effect <span id="fr_209"></span>[2](#fn_202),
'O duke, you are the enlightener and sustainer of my youth. You have set
forth the great and illustrious virtues, that I, notwithstanding my
youth, may display a brilliant merit like that of Wăn and Wû, reverently
responding to the favouring decree of Heaven; and harmonize and long
preserve the people of all the regions, settling the multitudes (in Lo);
and that I may give due honour to the great ceremony (of recording) the
most distinguished (for their merits), regulating the order for the
first places at the sacrifices, and doing everything in an orderly
manner without display.

'But your virtue, O duke, shines brightly above and beneath, and is
displayed actively throughout the four quarters. On every hand appears
the deep reverence (of your virtue) in securing the establishment of
order, so that you fail in nothing of the earnest lessons of Wăn and Wû.
It is for me, the youth, (only) to attend reverently, early and late, to
the sacrifices.'

The king said, 'Great, O duke, has been your merit in helping and
guiding me;--let it ever continue so.'

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

The king said, 'O duke, let me, the little child, return to my
sovereignty in *K*âu, and I charge you, O duke, to remain behind (here).
Order has been initiated throughout the four quarters of the kingdom,
but the ceremonies to be honoured (by general observance) have not yet
been settled, and I cannot look on your service as completed. Commence
on a great scale what is to be done by your remaining here, setting an
example to my officers and greatly preserving the people whom Wăn and Wû
received;--by your good government you will be a help to the whole
kingdom.'

The king said, 'Remain, O duke. I will certainly go. Your services are
devoutly acknowledged and reverently rejoiced in. Do not, O duke,
occasion me this difficulty. I on my part will not be weary in seeking
the tranquillity (of the people);--do not let the example which you have
afforded me be intermitted. So shall the kingdom enjoy for generations
(the benefit of your virtue).'

5\. The duke of *K*âu did obeisance with his hands to his head and his
head to the ground, saying, 'You have charged me, O king, to come here.
I undertake (the charge), and will protect the people whom your
accomplished grandfather, and your glorious and meritorious father, king
Wû, received by the decree (of Heaven). I will enlarge the reverence
which I cherish for you. (But), my son, come (frequently), and inspect
this settlement. Pay great honour to (old) statutes, and to the good and
wise men of Yin. Good government (here) will make you (indeed) the new
sovereign of the kingdom, and an example of (royal) respectfulness to
all your successors of *K*âu.'

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

(The duke) proceeded to say, 'From this time, by the government
administered in this central spot, all the states will be conducted to
repose; and this will be the completion of your merit, O king.

'I, Tan, with the numerous officers and managers of affairs, will
consolidate the achievements of our predecessors, in response to (the
hopes of) the people. I will afford an example of sincerity to (future
ministers of) *K*âu, seeking to render complete the pattern intended for
the enlightenment of you, my son, and thus to carry fully out the virtue
of your accomplished grandfather.'

6\. (Afterwards, on the arrival of a message and gifts from the king,
the duke said <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_203)), '(The king) has
sent messengers to admonish (the people of) Yin, and with a soothing
charge to me, along with two flagons of the black-millet herb-flavoured
spirits, saying, "Here is a pure sacrificial gift, which with my hands
to my head and my head to the ground I offer for you to enjoy its
excellence!"\* I dare not keep this by me, but offer it in sacrifice to
king Wăn and king Wû.' (In doing so, he prayed), 'May he be obedient to,
and observant of your course! Let him not bring on himself any evil or
illness! Let him satisfy his descendants for myriads of years with your
virtue! Let (the people of) Yin enjoy prolonged (prosperity)!'\* (He
also said to the messengers), 'The king has sent you to Yin,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

and we have received his well-ordered charges, (sufficient to direct us)
for myriads of years, but let (the people) ever (be able to) observe the
virtue cherished by my son.'

7\. On the day Wû-*kh*ăn, the king, being in the new city <span
id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_204), performed the annual winter sacrifice,
offering (moreover) one red bull to king Wăn and another to king Wû.\*
He then ordered a declaration to be prepared, which was done by Yî <span
id="fr_212"></span>[2](#fn_205) in the form of a prayer, and it simply
announced the remaining behind of the duke of *K*âu. The king's
guests <span id="fr_213"></span>[3](#fn_206), on occasion of the killing
of the victims and offering the sacrifice, were all present. The king
entered the grand apartment, and poured out the libation.\* He gave a
charge to the duke of *K*âu to remain, and Yî, the preparer of the
document, made the announcement;--in the twelfth month. (Thus) the duke
of *K*âu grandly sustained the decree which Wăn and Wû had received
through the space of seven years <span id="fr_214"></span>[4](#fn_207).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[189:1](sbe03040.htm#fr_205) See the
introductory note to Book ix.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[189:2](sbe03040.htm#fr_206) In sending his
message to the king, the duke does obeisance as if he were in the
presence of his majesty. The king responds with a similar ceremony.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[190:1](sbe03040.htm#fr_207) We must suppose
that the duke of *K*âu, after receiving the reply to his message, had
himself returned to Hâo, to urge upon the king the importance of his
repairing in person to Lo, and solemnly inaugurating the new city as the
capital of the kingdom.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[192:1](sbe03040.htm#fr_208) By this expression
the duke indicates his wish and intention now to retire from public
life, and leave the government and especially the affairs of Lo in the
king's hands.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[192:2](sbe03040.htm#fr_209) From the words of
the king in this chapter, we receive the impression that they were
spoken in Lo. He must have gone there with the duke from Hâo. He
deprecates the duke's intention to retire into private life; intimates
his own resolution to return to Hâo; and wishes the duke to remain in
Lo, accomplishing all that was still necessary to the establishment of
their dynasty.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[194:1](sbe03040.htm#fr_210) We must suppose
that the king had returned to Hâo, and now sends a message to the duke
with an extraordinary gift, doing honour to him as if be were a departed
spirit, continuing in heaven the guardianship of the dynasty which he
bad so long efficiently discharged on earth. This gives occasion for the
duke to exhibit anew his humility, piety, and loyalty.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[195:1](sbe03040.htm#fr_211) The duke had asked
the king to come frequently to the new city; he is there now
accordingly.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[195:2](sbe03040.htm#fr_212) Yî was the name of
the Recorder who officiated on the occasion.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[195:3](sbe03040.htm#fr_213) All the princes
present and assisting at the sacrifices, and especially the
representatives of the previous dynasties.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[195:4](sbe03040.htm#fr_214) These seven years
are to be calculated from the seventh year of king *Kh*ăng, after the
duke had served as administrator of the government seven years from the
death of king Wû. Many think, however, that the 'seven years' are only
those of the duke's regency.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIV. The Numerous Officers](sbe03041)
