[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03007)  [Next](sbe03009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

# THE SHÛ KING.

## PART I. THE BOOK OF THANG.

### THE CANON OF YÂO.

SHÛ KING, the name of the whole work, has been sufficiently explained in
the Introduction. The name of this Part, the first of the five into
which the whole is divided, is the Book of Thang, Thang being taken as
the dynastic designation of Yâo, who before his elevation to the throne
had been marquis of the small state of Thang, the name of which is
supposed to be still retained in Thang, one of the districts of the
department Pâo-ting, in *K*ih-lî. It is said that after his elevation he
established his capital in Phing-yang, lat. 36º 06´, long. 111º 33´, in
Shan-hsî. But all this is very uncertain. See on Part III, Book iii, ch.
2. The one Book, forming this Part, is called the Canon of Yâo. The
character which we translate 'Canon' means a document of the most
exalted nature, the contents of which are entitled to the greatest
regard. The name is given expressly only to one other Book in the Shû.
The Canons are the first of the six classes of documents which the Shû
contains.

Yâo is the subject of the Book:--In ch. 1, in his personal character and
the general results of his government; in ch. 2, in his special care for
the regulation of the calendar and the labours of agriculture; in ch. 3,
in his anxiety to find one who could cope with the ravages of a terrible
inundation, and take his place on the throne. The third chapter
introduces to our notice Shun, the successor of Yâo.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

1\. Examining into antiquity, (we find that) the Tî Yâo <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) was styled Fang-hsün <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23). He was reverential, intelligent,
accomplished, and thoughtful,--naturally and without effort. He was
sincerely courteous, and capable of (all) complaisance. The bright
(influence of these qualities) was felt through the four quarters (of
the land), and reached to (heaven) above and (earth) beneath.

He made the able and virtuous distinguished, and thence proceeded to the
love of (all in) the nine classes of his kindred, who (thus) became
harmonious. He (also) regulated and polished the people (of his domain),
who all became brightly intelligent. (Finally), he united and harmonized
the myriad states; and so the black-haired people were transformed. The
result was (universal) concord.

2\. He commanded the Hsîs and Hos <span id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24),
in reverent accordance with (their observation of) the wide heavens, to
calculate and delineate (the movements and appearances of) the sun, the
moon, the stars, and the zodiacal spaces, and so to deliver respectfully
the seasons to be observed by the people.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

He separately commanded the second brother Hsî to reside at Yü-î <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25), in what was called the Bright Valley, and
(there) respectfully to receive as a guest the rising sun, and to adjust
and arrange the labours of the spring. 'The day,' (said he), 'is of the
medium length, and the star is in Niâo;--you may thus exactly determine
mid-spring. The people are dispersed (in the fields), and birds and
beasts breed and copulate.'

He further commanded the third brother. Hsî to reside at
Nan-*k*iâo <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26), (in what was called the
Brilliant Capital). to adjust and arrange the transformations of the
summer, and respectfully-to observe the exact limit (of the shadow).
'The day,' (said he), 'is at its longest, and the star is in Hwo;--you
may thus exactly determine mid-summer. The people are more dispersed;
and birds and beasts have their feathers and hair thin, and change their
coats.'

He separately commanded the second brother Ho to reside at the west, in
what was called the Dark Valley, and (there) respectfully to convoy the
setting sun, and to adjust and arrange the completing labours of the
autumn. 'The night' (said he), 'is of the medium length, and the star is
In Hsü;--you may thus exactly determine mid-autumn. The people feel at
ease, and birds and beasts have, their coats in good condition.'

He further commanded the third brother Ho to

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

reside in the northern region, in what was called the Sombre Capital,
and (there) to adjust and examine the changes of the winter. 'The day,'
(said he), 'is at its shortest, and the star is in Mâo;--you may thus
exactly determine mid-winter. The people, keep in their houses, and the
coats of birds and beasts are downy and thick.'

The Tî said, 'Ah! you, Hsîs and Hos, a round year consists of three
hundred, sixty, and six days. Do you, by means of the intercalary month,
fix the four seasons, and complete (the period of) the year.
(Thereafter), the various officers being regulated, in accordance with
this, all the works (of the year) will be fully performed.'

3\. The Tî said, 'Who will search out (for me) a man according to the
times, whom I can raise and employ?' Fang-*kh*î said, '(Your) heir-son
Kû <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) is highly intelligent.' The Tî
said, 'Alas; he is insincere and quarrelsome:--can he do?'

The Tî said, 'Who will search out (for me) a man'. equal to the exigency
of my affairs?' Hwan-tâu <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) said, 'Oh!
the merits of the Minister of Works have just been displayed on a wide
scale.' The Tî, said, 'Alas! when all is quiet, he talks; but when,
employed, his actions turn out differently. he is respectful (only) in
appearance. See! the floods assail the heavens!'

The Tî said, 'Ho! (President of) the Four

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mountains <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29), destructive in their overflow are the
waters of the inundation. In their vast extent they embrace the hills
and overtop the great heights, threatening the heavens with their
floods, so that the lower people groan and murmur 'Is there a capable
man to whom I can assign the correction (of this calamity)?' All (in the
court) said, 'Ah! is there not Khwăn <span
id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30)?' The Tî said, 'Alas! how perverse is he!
He is disobedient to orders, and tries to injure his peers.' (The
President of) the Mountains said, 'Well but--. Try if he can (accomplish
the work).' (Khwăn) was employed accordingly. The Tî said (to him), 'Go;
and be reverent!' For nine years he laboured, but the work was
unaccomplished.

The Tî said, 'Ho! (President of) the Four Mountains, I have been on the
throne seventy years. You can carry out my commands;--I will resign my
place to you.' The Chief said, 'I have not the virtue; I should disgrace
your place.' (The Tî) said, 'Show me some one among the illustrious, or
set forth one from among the poor and mean.' All (then) said to the Tî,
'There is an unmarried man among the lower people, called Shun of
Yü <span id="fr_31"></span>[3](#fn_31)'. The Tî

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

said, 'Yes, I have heard of him. What have you to say about him?' The
Chief said,' He is the son of a blind man. His father was obstinately
unprincipled; his (step-)mother was insincere; his (half-) brother
Hsiang was arrogant. He has been able (however), by his filial piety to
live in harmony with them, and to lead them gradually to
self-government, so that they (no longer) proceed to great wickedness.'
The Tî said, 'I will try him; I will wive him, and thereby see his
behaviour with my two daughters.' (Accordingly) he arranged and sent
down his two daughters to the north of the Kwei <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32), to be wives in (the family of) Yü. The Tî
said to them, 'Be reverent!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[32:1](sbe03008.htm#fr_22) Yâo is to us now the
name of the ancient ruler so denominated. The character means 'high,'
'lofty and grand.' It may originally have been an epithet, 'the Exalted
One.' On the meaning of Tî in Tî Yâo, see what has been said in the
Preface.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[32:2](sbe03008.htm#fr_23) The Han scholars held
that Fang-hsün was the name of Yâo. Those of Sung, taking the characters
as an epithet, make them signify 'the Highly Meritorious.'

<span id="fn_24"></span>[32:3](sbe03008.htm#fr_24) The Hsîs and Hos seem
to 'have been brothers of two families, on whom devolved the care of the
calendar, principally with a view to regulate the seasons of
agriculture. See Parts III, iv, and V, xxvii. On Yâo's directions to
them, see the Introduction, pp. 24-28.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[33:1](sbe03008.htm#fr_25) Yü-î is by some
identified with Tăng-*k*âu, in Shan-tung, lat. 37° 48´ long. 12° 4´; by
others, it is sought in Corea.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[33:2](sbe03008.htm#fr_26) Nan-*k*iâo was south,
it is said, on the border of An-nan or Cochin-China. The characters for
'in what was called the Brilliant Capital' are supposed to have dropt
out of the text.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[34:1](sbe03008.htm#fr_27) In Part II, iv, 2, Yü
speaks of this son of Yâo as 'the haughty Kû of Tan,' Tan probably being
the name of a state, over which, according to tradition, he had been
appointed.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[34:2](sbe03008.htm#fr_28) Hwan-tâu and the
Minister of Works, whom he recommends, appear in the next Book as great
criminals.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[35:1](sbe03008.htm#fr_29) (President of) the
Four Mountains, or simply Four Mountains, appears to have been the title
of the chief minister of Yâo. The four mountains were--mount Thâi in the
east; Hwâ in the west in Shan-hsî; Hăng in the south, in Hû-nan; and
Hăng in the north, in *K*ih-lî. These, probably, were the limits of the
country, so far as known, and all within these points were the care of
the chief minister.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[35:2](sbe03008.htm#fr_30) Khwăn is believed to
have been the father of Yü, who afterwards coped successfully with the
inundation. We are told that he was earl of *Kh*ung, corresponding to
the present district of Hû, in Shen-hsî.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[35:3](sbe03008.htm#fr_31) See on the title of
next Book.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[36:1](sbe03008.htm#fr_32) The Kwei is a small
stream in Shan-hsî, which flows into the Ho.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I. The Canon of Shun](sbe03009)
