[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03038)  [Next](sbe03040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XII.

### THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE DUKE OF SHÂO.

SHÂO was the name of a territory within the royal domain, corresponding
to the present district of Hwan-*kh*ü, *K*iang *K*âu, Shan-hsî. It was
the appanage of Shih, one of the ablest of the men who lent their aid to
the establishment of the dynasty of *K*âu. He appears in this Book as
the Grand-Guardian at the court of king *Kh*ăng, and we have met with
him before in

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

the Hounds of Lü and the Metal-bound Coffer. He is introduced here in
connexion with one of the most important enterprises of the duke of
*K*âu, the building of the city of Lo, not very far from the present
city of Lo-yang, in Ho-nan, as a new and central capital of the kingdom.
King Wû had conceived the idea of such a city; but it was not carried
into effect till the reign of his son, and is commonly assigned to
*Kh*ăng's seventh year, in B.C. 1109.

Shih belonged to the royal House, and of course had the surname Kî. He
is styled the duke of Shâo, as being one of the 'three dukes,' or three
highest officers of the court, and also the chief of Shâo, all the
country west of Shen being under him, as all the east of it was under
the duke of *K*âu. He was invested by Wû with the principality of 'the
Northern Yen,' corresponding to the present department of Shun-thien,
*K*ih-lî, which was held by his descendants fully nine hundred years. It
was in Lo--while the building of it was proceeding--that he composed
this Book, and sent it by the hands of the duke of *K*âu to their young
sovereign.

The whole may be divided into three chapters. The first contains various
information about the arrangements for the building of Lo, first by the
duke of Shâo, and then by the duke of *K*âu; and about the particular
occasion when the former recited the counsels which he had composed,
that they might be made known to the king. These form the second
chapter. First, it sets forth the uncertainty of the favour of Heaven,
and urges the king to cultivate the 'virtue of reverence,' in order to
secure its permanence, and that he should not neglect his aged and
experienced ministers. It speaks next of the importance and difficulty
of the royal duties, and enforces the same virtue of reverence by
reference to the rise and fall of the previous dynasties. Lastly, it
sets forth the importance, at this early period of his reign, of the
king's at once setting about the reverence which was thus described.
There is a concluding chapter, where the duke gives expression to his
loyal and personal feelings for the king, and the purpose to be served
by the offerings, which he was then sending to the court.

The burden of the Announcement is 'the virtue of reverence.' Let the
king only feel how much depended on his attending reverently to his
duties, and all would be well. The people would love and support the
dynasty of *K*âu, and Heaven would smile upon and sustain it.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

1\. In the second month, on the day Yî-wei, six n the second month, on
the days after full moon, the king proceeded in the morning from *K*âu
to Făng <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_193). (Thence.md) the Grand
Guardian went before the duke of *K*âu to survey the locality (of the
new capital); and in the third month, on the day Wû-shan, the third day
after the first appearance of the moon on Ping-wû, he came in the
morning to Lo. He divined by the tortoiseshell about the (several)
localities, and having obtained favourable indications, he set about
laying out the plan (of the city).\* On Kăng-hsü, the third day after,
he led the people of Yin to prepare the various sites on the north of
the Lo; and this work was completed on *K*iâ-yin, the fifth day after.

On Yî-mâo, the day following, the duke of *K*âu came in the. morning to
Lo, and thoroughly inspected the plan of the new city. On Ting-sze, the
third day after, he offered two bulls as victims in the (northern and
southern) suburbs <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_194.md); and on the
morrow, Wû-wû, at the altar to the spirit of the land in the new city,
he sacrificed a bull, a ram, and a boar.\* After seven days, on
*K*iâ-ȝze, in the morning, from his written (specifications) he gave
their several orders to the people of Yin, and to the presiding chiefs
of the princes from the Hâu, Tien, and Nan domains. When the people of
Yin had thus received their orders, they arose and entered with vigour
on their work.

('When the work was drawing to a completion),

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

the Grand-Guardian went out with the hereditary princes of the various
states to bring their offerings (for the king) <span
id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_195.md); and when he entered again, he gave them
to the duke of *K*âu, saying, 'With my hands to my head and my head to
the ground, I present these to his Majesty and your Grace <span
id="fr_203"></span>[2](#fn_196.md). Announcements for the information of
the multitudes of Yin must come from you, with whom is the management of
affairs.'

2\. 'Oh! God (dwelling in) the great heavens has changed his decree
respecting his great son and the great dynasty of Yin. Our king has
received that decree. Unbounded is the happiness connected with it, and
unbounded is the anxiety:--Oh! how can he be other than reverent?\*

'When Heaven rejected and made an end of the decree in favour of the
great dynasty of Yin, there were many of its former wise kings in
heaven.\* The king, however, who had succeeded to them, the last of his
race, from the time of his entering into their appointment, proceeded in
such a way as at last to keep the wise in obscurity and the vicious in
office. The poor people in such a case, carrying their children and
leading their wives, made their moan to Heaven. They even fled away, but
were apprehended again. Oh! Heaven had compassion on the people of the
four quarters; its favouring

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

decree lighted on our earnest (founders). Let the king sedulously
cultivate the virtue of reverence.\*

Examining the men of antiquity, there was the (founder of the) Hsiâ
dynasty. Heaven guided (his mind), allowed his descendants (to succeed
him), and protected them.\* He acquainted himself with Heaven, and was
obedient to it. But in process of time the decree in his favour fell to
the ground.\* So also is it now when we examine the case of Yin. There
was the same guiding (of its founder), who corrected (the errors of
Hsiâ), and (whose descendants) enjoyed the protection (of Heaven). He
(also) acquainted himself with Heaven, and was obedient to it.\* But now
the decree in favour of him has fallen to the ground. Our king has' now
come to the throne in his youth;--let him not slight the aged and
experienced, for it may be said of them that they have studied the
virtuous conduct of the ancients, and have matured their counsels in the
sight of Heaven.

'Oh! although the king is young, yet he is the great son (of God).\* Let
him effect a great harmony with the lower people, and that will be the
blessing of the present time. Let not the king presume to be remiss in
this, but continually regard and stand in awe of the perilous
(uncertainty) of the people's (attachment).

'Let the king come here as the vice-gerent of God, and undertake (the
duties of government) in this centre of the land.\* Tan <span
id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_197.md) said, "Now that this great city has been
built, from henceforth he may

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

be the mate of great Heaven, and reverently sacrifice to (the spirits)
above and beneath; from henceforth he may from this central spot
administer successful government." Thus shall the king enjoy the
favouring regard (of Heaven) all-complete, and the government of the
people will now be prosperous.\*

'Let the king first subdue to himself those who were the managers of
affairs under Yin, associating them with the managers of affairs for our
*K*âu. This will regulate their (perverse) natures, and they will make
daily advancement. Let the king make reverence the resting-place (of his
mind);--he must maintain the virtue of reverence.

'We should by all means survey the dynasties of Hsiâ and Yin. I do not
presume to know and say, "The dynasty of Hsiâ was to enjoy the favouring
decree of Heaven just for (so many) years," nor do I presume to know and
say, "It could not continue longer."\* The fact simply was, that, for
want of the virtue of reverence, the decree in its favour prematurely
fell to the ground. (Similarly), I do not presume to know and say, "The
dynasty of Yin was to enjoy the favouring decree of Heaven just for (so
many) years," nor do I presume to know and say, "It could not continue
longer."\* The fact simply was, that, for want of the virtue of
reverence, the decree in its favour fell prematurely to the ground. The
king has now inherited the decree,--the same decree, I consider, which
belonged to those two dynasties. Let him seek to inherit (the virtues

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

of) their meritorious (sovereigns);--(let him do this especially) at
this commencement of his duties.

'Oh! it is as on the birth of a son, when all depends on (the training
of) his early life, through which he may secure his wisdom, in the
future, as if it were decreed to him. Now Heaven may have decreed wisdom
(to the king); it may have decreed good fortune or bad; it may have
decreed a (long) course of years;--we only know that now is with him the
commencement of his duties. Dwelling in this new city, let the king now
sedulously cultivate the virtue of reverence. When he is all-devoted to
this virtue, he may pray to Heaven for a long-abiding decree in his
favour.\*

'In the position of king, let him not, because of the excesses of the
people in violation of the laws, presume also to rule by the violent
infliction of death;--when the people are regulated gently, the merit
(of government) is seen. It is for him who is in the position of king to
overtop all with his virtue. In this case the people will imitate him
throughout the kingdom, and he will become still more illustrious.

'Let the king and his ministers labour with a mutual sympathy, saying,
"We have received the decree of Heaven, and it shall be great as the
long-continued years of Hsiâ;--yea, it shall not fail of the
long-continued years of Yin." I wish the king, through (the attachment
of) the lower people, to receive the long-abiding decree of Heaven.'\*

3\. (The duke of Shâo) then did obeisance with his hands to his head and
his head to the ground, and said, 'I, a small minister, presume, with
the king's (heretofore) hostile people and all their officers,

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

and with his (loyal) friendly people, to maintain and receive his
majesty's dread command and brilliant virtue. That the king should
finally obtain the decree all-complete, and that he should become
illustrious'--this I do not presume to labour for. I only bring
respectfully these offerings to present to his majesty, to be used in
his prayers to Heaven for its long-abiding decree.'\*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[183:1](sbe03039.htm#fr_200.md) That is, from Wû's
capital of Hâo to king Wăn's at Făng.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[183:2](sbe03039.htm#fr_201.md) By the addition to
the text here of 'northern and southern,' I intimate my opinion that the
duke of *K*âu offered two sacrifices, one to one to Heaven at the altar
in the southern suburb, and one to Earth in the northern suburb.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[184:1](sbe03039.htm#fr_202.md) These 'offerings'
were the 'presents of introduction,' which the feudal princes brought
with them to court, when they, were to have audience of the king. This
has led many critics to think that the king was now in Lo, which was not
the case.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[184:2](sbe03039.htm#fr_203.md) The original text
here is difficult and remarkable;--intended probably to indicate that
the king's majesty was revered in the person of the duke of *K*âu, who
was regent.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[185:1](sbe03039.htm#fr_204.md) Tan was the name
of the duke of *K*âu, and his brother duke here refers to him by it, in
accordance with the rule that 'ministers <span id="page_186">p.
186</span> should be called by their names in the presence of the
sovereign.' King *Kh*ăng, indeed, was not now really present in Lo, but
he was represented by his uncle, the regent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIII. The Announcement Concerning Lo](sbe03040.md)
