[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe03065)  [Next](sbe03067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ODE 2. THE LIEH ȜÛ.

#### PROBABLY LIKE THE LAST ODE, APPROPRIATE TO A SACRIFICE TO THANG, DWELLING ON THE SPIRITS, THE SOUP, AND THE GRAVITY OF THE SERVICE, AND ON THE ASSISTING PRINCES.

Neither can we tell by which of the kings of Shang this ode was first
used. *K*û Hsî says that the object of the sacrifice was Thang. The
Preface assigns it to Thâi Mâu, the *K*ung Ȝung, or second of the three
'honoured Ones.' But there is not a

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

word in praise of *K*ung Ȝung, and the 'meritorious ancestor' of the
first line is not to be got over. Still more clearly than in the case of
the former ode does this appear to have been made by some one who had
taken part in the service, for in line 4 he addresses the sacrificing
king as 'you.'

Ah! ah! our meritorious ancestor! Permanent are the blessings coming
from him, Repeatedly conferred without end;--They have come to you in
this place.

The clear spirits are in our vessels, And there is granted to us the
realization of our thoughts. There are also the well-tempered soups,
Prepared beforehand, with the ingredients rightly proportioned. By these
offerings we invite his presence, without a word, Without (unseemly)
contention (among the worshippers). He will bless us with the eyebrows
of longevity, With the grey hair and wrinkled face in unlimited degree.

With the naves of their wheels bound with leather, and their ornamented
yokes, With the eight bells at their horses' bits all tinkling, (The
princes) come to assist at the offerings <span
id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_324). We have received the appointment in all
its greatness, And from Heaven is our prosperity sent down, Fruitful
years of great abundance. (Our ancestor) will come and enjoy (our
offerings), And confer on us happiness without limit.

May he regard our sacrifices of winter and autumn, (Thus) offered by the
descendant of Thang!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_324"></span>[306:1](sbe03066.htm#fr_336) These lines are
descriptive of the feudal princes, who were present and assisted at the
sacrificial service. The chariot of each was drawn by four horses yoked
abreast, two insides and two outsides, on each side of the bits of which
small bells were attached.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ode 3. The Hsüan Niâo](sbe03067)
