[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a084) 
[Next](m12a086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXXXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'What should be the kind of city within which the
king should himself dwell? Should he select one already made or should
he cause one to be especially constructed? Tell me this O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'It is proper, O Bharata, to enquire about the conduct
that should be followed and the defences that should be adopted with
respect to the city in which, O son of Kunti, a king should reside. I
shall, therefore, discourse to thee on the subject, referring especially
to the defences of citadels. Having listened to me, thou shouldst make
the arrangements required and conduct thyself attentively as directed.
Keeping his eye on the six different kinds of citadels, the king should
build his cities containing every kind of affluence and every other
article of use in abundance. Those six varieties are water-citadels,
earth-citadels, hill-citadels, human-citadels, mud-citadels, and
forest-citadels. <span id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_246) The king, with
his ministers and the army thoroughly loyal to him, should reside in
that city which is defended by a citadel which contains an abundant
stock of rice and weapons,--which is protected with impenetrable walls
and a trench, which teems with elephants and steeds and

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

cars, which is inhabited by men possessed of learning and versed in the
mechanical arts, where provisions of every kind have been well stored,
whose population is virtuous in conduct and clever in business and
consists of strong and energetic men and animals, which is adorned with
many open squares and rows of shops, where the behaviour of all persons
is righteous, where peace prevails, where no danger exists, which blazes
with beauty and resounds with music and songs, where the houses are all
spacious, were the residents number among them many brave and wealthy
individuals, which echoes with the chant of Vedic hymns, where
festivities and rejoicings frequently take place, and where the deities
are always worshipped. <span id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_247) Residing
there, the king should be employed in filling his treasury, increasing
his forces, enhancing the number of his friends, and establishing courts
of justice. He should cheek all abuses and evils in both his cities and
his provinces. He should be employed in collecting provisions of every
kind and in filling his arsenals with care. He should also increase his
stores of rice and other grain, and strengthen his counsels (with
wisdom). He should further, enhance his stores of fuel, iron, chaff,
charcoal, timber, horns, bones, bamboos, marrow, oils and ghee, fat,
honey, medicines, flax, resinous exudations, rice, weapons, shafts,
leather catgut (for bow-strings), caries, and strings and cords made of
*munja* grass and other plants and creepers. He should also increase the
number of tanks and well, containing large quantities of water, and
should protect all juicy trees. <span id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_248) He
should entertain with honour and attention preceptors (of different
sciences), *Ritwijas*, and priests, mighty bowmen, persons skilled in
architecture, astronomers and astrologers, and physicians, as also all
men possessed of wisdom and intelligence and self-restraint and
cleverness and courage and learning and high birth and energy of mind,
and capable of close application to all kinds of work. The king should
honour the righteous and chastise the unrighteous. He should, acting
with resolution, set the several orders to their respective duties.
Ascertaining properly, by means of spies, the outward behaviour and the
state of mind of the inhabitants of his city and provinces, he should
adopt those measures that may be required. The king should himself
supervise his spies and counsels, his treasury, and the agencies for
inflicting chastisements. Upon these everything may be said to depend.
With spies constituting his sight, the king should ascertain all the
acts and intentions of his foes, friends, and neutrals. He should then,
with heedfulness, devise his own measures, honouring those that are
loyal to him and punishing those that are hostile. The king should
always adore the gods in sacrifices and make gifts without giving pain
to anybody. He should protect his subjects, never doing anything that
may obstruct or thwart righteousness. He should always maintain and
protect the helpless, the masterless, and the old, and women that are
widows. The king should always honour the ascetics and make unto them
gifts, at proper seasons of cloths and vessels and food. The king
should, with attentive care, inform the

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

ascetics (within his dominions) of the state of his own self, of all his
measures, and of the kingdom, and should always behave with humility in
their presence. When he sees ascetics of high birth and great learning
that have abandoned all earthly objects, he should honour them with
gifts of beds and seats and food. Whatever the nature of the distress
into which he may fall, he should confide in an ascetic. The very
robbers repose confidence upon persons of that character. The king
should place his wealth in charge of an ascetic and should take wisdom
from him. He should not, however, always wait upon them or worship them
on all occasions. <span id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_249) From among those
residing in his own kingdom, he should select one for friendship.
Similarly, he should select another from among those that reside in the
kingdom of his foe. He should select a third from among those residing
in the forests, and a fourth from among those dwelling in the kingdoms
paying tribute to him. He should show hospitality towards and bestow
honours upon them and assign them the means of sustenance. He should
behave towards the ascetics dwelling in the kingdoms of foes and in the
forests in the same way as towards those that reside in his own kingdom.
Engaged in penances and of rigid vows they would, if calamity overtakes
the king and if he solicits protection, grant him what he wants. I have
now told thee in brief the indications of the city in which the king
should reside.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_246"></span>[187:1](m12a085.htm#fr_246) Water-citadels are
those that are surrounded on all sides by a river or rivers, or the sea.
Earth-citadels are those that are built, on plains fortified with high
walls and encircled with trenches all around. Human-citadels are
unfortified cities properly protected by guards and a loyal population.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[188:1](m12a085.htm#fr_247) Nilakantha says
that this has reference to the second variety of citadels mentioned in
the previous verse.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[188:2](m12a085.htm#fr_248) Such as banian,
peepul, etc. These afford refreshing shade to sunburnt travellers.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[189:1](m12a085.htm#fr_249) 'Take wisdom,'
*i.e.*, consult with them. 'Should not always wait upon them, etc.' lest
robbers should kill them, suspecting them to be depositories of the
king's wealth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXXVII](m12a086)
