[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a046) 
[Next](m12a048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XLVIII

"Janamejaya said, 'How did the grandsire of the Bharatas, who lay on a
bed of arrows, cast off his body and what kind of *Yoga* did he adopt?'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Listen, O king, with pure heart and concentrated
attention, as to how, O tiger among the Kurus, the high-souled Bhishma
cast off his body. As soon as the Sun, passing the solstitial point,
entered in his northerly course, Bhishma, with concentrated attention,
caused his soul (as connected with and independent of the body) to enter
his soul (in its independent and absolute state). Surrounded by many
foremost of Brahmanas, that hero, his body pierced with innumerable
arrows, blazed forth in great beauty like Surya himself with his
innumerable rays. Surrounded by Vyasa conversant with the Vedas by the
celestial *Rishi* Narada, by Devasthana, by Asmaka Sumantu, by Jaimini,
by the high-souled Paila, by Sandilya, by Devarata, by Maitreya of great
intelligence, by Asita and Vasishtha and the high-souled Kausika, by
Harita and Lomasa and Atri's son of great intelligence, by Vrihaspati
and Sukra and the great sage Chyavana, by Sanatkumara and Kapila and
Valmiki and Tumvuru and Kuru, by Maudgalya and Rama of Bhrigu's race,
and the great sage Trinavindu, by Pippalada and Vayu and Samvarta and
Pulaha and Katha, by Kasyapa and Pulastya and Kratu and Daksha and
Parasara, by Marichi and Angiras and Kasmya and Gautama and the sage
Galava, by Dhaumya and Vibhanda and Mandavya and Dhaumra and
Krishnanubhautika, by Uluka, that foremost of Brahmanas and the great
sage Markandeya, by Bhaskari and Purana and Krishna and Suta,--that
foremost of virtuous persons, surrounded by these and many other
highly-blessed sages of great souls and possessed of faith and
self-restraint and tranquillity of mind, the Kuru hero looked like the
Moon in the midst of the planets and the stars. Stretched on his bed of
arrows, that tiger among men, Bhishma, with pure heart and joined palms,
thought of Krishna in mind, word, and act. With a cheerful and strong
voice he hymned the praise of the slayer of Madhu, that master of
*yoga*, with the lotus in his navel, that lord of the universe, called
Vishnu and Jishnu. With joined hands, that foremost of

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

eloquent men, that puissant one, *viz*., Bhishma of highly virtuous
soul, thus praised Vasudeva.

"Bhishma said, 'O Krishna, O foremost of Beings, be thou pleased with
these words which I utter, in brief and in detail, from desire of
hymning thy praises. Thou art pure and purity's self. Thou transcendest
all. Thou art what people say to be THAT. Thou art the Supreme Lord.
With my whole heart I seek thy refuge, O universal Soul and Lord of all
creatures! <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136) Thou art without
beginning and without end. Thou art the highest of the high and
*Brahma*. Neither the gods nor the *Rishis* know thee. The divine
Creator, called Narayana or Hari, alone knows thee. Through Narayana,
the *Rishis*, the Siddhas, the great Nagas, the gods, and the celestial
*Rishis* know a little of thee. Thou art the highest of the high and
knowest no deterioration. The gods, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the
Yakshas, the Pannagas, do not know who thou art and whence art thou. All
the worlds and all created things live in thee, and enter thee (when the
dissolution comes). Like gems strung together in a thread, all things
that have attributes reside in thee, the Supreme Lord.' <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137) Having the universe for thy work and the
universe for thy limbs, this universe consisting of mind and matter
resides in thy eternal and all-pervading soul like a number of flowers
strung together in a strong thread. Thou art called Hari, of a thousand
heads, a thousand feet, a thousand eyes, a thousand arms, a thousand
crowns, and a thousand faces of great splendour. Thou art called
Narayana, divinity, and the refuge of the universe. Thou art the
subtlest of the subtle, grossest of the gross, the heaviest of the heavy
and the highest of the high. In the Vaks, the Anuvaks, the Nishads, and
Upanishads, thou art regarded as the Supreme Being of irresistible
force. In the Samans also, whose declarations are always true, thou art
regarded as Truth's self! <span id="fr_138"></span>[3](#fn_138) Thou art
of quadruple soul. Thou art displayed in only the understanding (of all
creatures). Thou art the Lord of those that are bound to thee in faith.
O God, thou art adored (by the faithful) under four excellent, high, and
secret names. <span id="fr_139"></span>[4](#fn_139) Penances are ever
present in thee. Performed (by other creatures for gratifying thee),
penances live in thy form. Thou art the Universal Soul. Thou art of
universal knowledge. Thou art the universe. Thou art omniscient.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thou art the creator of everything in the
universe. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) Like a couple of sticks
generating a blazing fire, thou hast been born of the divine Devaki and
Vasudeva for the protection of *Brahma* on earth. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141) For this eternal salvation, the devout
worshipper, with mind withdrawn from everything else and casting off all
desires, beholds thee, O Govinda, that art the pure Soul, in his own
soul. Thou transcendest Surya in glory. Thou art beyond the ken of the
senses and the understanding. O Lord of all creatures, I place myself in
thy hands. In the Puranas thou hast been spoken as *Purusha*
(all-pervading spirit). On occasions of the commencement of the *Yugas*,
thou art said to be Brahma, while on occasions of universal dissolution
thou art spoken of as Sankarshana. Adorable thou art, and therefore I
adore thee. Though one, thou hast yet been born in innumerable forms.
Thou hast thy passions under complete control. Thy devout worshippers,
faithfully performing the rites laid down in the scriptures, sacrifice
to thee, O giver of every wish! Thou art called the sheath within which
the universe lies. All created things live in thee. Like swans and ducks
swimming on the water, all the worlds that we see float in thee. Thou
art Truth. Thou art One and undeteriorating. Thou art Brahma, Thou art
That which is beyond Mind and Matter. Thou art without beginning,
middle, and end. Neither the gods nor the *Rishis* know thee. The gods,
the Asuras, the Gandharvas, the Siddhas, the *Rishis*, and the great
Uragas with concentrated souls, always adore thee. Thou art the great
panacea for all sorrow. Thou art without birth and death. Thou art
Divine. Thou art self-created. Thou art eternal. Thou art invisible and
beyond ken. Thou art called Hari and Narayana, O puissant one. The
*Vedas* declare thee to be the Creator of the universe and the Lord of
everything existing in the universe. Thou art the Supreme protector of
the universe. Thou knowest no deterioration and thou art that which is
called the highest. Thou art of the complexion of gold. Thou art the
slayer of *Asuras*. Though One, Aditi brought thee forth in twelve
forms. <span id="fr_142"></span>[3](#fn_142) Salutations to thee that
art the soul of the Sun. Salutations to thee in thy form of Soma that is
spoken of as the chief of all the regenerate ones and that gratifies
with nectar the gods in the lighted fortnight and the *Pitris* in the
dark fortnight. Thou art the One Being of transcendent effulgence
dwelling on the other side of thick darkness. Knowing thee one ceases to
have any fear of death. Salutations to thee in that form which is an
object of knowledge. <span id="fr_143"></span>[4](#fn_143) In the grand
*Uktha* sacrifice, the Brahmanas adore thee as the great *Rich*. In the
great fire-sacrifice, they sing thee as the chief *Adhyaryu* (priest).
Thou

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

art the soul of the Vedas. Salutations to thee. The *Richs*, the
*Yajus*, and the *Samans* are thy abode. Thou art the five kinds of
sanctified libations (used in sacrifices). Thou art the seven woofs used
in the Vedas. Salutations to thee in thy form of Sacrifice. <span
id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144) Libations are poured on the *Homa* fire
in accompaniment with the seventeen monosyllabic sounds. Thou art the
soul of the Homa. Salutations to thee! Thou art that *Purusha* whom the
Vedas sing. Thy name is *Yajus*. The Vedic metres are thy limbs. The
sacrifices laid down in the three Vedas are thy three heads. The great
sacrifice called *Rathantara* is thy voice expressive of gratification.
Salutation to thee in thy form of sacred hymns! Thou art the *Rishi*
that hadst appeared in the great sacrifice extending for a thousand
years performed by the creators of the universe. Thou art the great swan
with wings of gold. Salutations to thee in thy form of a swan. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_145) Roots with all kinds of affixes and
suffixes are thy limbs. The *Sandhis* are thy joints. The consonants and
the vowels are thy ornaments. The Vedas have declared thee to be the
divine word. Salutations to thee in thy form as the word! <span
id="fr_146"></span>[3](#fn_146) Assuming the form of a boar whose limbs
were constituted by sacrifice, thou hadst raised the submerged earth for
the benefit of the three worlds. Salutations to thee in thy form of
infinite prowess! Thou sleepest in *Yoga* on thy snake-decked sofa
constituted by the thousand hoods (of the Naga). Salutations to thee in
thy form of sleep! Thou buildest the bridge for the good (to cross the
sea of life) with Truth, with those means by which emancipation may be
obtained, and with the means by which the senses may be controlled.
Salutations to thee in thy form of Truth! Men practising diverse creeds,
actuated by desire of diverse fruits worship thee with diverse rites.
Salutations to thee in thy form of Creed! From thee have all things
sprung. It is thou that excitest all creatures having physical frames
containing the principle of desire. Salutations to thee in thy form of
Excitement. The great *Rishis* seek thy unmanifest self within the
manifest. Called *Kshetrajna*, thou sittest in *Kshetra*. Salutations to
thee in thy form of *Kshetra*! <span id="fr_147"></span>[4](#fn_147)
Thou always conscious and present in self, the Sankhyas still describe
thee as existing in the three states of wakefulness, dream, and sound
sleep. They further speak of thee as possessed of sixteen attributes and
representing the number seventeen. Salutations to thy form as conceived
by the Sankhyas! <span id="fr_148"></span>[5](#fn_148) Casting off
sleep, restraining

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

breath, withdrawn into their own selves, *Yogins* of restrained senses
behold thee as eternal light. Salutations to thee in thy Yoga form!
Peaceful Sannyasins, freed from fear of rebirth in consequence of the
destruction of all their sins and merits, obtain thee. Salutations to
thee in thy form of emancipation! <span id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149)
At the end of a thousand Yugas, thou assumest the form of a fire with
blazing flames and consumest all creatures. Salutations to thee in thy
form of fierceness! Having consumed all creatures and making the
universe one vast expanse of water, thou sleepest on the waters in the
form of a child. Salutations to thee in thy form as Maya (illusion)!
From the navel of the Self-born of eyes like lotus leaves, sprang a
lotus. On that lotus is established this universe. Salutations to thee
in thy form as lotus! Thou hast a thousand heads. Thou pervadest
everything. Thou art of immeasurable soul. Thou hast subjugated the four
kinds of desire that are as vast as the four oceans. Salutations to thee
in thy form of Yoga-sleep! The clouds are in the hair of thy head. The
rivers are in the several joints of thy limbs. The four oceans are in
thy stomach. Salutations to thee in thy form as water! Birth and the
change represented by death spring from thee. All things, again, at the
universal dissolution dissolve away in thee. Salutations to thy form as
cause! Thou sleepest not in the night. Thou art occupied in day time
also. Thou observest the good and the bad actions (of all). Salutations
to thee in thy form of (universal) observer! There is no act which thou
canst not do. Thou art, again, ever ready to accomplish acts that are
righteous. Salutations to thee in thy form of Work, the form, *viz*.,
which is called Vaikuntha! In wrath thou hadst, in battle, exterminated
thrice seven times the Kshatriyas who had trampled virtue and authority
under their feet. Salutations to thee in thy form of Cruelty! Dividing
thyself into five portions thou hast become the five vital breaths that
act within everybody and cause every living creature to move.
Salutations to thee in thy form of air! Thou appearest in every Yuga in
the form called month and season and half-year and year, and art the
cause of both creation and dissolution. Salutations to thee in thy form
of Time! Brahmanas are thy mouth, Kshatriyas are thy two arms, Vaisyas
are thy stomach and thighs, and Sudras live in thy feet. Salutations to
thee in thy form of caste! Fire constitute thy mouth. The heavens are
the crown of thy head. The sky is thy navel. The earth is thy feet. The
Sun is thy eye. The points of the compass are thy ears. Salutations to
thee in thy form as the (three) worlds! Thou art superior to Time. Thou
art superior to Sacrifice. Thou art higher than the highest. Thyself
without origin, thou art the origin of the universe. Salutations to thee
in thy form as Universe! Men of the world, according to the attributes
ascribed to thee by the Vaiseshika theory, regard thee as the Protector
of the world. Salutations to thee in thy form of Protector! Assuming the
forms of food, drink, and fuel, thou increasest the humours and the
life-breaths of creatures and upholdest their existence. Salutations to
thee in thy

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

form of life! For supporting the life-breaths thou eatest the four kinds
of food. <span id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150) Assuming also the form of
*Agni* within the stomach, thou digestest that food. Salutations to thee
in the form of digesting heat! Assuming the form of half-man and
half-lion, with tawny eyes and tawny manes, with teeth and claws for thy
weapons, thou hadst taken the life of the chief of the *Asuras*.
Salutations to thee in thy form of swelling might! Neither the gods, nor
the *Gandharvas*, nor the *Daityas*, nor the *Danavas*, know thee truly.
Salutations to thy form of exceeding subtility! Assuming the form of the
handsome, illustrious, and puissant Ananta in the nether region, thou
upholdest the world. Salutations to thy form of Might! Thou stupefiest
all creatures by the bonds of affection and love for the continuance of
the creation. Salutations to thee in thy form of stupefaction. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_151) Regarding that knowledge which is
conversant with the five elements to be the true Self-knowledge (for
which *yogins* strive), people approach thee by knowledge! Salutations
to thee in thy form of Knowledge! Thy body is immeasurable. Thy
understanding and eyes are devoted to everything. Thou art infinite,
being beyond all measures. Salutations to thee in thy form of vastness!
Thou hadst assumed the form of a recluse with matted locks on head,
staff in hand, a long stomach, and having thy begging bowl for thy
quiver. Salutations to thee in thy form of *Brahma*. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[3](#fn_152) Thou bearest the trident, thou art the
lord of the celestials, thou hast three eyes, and thou art high-souled.
Thy body is always besmeared with ashes, and thy phallic emblem is
always turned upwards. Salutations to thee in thy form of *Rudra*! The
half-moon forms the ornament of thy forehead. Thou hast snakes for the
holy thread circling thy neck. Thou art armed with *Pinaka* and trident.
Salutations to thy form of Fierceness! Thou art the soul of all
creatures. Thou art the Creator and the Destroyer of all creatures. Thou
art without wrath, without enmity, without affection. Salutations to
thee in thy form of Peace! Everything is in thee. Everything is from
thee. Thyself art Everything. Everywhere art thou. Thou art always the
All. Salutations to thee in thy form as Everything! Salutations to thee
whose work is the universe, to thee that art the soul of the universe,
to thee from whom hath sprung the universe, to thee that art the
dissolution of all things, to thee that are beyond the five (elements
that constitute all things)! Salutations to thee that art the three
worlds, to thee that art above the three worlds! Salutations to thee
that art all the directions! Thou art all and thou art the one
receptacle of All. Salutations to thee, O divine Lord, O Vishnu, and O
eternal origin of all the worlds! Thou, O Hrishikesa, art the Creator,
thou art the Destroyer, and thou art invincible. I cannot behold that
heavenly form in which thou art displayed in the Past, Present, and the
Future. I can, however, behold truly thy eternal form (as manifest in
thy works). Thou hast filled heaven with thy head, and the earth

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

with thy feet: with thy prowess thou hast filled the three worlds. Thou
art Eternal and thou pervadest everything in the universe. The
directions are thy arms, the Sun is thy eye, and prowess is thy vital
fluid. Thou art the lord of all creatures. Thou standest, shutting up
the seven paths of the Wind whose energy is immeasurable. They are freed
from all feats that worship thee, O Govinda of unfading prowess, thee
that art attired in yellow robes of the colour of the *Atasi*
flower. <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153) Even one bending of the
head unto thee, O Krishna, is equal to the completion of ten
Horse-sacrifices. The man that has performed ten Horse-sacrifices is not
freed from the obligation of rebirth. The man, however, that bows to
Krishna escapes rebirth. They that have Krishna for their vow, they that
think of Krishna in the night, and upon rising from sleep, may be said
to have Krishna for their body. Those people (after death) enter
Krishna's self even as libations of clarified butter sanctified with
*mantras* enter the blazing fire. Salutations to thee that dispellest
the fear of hell, to thee, O Vishnu, that art a boat unto them that are
plunged amid the eddies of the ocean represented by worldly life!
Salutations to thee, O God, that art the Brahmana's self, to thee that
art the benefactor of Brahmanas and kine, to thee that art the
benefactor of the universe, to thee that art Krishna and Govinda! The
two syllables *Hari* constitute the pecuniary stock of those that
sojourn through the wilderness of life and the medicine that effectually
cures all worldly, predilections, besides being the means that alleviate
sorrow and grief. <span id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_154) As truth is full
of Vishnu, as the universe is full of Vishnu, as everything is full of
Vishnu, so let my soul be full of Vishnu and my sins be destroyed! I
seek thy protection and am devoted to thee, desirous of obtaining a
happy end O thou of eyes like lotus petals, O best of gods, do thou
think of what will be for my good! Thyself without origin, O Vishnu,
thou art the origin of Knowledge and Penances. Thus art thou praised! O
Janardana, thus worshipped by me in the Sacrifice constituted by speech
(alone), be, O god, gratified with me! The Vedas are devoted to
Narayana. Penances are devoted to Narayana. The gods are devoted to
Narayana. Everything is always Narayana!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having uttered these words, Bhishma, with mind
concentrated upon Krishna, said, 'Salutations to Krishna!' and bowed
unto him. Learning by his *Yoga* prowess of the devotion of Bhishma,
Madhava, otherwise called Hari, (entering his body) bestowed upon him
heavenly knowledge compassing the Past, the Present, and the Future, and
went away. When Bhishma became silent, those utterers of *Brahma* (that
sat around him), with voices choked in tears, adored that high-souled
chief of the Kurus in excellent words. Those foremost of Brahmanas
uttered the praises of Krishna also, that first of Beings, and then
continued in soft voices to commend Bhishma repeatedly. Learning (by his
*Yoga* powers) of the devotion of Bhishma towards him, that foremost of
Beings, *viz*., Madhava, suddenly

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

rose from his seat and ascended on his car, Kesava and Satyaki proceeded
on one car. On another proceeded those two illustrious princes, *viz*.,
Yudhishthira and Dhananjaya. Bhimasena and the twins rode on a third;
while those bulls among men, Kripa and Yuyutsu, and that scorcher of
foes, Sanjaya of the *Suta* caste, proceeded on their respective cars,
each of which looked like a town. And all of them proceeded, causing the
earth to tremble with the rattle of their chariot-wheels. That foremost
of men, as he proceeded, cheerfully listened to the speeches, fraught
with his praise, that were uttered by the Brahmanas. The slayer of Kesi,
with gladdened heart, saluted the people that waited (along the streets)
with joined hands and bent heads."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[93:1](m12a047.htm#fr_136) The Supreme Being is
called here and elsewhere *Hansa*, *i.e.*, swan, because as the swan is
supposed to transcend all winged creatures in the range of its flight,
so the Supreme Being transcends all creatures in the universe. He is
called *That*, as in the Vedic formula of Praise, "Thou art *That*,"
meaning, "Thou art inconceivable and incapable of being described in
words."

<span id="fn_137"></span>[93:2](m12a047.htm#fr_137) Created things have
attributes. It is Brahma only that has no attributes, in the sense that
no attributes with which we are familiar can be affirmed of him.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[93:3](m12a047.htm#fr_138) The Vaks are the
*mantras*; the *Anuvaks* are those portions of the Vedas which are
called Brahmanas; the *Nishads* are those portions of the Vedic ritual
which lead to an acquaintance with the gods. The Upanishads are those
portions which treat exclusively of the knowledge of the Soul.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[93:4](m12a047.htm#fr_139) Quadruple soul,
*i.e.*, *Brahma*, *Jiva*, Mind, and Consciousness. The four names under
which the Supreme Being is adored by the faithful are Vasudeva,
Sankarsana, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[94:1](m12a047.htm#fr_140) *Penances are ever
present in thee*, in the sense thou art never without them, penances
constituting thy essence. *Performed by creatures, they live in thy
limbs*, in the sense that penances performed are never lost.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[94:2](m12a047.htm#fr_141) In ancient India,
the *Rishis* living in the woods got their fire by rubbing two sticks
together. These they called *Arani*. Brahma on earth is explained by
Nilakantha to mean the Vedas, the Brahmanas, and the Sacrifices.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[94:3](m12a047.htm#fr_142) These are the twelve
Adityas or chief gods.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[94:4](m12a047.htm#fr_143) Thou art pure
Knowledge and resident beyond the darkness of ignorance. I bow to thee
not in any of those forms in which thou art ordinarily adored but in
that form of pure light which *Yogins* only can behold by spiritual
sight.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[95:1](m12a047.htm#fr_144) The five libations
are *Dhana*, *Karambha*, *Parivapa*, and water. The seven woofs are the
seven *mantras* (*Cchandas*) predominating in the Vedic hymns, such as
*Gayatri*, etc.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[95:2](m12a047.htm#fr_145) The *Prajapatis* who
are the creators of the universe performed a sacrifice extending for a
thousand years. The Supreme Being appeared in that sacrifice as an act
of grace to the sacrificers.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[95:3](m12a047.htm#fr_146) *Sandhis* are those
changes of contiguous vowels (in compounding two words) that are
required by the rules of euphony. *Akshara* is literally a character or
letter; word made up of characters or letters.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[95:4](m12a047.htm#fr_147) The manifest is the
body. The *Rishis* seek thy unmanifest self within the body, in their
own hearts. *Kshetra* is *buddhi* or intelligence. The Supreme Being is
called *Kshetrajna* because he knows every mind. Intelligence or mind is
one of his forms.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[95:5](m12a047.htm#fr_148) The sixteen
attributes are the eleven senses and the five elements in their subtle
forms called *Mahabhutas*. Added to this is Infinity. The Supreme Being,
according to the *Sankhya* doctrine, is thus the embodiment of the
number seventeen. *Thy form as conceived by the Sankhyas, i.e., thy form
as Number*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[96:1](m12a047.htm#fr_149) In cases of those
that are reborn, there is always a residuum of sin and merit for which
they have, in their earthly life, to suffer and enjoy. In the case,
however, of those that have betaken themselves to a life of renunciation
the great endeavour is to exhaust this residuum.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[97:1](m12a047.htm#fr_150) *i.e.* that which is
chewed, that which is sucked, that which is licked, and that which is
drunk.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[97:2](m12a047.htm#fr_151) All creatures are
stupefied by love and affection. The great end which the *Yogins*
propose to themselves is to tear those bonds rising superior to all the
attractions of the flesh to effect their deliverance or emancipation
from rebirth.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[97:3](m12a047.htm#fr_152) *i.e.*
*Brahmacharin*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[98:1](m12a047.htm#fr_153) *Linum
usitatissimun*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[98:2](m12a047.htm#fr_154) *Samsara* is the
world or worldly life characterised by diverse attachments. Reflection
on Hari frees one from those attachments. Or, *Samsara* may mean the
repeated deaths and births to which the unemancipated soul is subject.
Contemplation of the divine Being may prevent such repeated births and
deaths by leading to emancipation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XLIX](m12a048)
