[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a134) 
[Next](m12a136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CXXXVI

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, *viz*., the method by which a king
should fill his treasury, persons acquainted with the scriptures of
olden days cite the following verses sung by Brahman himself. The wealth
of persons who are given to the performance of sacrifices, as also the
wealth dedicated to the deities, should never be taken. A Kshatriya
should take the wealth of such persons as never perform religious rites
and sacrifices as are on that account regarded to be equal to robbers.
All the creatures that inhabit the earth and all the enjoyments that
appertain to sovereignty, O Bharata, belong to the Kshatriyas. All the
wealth of the earth belongs to the Kshatriya, and not to any person
else. That wealth the Kshatriya should use for keeping up his army and
for the performance of sacrifice. Tearing up such creepers and plants as
are not of any use, men burn them for cooking such vegetables as serve
for food. <span id="fr_407"></span>[1](#fn_406) Men conversant with duty
have said that his wealth is useless who does not, with libations of
clarified butter, feed the gods, the *Pitris*, and men. A virtuous
ruler, O king, should take away such wealth. By that wealth a large
number of good people can be gratified. He should not, however, hoard
that wealth in his treasury. He who makes himself an instrument of
acquisition and taking away wealth from the wicked gives them to those
that are good is said to be conversant with the whole science of
morality. A king should extend his conquests in the next world according
to the measure of his power, and as gradually as vegetable products are
seen to grow. As some ants are seen to grow from no adequate cause, even
so sacrifice spring from no adequate

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

cause. <span id="fr_408"></span>[1](#fn_407) As flies and gnats and ants
are driven off from the bodies of kine and other domestic cattle (at the
time of milking them), even so should persons who are averse to the
performance of sacrifices should be similarly driven off from the
kingdom. This is consistent with morality. As the dust that lies on the
earth, if pounded between two stones, becomes finer and finer, even so
questions of morality, the more they are reflected upon and discussed,
become finer and finer.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_406"></span>[290:1](m12a135.htm#fr_407) The king should
similarly, by punishing the wicked, cherish the good.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[291:1](m12a135.htm#fr_408) The sense seems to
be that sacrifice proceeds more from an internal desire than from a
large sum of money lying in the treasury. If the desire exists, money
comes gradually for accomplishing it. The force of the simile consists
in the fact that ants (probably white ants) are seen to gather and
multiply from no ostensible cause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXXXVII](m12a136)
