[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a010) 
[Next](m12a012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XI

"Arjuna said, 'In this connection an old history is cited, *viz*., the
discourse between certain ascetics and Sakra, O bull of Bharata's race!
A number of well-born Brahmana youth of little understanding, without
the hirsute honours of manhood, abandoning their homes, came to the
woods for leading a forest life. Regarding that to be virtue, those
youths of abundant resources became desirous of living as
*Brahmacharins*, having abandoned their brothers and sires. It so
happened that Indra became compassionate towards them. Assuming the form
of a golden bird, the holy Sakra addressed them, saying, 'That which is
done by persons that eat the remnants of a sacrifice is the most
difficult of acts that men can achieve. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) Such an act is highly meritorious. The
lives of such men are worthy of every praise. Having attained the object
of life, those men, devoted to virtue obtain the highest end.' Hearing
these words, the *Rishis* said, 'Lo, this bird applauds those that
subsist upon the remnants of

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

sacrifices. He informs us of it, for we live upon such remnants.' The
bird then said, 'I do not applaud you.' Ye are stationed with mire and
very impure. Living upon offals, ye are wicked. Ye are not persons
subsisting upon the remnants of sacrifice.'

"The *Rishis* said, 'We regard this our course of life to be highly
blessed. Tell us, O bird, what is for our good. Thy words inspire us
with great faith.'

"The bird said, 'If you do not refuse me your faith by arraying
yourselves against your better selves, then I shall tell you words that
are true and beneficial.'

"The *Rishis* said, 'We shall listen to thy words, O sire, for the
different paths are all known to thee. O thou of righteous soul, we
desire also to obey thy commands. Instruct us now.'

"The bird said, 'Among quadrupeds the cow is the foremost. Of metals,
gold is the foremost. Of words, *mantras*, and of bipeds, the Brahmanas,
are the foremost. These *mantras* regulate all the rites of a Brahmana's
life beginning with those appertaining to birth and the period after it,
and ending with those appertaining to death and the crematorium. These
Vedic rites are his heaven, path, and foremost of sacrifices. If it were
otherwise, how could I find the acts (of persons in quest of heaven)
become successful through *mantras*? He who, in this world, adores his
soul, firmly regarding it to be a deity of a particular kind, obtains
success consistent with the nature of that particular deity. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) The seasons measured by half the months
lead to the Sun, the Moon, or the Stars. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17) These three kinds of success, depending
upon action are desired by every creature. The domestic mode of life is
very superior and sacred and is called the field (for the cultivation)
of success. By what path do those men go that censure action? Of little
understanding and deprived of wealth, they incur sin. And since those
men of little understanding live by abandoning the eternal paths of the
gods, the paths of the *Rishis*, and the paths of *Brahma*, therefore,
they attain to paths disapproved of by the *Srutis*. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18) There is an ordinance in the *mantras*
which says, 'Ye sacrificer, perform the sacrifice represented by gifts
of valuable things. I wilt give thee happiness represented by sons,
animals, and heaven!'--To live, therefore, in accordance with ordinance
is said to be the highest asceticism of the ascetics. Therefore, ye
should perform such sacrifices and such penances in the shape of gifts.
The due performance of

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

these eternal duties, *viz*., the worship of the gods, the study of the
*Vedas*, and the gratification of the *Pitris*, as also regardful
services unto the preceptors--these are called the austerest of
penances. The gods, by performing such exceedingly difficult penances,
have obtained the highest glory and power. I, therefore, tell you to
bear the very heavy burthen of the duties of domesticity. Without doubt,
penances are the foremost of all things and are the root of all
creatures. Asceticism, however, is to be obtained by leading a life of
domesticity, upon which depends everything. They that eat the remnants
of feasts, after duly apportioning the food morning and evening among
kinsmen, attain to ends that are exceedingly difficult of attainment.
They are called eater of the remnants of feasts who eat after having
served guests and gods and *Rishis* and kinsmen. Therefore, those
persons that are observant of their own duties, that practise excellent
vows and are truthful in speech, become objects of great respect in the
world, with their own faith exceedingly strengthened. Free from pride,
those achievers of the most difficult feats attain to heaven and live
for unending time in the regions of Sakra.'

"Arjuna continued, 'Those ascetics then, hearing these words that were
beneficial and fraught with righteousness, abandoned the religion of
renunciation, saying, 'There is nothing in it,' and betook themselves to
a life of domesticity. Therefore, O thou that are conversant with
righteousness, calling to thy aid that eternal wisdom, rule the wide
world, O monarch that is now destitute of foes.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[17:1](m12a011.htm#fr_15) The meaning is that
they who perform sacrifice and partake of the sacrificial food after
offering it unto gods and guests, acquire such religious merit that the
like of it cannot be acquired by other men. Sacrifice, therefore, is the
highest act in life and the most meritorious that man call do.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[18:1](m12a011.htm#fr_16) The *iti* after *vadi*
is really *eti*, the absence of *sandhi* in the proper form is *Arsha*.
Literally rendered, the line becomes,--According to the manner in which
the person of firm conviction approaches the Soul, is the success that
he gets here. As the *Srutis* declare, if one firmly regards oneself to
be Siva, the success one attains here and hereafter is after the kind of
that deity.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18:2](m12a011.htm#fr_17) The brevity of such
passages is the chief obstacle to their clear comprehension. Fortunately
the allusions are very plain. What is meant is that those who die during
the lighted fortnights of the summer solstice attain to solar regions of
bliss. Those that die during the dark fortnights of the winter solstice,
attain to lunar regions. These last have to return after passing their
allotted periods of enjoyment and happiness. While those that are freed
from attachments, whatever the time of their Death, go to Stellar
regions which are equal to that of Brahma.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18:3](m12a011.htm#fr_18) Without attaining to
the companionship of the gods and *Pitris*, and without obtaining
*Brahma*, they sink in the scale of being and become worms and vermin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XII](m12a012)
