[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a058) 
[Next](m12a060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LX

Vaisampayana said, "After this, Yudhishthira, saluted his grandsire,
*viz*. the son of Ganga, and with joined hands and concentrated
attention, once more asked him, saying, 'What are the general duties of
the four orders of men, and what the special duties of each order? What
mode of life should be adopted by which order? What duties are
especially called the duties of kings? By what means does a kingdom
grow, and what are those means by which the king himself grows? How
also, O bull of Bharata's race, do the citizens and the servants of the
king grow? What sorts of treasuries, punishments, forts, allies,
counsellors, priests, and preceptors, should a king avoid? <span
id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_178) Whom should the king trust in what kinds
of distress and danger? From what evils should the king guard himself
firmly? Tell me all this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'I bow down to Dharma who is great, and to Krishna who is
*Brahma*. Having bowed down also unto the Brahmanas (assembled here), I
shall discourse on duties that are eternal. The suppression of wrath,
truthfulness of speech, justice, forgiveness, begetting children upon
one's own wedded wives, purity of conduct, avoidance of quarrel,
simplicity, and maintenance of dependants, these nine duties belong to
all the four orders (equally). Those duties, however, which belong
exclusively to Brahmanas, I shall now tell thee. Self-restraint, O king,
has been declared to be the first duty of Brahmanas. Study of the
*Vedas*, and patience in undergoing austerities, (are also their other
duties). By practising these two, all their acts are

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

accomplished. If while engaged in the observance of his own duties,
without doing any improper act, wealth comes to a peaceful Brahmana
possessed of knowledge, he should then marry and seek to beget children
and should also practise charity and perform sacrifices. It has been
declared by the wise that wealth thus obtained should be enjoyed by
distributing it (among deserving persons and relatives). By his study of
the *Vedas* all the pious acts (laid down for the Brahmana) are
accomplished. Whether he does or does not achieve anything else, if he
devotes himself to the study of the *Vedas*, he becomes (by that) known
as a Brahmana or the friend of all creatures. I shall also tell thee, O
Bharata, what the duties are of a Kshatriya. A Kshatriya, O king, should
give but not beg, should himself perform sacrifices but not officiate as
a priest in the sacrifices of others. He should never teach (the
*Vedas*) but study (them with a Brahmana preceptor). He should protect
the people. Always exerting himself for the destruction of robbers and
wicked people, he should put forth his prowess in battle. Those among
Kshatriya rulers who perform great sacrifices, who are possessed of a
knowledge of the *Vedas*, and who gain victories in battle, become
foremost of those that acquire many blessed regions hereafter by their
merit. Persons conversant with the old scriptures do not applaud that
Kshatriya who returns unwounded from battle. This has been declared to
be the conduct of a wretched Kshatriya. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_179) There is no higher duty for him than the
suppression of robbers. Gifts, study, and sacrifices, bring prosperity
to kings. Therefore, a king who desires to acquire religious merit
should engage in battle. <span id="fr_180"></span>[2](#fn_180)
Establishing all his subjects in the observance of their respective
duties, it king should cause all of them to do everything according to
the dictates of righteousness. Whether he does or does not do any other
act, if only he protects his subjects, he is regarded to accomplish all
religious acts and is called a Kshatriya and the foremost of men. I
shall now tell thee, O Yudhishthira, what the eternal duties of the
Vaisya are. A Vaisya should make gifts, study the Vedas, perform
sacrifices, and acquire wealth by fair means. With proper attention he
should also protect and rear all (domestic) animals as a sire protecting
his sons. Anything else that he will do will be regarded as improper for
him. By protecting the (domestic) animals, he would obtain great
happiness. The Creator, having created the (domestic) animals, bestowed
their care upon the Vaisya. Upon the Brahmana and the Kshatriya he
conferred (the care of) all creatures. I shall tell thee what the
Vaisya's profession is and how he is to earn the means of his
sustenance. If he keeps (for others) six kine, he may take the milk of
one cow as his remuneration; and if he keeps (for others) a hundred
kine, he may take a single pair as such fee. If he trades with other's
wealth, he may take a seventh part of the profits (as his share). A
seventh also is his share in the profits arising from the trade in
horns, but he should take a sixteenth if the trade

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

be in hoofs. If he engages in cultivation with seeds supplied by others,
he may take a seventh part of the yield. This should be his annual
remuneration. A Vaisya should never desire that he should not tend
cattle. If a Vaisya desires to tend cattle, no one else should be
employed in that task. I should tell thee, O Bharata, what the duties of
a Sudra are. The Creator intended the Sudra to become the servant of the
other three orders. For this, the service of the three other classes is
the duty of Sudra. By such service of the other three, a Sudra may
obtain great happiness. He should wait upon the three other classes
according to their order of seniority. A Sudra should never amass
wealth, lest, by his wealth, he makes the members of the three superior
classes obedient to him. By this he would incur sin. With the king's
permission, however, a Sudra, for performing religious acts, may earn
wealth. I shall now tell thee the profession he should follow and the
means by which he may earn his livelihood. It is said that Sudras should
certainly be maintained by the (three) other orders. Worn-out umbrellas,
turbans, beds and seats, shoes, and fans, should be given to the Sudra
servants. <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_181) Torn clothes which are
no longer fit for wear, should be given away by the regenerate classes
unto the Sudra. These are the latter's lawful acquisitions. Men
conversant with morality say that if the Sudra approaches any one
belonging to the three regenerate orders from desire of doing menial
service, the latter should assign him proper work. Unto the sonless
Sudra his master should offer the funeral cake. The weak and the old
amongst them should be maintained. <span id="fr_182"></span>[2](#fn_182)
The Sudra should never abandon his master, whatever the nature or degree
of the distress into which the latter may fall. If the master loses his
wealth, he should with excessive zeal be supported by the Sudra servant.
A Sudra cannot have any wealth that is his own. Whatever he possesses
belongs lawfully to his master. <span id="fr_183"></span>[3](#fn_183)
Sacrifice has been laid down as a duty of the three other orders. It has
been ordained for the Sudra also, O Bharata! A Sudra, however, is not
competent to titter *swaha* and *swadha* or any other Vedic *mantra*.
For this reason, the Sudra, without observing the vows laid down in the
*Vedas*, should worship the gods in minor sacrifices called
*Paka-yajnas*. The gift called *Purna-patra* is declared to be the
*Dakshina* of such sacrifices. <span id="fr_184"></span>[4](#fn_184) It
has been heard by us that in days of old a Sudra of the name of
Paijavana gave a *Dakshina* (in one of his sacrifices) consisting of a
hundred thousand

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Purnapatras*, according to the ordinance called
*Aindragni*. <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_185) Sacrifice (as has
been already said), is as much laid down for the Sudra as for the three
other classes. Of all sacrifices, devotion has been laid down to be the
foremost. <span id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_186) Devotion is a high
deity. It cleanses all sacrificers. Then again Brahmanas are the
foremost of gods unto their respective Sudra attendants. They worship
the gods in sacrifices, for obtaining the fruition of various wishes.
The members of the three other classes have all sprung from the
Brahmanas. <span id="fr_187"></span>[3](#fn_187) The Brahmanas are the
gods of the very gods. Whatever they would say would be for thy great
good. Therefore, all kinds of sacrifices naturally appertain to all the
four orders. The obligation is not one whose discharge is optional. The
Brahmana, who is conversant with *Richs*, *Yajuses*, and *Samans*,
should always be worshipped as a god. The Sudra, who is without *Richs*
and *Yajuses* and *Samans*, has *Prajapati* for his god. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[4](#fn_188) Mental sacrifice. O sire, is laid down
for all the orders, O Bharata! It is not true that the gods and other
(Superior) persons do not manifest a desire to share the offerings in
such sacrifices of even the Sudra. <span id="fr_189"></span>[5](#fn_189)
For, this reason, the sacrifice that consists in devotion is laid down
for all the classes. <span id="fr_190"></span>[6](#fn_190) The Brahmana
is the foremost of gods. It is not true that they that belong to that
order do not perform the sacrifices of the other orders. The fire called
*Vitana*, though procured from Vaisyas and inspired with *mantras*, is
still inferior. <span id="fr_191"></span>[7](#fn_191) The Brahmana is
the performer or the sacrifices of the three other orders. For this
reason all the four orders are holy. All the orders bear towards one
another to relation of consanguinity, through the intermediate classes.
They have all sprung from Brahmanas. In ascertaining (the priority or
subsequence of men in respect of their creation) it will appear that
amongst all the orders the Brahmana was created first. Originally
*Saman* 

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

was one; *Yajus* was one, and *Rich* was one. <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192) In this connection, persons conversant
with ancient histories cite a verse, O king, sung in praise of sacrifice
by the Vaikhanasa *Munis* on the occasion of performing a sacrifice of
theirs. Before or after sunrise a person of subdued senses, with heart
filled with devotion, poureth libations on the (sacrificial) fire
according to the ordinance. Devotion is a mighty agent. With regard to
*homas* again, that variety which is called *skanna* is the initial one,
while that which is called *askanna* is the last (but foremost in point
of merit). Sacrifices are multifarious. Their rites and fruits again are
multifarious. The Brahmana possessed of devotion who, endued with
scriptural learning, who is acquainted with them all, is competent to
perform sacrifices. That person who desires to perform a sacrifice is
regarded as righteous even if he happens to be a thief, a sinner, or the
worst of sinners. The *Rishis* applaud such a man. Without doubt they
are right. This then is the conclusion that all the orders should always
and by every means in their power perform sacrifices. There is nothing
in the three worlds equal to sacrifice. Therefore, it has been said that
every one with heart free from malice, should perform sacrifices, aided
by devotion which is sacred, to the best of his power and according as
he pleases.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_178"></span>[129:1](m12a059.htm#fr_178) The difference
between a *Ritwija* and a *Purohita* is that the former is engaged on
special occasions, while the services of the latter are permanent and
constant.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[130:1](m12a059.htm#fr_179) *viz*., returning
unwounded from battle.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[130:2](m12a059.htm#fr_180) For without battle,
he cannot extend his kingdom and acquire wealth to give away and meet
the expenses of sacrifices.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[131:1](m12a059.htm#fr_181) A *Beshtana* is
literally a cloth tied round (the head); hence, a turban or *pagree*.
The word *Ousira* is applied to both beds and seats. The Hindu *Upanaha*
had wooden soles.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[131:2](m12a059.htm#fr_182) The Burdwan Pundits
understand this verse to mean that the Sudra should offer the funeral
cake unto his sonless master and support masters if old and weak. There
can be little doubt that they are wrong.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[131:3](m12a059.htm#fr_183) *Atirekena*
evidently means 'with excessive zeal.' Nilakantha explains it as 'with
greater zeal than that which is shown in supporting his own relations.'
It cannot mean, as K.P. Sinha puts it, 'with the surplus left after
supporting his own relations.'

<span id="fn_184"></span>[131:4](m12a059.htm#fr_184) A *Paka-yajna* is a
minor sacrifice, such as the propitiation of a planet foreboding evil,
or worship offered to the inferior deities called Viswadevas. A
*Purnapatra* is literally a large dish or basket full of rice. It should
consist of 256 handfuls. Beyond a *Purnapatra*, the Sudra should not
give any other *Dakshina* in any sacrifice of his.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[132:1](m12a059.htm#fr_185) This ordinance lays
down that the *Dakshina* should be a hundred thousand animals such as
kine or horses. In the case of this particular Sudra, that ordinance
(without its *mantras*) was followed, and a hundred thousand
*Purnapatras* were substituted for kine or horses of that number.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[132:2](m12a059.htm#fr_186) Hence the Sudra, by
devotion to the members of the three other classes, may earn the merit
of sacrifices though he is not competent to utter *mantras*.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[132:3](m12a059.htm#fr_187) For this reason the
Sudra earns the merit of the sacrifices performed by their Brahmana
masters and progenitors.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[132:4](m12a059.htm#fr_188) The Brahmana
conversant with the *Vedas* is himself a god. The Sudra, though
incompetent to read the *Vedas* and utter Vedic *mantras*, has
*Prajapati* for his god whom he can worship with rites other than those
laid down in the *Vedas*. The Brahmanas have *Agni* for their god, and
the Kshatriyas, *Indra*. *Upadravah* means a servant or attendant,
hence, a Sudra.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[132:5](m12a059.htm#fr_189) Sacrifices are
performed by the body, by words, and by the mind. The Brahmana can
perform sacrifices by all the three. The Kshatriya and the Vaisya cannot
perform sacrifices by means of their bodies. They must employ Brahmanas
in their sacrifices. These two orders, however, can utter *mantras* and
perform mental sacrifices. The Sudra alone cannot employ his body or
utter *mantras* in sacrifices. The holy sacrifice in his case is the
mental sacrifice. A mental sacrifice is a resolve to give away in honour
of the gods or unto the gods without the aid of the Vedic ritual. The
resolve must be followed by actual gifts.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[132:6](m12a059.htm#fr_190) *i.e.*. for the
Sudras also.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[132:7](m12a059.htm#fr_191) All sacrificial
fires, as a rule, are procured front the houses of Vaisyas. The
sacrificial fire of the Sudra is called *Vitana*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[133:1](m12a059.htm#fr_192) Though originally
one, the Vedas have become diverse. Similarly, from the Brahmana, who
created first, all the rest have sprung.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXI](m12a060)
