[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a045) 
[Next](m12a047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XLVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'How wonderful is this, O thou of immeasurable
prowess, that thou art rapt in meditation! O great refuge of the
universe, is it all right with the three worlds? When thou hast, O God,
withdrawn thyself (from the world), having, O bull among men, adopted
the fourth, state, my mind has been filled with wonder. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_134) The five life-breaths that act within
the body have been controlled by thee into stillness. Thy delighted
senses thou hast concentrated within thy mind. Both speech and mind, O
Govinda, have been concentrated within thy understanding. All thy
senses, indeed, have been withdrawn into thy soul. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[3](#fn_135) The hair on thy body stands erect. Thy
mind and understanding are both still. Thou art as immobile now, O
Madhava, as a wooden post or a stone. O illustrious God, thou art as
still as the flame of a lamp burning in a place where there is no wind.
Thou art as immobile as a mass of rock. If I am fit to hear the cause,
if it is no secret of thine, dispel, O god, my doubt for I beg of thee
and solicit it as a favour. Thou art the Creator and thou art the
Destroyer. Thou art destructible and thou art indestructible. Thou art
without beginning and thou art without end. Thou art the first and the
foremost of Beings. O foremost of righteous persons, tell me the cause
of this (*Yoga*) abstraction. I solicit thy favour, and am thy devoted
worshipper, and bow to thee, bending my head.' Thus addressed, the
illustrious younger brother of Vasava, recalling his mind,
understanding, and the senses to their usual sphere, said these words
with a soft smile.'

"Vasudeva said, 'That tiger among men, Bhishma, who is now lying on a
bed of arrows, and who is now like unto a fire that is about to go out,
is thinking of me. Hence my mind also was concentrated on him. My mind

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

was concentrated upon him, the twang of whose bowstring and the sound of
whose palms Indra himself was unable to bear. I was thinking of him who
having vanquished in a trice all the assembled kings (at the Self-choice
of the daughters of the king of Kasi) abducted the three princesses for
the marriage of his brother Vichitravirya. I was thinking of him who
fought continually for three and twenty days with Rama himself of
Bhrigu's race and whom Rama was unable to overcome. Collecting all his
senses and concentrating his mind by the aid of his understanding, he
sought my refuge (by thinking of me). It was for this that I had
centered my mind upon him. I was thinking of him whom Ganga conceived
and brought forth according to ordinary human laws and whom Vasishtha
took as a pupil. I was thinking of that hero of mighty energy and great
intelligence who possesses a knowledge of all the celestial weapons as
also of the four *Vedas* with all their branches. I was thinking of him,
O son of Pandu, who is the favourite disciple of Rama, the son of
Jamadagni, and who is the receptacle of the sciences. I was thinking of
that foremost of all persons conversant with morality and duty, of him,
O bull of Bharata's race, who knows the Past, the Future, and the
Present. After that tiger among kings shall have, in consequences of his
own [achievements](errata.htm#13), ascended to heaven, the earth, O son
of Pritha, will look like a moonless night. Therefore, O Yudhishthira,
submissively approaching Ganga's son, *viz*., Bhishma of terrible
prowess, question him about what thou mayst desire to learn. O lord of
the earth, enquire of him about the four branches of knowledge (in
respect of morality, profit., pleasure and salvation), about the
sacrifices and the rites laid down for the four orders, about the four
modes of life, and about the kingly duties in full. When Bhishma, that
foremost one of Kuru's race, will disappear from the world, every kind
of knowledge will disappear with him. It is for this that I urge thee
(to go to him now).' Hearing these beneficial words of high import from
Vasudeva, the righteous Yudhishthira, with voice choked in tears,
answered Janardana, saying, 'What thou hast said, O Madhava, about the
eminence of Bhishma, is perfectly true. I have not the slightest doubt
regarding it. Indeed, I had heard of the high blessedness, as also the
greatness, of the illustrious Bhishma from high-souled Brahmanas
discoursing upon it. Thou, O slayer of foes, art the Creator of all the
worlds. There cannot, therefore, O delighter of the Yadavas, be the
slightest doubt in what thou sayest. If thy heart be inclined to show
grace, O Madhava, then we shall go unto Bhishma with thyself at our
head. When the divine Surya shall have turned towards the north, Bhishma
will leave (this world), for those regions of bliss that he has won.
That descendant of Kuru's race, therefore, O mighty-armed one, deserves
to have a sight of thee. (If thou grantest my prayer), Bhishma will then
obtain a sight of thee that art the first of Gods, of thee that art
destructible and indestructible. Indeed, O lord, thou it is that art the
vast receptacle of *Brahma*.'"

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of king Yudhishthira the
just, the slayer of Madhu addressed Satyaki who was sitting beside him,
saying, 'Let my car be yoked.' At this, Satyaki quickly left Kesava's
presence and going out, commanded Daruka, saying, 'Let Krishna's car be
made

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

ready.' Hearing the words of Satyaki, Daruka speedily yoked Krishna's
car. That foremost of vehicles, adorned with gold, decked with a
profusion of emeralds, and moon-gems and sun-gems, furnished with wheels
covered with gold, possessed of effulgence, fleet as the wind, set in
the middle with diverse other kinds of jewels, beautiful as the morning
sun, equipped with a beautiful standard topped by Garuda, and gay with
numerous banners, had those foremost of steeds, fleet as thought,
*viz*., Sugriva and Saivya and the other two, in trappings of gold,
yoked unto it. Having yoked it, O tiger, among kings, Daruka, with
joined hands, informed Krishna of the fact.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[90:1](m12a045.htm#fr_133) This is an allusion
to Krishna's having covered the three worlds with three of his steps for
deluding the Asura Vali and depriving him of universal sovereignty.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[90:2](m12a046.htm#fr_134) There are three
states of consciousness in the case of ordinary men, *viz*., waking,
dream, and sound sleep. The fourth state, realisable by *Yogins* alone,
is called *Turiya*. It is the state of perfect unconsciousness of this
world, when the soul, abstracted within itself, is said to be fixed upon
the Supreme Being or some single object.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[90:3](m12a046.htm#fr_135) Mind, as used
generally in Hindu philosophy, is the seat of the senses and the
feelings. *Buddhi* is the Understanding or the cognitive faculties of
the Kantian school. The Bombay reading of the second line is correct. It
is *Gunadevah Kshetrajne* etc. Nilakantha correctly explains it as
*Savdadiguna-bhajodevah*, *i.e.*, the senses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XLVIII](m12a047)
