[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a107) 
[Next](m12a109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'How, O Bharata, should a person act who desires to
adhere to virtue? O bull of Bharata's race, possessed as thou art of
learning, tell me this, questioned by me. Truth and falsehood exist,
covering all the worlds. Which of these two, O king, should a person
adopt that is firm in virtue? What again is truth? What is falsehood?
What, again, is eternal virtue? On what occasions should a person tell
the truth, and on what occasions should he tell an untruth?'

"Bhishma said, 'To tell the truth is consistent with righteousness.
There is nothing higher than truth. I shall now, O Bharata, say unto
thee that which is not generally known to men. There where falsehood
would assume the aspect of truth, truth should not be said. There,
again, where truth would assume the aspect of falsehood, even falsehood
should be said. That ignorant person incurs sin who says truth which is
dissociated from righteousness. That person is said to be conversant
with duties who can distinguish truth from falsehood. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[1](#fn_333) Even a person that is disrespectable,
that is of uncleansed soul, and that is very cruel, may succeed in
earning great merit as the hunter Valaka by slaying the blind beast
(that threatened to destroy all creatures). <span
id="fr_334"></span>[2](#fn_334) How extraordinary it is that a person of
foolish understanding, though desirous of acquiring merit (by austere
penances) still committed a sinful act! <span
id="fr_335"></span>[3](#fn_335) An owl again, on the banks of the
Ganges, (by doing an unrighteous deed) obtained great merit. <span
id="fr_336"></span>[4](#fn_336) The question thou hast asked me is a
difficult one, since it is

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

difficult to say what righteousness is. It is not easy to indicate it.
No one in discoursing upon righteousness, can indicate it accurately.
Righteousness was declared (by Brahman) for the advancement and growth
of all creatures. Therefore, that which leads to advancement and growth
is righteousness. Righteousness was declared for restraining creatures
from injuring one another. Therefore, that is Righteousness which
prevents injury to creatures. Righteousness (*Dharma*) is so called
because it upholds all creatures. In fact, all creatures are upheld by
righteousness. Therefore, that is righteousness which is capable of
upholding all creatures. Some say that righteousness consists in what
has been inculcated in the *Srutis*. Others do not agree to this. I
would not censure them that say so. Everything, again, has not been laid
down in the *Srutis*. <span id="fr_337"></span>[1](#fn_337) Sometimes
men (robbers), desirous of obtaining the wealth of some one, make
enquiries (for facilitating the act of plunder). One should never answer
such enquiries. That is a settled duty. If by maintaining silence, one
succeeds in escaping, one should remain silent. If, on the other hand,
one's silence at a time when one must speak rouses suspicion, it would
be better on such an occasion to say what is untrue than what is true.
This is a settled conclusion. If one can escape from sinful men by even
a (false) oath, one may take it without incurring sin. One should not,
even if one be able, giveaway his wealth to sinful men. Wealth given to
sinful men afflicts even the giver. If a creditor desires to make his
debtor pay off the loan by rendering bodily service, the witnesses would
all be liars, if, summoned by the creditor for establishing the truth of
the contract, they did not say what should be said. When life is at
risk, or on occasion of marriage, one may say an untruth. One that seeks
for virtue, does not commit a sin by saying an untruth, if that untruth
be said to save the wealth and prosperity of others or for the religious
purposes. Having promised to pay, one becomes bound to fulfil his
promise. Upon failure, let the self-appropriator be forcibly enslaved.
If a person without fulfilling a righteous engagement acts with
impropriety, he should certainly be afflicted with the rod of
chastisement for having adopted such behaviour. <span
id="fr_338"></span>[2](#fn_338) A deceitful person, falling away from
all duties and abandoning those of his own order, always wishes to
betake himself to the practices of *Asuras* for supporting life. Such a
sinful wretch living by deceit should be slain by every means. Such
sinful men think that there is nothing in this world higher than wealth.
Such men should never be tolerated. No one should eat with them. They
should be regarded to have fallen down in consequence of their sins.
Indeed, fallen away from the condition of humanity and shut out from the
grace of the gods, they are even like evil genii. Without sacrifices and
without penances as they are, forbear from their companionship. If their
wealth be

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

lost, they commit even suicide which is exceedingly pitiable. Among
those sinful men there is no one to whom thou canst say, 'This is thy
duty. Let thy heart turn to it.' Their settled convictions are that
there is nothing in this world that is equal to wealth. The person that
would slay such a creature would incur no sin. He who kills him kills
one that has been already killed by his own acts. If slain, it is the
dead that is slain. He who vows to destroy those persons of lost senses
should keep his vows. <span id="fr_339"></span>[1](#fn_339) Such sinners
are, like the crow and the vulture, dependent on deceit for their
living. After the dissolution of their (human) bodies, they take rebirth
as crows and vultures. One should, in any matter, behave towards another
as that other behaves in that matter. He who practises deceit should be
resisted with deceit while one that is honest should be treated with
honesty.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_333"></span>[237:1](m12a108.htm#fr_333) *i.e.*, who knows
when truth becomes as harmful as untruth, and untruth becomes as
righteous as truth.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[237:2](m12a108.htm#fr_334) Vide *ante*, Karna
Parva.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[237:3](m12a108.htm#fr_335) Alludes to *ante*,
Karna Parva. The Rishi, by pointing out the place where certain innocent
persons had concealed themselves while flying from a company of robbers,
incurred the sin of murder.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[237:4](m12a108.htm#fr_336) The allusion is to
the story of an owl going to heaven for having, with his beaks, broken a
thousand eggs laid by a she-serpent of deadly poison. The Burdwan
Pundits have made nonsense of the first line of verse 8. There is no
connection between the first and the second lines of this verse. K.P.
Singha has rendered it correctly.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[238:1](m12a108.htm#fr_337) This refers to the
well-known definition of Dharma ascribed to Vasishtha, *viz*., "That
which is laid down in the *Srutis* and *Smritis* is *Dharma*." The
defect of this definition is that the *Srutis* and the *Smritis* do not
include every duty. Hence Vasishtha was obliged to add that where these
are silent, the examples and practices of the good ought to be the
guides of men, etc.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[238:2](m12a108.htm#fr_338) The Burdwan
translator has made a mess of verse 21. K.P. Singha quietly leaves it
out. The act is, *Swakaryastu* is *Swakariastu*, meaning 'let the
appropriator be.'

<span id="fn_339"></span>[239:1](m12a108.htm#fr_339) The construction is
elliptical. *Yah samayam chikrashet tat kurvit*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CX](m12a109)
