[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12a077) 
[Next](m12a079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

### SECTION LXXIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'What, O grandsire, should be the acts and what the
behaviour of persons employed as priests in our sacrifices? What sort of
persons should they be, O king? Tell me all this, O foremost of
speakers.'

"Bhishma said, 'It is laid down from those Brahmanas that are eligible
as priests that they should be conversant with the *Chhandas* including
the *Samans*, and all the rites inculcated in the *Srutis*, and that
they should be able to perform all such religious acts as lead to the
prosperity of the king. They should be devotedly loyal and utter
agreeable speeches in addressing kings. They should also be friendly
towards one another, and cast equal eyes on all. They should be devoid
of cruelty, and truthful in speech. They should never be usurers, and
should always be simple and sincere. One that is peaceful in temper,
destitute of vanity, modest, charitable, self-restrained, and contented,
possessed of intelligence, truthful, observant of vows, and harmless to
all creatures, without lust and malice, and endued with the three
excellent qualities, devoid of envy and possessed of knowledge, deserves
the seat of Brahman himself. Persons with such qualities, O sire, are
the best of priests and deserve every respect.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'There are Vedic texts about the gift of *Dakshina*
in sacrifices. There is no ordinance, however, which lays down that so
much should be given. This ordinance (about the gift of *Dakshina*) has
not proceeded from motives connected with the distribution of wealth.
The command of the ordinance, in [consequence](errata.htm#31) of the
provision in cases of incapacity, is terrible. That command is blind to
the competence of the sacrificer. <span id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236)
The audition occurs in the Vedas that a person should, with devotion,
perform a sacrifice. But what can devotion do when the sacrificer is
stained by falsehood? <span id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_237)

"Bhishma said, 'No man acquires blessedness or merit by disregarding the
Vedas or by deceit or falsehood. Never think that it is otherwise.
*Dakshina* constitutes one of the limbs of sacrifice and conduces to the
nourishment of the Vedas. A sacrifice without *Dakshina* can never lead
to salvation. The efficacy, however, of a single Purnapatra is equal to
that of any *Dakshina*, however rich. Therefore, O sire, everyone
belonging to the three orders should perform sacrifices. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[3](#fn_238) The Vedas have settled that *Soma* is as
the king himself

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

to the Brahmanas. Yet they desire to sell it for the sake of performing
sacrifices, though they never wish to sell it for gaining a livelihood.
*Rishis* of righteous behaviour have declared, agreeably to the dictates
of morality, that a sacrifice performed with the proceeds of the sale of
*Soma* serves to extend sacrifices. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_239) These three, *viz*., a person, a
sacrifice and *Soma*, must be of good character. A person that is of bad
character is neither for this nor for the other world. This audition has
been heard by us that the sacrifice which high-souled Brahmanas perform
by wealth earned by excessive physical labour, is not productive of
great merit. There is a declaration in the Vedas that penances are
higher than sacrifices. I shall now speak to thee of penances. O learned
prince, listen to me. Abstention from injury, truthfulness of speech,
benevolence, compassion,--these are regarded as penances by the wise and
not the emaciation of the body. Disregard of the Vedas, disobedience to
the dictates of the scriptures, and violation of all wholesome
restraints, are productive of self-destruction. Listen, O son of Pritha,
to what has been laid down by those that pour ten libations upon the
fire at ten times of the day.--For them that perform the sacrifice of
penance, the Yoga they endeavour to effect with *Brahma* is their ladle;
the heart is their clarified butter; and high knowledge constitutes
their *Pavitra*. <span id="fr_240"></span>[2](#fn_240) All kinds of
crookedness mean death, and all kinds of sincerity are called Brahma.
This constitutes the subject of knowledge. The rhapsodies of
system-builders cannot affect this.--'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_236"></span>[172:1](m12a078.htm#fr_236) *Idam sastram
pratidhanam na* is thus explained by Nilakantha. In cases of incapacity,
again, to give the prescribed *Dakshina*, the sacrificer is directed to
give away *all* he has. This direction or command is certainly terrible,
for who can make up his mind to part with all his wealth for completing
a sacrifice?

<span id="fn_237"></span>[172:2](m12a078.htm#fr_237) The falsehood
consists in finding substitutes for the *Dakshina* actually laid down.
They are morsels of cooked food for a living cow, a grain of barley for
a piece of cloth; a copper coin for gold; etc.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[172:3](m12a078.htm#fr_238) The fact is that
although the sacrificer may not be able to give the *Dakshina* actually
laid down in the Vedas, yet by giving its substitute he does not lose
any merit, for a single *Purnapatra* (256 handfuls of rice) is as
efficacious if given away with devotion, as the richest *Dakshina*.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[173:1](m12a078.htm#fr_239) *i.e.*, such a
sacrifice, instead of producing no merit, becomes the means of extending
the cause of sacrifices. In other words, such a sacrifice is fraught
with merit.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[173:2](m12a078.htm#fr_240) A *Pavitra* is made
by a couple of *Kusa* blades for sprinkling clarified butter upon the
sacrificial fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXX](m12a079)
