[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b117) 
[Next](m12b119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXCI

"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou of mighty arms, tell me, after this what is
beneficial for us. O grandsire, I am never satiated with thy words which
seem to me like Amrita. What are those good acts, O best of men, by
accomplishing which a man succeeds in obtaining what is for his highest
benefit both here and hereafter, O giver of boons!'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection I shall narrate to thee what the
celebrated king Janaka had enquired, in days of yore, of the high-souled
Parasara, 'What is beneficial for all creatures both in this world and
the next! Do thou tell me what should be known by all this connection.'
Thus questioned, Parasara,

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

possessed of great ascetic merit and conversant with the ordinances of
every religion, <span id="fr_997"></span>[1](#fn_997) said these words,
desirous of favouring the king.'

"Parasara said, 'Righteousness earned by acts is supreme benefit both in
this world and the next. The sages of the old have said that there is
nothing higher than Righteousness. By accomplishing the duties of
righteousness a man becomes honoured in heaven. The Righteousness,
again, of embodied creatures, O best of kings, consists in the ordinance
(laid down in the scriptures) on the subject of acts. <span
id="fr_998"></span>[2](#fn_998) All good men belonging to the several
modes of life, establishing their faith on that righteousness,
accomplish their respective duties. <span
id="fr_999"></span>[3](#fn_999) Four methods of living, O child, have
been ordained in this world. (Those four methods are the acceptance of
gifts for Brahmanas; the realisation of taxes for Kshatriyas;
agriculture for Vaisyas; and service of the three other classes for the
Sudras). Wherever men live the means of support come to them of
themselves. Accomplishing by various ways acts that are virtuous or
sinful (for the purpose of earning their means of support), living
creatures, when dissolved into their constituent elements attain to
diverse ends. <span id="fr_1000"></span>[4](#fn_1000) As vessels of
white brass, when steeped in liquefied gold or silver, catch the hue of
these metals, even so a living creature, who is completely dependent
upon the acts of his past lives takes his colour from the character of
those acts. Nothing can sprout forth without a seed. No one can obtain
happiness without having accomplished acts capable of leading to
happiness. When one's body is dissolved away (into its constituent
elements), one succeeds in attaining to happiness only in consequence of
the good acts of previous lives. The sceptic argues, O child, saying, I
do not behold that anything in this world is the result of destiny or
the virtuous and sinful acts of past lives. Inference cannot establish
the existence or operation of destiny. <span
id="fr_1001"></span>[5](#fn_1001) The deities, the Gandharvas and the
Danavas have become what they are in consequence of their own nature
(and not of their acts of past lives). People never recollect in their
next lives the acts done by them in previous ones. For explaining the
acquisition of fruits in any particular life people seldom name the four
kinds of acts alleged to have been accomplished in past lives. <span
id="fr_1002"></span>[6](#fn_1002) The declarations

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

having the Vedas for their authority have been made for regulating the
conduct of men in this world, and for tranquillizing the minds of men.
These (the sceptic says), O child, cannot represent the utterances of
men possessed of true wisdom. This opinion is wrong. In reality, one
obtains the fruits of whatever among the four kinds of acts one does
with the eye, the mind, the tongue, and muscles. <span
id="fr_1003"></span>[1](#fn_1003) As the fruit of his acts, O king, a
person sometimes obtains happiness wholly, sometimes misery in the same
way, and sometimes happiness and misery blended together. Whether
righteous or sinful, acts are never destroyed (except by enjoyment or
endurance of their fruits). <span id="fr_1004"></span>[2](#fn_1004)
Sometimes, O child, the happiness due to good acts remains concealed and
covered in such a way that it does not display itself in the case of the
person who is sinking in life's ocean till his sorrows disappear. After
sorrow has beep exhausted (by endurance), one begins to enjoy (the
fruits of) one's good acts. And know, O king, that upon the exhaustion
of the fruits of good acts, those of sinful acts begin to manifest
themselves. Self-restraint, forgiveness, patience, energy, contentment,
truthfulness of speech, modesty, abstention from injury, freedom from
the evil practices called *vyasana*, and cleverness,--these are
productive of happiness. No creature is eternally subject to the fruits
of his good or bad acts. The man possessed of wisdom should always
strive to collect and fix his mind. One never has to enjoy or endure the
good and bad acts of another. Indeed, one enjoys and endures the fruits
of only those acts that one does oneself. The person that casts off both
happiness and misery walks along a particular path (the path, *viz*., of
knowledge). Those men, however, O king, who suffer themselves to be
attached to all worldly objects, tread along a path that is entirely
different. A person should rot himself do that act which, if done by
another, would call down his censure. Indeed, by doing an act that one
censures in others, one incurs ridicule. A Kshatriya bereft of courage,
a Brahmana that takes every kind of food, a Vaisya unendued with
exertion (in respect of agriculture and other moneymaking pursuits), a
Sudra that is idle (and, therefore, averse to labour), a learned person
without good behaviour, one of high birth but destitute of righteous
conduct, a Brahmana fallen away from truth, a woman that is unchaste and
wicked, a Yogin endued with attachments, one that cooks food for one's
own self, an ignorant person employed in making a discourse,

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

a kingdom without a king and a king that cherishes no affection for his
subjects and who is destitute of Yoga,--these all, O king, are deserving
of pity!'" <span id="fr_1005"></span>[1](#fn_1005)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_997"></span>[346:1](m12b118.htm#fr_997) *i.e.*, the
religions of all the orders and all the modes of life.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[346:2](m12b118.htm#fr_998) The scriptural
injunctions are that one should sacrifice in honour of the gods, pour
libations on the sacred fire, make gifts etc, In these exists
Righteousness.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[346:3](m12b118.htm#fr_999) The grammar of the
third line is a little involved. *Tasmin* refers to *Dharme*. Supply
*nisthavantah* after *tasmin*. The sense, of course, is that believing
in the efficacy of righteousness, people of all modes of life accomplish
the duties of their respective modes.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[346:4](m12b118.htm#fr_1000) The sinful become
intermediate animals. The virtuous attain to heaven. They that are both
virtuous and sinful attain to the status of humanity. They that acquire
Knowledge become Emancipated.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[346:5](m12b118.htm#fr_1001) Destiny here
means the result of the acts of past lives.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[346:6](m12b118.htm#fr_1002) The reading I
adopt is *jatikritam karma* etc. Hence, this Verse also represents the
arguments of the sceptic or the *Charvakas*. The four kinds of acts are
*Nitya*, *Naimittika*, *Kamya*, and *Nishiddha*. If, however, for
'*jatikritam karma*, etc.,' the reading *yantyakritam karma* be adopted,
the meaning would be--'In one's next life one does not meet with fruits
that are not the results of one's acts of past life. This must be so,
for the opposite opinion would imply the destruction of acts and their
consequences. Then again, such an opinion would conflict with the
received opinion of mankind, for men, when they obtain the fruits of any
<span id="page_347">p. 347</span> act, always recollect the four kinds
of acts of a past life for explaining the accession of those fruits.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[347:1](m12b118.htm#fr_1003) Verses 12 to 14
represent the theory of the sceptic, and I have rendered them as such.
Only by reading verse 13 as '*yantyakritam karma*, etc.,' the
commentator points out that it may be taken as an observation of
*Parasara* himself. As regards verse 15, it represents the *ipse dixit*
of the speaker. He does not think that the sceptic is at all entitled to
a reply. It is scarcely necessary to say that the Burdwan translator
makes a thorough mess of these verses. K.P. Singha gives the substance
correctly.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[347:2](m12b118.htm#fr_1004) The commentator
shows that this is an answer to the sceptic's averment about Nature
being the cause of everything. Fire is hot-by nature, therefore, it does
not become hot at one time, cold at another, and *lukewarm* at another
time. One becomes either wholly happy or wholly unhappy or wholly happy
and unhappy at the same time. Man's nature should not be such. The
difference of state is produced by difference of causes.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[348:1](m12b118.htm#fr_1005) A Brahmana is
precluded from eating many things. Many things again that he is
competent to eat on all days of the year. In fact, there are many rules
for regulating the fare of a Brahmana. To this day, an orthodox Brahmana
abstains from many kinds of food. A Brahmana, therefore, who is
unscrupulous in respect of his food, is no Brahmana and deserves to be
pitied. Similarly, a man who cooks food for himself is an object of
pity. Raw food, such as fruits, etc., one may take without offering a
share thereof to guests and others. But cooked food can never be taken
without a share thereof being given to others. *Yati cha Brahmachari cha
pakvannaswaminavubhau*, hence he that takes cooked food without giving a
share to these is said to eat *Brahmaswam* or that which belongs to a
Brahmana.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXCII](m12b119)
