[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b113) 
[Next](m12b115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

### SECTION CCLXXXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Living creatures always stand in fear of sorrow and
death. Tell me, O grandsire, how the occurrence of these two may be
prevented.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, O Bharata, is cited the old
narrative of the discourse between Narada and Samanga.'

"Narada said, '(While others salute their superiors by only a bend of
the head) thou salutest thy superiors by prostrating thyself on the
ground till thy chest comes into contact with the ground. Thou seemest
to be engaged in crossing (the river of life) with thy hands. <span
id="fr_952"></span>[1](#fn_952) Thou seemest to be always free from
sorrow and exceedingly cheerful. I do not see that thou hast the least
anxiety. Thou art always content and happy and thou seemest to sport (in
felicity) like a child.'

"Samanga said, 'O giver of honours, I know the truth about the Past, the
Present, and the Future. Hence I never become cheerless. <span
id="fr_953"></span>[2](#fn_953) I know also what the beginning of acts
is in this world, what the accession of their fruits, and how varied are
those fruits. Hence I never yield to sorrow. <span
id="fr_954"></span>[3](#fn_954) Behold, the illiterate, the destitute,
the prosperous, O Narada, the blind, idiots and madmen, and ourselves
also, all live. <span id="fr_955"></span>[4](#fn_955) These live by
virtue of their acts of past lives. The very deities, who exist freed
from diseases, exist (in that state) by virtue of their past acts. The
strong and the weak, all, live by virtue of past acts. It is fitting,
therefore, that thou shouldst hold us in esteem. The owners of thousands
live. The owners of hundreds also live. They that are overwhelmed with
sorrow live. Behold, we too are living! When we, O Narada, do not give
way to grief, what can the practice of the duties (of religion) or the
observance of (religious) acts do to us? And since all joys and sorrows
also are not unending, they are, therefore, unable to agitate us at
all. <span id="fr_956"></span>[5](#fn_956) That for which men

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

are said to be wise, indeed, the very root of wisdom, is the freedom of
the senses from error. It is the senses that yield to error and grief.
One whose senses are subject to error can never be said to have attained
wisdom. That pride which is indulged in by a man subject to error is
only a form of the error to which he is subject. As regards the man of
error, he has neither this world nor the next. It should be remembered
that griefs do not last for ever and that happiness cannot be had
always. <span id="fr_957"></span>[1](#fn_957) Worldly life with all its
vicissitudes and painful incidents, one like me would never adopt. Such
a one would not care for desirable objects of enjoyments, and would not
think at all of the happiness their possession may bring about, or,
indeed, of the griefs that present themselves. <span
id="fr_958"></span>[2](#fn_958) One capable of resting on one's own self
would never covet the possessions of others; would not think of gains
unacquired, would not feel delighted at the acquisition of even immense
wealth; and would not yield to sorrow at the loss of wealth. Neither
friends, nor wealth, nor high birth, nor scriptural learning, nor
*mantras*, nor energy, can succeed in rescuing one from sorrow in the
next world. It is only by conduct that one can attain to felicity there.
The Understanding of the man unconversant with Yoga can never be
directed towards Emancipation. One unconversant with Yoga can never have
happiness. Patience and the resolution to cast off sorrow, these two
indicate the advent of happiness. Anything agreeable leads to pleasure.
Pleasure induces pride. Pride, again, is productive of sorrow. For these
reasons, I avoid all these. Grief, Fear, Pride,--these that stupefy the
heart,--and also Pleasure and Pain, I behold as (an unconcerned) witness
since my body is endued with life and moves about. <span
id="fr_959"></span>[3](#fn_959) Casting off both wealth and pleasure,
and thirst and error, I wander over the earth, freed from grief and
every kind of anxiety of heart. Like one that has drunk nectar I have no
fear, here or hereafter, of death, or iniquity, or cupidity, or anything
of that kind. I have acquired this knowledge, O Brahmana, as the result
of my severe and indestructible penances. It is for this reason, O
Narada, that grief, even when it comes to me, does not succeed in
afflicting me.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_952"></span>[333:1](m12b114.htm#fr_952) *i.e.*, in even thy
direst distress thou dependest on thyself. To cross the fearful river of
life without a raft and with the aid of only one's bare arms implies
great self-dependence.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[333:2](m12b114.htm#fr_953) That which did not
exist and will not exist, exists not at the present moment. Everything,
therefore, which is of the nature of *asat* is non-existent. Our sorrows
are connected with the *asat*. Knowing this, I have cast off all
sorrows.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[333:3](m12b114.htm#fr_954) I have understood
that acts are for sorrow; that the fruits also of acts are for sorrow in
spite of the apparent character of some; and that the fruits of acts are
varied, sometimes other fruits appearing than those expected. Hence, I
do not indulge in sorrow, for I avoid acts and do not grieve for not
obtaining the fruits of acts or for the accession of fruits other than
those apparently agreeable.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[333:4](m12b114.htm#fr_955) The sense is that
we who avoid acts, are not dead; in fact, we live quite as others do;
and those others, how unequally circumstanced! The Burdwan translator
makes nonsense of the first line simple though it is.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[333:5](m12b114.htm#fr_956) Ignorance lies at
the root of sorrow. By casting off ignorance, we have avoided sorrow.
Hence, neither religion or religious acts such as Sacrifices, etc., can
do us any good or harm. As regards happiness and misery again, these two
cannot agitate us at all, since we know their value, both being
ephemeral in comparison with the period for which we are to exist.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[334:1](m12b114.htm#fr_957) Hence, no one
should indulge in pride, saying, 'I am happy,' nor yield to sorrow,
saying, 'I am miserable.' Both happiness and misery are transitory. The
man of wisdom should never suffer himself to be agitated by these
transitory states of his mind.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[334:2](m12b114.htm#fr_958) The first word is
read either as *bhavatmakam* or *bhavatmakam*. The first means
*samsararupam*; the second, *drisyatmakam*.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[334:3](m12b114.htm#fr_959) I am obliged to
behold them because I am a living being having a body, but then I behold
them as an unconcerned witness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXXVIII](m12b115)
