[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b029) 
[Next](m12b031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### SECTION CCIII

"Manu said, 'The mind united with the senses, recollects after a long
time the impressions of the objects received in the past. When the
senses are all suspended (in respect of their functions), <span
id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_175) the Supreme (the Soul), in the form of
the Understanding, exists in its own true nature. When the Soul (at such
a time) does not in the least regard all those objects of the senses in
respect of their simultaneity or the reverse in point of time but
mustering them from all directions holds them before it together, it
necessarily happens that he wanders among all things that are
incongruous. He is, therefore, the (silent) Witness. Hence the Soul
encased in body is something having a distinct and independent
existence. <span id="fr_176"></span>[2](#fn_176) There is *Rajas*, there
is *Tamas*, and there is *Sattwa*, the third. There are again three
states of the understanding, *viz*., waking, dreaming, and sound sleep.
The Soul has knowledge of the pleasures and pains, which are all
contradictory, of those states, and which partake of the nature of the
threefold attributes first mentioned. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[3](#fn_177) The Soul enters the senses like the wind
entering the fire in a piece of wood. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[4](#fn_178) One cannot behold the form of the Soul
by one's eye, nor can the sense of touch, amongst the senses, apprehend
it. The Soul is not, again, an object of apprehension by the ear. It
may, however, be seen by the aid of the *Srutis* and the instructions of
the wise. As regards the senses, that particular sense which apprehends
it loses upon such apprehension its existence as a sense. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[5](#fn_179) The senses cannot themselves apprehend
their respective forms by themselves. The Soul is omniscient (inasmuch
as it apprehends both the knower and the known). It beholds all things.
Being omniscient, it is the Soul that beholds the senses (without, as
already said, the senses being able to apprehend it). Nobody has seen
the other side of the Himavat mountains, nor the reverse of the moon's
disc. Yet it cannot be said that these do not

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

exist. Similarly, though never apprehended by the senses, yet nobody can
say that the Soul, which dwells in all creatures, which is subtile, and
which has knowledge for its essence, does not exist. People see the
world reflected on the moon's disc in the form of spots. Though seeing,
they do not know that it is the world that is so reflected there. Even
such is the knowledge of the Soul. That knowledge must come of itself.
The Soul depends upon the Soul itself. Men of wisdom, reflecting on the
formlessness of visible objects before birth and after destruction,
behold by the aid of intelligence, the formlessness of objects that have
apparent forms, So also although the Sun's motion cannot be seen, yet
persons, by watching its rising and setting, conclude that the sun has
motion. <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180) Similarly, those who are
endued with wisdom and learning behold the Soul by the aid of the lamp
of intelligence, though it is at a great distance from them, and seek to
merge the fivefold elements, which are near, into *Brahma*. <span
id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181) Verily, an object cannot be accomplished
without the application of means. Fishermen catch fish by means of nets
made of strings. Animals are captured by employing animals as are the
means. Birds are caught by employing birds as the means. Elephants are
taken by employing elephants. In this way, the Soul may be apprehended
by the principle of knowledge. We have heard that only a snake can see a
snake's legs. After the same manner one beholds, through Knowledge, the
Soul encased in subtile form and dwelling within the gross body. People
cannot, through their senses, know the senses. Similarly, mere
Intelligence at its highest cannot behold the Soul which is supreme. The
moon, on the fifteenth day of the dark fortnight, cannot be seen in
consequence of its form being hid. It cannot be said, however, that
destruction overtakes it, Even such is the case with the Soul dwelling
in the body. On the fifteenth day of the dark fortnight, the gross body
of the moon becomes invisible. After the same manner, the Soul, when
liberated from the body, cannot be apprehended. As the moon, gaining
another point in the firmament begins to shine once more, similarly, the
Soul obtaining a new body, begins to manifest itself once more. The
birth, growth and disappearance of the moon can all be directly
apprehended by the eye. These phenomena, however, appertain to the gross
form of that luminary. The like are not the attributes of the Soul. The
moon, when it shows itself after its disappearance on the fifteenth day
of the dark fortnight, is regarded as the same luminary that had become
invisible. After the same manner, notwithstanding the changes

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

represented by birth, growth and age, a person is regarded as the same
individual without any doubt of his identity. It cannot be distinctly
seen how Rahu approaches and leaves the moon. After the same manner, the
Soul cannot be seen how it leaves one body and enters another. <span
id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182) Rahu becomes visible only when it exists
with the sun or the moon. Similarly, the Soul becomes an object of
apprehension only when it exists with the body. When liberated from the
sun or the moon, Rahu can no longer be seen. Similarly, the Soul,
liberated from the body, can no longer be seen. Then again, as the moon,
even when it disappears on the fifteenth day of the dark fortnight, is
not deserted by the constellations and the stars, the Soul also, even
though separated from the body, is not deserted by the fruits of the
acts it has achieved in that body.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_175"></span>[72:1](m12b030.htm#fr_175) By death on sleep.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[72:2](m12b030.htm#fr_176) *Yugapat* means
simultaneous: *atulyakalam* means differing in point of time in respect
of occurrence: *kritsnam* qualifies *indriyartham*; *Vidwan* means
*Sakshi*; and *ekah*, independent and distinct. What is intended to be
said here is that when the soul, in a dream, musters together the
occurrences and objects of different times and places, when, in fact,
congruity in respect of both time and place does not apply to it, it
must be regarded to have an existence that is distinct and independent
of the senses and the body.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[72:3](m12b030.htm#fr_177) The object of this
is to show that the Soul has only knowledge of the pleasures and pains
arising in consequence of *Sattwa* and *Rajas* and *Tamas* and in
connection with the three states of the understanding due to the same
three attributes. The Soul, however, though knowing them, does not enjoy
or suffer them. He is only the silent and inactive Witness of
everything.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[72:4](m12b030.htm#fr_178) The object of the
simile is to show that as wind is a separate entity although existing
*with* the fire in a piece of wood, so the Soul, though existing with
the senses is distinct from them.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[72:5](m12b030.htm#fr_179) The Bengal texts
read *indriyanam* which I adopt. The Bombay edition reads
*indriyendriyam*, meaning the sense of the senses, in the same way as
the *Srutis* declare that is the *Prana* of *Prana*, the eye of the eye,
the ear of the ear, etc., Sravanena darsanam tatha kritam is
'apprehended by the ear,' *i.e.*, as rendered above, 'apprehended
through the aid of the *Srutis*.'

<span id="fn_180"></span>[73:1](m12b030.htm#fr_180) The commentator uses
the illustration of a tree. Before birth the tree was not; and after
destruction, it is not; only in the interim, it is. Its formlessness or
nothingness is manifest from these two states, for it has been said that
which did not exist in the past and will not exist in the future cannot
be regarded as existing in the present. *Tadgatah* is explained by the
commentator as *udayastamanagatah* or *taddarsinah*.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[73:2](m12b030.htm#fr_181) Both the vernacular
translators render the second line incorrectly. The first line is
elliptical, and would be complete by supplying *asannam pasyanti*. The
paraphrase of the second line is *Pratyayannam Jneyam
Jnanabhisamhitam*(*prati*)*ninisante*. *Jneyam* is explained by the
commentator as *prapancham*. *Jnanabhisamhitam* means that which is
known by the name of Knowledge, *i.e.*, *Brahma*, which has many similar
names some of which the commentator quotes such as Satyam (truth),
*Jananam* (knowledge), Anantam (infinite), Vijnanam (true knowledge),
Anandam (joy or happiness).

<span id="fn_182"></span>[74:1](m12b030.htm#fr_182) *Tamas* is another
name for Rahu. The first line, therefore, refers to the manner in which
an eclipse occurs. There is no absolute necessity, however, for taking
it as an allusion to the eclipse. The meaning may be more general. Every
day, during the lighted fortnight, the moon gains in appearance, as,
indeed, every day, during the dark fortnight, it loses in appearance. It
may, therefore, be said that darkness approaches it or leaves it for
eating it away or discovering it more and more. The actual process of
covering and discovering cannot be noticed. This circumstance may be
taken as furnishing the simile. In verse 21, similarly, *tamas* is
capable of a wider meaning. In 22, the word *Rahu* is used. It should be
explained, however, that Rahu is no imaginary monster as the Puranas
describe but the descending node of the moon, *i.e.*, a portion of space
in and about the lunar orbit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCIV](m12b031)
