[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b073) 
[Next](m12b075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXLVII

"Suka said, 'O illustrious one, O foremost of *Rishis*, once again
discourse to me on *Adhyatma* more elaborately. Tell me what, indeed, is
Adhyatma and whence does it come?' <span id="fr_541"></span>[1](#fn_541)

"Vyasa said, 'That, O son, which is regarded as *Adhyatma* with
reference to human beings, I shall now mention to thee, and listen to
the explanation I give (of *Adhyatma*). Earth, water, light, wind, and
space, are the great entities that form the component parts of all
creatures, and, though really one, are yet regarded different like the
waves of the ocean (which though identical with respect to their
constituent substance are yet counted as different from one another).
Like a tortoise stretching out its limbs and withdrawing them again, the
great entities (already named), by dwelling in numberless small forms,
undergo transformations (called creation and destruction). All this
universe of mobile and immobile objects hath for its component parts
these five entities. Everything, in respect of its creation and
destruction, is referable to this fivefold entity. These five entities
occur in all existent things. The Creator of all things, however, hath
made an unequal distribution of those entities (by placing them in
different things in different proportions) for serving different
ends.' <span id="fr_542"></span>[2](#fn_542)

"Suka said, 'How may one succeed in understanding that unequal
distribution (of the five great entities of which thou speakest) in the
diverse things of the universe? Which amongst them are the senses and
which the attributes? How may this be understood?'

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

"Vyasa said, 'I shall explain thee this duly one after another. Listen
with concentrated attention to the subject as I expound how what I have
said actually happens. Sound, the sense of hearing, and all the cavities
within the body,--these three--have space for their origin. The vital
breaths, the action of the limbs and touch form the attributes of the
wind. Form, eyes, and the digestive fire within the stomach, are
originated by light. Taste, tongue, and all the humours,--these
three,--are from water. Scent, nose, and the body,--these three,--are
the attributes of earth. These, then, as I have expounded to thee, are
the transformations of the five (great) entities with senses. Touch is
said to be the attribute of the wind; taste of water; form of light.
Sound is said to have its origin in space, and scent is said to be the
property of earth. Mind, Understanding, and Nature,--these
three,--spring from their own previous states, and attaining (at each
rebirth) to a position higher than the attributes (which form their
respective objects), do not transcend those attributes. <span
id="fr_543"></span>[1](#fn_543) As the tortoise stretches out its limbs
and withdraws them once again within itself, even so the Understanding
creates the senses and once again withdraws them into itself. <span
id="fr_544"></span>[2](#fn_544) The consciousness of personal identity
that arises in respect of that which is above the soles of the feet and
below the crown of the head, is principally due to the action of the
Understanding. <span id="fr_545"></span>[3](#fn_545) It is the
understanding that is transformed into the (five) attributes (of form,
scent, etc.). It is understanding also that is transformed into the
(five) senses with the mind for the sixth. When the Understanding is
absent, where are the attributes? <span id="fr_546"></span>[4](#fn_546)
In man there are five senses. The mind is called the sixth (sense). The
Understanding is called the seventh. The Soul is the eighth. The eyes
(and the other senses) are for only receiving impressions of form (and
scent, etc.). The mind exists for doubting (the accuracy of those
impressions). The Understanding

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

settles those doubts. The Soul is said only to witness every operation
without mingling with them. Rajas, Tamas, and Sattwa,--these
three,--arise from their own counterparts. These exist equal in all
creatures (*viz*., the deities and human beings, etc.). These are called
attributes and should be known by the actions they induce. <span
id="fr_547"></span>[1](#fn_547) As regards those actions all such states
in which one becomes conscious of oneself as united with cheerfulness or
joy and which are tranquil and pure, should be known as due to the
attribute of Sattwa. All such states in either the body or the mind, as
are united with sorrow, should be regarded as due to the influence of
the attribute called Rajas. All such states again as exist with
stupefication (of the senses, the mind or the understanding) whose cause
is unascertainable, and which are incomprehensible (by either reasons or
inward light), should be known as ascribable to the action of Tamas.
Delight, cheerfulness, joy, equanimity, contentment of heart, due to any
known cause or arising otherwise, are all effects of the attribute of
Sattwa. Pride, untruthfulness of speech, cupidity, stupefication,
vindictiveness, whether arising from any known cause or otherwise, are
indications of the quality of Rajas. Stupefaction of judgment,
heedlessness, sleep, lethargy, and indolence, from whatever cause these
may arise, are to be known as indications of the quality of
Tamas.'" <span id="fr_548"></span>[2](#fn_548)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_541"></span>[202:1](m12b074.htm#fr_541) *Adhyatma* is topic
bearing on the Soul. Here it signifies the seven and twenty usual topics
of philosophical discourse, *viz*., the five organs of action, the five
organs of knowledge, the mind and three others called Chitta, etc., the
five vital breaths, the five elementary substances, Desire. Acts, and
*Avidya*.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[202:2](m12b074.htm#fr_542) The second clause
of the second line is explained by the commentator as *yasmin kamani
nimitte sati yat anupasyati*.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[203:1](m12b074.htm#fr_543) The grammatical
construction is *Gunebhyah paramagatah gunan na ativartante*. The
meaning is this: Mind, Understanding, and Nature (or individual
disposition of man or animal or vegetable, etc) are all due to their own
previous states. Nature in particular being the result of the desires of
a past state of existence. Such being their origin, they too are due to
the five entities named. As regards their functions, it is said that
having reached to that which is *Gunebhyah parama*, *i.e.*,
*Srotradikaryam swarupam*, they do not transcend the *gunas* themselves;
or in other words having become endued with the faculty or power of
seizing particular attributes (such as scent, form, etc)., they actually
seize or apprehend them.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[203:2](m12b074.htm#fr_544) In other words, the
senses and the mind are nothing but the understanding displayed in a
particular shape or form. The principal function of the mind is to
cherish and discard impressions. The understanding is *nischayatmika* or
engaged in arriving at certainty of conclusions.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[203:3](m12b074.htm#fr_545) Everything above
the soles of, the feet and below the crown of the head, is, of course,
the whole body or self or the person. *Asmin kritye* is, *aham iti yat
darsanam tasmin karaniye*. There can be no doubt that the commentator
correctly explains the meaning.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[203:4](m12b074.htm#fr_546) *Neniyate* is as
the commentator explains, an instance of *karmakartari prayogah*. Hence,
the meaning is that both the attributes of form etc., and the senses
with mind which apprehend those attributes, are the understanding
itself, so that when the understanding is not, these also are not. The
object of this verse is to establish the identity of the understanding
with the senses, the mind, and the attribute with the senses and the
mind apprehend. Both the vernacular versions are inaccurate.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[204:1](m12b074.htm#fr_547) The three
attributes of *Rajas*, *Tamas*, and *Sattwa* do not spring front any
different thing but from their own counterparts existing in a previous
state of existence or life. They arise from their respective states as
they existed with the *Chitta* or understanding in a previous life.
Hence *Chitta*, and the objects of the senses and the senses also
arising from it, are all affected by these three Gunas.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[204:2](m12b074.htm#fr_548) The last word in
the first line is not *prabodhita* but *aprabodhita*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXLVIII](m12b075)
