[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b055) 
[Next](m12b057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### SECTION CCXXIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'By what disposition, what course of duties, what
knowledge, and what energy, does one succeed in attaining to *Brahma*
which is immutable and which is beyond the reach of primordial
nature.' <span id="fr_366"></span>[1](#fn_366)

"Bhishma said, 'One that is engaged in the practice of the religion of
*nivritti*, that eats abstemiously, and that has his senses under
complete control, can attain to *Brahma* which is immutable and which is
above primordial nature. In this connection is cited the old narrative,
O Bharata, of the discourse between Jaigishavya and Asita. Once on a
time Asita-Devala addressed Jaigishavya who was possessed of great
wisdom and fully acquainted with the truths of duty and morality.'

"Devala said, 'Thou art not gladdened when praised. Thou dost not give
way to wrath when blamed or censured. What, indeed, is thy wisdom?
Whence hast thou got it? And what, indeed, is the refuge of that
wisdom?'

"Bhishma said, 'Thus questioned by Devala, the pure Jaigishavya of
austere penances, said those words of high import, fraught with full
faith and profound sense.'

"Jaigishavya said, 'O foremost of *Rishis*, I shall tell thee of that
which is the highest end, that which is the supreme goal, that which is
tranquillity, in the estimation of all persons of righteous acts. They,
O Devala, who behave uniformly towards those that praise them and those
that blame them, they who conceal their own vows and good acts, they who
never indulge in recriminations, they who never say even what is good
when it is calculated to injure (instead of producing any benefit), they
who do not desire to return injury for injury received, are said to be
men possessed of wisdom. <span id="fr_367"></span>[2](#fn_367) They
never grieve for what is yet to come. They are concerned with only what
is before them and acts as they should. They never indulge in sorrow for
what is past or even call it to their minds. Possessed of power and
regulated minds, they do at their pleasure, according to the way in
which it should be done, what waits for them to do in respect of all
objects, O Devala, if solicited regardfully thereto. <span
id="fr_368"></span>[3](#fn_368) Of mature knowledge, of great wisdom,
with wrath under complete control, and with their passions kept under
sway, they never do an injury to any one in thought, word, or deed.
Destitute of envy, they never injure others, and possessed of
self-control, they are never pained at the sight of other people's
prosperity. Such men never indulge in exaggerated speeches, or set
themselves in praising others, or in speaking ill of them. They are

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

again never affected by praise and blame uttered by others in respect of
them. They are tranquil in respect of all their desires, and are engaged
in the good of all creatures. They never give way to wrath, or indulge
in transports of joy, or injure any creature. Untying all the knots of
their hearts, they pass on very happily. They have no friends nor are
they the friends of others. They have no foes nor are they the foes of
other creatures. Indeed, men that can live in this way can pass their
days for ever in happiness. O best of regenerate ones, they who acquire
a knowledge of the rules of morality and righteousness, and who observe
those rules in practice, succeed in winning joy, while they who fall off
from the path of righteousness are afflicted by anxieties and sorrow. I
have now betaken myself to the path of righteousness. Decried by others,
why shall I get annoyed with them, or praised by others, why shall I be
pleased? Let men obtain whatsoever objects they please from whatsoever
pursuits in which they engage themselves. (I am indifferent to
acquisitions and losses). Praise and blame are unable to contribute to
my advancement or the reverse. He that has understood the truths of
things becomes gratified with even disregard as if it were ambrosia. The
man of wisdom is truly annoyed with regard as if it were poison. He who
is freed from all faults sleeps fearlessly both here and hereafter even
if insulted by others. On the other hand, he who insults him, suffers
destruction. Those men of wisdom who seek to attain to the highest end,
succeed in obtaining it by observing conduct such as this. The man who
has vanquished all his senses is regarded to have performed all the
sacrifices. Such a person attains to the highest rung, *viz*., that of
*Brahma*, which is eternal and which transcends the reach of primordial
nature. The very gods, the *Gandharvas*, the *Pisachas*, and the
*Rakshasas*, cannot reach the rung which is his who has attained to the
highest end.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_366"></span>[151:1](m12b056.htm#fr_366) Everything else
liable to be affected by primordial nature. Only the Supreme Soul cannot
be affected. Hence, *Brahma* is often said to be "above *Prakriti*."
*Prakriti*, here, is of course used in its largest sense.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[151:2](m12b056.htm#fr_367) The second line of
verse 8, and the last clause of the first line of verse 9, are wrongly
rendered by both the Vernacular translators. K.P. Singha omits certain
portions, while the Burdwan translator, as usual, writes nonsense. The
verb is *nihnuvanti*, meaning 'conceal: *i.e.*, 'do not brag of.' The
verb *vadishyanti* is to be repeated after *ahite hitam*. For *hitam*
*ahitam* may be read by way of antithesis.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[151:3](m12b056.htm#fr_368) K.P. Singha
mistranslates this verse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXX](m12b057)
