[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b049) 
[Next](m12b051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### SECTION CCXXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, by adopting what sort of
intelligence may a monarch, who has been divested of prosperity and
crushed by Time's heavy bludgeon, still live on this earth.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse between Vasava and Virochana's son, Vali. One day Vasava,
after having subjugated all the *Asuras*, repaired to the Grandsire and
joining his hands bowed to him and enquired after the whereabouts of
Vali. Tell me, O Brahman, where I may now find that Vali whose wealth
continued undiminished even though he used to give it away as lavishly
as he wished. He was the god of wind. He was Varuna. He was Surya. He
was Soma. He was Agni that used to warm all creatures. He became water
(for the use of all). I do not find where he now is. Indeed, O Brahman,
tell me where I may find Vali now. Formerly, it was he who used to
illumine all the points of the compass (as Surya) and to set (when
evening came). Casting off idleness, it was he who used to pour rain
upon all creatures at the proper season. I do not now see that Vali.
Indeed, tell me, O Brahmana, where I may find that chief of the *Asuras*
now.'

"Brahman said, 'It is not becoming in thee, O Maghavat, to thus enquire
after Vali now. One should not, however, speak an untruth when one is
questioned by another. For this reason, I shall tell thee the
whereabouts of Vali. O lord of Sachi, Vali may now have taken his birth
among camels or bulls or asses or horses, and having become the foremost
of his species may now be staying in an empty apartment.'

"Sakra said, 'If, O Brahman, I happen to meet with Vali in an empty
apartment, shall I slay him or spare him? Tell me how I shall act.'

"Brahman said, 'Do not, O Sakra, injure Vali, Vali does not deserve
death. Thou shouldst, on the other hand, O Vasava, solicit instruction
from him about morality, O Sakra, as thou pleasest.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by the divine Creator, Indra roamed
over the earth, seated on the back of Airavata and attended by
circumstances of great splendour. He succeeded in meeting with Vali,
who, as the Creator had said, was living in an empty apartment clothed
in the form of an ass.'

"Sakra said, 'Thou art now, O Danava, born as an ass subsisting on chaff
as thy food. This thy order of birth is certainly a low one. Dost thou
or dost thou not grieve for it? I see what I had never seen before,
*viz*., thyself brought under the sway of thy enemies, divested of
prosperity and friends, and shorn of energy and prowess. Formerly, thou
used to make progress through the worlds with thy train consisting of
thousands of vehicles and thousands of kinsmen, and to move along,
scorching everybody with thy splendour and counting us as nought. The
*Daityas*, looking up to thee as their protector, lived under thy sway.
Through thy power, the earth used to yield crops without waiting for
tillage. Today, however, I behold thee overtaken by this dire calamity.
Dost thou or dost thou not indulge in grief for this? When formerly

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

thou usedst, with pride reflected in thy face, to divide on the eastern
shores of the ocean thy vast wealth among thy kinsmen, what was the
state of thy mind then? Formerly, for many years, when blazing with
splendour, thou usedst to sport, thousands of celestial damsels used to
dance before thee. All of them were adorned with garlands of lotuses and
all had companions bright as gold. What, O lord of *Danavas*, was the
state of thy mind then and what is it now? Thou hadst a very large
umbrella made of gold and adorned with jewels and gems. Full two and
forty thousand Gandharvas used in those days to dance before thee. <span
id="fr_335"></span>[1](#fn_335) In thy sacrifices thou hadst a stake
that was very large and made entirely of gold. On such occasions thou
wert to give away millions upon millions of kine. What, O Daitya, was
the state of thy mind then? Formerly, engaged in sacrifice, thou hadst
gone round the whole earth, following the rule of the hurling of the
*Samya*: What was the state of thy mind then? <span
id="fr_336"></span>[2](#fn_336) I do not now behold that golden jar of
thine, nor that umbrella of thine, nor those fans. I behold not also, O
king of the *Asuras*, that garland of thine which was given to thee by
the Grandsire.'

"Vali said, 'Thou seest not now, O Vasava, my jar and umbrella and fans.
Thou seest not also my garland, that gift of the Grandsire. Those
precious possessions of mine about which thou askest are now buried in
the darkness of a cave. When my time comes again, thou wilt surely
behold them again. This conduct of thine, however, does not become thy
fame or birth. Thyself in prosperity, thou desirest to mock me that am
sunk in adversity. They that have acquired wisdom, and have won
contentment therefrom, they that are of tranquil souls, that are
virtuous and good among creatures, never grieve in misery nor rejoice in
happiness. Led, however, by a vulgar intelligence, thou indulgest in
brag, O Purandara! When thou shalt become like me thou shalt not then
indulge in speeches like these.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_335"></span>[129:1](m12b050.htm#fr_335) The Burdwan
translator renders the second line as "six thousand Gandharvas used to
dance before thee seven kinds of dance."

<span id="fn_336"></span>[129:2](m12b050.htm#fr_336) Both the vernacular
translators have misunderstood this verse. A *samya* is explained as a
little wooden cane measuring about six and thirty fingers breadth in
altitude. What Vali did was to go round the Earth (*anuparyagah*,
*i.e.*, *parihrityagatavan*) throwing or hurling a *samya*. When thrown
from a particular point by a strong man, the *samya* clears a certain
distance. This space is called a *Devayajana*. Vali went round the
globe, performing sacrifices upon each such Devayajana.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXIV](m12b051)
