[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b039) 
[Next](m12b041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXIII

"Bhishma said, 'From the attribute of Passion arises delusion or loss of
judgment. From the attribute of Darkness, O bull of Bharata's race,
arise

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

wrath and cupidity and fear and pride. When all these are destroyed, one
becomes pure. By obtaining purity, a person succeeds in arriving at the
knowledge of the Supreme Soul which is resplendent with effulgence,
incapable of deterioration, without change, pervading all things, having
the unmanifest for his refuge, and the foremost of all the deities.
Invested in His *maya*, men fall away from knowledge and become
senseless, and in consequence of their knowledge being darkened, yield
to wrath. <span id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236) From wrath, they become
subject to desire. From desire spring cupidity and delusion and vanity
and pride and selfishness. From such selfishness proceeds various kinds
of acts. <span id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_237) From acts spring diverse
bonds of affection and from those bonds of affection spring sorrow or
misery and from acts fraught with joy and sorrow proceeds the liability
to birth and death. <span id="fr_238"></span>[3](#fn_238) In consequence
of the obligation of birth, the liability is incurred of a residence
within the womb, due to the union of vital seed and blood. That
residence is defiled with excreta and urine and phlegm, and always
fouled with blood that is generated there. Overwhelmed by thirst, the
Chit-Soul becomes bound by wrath and the rest that have been enumerated
above. It seeks, however, to escape those evils. In respect of this,
women must be regarded as instruments which set the stream of Creation
agoing. By their nature, women are *Kshetra*, and men are *Kshetrajna*
in respect of attributes. For this reason, persons of wisdom should not
pursue women in especial (among other objects of the world). <span
id="fr_239"></span>[4](#fn_239) Indeed, women are like frightful
*mantra*-powers. They stupefy persons reft of wisdom. They are sunk in
the attribute of Passion. They are the eternal embodiment of the
senses. <span id="fr_240"></span>[5](#fn_240)

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

\[paragraph continues\] In consequence of the keen desire that men
entertain for women, off-spring proceed from them, due to (the action
of) the vital seed. As one casts off from one's body such vermin as take
their birth there but as are not on that account any part of oneself,
even so should one cast off those vermin of one's body that are called
children, who, though regarded as one's own, are not one's own in
reality. From the vital seed as from sweat (and other filth) creatures
spring from the body, influenced by the acts of previous lives or in the
course of nature. Therefore, one possessed of wisdom should feel no
regard for them. <span id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_241) The attribute of
Passion rests on that of Darkness. The attribute of Goodness, again,
rests on that of Passion. Darkness which is unmanifest overspreads
itself on Knowledge, and causes the phenomena of Intelligence and
Consciousness. <span id="fr_242"></span>[2](#fn_242) That knowledge
possessing the attributes of Intelligence and Consciousness has been
said to be the seed of embodied Souls. That, again, which is the seed of
such knowledge is called the *Jiva* (or *Chit*-Soul). <span
id="fr_243"></span>[3](#fn_243) In consequence of acts and the virtue of
time, the Soul goes through birth and repeated rounds of rebirth. As in
a dream the Soul sports as if invested with a body which, of course, is
due to the action of the mind, after the same manner, it obtains in the
mother's womb a body in consequence of attributes and propensities
having (past) acts for their origin. Whatever senses while it is there,
are awakened by past acts as the operating cause, become generated

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

in Consciousness in consequence of the mind co-existing with
attachments. <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244) In consequence of the
past thoughts of sound that are awakened in it, the Soul, subjected to
such influences, receives the organ of hearing. Similarly, from
attachment to forms, its eye is produced, and from its longing after
scent its organ of smelling. From thoughts of touch it acquires the
skin. In the same way the five-fold breaths are acquired by it, *viz*.,
*Prana*, *Apana*, *Vyana*, *Udana*, and *Samana*, which contribute to
keep the body agoing. Encased in body with all limbs fully developed in
consequence (as shown above) of past acts, the Soul takes birth, with
sorrow, both physical and mental, in the beginning, middle, and end. It
should be known that sorrow springs from the very fact of acceptance of
body (in the womb). It increases with the idea of Self. From
renunciation of these (attachments which are the cause of birth), sorrow
meets with an end. He that is conversant with sorrow's end attains to
Emancipation. <span id="fr_245"></span>[2](#fn_245) Both the origin and
the destruction of the senses rest in the attribute of Passion. The man
of wisdom should act with proper scrutiny with the aid of the eye
constituted by the scriptures. <span id="fr_246"></span>[3](#fn_246) The
senses of knowledge, even if they succeed in earning all their objects,
never succeed in overwhelming the man that is without thirst. The
embodied Soul, by making its senses weak, escapes the obligation or
rebirth.'" <span id="fr_247"></span>[4](#fn_247)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_236"></span>[97:1](m12b040.htm#fr_236) In the *Srutis* it
is said that Brahma has two attributes, *Vidya* (Knowledge), and
*Avidya* (Ignorance) with *Maya* (delusion). it is in consequence of
this Maya that *chit-souls* or *jivas* become attached to worldly
things. It is in consequence of this Maya that persons, even when they
understand that all is nought, cannot totally dissociate themselves from
them.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[97:2](m12b040.htm#fr_237) *Mana* is explained
by the commentator as worship of one's own self; *Darpa* is freedom from
all restraints; and *Ahankara* is a complete disregard of others and
centering all thoughts on ones own self. Here *Ahankara* is *not*
Consciousness.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[97:3](m12b040.htm#fr_238) *Kritalakshanah* is
explained by the Commentator as *Kritaswikarah*.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[97:4](m12b040.htm#fr_239) The force of the
simile lies in this: *Prakriti* binds *Kshetrajna* or the Soul and
obliges it to take birth, etc. Women are *Prakriti*, men are Souls. As
the Soul should seek to avoid the contact of *Prakriti* and strive for
emancipation, even so should men seek to avoid women. It should be added
that women, in almost all the dialects of India derived from Sanskrit,
are commonly called *Prakriti* or symbols of *Prakriti*, thus
illustrating the extraordinary popularity of the philosophical doctrine
about *Prakriti* and *Purusha*.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[97:5](m12b040.htm#fr_240) *Kritya* is
*mantra*-power or the efficacy of *Atharvan* rites. What is said here is
that women are as frightful as *Atharvan* rites which can bring
destruction upon even unseen foes. *Rajasi antarhitah* means that they
are sunk so completely in that attribute as to become invisible, *i.e.*,
completely enveloped by that attribute.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[98:1](m12b040.htm#fr_241) The sense is this:
parasitical vermin spring from sweat and other filth emitted by the
body. Children spring from the vital seed. In the former case, it is
*Swabhava* (nature) that supplies the active energy. In the latter, the
undying influence of previous acts and propensities supply the active
force. One's offspring, therefore, are like parasitical vermin on one's
body. Wisdom should teach disregard or indifference for either.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[98:2](m12b040.htm#fr_242) This is a repetition
of what has been asserted in various forms before. *Rajas* (passion) is
the cause of *Pravritti* or propensity for acts. *Sattwa* (goodness) is
enlightenment or the higher aspirations that lead to *Brahma*. Both rest
on *Tamas* (Darkness), the first immediately, the last mediately. *Chit*
or *Jiva* is pure Knowledge. When overtaken by *Tamas* or *Avyakta*, it
becomes clothed with that existence which is called life or which we
realise in the world, the conditions of that life being Consciousness
and Intelligence.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[98:3](m12b040.htm#fr_243) The *Chit* or Soul
is all-Knowledge. When overspread with Ignorance or Darkness, it becomes
manifested by Intelligence and Consciousness, *i.e.*, assumes a form or
body. Knowledge overspread by Darkness, therefore, or Knowledge with the
attributes of Intelligence and Consciousness, is the cause of *Chit* or
soul or *Jiva* assuming a body. Such knowledge, therefore, is called the
*seed* of the body. Then, again, the *tadvijam* (the second expression),
*i.e.*, the foundation on which knowledge overspread by ignorance (or
knowledge with the attributes of intelligence and consciousness) rests,
is, of course, pure Knowledge or *chit* or *jiva* or Soul as it existed
before life. It is only another form of repeating a statement made
several times before. Both the vernacular translators have misunderstood
the last half of the second line.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[99:1](m12b040.htm#fr_244) The meaning, of
course, is that while in the mother's womb, the Soul remembers the acts
of past lives, and those acts influence and determine the growth of its
senses as also the character it will display in its new life.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[99:2](m12b040.htm#fr_245) I do not follow
Nilakantha in his grammatical exposition of the second line. That
exposition seems to be very far-fetched. Besides *tebhyah tyagat* for
*tesham tyagat* is no violence to grammar, the use of the ablative in
this sense not being [infrequent](errata.htm#75) in these writings.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[99:3](m12b040.htm#fr_246) Women have before
(*vide* verse 9 of this section) been said to be the embodiment of the
senses and as *antarhitah* in *Rajas* or Passion. The senses, therefore,
are, it is concluded here, originated in *Rajas*. By the destruction,
again, of *Rajas*, they may be destroyed. What is wanted, therefore, is
the conquest of *Rajas* or Passion. This may be effected with the aid of
the eye whose vision has been sharpened by scriptural knowledge.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[99:4](m12b040.htm#fr_247) After
*indriyartham*, as explained by the commentator, *prapyapi* is
understood. There are two classes of *indriyas*, *viz*., those of
knowledge and those for the performance of acts. *Escapes the obligation
of rebirth*, *i.e.*, attains to Emancipation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXIV](m12b041)
