[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b028) 
[Next](m12b030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCII

"Manu said, 'From that eternal and undeteriorating One first sprang
Space; from space came Wind; from wind came Light; from light came
Water; from water sprang the Universe; and from the universe, all things
that occur in it. The bodies of all (earthly) things, (after
dissolution), first enter into water, thence to light or heat, thence to
the wind, and thence to space. They that seek Emancipation have not to
return from space. On the other hand, they attain to Brahma. The refuge
of Emancipation, *viz*., Brahma, is neither hot, nor cold, neither mild
nor fierce, neither sour nor astringent, neither sweet nor bitter. He is
not endued with sound, or scent, or form. He transcends all these and
everything, and is without dimensions. <span
id="fr_164"></span>[3](#fn_164) The skin perceives touch; the tongue,
taste; the nose, scent; the ears, sounds; and the eyes, forms. Men not
conversant with *Adhyatma* succeed not in beholding what is above these.
Having withdrawn the tongue from tastes, the nose from scents, the ears
from touch, and the eyes from forms, one succeeds in beholding one's own
self (as independent of the senses and the mind and, therefore, of
attributes). <span id="fr_165"></span>[4](#fn_165) It hath been said
that that which is the Cause of the actor, the act, the material with
which the act is done, the place and the time of the act, and the
inclinations and propensities in respect of happiness and misery, is
called the Self (or Soul). That which pervades everything, which does
everything (assuming the forms of living creatures), that which exists
in

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

the universe even as the *mantras* declare, <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166) that which is the cause of all, that
which is the highest of the high, and that which is One without a second
and does all things, is the Cause. Everything else is effect. It is seen
that a person, in consequence of the acts performed by him, obtains
results both good and evil, which (though apparently incompatible with
each other, still) dwell together in harmony. Indeed, as the good and
evil fruits born of their own acts dwell together in the bodies of
creatures which are their refuge, even so Knowledge dwells in the
body. <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_167) As a lighted lamp, while
burning, discovers other objects before it, even so the five senses
which are like lamps set on high trees, find out their respective
objects when lighted by Knowledge. <span id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_168)
As the various ministers of a king, uniting together, give him counsel,
even so the five senses that are in the body are all subservient to
Knowledge. The latter is superior to all of them. As the flames of fire,
the current of the wind, the rays of the sun, and the waters of rivers,
go and come repeatedly, even so the bodies of embodied creatures are
going and coming repeatedly. <span id="fr_169"></span>[4](#fn_169) As a
person by taking up an axe cannot, by cutting open a piece of wood, find
either smoke or fire in it, even so one cannot, by cutting open the arms
and feet and stomach of a person, see the principle of knowledge, which,
of course, has nothing in common with the stomach, the arms and the
feet. As again, one beholds both smoke and fire in wood by rubbing it
against another piece, so a person of well-directed intelligence and
wisdom, by uniting (by means of *yoga*) the senses and the soul, may
view the Supreme Soul which, of course, exists in its own nature. <span
id="fr_170"></span>[5](#fn_170) As in the midst of a dream one beholds
one's own body lying on the ground as something distinct from one's own
self, even so a person, endued with the five senses, the mind, and the
understanding, beholds (after death) his own body and then goes from one
into another form <span id="fr_171"></span>[6](#fn_171). The Soul is not
subject to birth, growth, decay, and destruction. In consequence of the
acts of life being endued with effects, the Soul, clothed in body,
passes

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

from this body (when deprived of animation) into another, unseen by
others. <span id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172) No one can behold with the
eye the form of the Soul. The Soul cannot, again, form the subject of
any one's touch. With those (*i.e.*, the senses), the Soul accomplishes
no act. The senses do not approach the Soul. The Soul, however,
apprehends them all. As anything, placed in a blazing fire before a
spectator, assumes a certain colour in consequence of the light and heat
that operates upon it, without taking any other hue or attribute, even
so the Soul's form is seen to take its colour from the body. After the
same manner, man, casting off one body, enters another, unseen by all.
Indeed, casting off his body to the (five) great primal elements, he
assumes a form that is similarly made of the same (five) elements. The
embodied creature (upon the destruction of his body) enters space, wind,
fire, water, and earth in such a way that each particular element in his
body mingles with the particular element (out of his body) with whose
nature it is consonant. The senses also, which are engaged in diverse
occupations and dependent on the five elements (for the exercise of
their functions), enter these five elements that call forth their
functions. The ear derives its capacity from space; and the sense of
scent from the earth. Form, which is the property of the eye, is the
consequence of light or fire. Fire or heat has been said to be the
dependent cause of water. The tongue which has for its property taste
becomes merged into water. The skin which has touch for its property
becomes lost in the wind whose nature it partakes. The fivefold
attributes, (*viz*., sound, etc.) dwell in the (five) great creatures
(*viz*., the five primal elements). Those fivefold objects of the senses
(*viz*., space, etc.) dwell in the (five) senses. All these again
(*viz*., the fivefold attributes, the fivefold elements, and the five
senses) follow the lead of the mind. The mind follows the lead of the
Understanding, and the Understanding follows the lead of That which
exists in its true and undefiled nature (*viz*., the Supreme
Soul). <span id="fr_173"></span>[2](#fn_173) The doer in his new body
receives all the good and bad acts done by him as also all acts done by
him in his past existence. All these acts done in this life and the next
ones to come follow the mind even as aquatic animals pass along a genial
current. As a quickly-moving and restless thing becomes an object of
sight, as a minute object appears to be possessed of large dimensions
(when seen through spectacles), as a mirror shows a person his own face
(which cannot otherwise be seen), even so the Soul (though subtile and
invisible) become an object of the Understanding's apprehension.'" <span
id="fr_174"></span>[3](#fn_174)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[69:3](m12b029.htm#fr_164) *Aswabhavam* is
explained by the commentator as *Pramatri-twadi vihinam*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[69:4](m12b029.htm#fr_165) *i.e.*, one sees
one's own soul.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[70:1](m12b029.htm#fr_166) *i.e.*, which,
though one, divides itself into a thousand form like the image of the
moon in a quantity of agitated water.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[70:2](m12b029.htm#fr_167) The analogy consists
in this: good and evil fruits, though incompatible, dwell together;
similarly, knowledge, though not material, resides in the material body.
Of course, knowledge is used here in the sense of the mind or the
understanding.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[70:3](m12b029.htm#fr_168) It is difficult to
understand why the idea of lamps set on trees is introduced here.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[70:4](m12b029.htm#fr_169) The analogy is thus
explained. Fire, when fed, bursts into flames. When not fed, it dies
out, but is not destroyed, for with new fuel the flames may be brought
back. The current of the wind ceases, but does not suffer extinction;
for if it did, there would be no current again. The same is the case
with the rays of the Sun. They die in the night, to reappear in the
morning. The rivers are dried up in summer and refilled during the
rains. The body, once dissolved, appears in another form. It will be
seen that the weakness of the reasoning is due only to incorrect notions
about the objects referred to.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[70:5](m12b029.htm#fr_170) *Exists in its own
nature*, *i.e.*, unaffected by attributes and qualities and accidents.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[70:6](m12b029.htm#fr_171) Some of the Bengal
texts read *sumahan* and *subuddhih* in the second line. Of course, this
is incorrect. The true reading is *samanah* and *sabuddhih*, meaning
'with mind and with understanding.' In the Bombay edition occurs a
misprint, *viz*., *sumanah* for *samanah*. Nilakantha cites the correct
readings.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[71:1](m12b029.htm#fr_172) The Burdwan
translator misunderstands the word *Linga* as used in both 14 and 15.
K.P. Singha also wrongly renders that word as it occurs in 15. The
commentator rightly explains that *Linga* has no reference to
*Linga-sarira* or the invisible body composed of the *tanmatra* of the
primal elements, but simply means the gross body. In 14, he says,
*Lingat sthuladehat*, *Lingam tadeva dehantaram*. In 15, anena Lingena
Savibhutena. Adristhah means *alakshitah*. A little care would have
removed such blunders.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[71:2](m12b029.htm#fr_173) The commentator
cites the *Gita* which furnishes a parallel passage, *viz*., *Indriyani
paranyahurindriyebhyah param manah*, etc.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[71:3](m12b029.htm#fr_174) This verse seems to
show that the *Rishis* had knowledge of spectacles, and probably also,
of microscopes. The instrument that shewed minute objects must have been
well known, otherwise some mention would have been made of it by name.
The commentator calls it *upanetra*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCIII](m12b030)
