[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b098) 
[Next](m12b100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXXII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Amongst the diverse kinds of sacrifices, all of
which, of course, are regarded to have but one object (*viz*., the
cleansing of the heart or the glory of God), tell me, O grandsire, what
that sacrifice is which has been ordained for the sake only of virtue
and not for the acquisition of either heaven or wealth!' <span
id="fr_783"></span>[2](#fn_783)

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection I shall relate to thee the history,
formerly

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

recited by Narada, of a Brahmana who for performing sacrifices, lived
according to the *unchha* mode.'

"Narada said, 'In one of the foremost of kingdoms that was distinguished
again for virtue, there lived a Brahmana. Devoted to penances and living
according to the *unchha* mode, that Brahmana was earnestly engaged in
adoring Vishnu in sacrifices. <span id="fr_784"></span>[1](#fn_784) He
had Syamaka for his food, as also Suryaparni and Suvarchala and other
kinds of potherbs that were bitter and disagreeable to the taste. In
consequence, however, of his penances, all these tasted sweet. <span
id="fr_785"></span>[2](#fn_785) Abstaining from injuring any creature,
and leading the life of a forest recluse, he attained to ascetic
success. With roots and fruits, O scorcher of foes, he used to adore
Vishnu in sacrifices that were intended to confer heaven upon him. <span
id="fr_786"></span>[3](#fn_786) The Brahmana, whose name was Satya, had
a wife named Pushkaradharini. She was pure-minded, and had emaciated
herself by the observance of many austere vows. (Herself having been of
a benevolent disposition, and her husband being thus addicted to
sacrifices that were cruel), she did not approve of the conduct of her
lord. Summoned, however, to take her seat by his side as his spouse (for
the performance of a sacrifice), she feared to incur his curse and,
therefore, comforted herself with his conduct. The garments that
invested her body consisted of the (cast off) plumes of peacocks.
Although unwilling, she still performed that sacrifice at the command of
her lord who had become its *Hotri*. In that forest, near to the
Brahmana's asylum, lived a neighbour of his, *viz*., the virtuous
Parnada of Sukra's race, [having](errata.htm#117) assumed the form of a
deer. He addressed that Brahmana, whose name was Satya, in articulate
speech and said unto him these words, 'Thou wouldst be acting very
improperly, <span id="fr_787"></span>[4](#fn_787) if this sacrifice of
thine were accomplished in such a manner as to be defective in *mantras*
and other particulars of ritual. I, therefore, ask thee to slay and cut
me in pieces for making libations therewith on thy sacrificial fire. Do
this and becoming blameless ascend to heaven.' Then the presiding
goddess of the solar disc, *viz*., Savitri, came to that sacrifice in
her own embodied form and insisted upon that Brahmana in

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

doing what he desired by that deer to do. Unto that goddess, however,
who thus insisted, the Brahmana replied, saying, 'I shall not slay this
deer who lives with me in this same neighbourhood.' <span
id="fr_788"></span>[1](#fn_788) Thus addressed by the Brahmana, the
goddess Savitri desisted and entered the sacrificial fire from desire of
surveying the nether world, and wishing to avoid the sight of (other)
defects in that sacrifice. <span id="fr_789"></span>[2](#fn_789) The
deer, then, with joined hands, once more begged of Satya (to be cut in
pieces and poured into the sacrificial fire). Satya, however, embraced
him in friendship and dismissed him, saying, 'Go!' <span
id="fr_790"></span>[3](#fn_790) At this, the deer seemed to leave that
place. But after he had gone eight steps he returned, and said, 'Verily,
do thou slay me. Truly do I say, slain by thee I am sure to attain to a
righteous end. I give thee (spiritual) vision. Behold the celestial
Apsaras and the beautiful vehicles of the high-souled Gandharvas.'
Beholding (that sight) for a protracted space of time, with longing
eyes, and seeing the deer ([solicitous](errata.htm#119) of sacrifice),
and thinking that residence in heaven is attainable by only slaughter,
he approved (of the counsels the deer had given). It was Dharma himself
who had become a deer that lived in those woods for many years. (Seeing
the Brahmana tempted by the prospect he beheld), Dharma provided for his
salvation and counselled him, saying, 'This (*viz*., slaughter of living
creatures) is not conformable to the ordinances about Sacrifices. <span
id="fr_791"></span>[4](#fn_791) The penances, which had been of very
large measure, of that Brahmana whose mind had entertained the desire of
slaying the deer, diminished greatly in consequence of that thought
itself. The injuring of living creatures, therefore, forms no part of
sacrifice. <span id="fr_792"></span>[5](#fn_792) Then the illustrious
Dharma (having assumed his real form), himself assisted that Brahmana,
by discharging the priestly office, to perform a sacrifice. The
Brahmana, after this, in consequence of his (renewed) penances, attained
to that state of mind which was his spouse's. <span
id="fr_793"></span>[6](#fn_793) Abstention from injury is that religion
which is complete in respect of its rewards. The religion, however, of
cruelty is only thus far beneficial that it leads to heaven (which has a
termination). I have spoken

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

to thee of that religion of Truth which, indeed, is the religion of
those that are utterers of *Brahma*.'" <span
id="fr_794"></span>[1](#fn_794)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_783"></span>[275:2](m12b099.htm#fr_783) The verse is not
difficult; the commentator, again, is very clear. The Burdwan
translator, however, while citing the very words of the commentary,
totally misunderstands them and makes utter nonsense of them.
*Ekarthanam* is explained as *Ekam chitiasuddhih Iswarapritirva
tadarthanam madhya*. The question asked is *dharmartham yo yajnah
samahitah* (*viniyuktah*) *tadeva vruhi* and not that *Yajna* which
*sukhartham* (*bhavati*).

<span id="fn_784"></span>[276:1](m12b099.htm#fr_784) One that subsists
upon grains of corn picked up from the fields after the reapers have
abandoned them is called a person leading the *unchha* mode of life. The
Burdwan translator commits the ridiculous error of taking
*unchhavrittih* as the *name* of the Brahmana. The commentator supposes
that *Yajna* here implies *Vishnu*, as expounded in the *Srutis*.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[276:2](m12b099.htm#fr_785) Syamaka is a
variety of paddy called *Panicum frumentaceum*. 'Suryaparni' is
otherwise called 'Mashaparni' (*Ayurvedhartha chandrika*). It is
identified with *Tiramus labialis*, syn.--*Glycine deblis*. 'Suvarchala'
is a name applied to various plants. Here, very probably,
'*Brahmisaka*,' or *Herpestes Monnjera* (syn.--*Gratiola Monniera*,
Linn) is intended.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[276:3](m12b099.htm#fr_786) *i.e.*, he never
slaughtered living animals for offering them in sacrifices because of
his inability to procure them. He, therefore,
[substituted](errata.htm#118) vegetable products for those animals. His
sacrifices, intended to take him to heaven, were really cruel in
intention.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[276:4](m12b099.htm#fr_787) Following the
Bombay text I read the last line of 8 as *Sukrasya punarajatih
Parnadonamadharmavit*, or *Sukrasya punarjnabhih*, etc.; *ajatih* is a
'descendant.' If *ajnabhih* be taken as the reading it would mean 'at
the repeated commands of Sukra.' The Bengal reading *apadhyanat
adharmavit* seems to be vicious. Both the vernacular versions are
incorrect; K.P. Singha supplying something of his own will for making
sense of what, he writes, and the Burdwan translator writing nonsense as
usual.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[277:1](m12b099.htm#fr_788) K.P. Singha wrongly
translates this verse; for once, the Burdwan translator is correct.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[277:2](m12b099.htm#fr_789) Both the vernacular
versions of this verse were incorrect. The commentator explains that the
grammar is *rasatalam didrikshuh sa Yajna-pavakam pravishtah*. *Yajne
duscharitam kinnu, samipavarti mudo janah* *i.e.*, fearing to see many
other defects in the sacrifice which was being celebrated by an ignorant
person.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[277:3](m12b099.htm#fr_790) *Vaddhanjalim* is
an adverb, qualifying *ayachata*. The Burdwan translator wrongly takes
it as an adjective of *Satyam*.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[277:4](m12b099.htm#fr_791) In verse 8, it is
said that it was a descendant of Sukra, *viz*., the virtuous Parnada,
who had become a deer and lived in those woods as the Brahmana's
neighbour. Here it is said that it was the deity Dharma who had become
so. The two statements may be reconciled supposing that Dharma first
became the *Rishi* Parnada and then, as Parnada, was metamorphosed into
a deer. *Tasya nishkritim adhatta* is explained by the commentator in a
very far-fetched way. He takes these words to mean that Dharma, who had
become a deer, provided at this juncture for his liberation from that
metamorphosis. I think *tasya* has reference to the misled Brahmana.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[277:5](m12b099.htm#fr_792) *Yajnia* is
explained as *yajnaya hita*.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[277:6](m12b099.htm#fr_793) *Samadhanam* is the
absorption of meditation, or that state of mind in which one has no
longer any affection for the world, *Bharyayh* is genitive, but the
Burdwan translator takes it for the instrumental singular.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[278:1](m12b099.htm#fr_794) *Yo dhamah* is the
reading I take, and not *no dharmah*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXIII](m12b100)
