[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b011) 
[Next](m12b013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CLXXXV

"Bharadwaja said, 'How does bodily fire or heat, entering the body,
reside there? How also does the wind, obtaining space for itself, cause
the body to move and exert itself?'

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

"Bhrigu said, 'I shall, O regenerate one, speak to thee of the course in
which the wind moves, and how, O sinless one, that mighty element causes
the bodies of living creatures to move and exert themselves. Heat
resides within the head (brain) and protects the body (from perishing).
The wind or breath called *Prana*, residing within the head and the heat
that is there, cause all kinds of exertion. That *Prana* is the living
creature, the universal soul, the eternal Being, and the Mind,
Intellect, and Consciousness of all living creatures, as also all the
objects of the senses. <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) Thus the
living creature is, in every respect, caused by *Prana* to move about
and exert. Them in consequence of the other breath called *Samana*,
every one of the senses is made to act as it does. The breath called
*Apana*, having recourse to the heat that is in the urethra and the
abdominal intestines, moves, engaged in carrying out urine and faeces.
That single breath which operates in these three, is called *Udana* by
those that are conversant with science. That breath which operates,
residing in all the joints of men's bodies, is called *Vyana*. There is
heat in the bodies of living creatures which is circulated all over the
system by the breath *Samana*. Residing thus in the body, that breath
operates upon the different kinds of watery and other elementary
substances and all bad humours. That heat, residing between *Apana* and
*Prana*, in the region of the navel, operates, with the aid of those two
breaths, in digesting all food that is taken by a living creature. There
is a duct beginning from the mouth down to the anal canal. Its extremity
is called the anus. From this main duct numerous subsidiary ones branch
out in the bodies of all living creatures. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58) In consequence of the rush of the several
breaths named above (through these ducts), those breaths mingle
together. The heat (that dwells in *Prana*) is called *Ushman*. It is
this heat that causes digestion in all creatures possessed of bodies.
The breath called *Prana*, the bearer of a current of heat, descends
(from the head) downwards to the extremity of the anal canal and thence
is sent upwards once more. Coming back to its seat in the head, it once
more sends down the heat it bears. Below the navel is the region of
digested matter. Above it is that for the food which is taken. In the
navel are all the forces of life that sustain the body. Urged by the ten
kinds of breaths having *Prana* for their first, the ducts (already
mentioned), branching out from the heart, convey the liquid juices that
food yields, upwards, downwards, and in transverse directions. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[3](#fn_59) The main duct leading from the mouth to
the anus is the path by which *yogins*, vanquishers of fatigue, of
perfect equanimity in joy and sorrow, and possessed of great patience,
succeed in attaining to

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Brahma* by holding the soul within the
brain. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) Even thus is heat panted in
the breaths called *Prana* and *Apana* and others, of all embodied
creatures. That heat is always burning there like a fire placed in any
(visible) vessel.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[28:1](m12b012.htm#fr_57) Both the Bengal and
the Bombay texts read *bhutani*. The correct reading, however, appears
to be *bhutanam*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[28:2](m12b012.htm#fr_58) The word for duct is
*Srotas*. It may also be rendered 'channel.' Very like the principal
artery or aorta.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[28:3](m12b012.htm#fr_59) Notwithstanding much
that is crude anatomy and crude physiology in these sections, it is
evident, however, that certain glimpses of truth were perceived by the
*Rishis* of ancient times. Verse 15 shows that the great discovery of
Harvey in modern times was known in ancient India.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[29:1](m12b012.htm#fr_60) In works on yoga it is
laid down that the main duct should be brought under the control of the
will. The soul may then, by an act of volition, be withdrawn from the
whole physical system into the convolutions of the brain in the head.
The brain, in the language of yogins, is a lot us of a thousand leaves.
If the soul be withdrawn into it, the living creature will then be
liberated from the necessity of food and sleep, etc., and will live on
from age to age, absorbed in contemplation of divinity and in perfect
beatitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXXXVI](m12b013)
