[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b004) 
[Next](m12b006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CLXXVIII

"Bhishma continued, 'In this connection is also cited the old narrative
of the verses sung by Janaka the ruler of the Videhas, who had attained
to tranquillity of soul. What the monarch said was, 'Unlimited is my
wealth. At the same time I have nothing, if the whole of (my kingdom)
Mithila be consumed in a conflagration, I shall incur no loss.' In the
connection is also cited the speech of Vodhya uttered in respect of this
very topic, *viz*., freedom from attachments. Listen to it O
Yudhishthira! Once on a time the royal son of Nahusha (Yayati)
questioned the *Rishi* Vodhya who had, in consequence of the abandonment
of desire, attained to tranquillity of soul and who had an intimate
acquaintance with the scriptures. The monarch said, 'O thou of great
wisdom, give me instructions about tranquillity. What is that under

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

standing relying upon which thou succeedest in wandering over the world
in tranquillity of soul and disengaged from all acts?'

"Vodhya said, 'I conduct myself according to the instructions of others
but never instruct others myself. I shall, however, mention the
indications of those instructions (according to which my conduct is
framed). Thou mayst catch their spirit by reflection. My six preceptors
are Pingala, the osprey, the snake, the bee in the forest, the maker of
shafts (in the story), and the maiden (in the story)!' <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33)

"Bhishma continued, 'Hope is very powerful (in agitating the heart), O
King! Freedom from hope is high felicity. Reducing hope to an absence of
expectation, Pingala sleeps in peace. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34) Beholding an osprey with meat in his
beaks, others, that have not found any meat, assail and destroy him. A
certain osprey, by altogether abstaining from meat obtained felicity. To
build a house for one's own self is productive of sorrow and not of
happiness. The snake, taking up his residence in another creature's
abode, lives in felicity. The ascetics live happily, betaking themselves
to mendicancy, without being injured by any creature, like bees in the
forest. A certain maker of shafts, while employed at his work, was so
deeply attentive to it that he did not notice the king who passed by his
side. When many are together, dispute ensues. Even when two reside
together, they are sure to converse. I, however, wander alone like the
anklet made of sea-shells in the wrist of the maiden in the
story.'" <span id="fr_35"></span>[3](#fn_35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[14:1](m12b005.htm#fr_33) Nilakantha explains
that by *Saranga* here is meant the bee. The *anweshanam* following
[it](errata.htm#61) is 'going behind.' The whole compound means
'imitation of the bee in the forest.'

<span id="fn_34"></span>[14:2](m12b005.htm#fr_34) The allusion is to the
story of Pingala, in Section 74 *ante*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[14:3](m12b005.htm#fr_35) The story, evidently a
very ancient one, is given in full in the *Bhagavat*. Once on a time, a
maiden, residing in her father's house, wished to feed secretly a number
of Brahmanas. While removing the grain from the barn, her anklets, made
of shells, began to jingle. Fearing discovery through that noise, she
broke all her anklets except one for each hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXXIX](m12b006)
