[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b000) 
[Next](m12b002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE MAHABHARATA

## SANTI PARVA

## PART II

### SECTION CLXXIV

(*Mokshadharma Parva*)

"YUDHISHTHIRA SAID, 'THOU hast, O grandsire, discoursed upon the
auspicious duties (of person in distress) connected with the duties of
kings. It behoveth thee now, O king, to tell me those foremost of duties
which belong to those who lead the (four) modes of life.'

"Bhishma said, 'Religion hath many doors. The observance of (the duties
prescribed by) religion can never be futile. Duties have been laid down
with respect to every mode of life. (The fruits of those duties are
invisible, being attainable in the next world.) The fruits, however, of
Penance directed towards the soul are obtainable in this world. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Whatever be the object to which one devotes
oneself, that object, O Bharata, and nothing else, appears to one as the
highest of acquisitions fraught with the greatest of blessings. When one
reflects properly (one's heart being purified by such reflection), one
comes to know that the things of this world are as valueless as straw.
Without doubt, one is then freed from attachment in respect of those
things. When the world, O Yudhishthira, which is full of defects, is so
constituted, every man of intelligence should strive for the attainment
of the emancipation of his soul.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, by what frame of soul should
one kill one's grief when one loses one's wealth, or when one's wife, or
son, or sire, dies.'

"Bhishma said, 'When one's wealth is lost, or one's wife or son or sire
is dead, one certainly says to oneself 'Alas, this is a great sorrow!'
But then one should, by the aid of reflection, seek to kill that sorrow.
In this connection is cited the old story of the speech that a
regenerate friend of his, coming to Senajit's court, made to that king.
Beholding the monarch agitated with grief and burning with sorrow on
account of the death of his son, the

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Brahmana addressed that ruler of very cheerless
heart and said these words, 'Why art thou stupefied? Thou art without
any intelligence. Thyself an object of grief, why dost thou grieve (for
others)? A few days hence others will grieve for thee, and in their turn
they will be grieved for by others. Thyself, myself, and others who wait
upon thee, O king, shall all go to that place whence all of us have
come.'

"Senajit said, 'What is that intelligence, what is that penance, O
learned Brahmana, what is that concentration of mind, O thou that hast
wealth of asceticism, what is that knowledge, and what is that learning,
by acquiring which thou dost not yield to sorrow?'

"The Brahmana said, 'Behold, all creatures,--the superior, the middling,
and the inferior,--in consequence of their respective acts, are
entangled in grief. I do not regard even my own self to be mine. On the
other hand, I regard the whole world to be mine. I again think that all
this (which I see) is as much mine as it belongs to others. Grief cannot
approach me in consequence of this thought. Having acquired such an
understanding, I do not yield either to joy or to grief. As two pieces
of wood floating on the ocean come together at one time and are again
separated, even such is the union of (living) creatures in this world.
Sons, grandsons, kinsmen, relatives are all of this kind. One should
never feel affection for them, for separation with them is certain. Thy
son came from an invisible region. He has departed and become invisible.
He did not know thee. Thou didst not know him. Who art thou and for whom
dost thou grieve? Grieve arises from the disease constituted by desire.
Happiness again results from the disease of desire being cured. From joy
also springs sorrow, and hence sorrow arises repeatedly. Sorrow comes
after joy, and joy after sorrow. The joys and sorrows of human beings
are revolving on a wheel. After happiness sorrow has come to thee. Thou
shalt again have happiness. No one suffers sorrow for ever, and no one
enjoys happiness for ever. The body is the refuge of both sorrow and
happiness. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) Whatever acts an embodied
creature does with the aid of his body, the consequence thereof he has
to suffer in that body. Life springs with the springing of the body into
existence. The two exist together, and the two perish together. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) Men of uncleansed souls, wedded to worldly
things by various bonds, meet with destruction like embankments of sand
in water. Woes of diverse kinds, born of ignorance, act like pressers of
oil-seeds, for assailing all creatures in consequence of their
attachments. These press them like oil-seeds in the oil-making machine
represented by the round of rebirths (to which they are subject). Man,
for the sake of his wife (and others), commits numerous evil acts, but
suffers singly diverse kinds of misery both in this and the next world.
All men, attached to children and wives and kinsmen and relatives, sink
in the miry sea of grief like wild elephants, when destitute of
strength, sinking in a miry slough. Indeed. O lord, upon loss of wealth
or

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

son or kinsmen or relatives, man suffers great distress, which resembles
as regards its power of burning, a forest conflagration. All this,
*viz*., joy and grief, existence and non-existence, is dependent upon
destiny. One having friends as one destitute of friends, one having foes
as one destitute of foes, one having wisdom as one destitute of wisdom,
each and every one amongst these, obtains happiness through destiny.
Friends are not the cause of one's happiness. Foes are not the cause of
one's misery. Wisdom is not competent to bring an accession of wealth;
nor is wealth competent to bring an accession of happiness. Intelligence
is not the cause of wealth, nor is stupidity the cause of penury. He
only that is possessed of wisdom, and none else, understands the order
of the world. Amongst the intelligent, the heroic, the foolish, the
cowardly, the idiotic, the learned, the weak, or the strong, happiness
comes to him for whom it is ordained. Among the calf, the cowherd that
owns her, and the thief, the cow indeed belongs to him who drinks her
milk. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) They whose understanding is
absolutely dormant, and they who have attained to that state of the mind
which lies beyond the sphere of the intellect, succeed in enjoying
happiness. Only they that are between the two classes, suffer
misery. <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) They that are possessed of
wisdom delight in the two extremes but not in the states that are
intermediate. The sages have said that the attainment of any of these
two extremes constitutes happiness. Misery consists in the states that
are intermediate between the two. <span id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5) They
who have succeeded in attaining to real felicity (which *samadhi* can
bring), and who have become free from the pleasures and pains of this
world, and who are destitute of envy, are never agitated by either the
accession of wealth or its loss. They who have not succeeded in
acquiring that intelligence which leads to real felicity, but who have
transcended folly and ignorance (by the help of a knowledge of the
scriptures), give way to excessive joy and excessive misery. Men
destitute of all notions of right or wrong, insensate with pride and
with success over others, yield to transports of delight like the gods
in heaven. <span id="fr_6"></span>[4](#fn_6) Happiness must end in
misery. Idleness is misery; while cleverness (in action) is the cause of
happiness. Affluence and prosperity dwell in one possessed of
cleverness, but not in one that is idle. Be it happiness or be it
misery, be it agreeable or be it disagreeable, what comes to one should
be enjoyed or

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

endured with an unconquered heart. Every day a thousand occasions for
sorrow, and hundred occasions for fear assail the man of ignorance and
folly but not the man that is possessed of wisdom. Sorrow can never
touch the man that is possessed of intelligence, that has acquired
wisdom, that is mindful of listening to the instructions of his betters,
that is destitute of envy, and that is self-restrained. Relying upon
such an understanding, and protecting his heart (from the influences of
desire and the passions), the man of wisdom should conduct himself here.
Indeed, sorrow is unable to touch him who is conversant with that
Supreme Self from which everything springs and unto which everything
disappears. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) The very root of that for
which grief, or heartburning, or sorrow is felt or for which one is
impelled to exertion, should, even if it be a part of one's body, be
cast off. That object, whatever it may be in respect of which the idea
of *meum* is cherished, becomes a source of grief and heart-burning.
Whatever objects, amongst things that are desired, are cast off become
sources of happiness. The man that pursues objects of desire meets with
destruction in course of the pursuit. Neither the happiness that is
derived from a gratification of the senses nor that great felicity which
one may enjoy in heaven, approaches to even a sixteenth part of the
felicity which arises from the destruction of all desires. The acts of a
former life, right or wrong, visit, in their consequences, the wise and
the foolish, the brave and the timid. It is even thus that joy and
sorrow, the agreeable and the disagreeable, continually revolve (as on a
wheel) among living creatures. Relying upon such an understanding, the
man of intelligence and wisdom lives at ease. A person should disregard
all his desires, and never allow his wrath to get the better of him.
This wrath springs in the heart and grows there into vigour and
luxuriance. This wrath that dwells in the bodies of men and is born in
their minds, is spoken of by the wise as Death. When a person succeeds
in withdrawing all his desires like a tortoise withdrawing all its
limbs, then his soul, which is self-luminous, succeeds in looking into
itself. <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8) That object, whatever it may
be, in respect of which the idea of *meum* is cherished, becomes a
source of grief and heart-burning. <span id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9)
When a person himself feels no fear, and is feared by no one, when he
cherishes no desire and no aversion, he is then said to attain to the
state of *Brahma*. Casting off both truth and falsehood, grief and joy,
fear and courage, the agreeable and the disagreeable, thou mayst become
of tranquil soul. When a person abstains from doing wrong to any
creature, in thought, word, or deed, he is then said to attain to a
state of *Brahma*. True happiness is his who can cast off that thirst
which is incapable of being cast off by the misguided, which does not
decay with decrepitude, and which is regarded as a fatal disease. In
this connection, O king, are heard

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the verses sung by Pingala about the manner in which she had acquired
eternal merit even at a time that had been very unfavourable. A fallen
woman of the name of Pingala, having repaired to the place of
assignation, was denied the company of her lover through an accident. At
that time of great misery, she succeeded in acquiring tranquillity of
soul.'

"Pingala said, 'Alas, I have for many long years lived, all the while
overcome by frenzy, by the side of that Dear Self in whom there is
nothing but tranquillity. Death has been at my door. Before this, I did
not, however approach that Essence of Purity. I shall cover this house
of one column and nine doors (by means of true Knowledge). <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) What woman is there that regards that
Supreme Soul as her dear lord, even when He comes near? <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11) I am now awake. I have been roused from
the sleep of ignorance. I am no longer influenced by desire. Human
lovers, who are really the embodied forms of hell, shall no longer
deceive me by approaching me lustfully. Evil produces good through the
destiny or the acts of a former life. Roused (from the sleep of
ignorance), I have cast off all desire for worldly objects. I have
acquired a complete mastery over my senses. One freed from desire and
hope sleeps in felicity. Freedom from every hope and desire is felicity.
Having driven off desire and hope, Pingala sleeps in felicity.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Convinced with these and other words uttered by the
learned Brahmana, king Senajit (casting off his grief), experienced
delight and became very happy.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](m12b001.htm#fr_0) It is very difficult to
literally translate such verses. The word *Dharma* is sometimes used in
the sense of Religion or the aggregate of duties. At other times it
simply means a duty or the course of duties prescribed for a particular
situation. *Tapah* is generally rendered penance. Here, however, it has
a direct reference to *sravana* (hearing), *manana* (contemplation), and
*nididhyasana* (abstraction of the soul from everything else for
absolute concentration). The Grammar of the second half of the first
line is *Sati apretya* etc., *Sat* being that which is real, hence, the
Soul, or the Supreme Soul, of which every individual Soul is only a
portion.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](m12b001.htm#fr_1) And not the Soul, as the
commentator explains. With the death of the body joy and grief
disappear.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2:2](m12b001.htm#fr_2) The art by which the body
could, as in Egypt, be preserved for thousands of years was not known to
the *Rishis*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:1](m12b001.htm#fr_3) The commentator explains
the sense of this as follows; The cow belongs to him who drinks her
milk. Those who derive no advantage from her have no need for showing
her any affection. One should not covet what is above one's want, It has
been said, that (to a thirsty or hungry or toil-worn man), a little
quantity of vaccine milk is of more use than a hundred kine; a small
measure of rice more useful than a hundred barns filled with grain; half
a little bed is of more use than a large mansion.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[3:2](m12b001.htm#fr_4) I follow Nilakantha in
rendering this verse. His interpretation is plausible. *Mudatamah*,
according to him, are those who are in deep sleep. There are four stages
of consciousness. These are (1) wakefulness, (2) dream, (3) dreamless or
deep slumber, and (4) Turiya or absolute Samadhi (which the Yogin only
can attain to).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[3:3](m12b001.htm#fr_5) The two extremes, of
course, are dreamless slumber and *Turiya* or *Samadhi*. The two
intermediate ones are wakefulness and sleep with dream.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[3:4](m12b001.htm#fr_6) *Pride* in consequences
of having insulted or humiliated others; and success over others such as
victories in, battle and other concerns of the world.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[4:1](m12b001.htm#fr_7) The first half of the
second line is read variously. The sense, however, in effect, remains
unaltered. What is said here is that man who succeeds in attaining to a
state of Brahma by true Samadhi or abstraction from the world, can never
be touched by grief.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[4:2](m12b001.htm#fr_8) In all treatises on Yoga
it is said that when the first stage is passed, the neophyte succeeds in
looking at his own self. The meaning seems to be that he experiences a
sort of double existence so that he succeeds in himself looking at his
own self.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[4:3](m12b001.htm#fr_9) This is the same as 46.
The Bombay edition does not repeat it.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[5:1](m12b001.htm#fr_10) The house referred to
is the body. The single column on which it is supported is the backbone,
and the nine doors are the eyes, the ears, the nostrils, etc. etc.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[5:2](m12b001.htm#fr_11) The sense is that women
always regard their human lovers as dear without regarding the Supreme
Being to be so, although He is always with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXXV](m12b002)
