[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b105) 
[Next](m12b107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXXIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'All men speak of ourselves as highly fortunate. In
truth, however, there is no person more wretched than ourselves. Though
honoured by all the world, O best of the Kurus, and though we have been
born among men, O grandsire, having been begotten by the very gods, yet
when so much sorrow has been our lot, it seems, O reverend chief, that
birth alone in an embodied form is the cause of all sorrow. Alas, when
shall we adopt a life of Renunciation that is destructive of
sorrow? <span id="fr_842"></span>[1](#fn_842) Sages of rigid vows freed
from the seven and ten (*i.e.*, the five breaths, mind, understanding,
and the ten organs of knowledge and action), from the five faults of
Yoga (*viz*., desire, wrath, covetousness, fear, and sleep) that
constitute the chief causes (for binding man to repeated rounds of
earthly life), and from the other eight, *viz*., the five objects of the
senses and the three attributes (of *Sattwa*, *Rajas*, and *Tamas*),
have never to incur rebirth. When, O scorcher of foes, shall we succeed
in abandoning sovereignty for adopting a life of renunciation?'

"Bhishma said, 'Everything, O great monarch, hath an end. Everything
hath bounds assigned to it. Even rebirth, it is well-known, hath an end.
In this world there is nothing that is, immutable. Thou thinkest, O
king, that this (*viz*., the affluence with which thou art invested is a
fault). That it is not so is not true, in regard to our present topic of
disquisition. Ye, however, are conversant with virtue, and have
readiness. It is certain, therefore, that ye shall attain to the end of
your sorrow, (*viz*., Emancipation) in time. <span
id="fr_843"></span>[2](#fn_843) Jiva equipped with body, O king, is not
the author of his merits and demerits (or their fruits as represented by
happiness and misery). On the other hand, he becomes enveloped by the
Darkness (of Ignorance having attachment and

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

aversion for its essence) that is born of his merits and demerits. <span
id="fr_844"></span>[1](#fn_844) As the wind impregnated with dust of
antimony once again seizes the efflorescence of realgar and (though
itself destitute of colour) assumes the hues of the substances which it
has seized and tinges the different points of the compass (which
represent its own hueless progenitor, *viz*., space), after the same
manner, Jiva, though himself colourless, assumes a hue in consequence of
being enveloped by Darkness and variegated by the fruits of action, and
travels from body to body (making his own stainless and immutable
progenitor appear as stained and changeful). <span
id="fr_845"></span>[2](#fn_845) When Jiva succeeds in dispelling by
means of Knowledge, the Darkness that invests him in consequence of
Ignorance, then Immutable Brahma becomes displayed (in all His glory).
The Sages say that reversion to Immutable Brahma is incapable of being
achieved by Acts. Thyself, others in the world, and the deities too,
should reverence them that have achieved Emancipation. All the great
*Rishis* never desist from culture of Brahma. <span
id="fr_846"></span>[3](#fn_846) In this connection is cited that
discourse which was sung (by the preceptor of the Daityas) in days of
old. Listen, O monarch, with undivided attention to the course of
conduct that was followed by the Daitya Vritra after he became divested
of all his prosperity. Depending only upon his intelligence, he did not
indulge in sorrow, in the midst of his enemies, although he was deprived
of sovereignty, O Bharata! Unto Vritra, when in days of old he was reft
of sovereignty, (his preceptor) Usanas said, 'I hope, O Danava, that in
consequence of thy defeat thou dost not cherish any grief?'

"Vritra said, 'Without doubt, having understood, by the aid of truth and
penances, the advent and departure of all living creatures, I have
ceased to indulge in either grief or joy. Urged by Time creatures sink
helplessly in hell. Some again, the sages say, go to heaven. All these
pass their time in contentment. Passing their allotted periods in heaven
and hell, and with some portion

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

of their merits and demerits unexhausted (by enjoyment and suffering),
they repeatedly take birth, impelled by Time. Chained by the bonds of
Desire, creatures pass through myriads of intermediate life and fall
helplessly into hell. <span id="fr_847"></span>[1](#fn_847) I have seen
that creatures come and go even thus. The lesson inculcated in the
Scriptures is that one's acquisitions correspond with one's acts. <span
id="fr_848"></span>[2](#fn_848) Creatures take birth as men or as
intermediate animals or as gods and go to hell. Having acted in lives,
that are past in such a way as to deserve them, all creatures, subject
to the ordinances of the Destroyer, meet with happiness and misery, the
agreeable and the disagreeable. Having enjoyed the measure of weal or
woe that corresponds with their acts, creatures always come back by the
old path, <span id="fr_849"></span>[3](#fn_849) which is measured by the
measure of acts.' Then the illustrious Usanas addressed the *Asura*
Vritra who was thus talking of the highest refuge of the creation,
saying, 'O intelligent Daitya, why, O child, dost thou utter such
foolish rhapsodies?'

"Vritra said, 'The severe penances which I underwent from greed of
victory are well-known to thee as also to other sages. Appropriating
diverse scents and diverse kinds of tastes that other creatures had for
enjoying, I swelled up with my own energy, afflicting the three worlds.
Decked with myriads of effulgent rays I used to rove through the skies
(on my celestial car), incapable of being defeated by any creature and
fearing none. I achieved great prosperity through my penances and lost
it again through my own acts. Relying on my fortitude, however, I do not
grieve for this change. Desirous (in days of yore) of fighting the great
Indra, the high-souled ruler of the heavens, I beheld in that battle the
illustrious Hari, the puissant Narayana. <span
id="fr_850"></span>[4](#fn_850) He who is called Vaikuntha, Purusha,
Ananta, Sukla, Vishnu, Sanatana, Munjakesa, Harismasru, and the
Grandsire of all creatures. <span id="fr_851"></span>[5](#fn_851)
Without doubt, there is still a remnant (to be enjoyed by me) of the
rewards attaching to that penance represented by a sight of the great
Hari. It is in consequence of that unexhausted remnant that I have
become desirous of asking thee, O illustrious one, about the fruits of
action! <span id="fr_852"></span>[6](#fn_852) Upon which order (of men)
hath

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

been established high Brahma prosperity? In what mariner, again, doth
high prosperity fall off? From whom do creatures spring and live?
Through whom again do they act? What is that high Fruit by attaining to
which a creature succeeds in living eternally as Brahma? By what Act or
by what Knowledge can that fruit be achieved? It behoveth thee, O
learned Brahmana, to expound these to me.'

"Recapitulated by me, O lion among kings, listen with undivided
attention, O bull of men, with all thy brothers, to what the sage Usanas
then said after he had been thus addressed by that prince of Danavas.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_842"></span>[292:1](m12b106.htm#fr_842) *Sanjnakam* from
the root *jna* meaning *marana* or killing.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[292:2](m12b106.htm#fr_843) The two negatives
in the first line are equivalent to an affirmative. *Prasangatah* is
explained by the commentator in a slightly different way. Affluence, in
consequence of the attachment it generates, stands in the way of
Emancipation. Hence, *i.e.*, in consequence of this consideration, the
king's opinion regarding affluence, is correct. With respect to the
certainty of attaining to Emancipation, compare *Gita*, *Vahunam
janmanamante jnanavan mam prapadyate*, etc.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[293:1](m12b106.htm#fr_844) The object of this
verse, as explained by the commentator, is to exhort Yudhishthira to
strive after Emancipation without being at all moved by his happiness or
misery which (as stated here) come to *Jiva* as accidents.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[293:2](m12b106.htm#fr_845) The wind has space
for its progenitor. Jiva has the stainless and immutable Chit for his
progenitor. Like the wind, which is hueless, catching hues from
surrounding objects and making its own hueless progenitor look as if it
has hues, Jiva also, though in reality stainless, catches stains from
Ignorance and Acts and makes his own progenitor, the stainless and
immutable *Chit*, display stains of every kind. This is how the
commentator puts the simile, supplying the points that have been omitted
in the text.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[293:3](m12b106.htm#fr_846) These aphorisms are
very abstruse. What is meant by saying that the attainment of Brahma
does not depend upon Acts is this: Acts are terminable. Their
consequences also are terminable. Acts, therefore, can never be the
means by which Brahma can be attained, for Brahma is interminable and
eternal, not like the felicity of heaven which is changeful. The only
means by which Jiva may revert to Brahma is by dispelling Ignorance
through Knowledge; or, as the Upanishads declare, one attains to it as
one gets one's forgotten necklace of gold, which all the while is on the
neck though sought for with assiduity everywhere. K.P. Singha
misunderstands it completely. What is meant by the direction about
reverencing persons who have attained to Brahma is this: the existence
of Brahma and the possibility of Jiva's reverting to that Immutable
status are matters that depend upon the conception of such men. Brahma,
again, is so difficult to keep, that the great sages never desist for a
moment from the culture that is necessary for its retention.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[294:1](m12b106.htm#fr_847) Intermediate
*i.e.*, as animals and birds and reptiles and worms, etc.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[294:2](m12b106.htm#fr_848) *i.e.*, if
righteous, one attains to happiness; if otherwise, to the reverse.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[294:3](m12b106.htm#fr_849) Verse 21 and the
first line of 22 are grammatically connected.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[294:4](m12b106.htm#fr_850) *Me* in the second
line is equivalent to *Maya*. *Tatah* is *tatra yuddhakale*. Hari had
come to aid Indra, and hence Vritra had beheld him. He is called Hari
because he takes away one's sins. Besides the well-known derivation of
the word Narayana, the commentator here offers another, *viz*., the
*ayanam* or *layasthanam* of *Nara* or *Jivasangha*.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[294:5](m12b106.htm#fr_851) *Vaikuntha* has
various etymologies. The commentator inclines to explain it as 'one who
brings together all creatures.' *Purusha* is full; as applied to
Narayana, it, of course, means one who has no defect but who is the sole
representative of fullness. *Sukla* or *Suddha* or pure. *Vishnu* is
all-pervading. *Sanatan* is *kutastha* or uniform or immutable.
*Munjakesa*, is possessed of yellow hair, or hair of the hue of Munja
grass. *Harismasru* is having a tawny beard.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[294:6](m12b106.htm#fr_852) Penances are
meritorious. The very sight of Hari that I obtain was as efficacious as
a course of the austerest penances. Of course, in consequence of that
and my other penances great have been the rewards that I have enjoyed.
It seems, however, that the full measure of rewards has not been reaped;
the remnant is to be enjoyed by me now, for I am about to <span
id="page_295">p. 295</span> ask thee about the fruits of acts. Sacred
and highly auspicious is my enquiry. To make it is, in itself, a reward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXX](m12b107)
