[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b060) 
[Next](m12b062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXXXIV

"Vyasa said, 'Thou hadst asked me about the Creation of all beings; I
have now narrated that to thee in full. Listen to me as I tell thee now
what the duties are of a Brahmana. The rituals of all ceremonies for
which sacrificial fees are enjoined, commencing with *Jatakarma* and
ending with *Samavartana*, depend for their performance upon a preceptor
competent in the Vedas. <span id="fr_394"></span>[2](#fn_394) Having
studied all the Vedas and having displayed a submissive behaviour
towards his preceptor during his residence with him, and having paid the
preceptor's fee, the youth should return home with a thorough knowledge
of all sacrifices. <span id="fr_395"></span>[3](#fn_395) Receiving the
permission of his preceptor, he should adopt

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

one of the four modes of life and live in it in due observance of its
duties till he casts off his body. He should either lead a life of
domesticity with spouses and engaged in creating offspring, or live in
the observance of *Brahmacharya*; or in the forest in the company of his
preceptor, or in the practice of the duties laid down for a *yati*. A
life of domesticity is said to be the root of all the other modes of
life. A self-restrained householder who has conquered all his
attachments to worldly objects always attains to success (in respect of
the great object of life). A Brahmana, by begetting children, by
acquiring a knowledge of the Vedas, and by performing sacrifices, pays
off the three debts he owes. <span id="fr_396"></span>[1](#fn_396) He
should then enter the other modes of life, having cleansed himself by
his acts. He should settle in that place which he may ascertain to be
the most sacred spot on earth, and he should strive in all matters that
lead to fame, for attaining to a position of eminence. The fame of
Brahmanas increases through penances that are very austere, through
mastery of the various branches of knowledge, through sacrifices, and
through gifts. Indeed, a person enjoys endless regions of the righteous
(in the next world) as long as his deeds or the memory thereof lasts in
this world. A Brahmana should teach, study, officiate at other people's
sacrifices, and offer sacrifices himself. He should not give away in
vain or accept other people's gifts in vain. Wealth, sufficient in
quantity, that may come from one who is assisted in a sacrifice, from a
pupil, or from kinsmen (by marriage) of a daughter, should be spent in
the performance of sacrifice or in making gifts. Wealth coming from any
of these sources should never be enjoyed by a Brahmana singly. <span
id="fr_397"></span>[2](#fn_397) For a Brahmana leading a life of
domesticity there is no means save the acceptance of gifts for the sake
of the deities, or *Rishis*, or *Pitris*, or preceptor or the aged, or
the diseased, or the hungry. <span id="fr_398"></span>[3](#fn_398) Unto
those that are persecuted by unseen foes, or those that are striving to
the best of their power to acquire knowledge, one should make gifts from
one's own possessions, including even cooked food, more than one can
fairly afford. <span id="fr_399"></span>[4](#fn_399) Unto a deserving
person there is nothing that cannot be given. They that are good and
wise deserve to have even the prince of steeds, called Uchchaisravas,
belonging to Indra himself. <span id="fr_400"></span>[5](#fn_400) Of
high vows (king) Satyasandha, having, with due humility, offered his own
life-breaths for saving those of a Brahmana, ascended to heaven.
Sankriti's son Rantideva, having given only lukewarm water to the
high-souled Vasishtha, ascended to heaven and received high honours
there.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Atri's royal son Indradamana, possessed of great
intelligence, having given diverse kinds of wealth to a deserving
person, acquired diverse regions of felicity in the next world.
Usinara's son Sivi, having given away his own limbs and the dear son of
loins for the sake of a Brahmana, ascended to heaven from this world.
Pratardana, the ruler of Kasi, having given away his very eyes to a
Brahmana, obtained great fame both here and hereafter. King Devavridha,
having given away a very beautiful and costly umbrella, with eight
golden ribs, proceeded to heaven with all the people of his kingdom.
Sankriti of Atri's race, possessed of great energy, having given
instruction to his disciples on the subject of Impersonal *Brahma*,
proceeded to regions of great felicity. Amvarisha of great prowess,
heaving given unto the Brahmanas eleven *Arvudas* of kine, proceeded to
heaven with all the people of his kingdom. Savitri, by giving away her
ear-rings, and king Janamejaya, by giving away his own body, both
proceeded to high regions of felicity. Yuvanaswa, the son of
Vrishadarbha, by giving away diverse kinds of gems, a fine mansion, and
many beautiful women, ascended to heaven. Nimi, the ruler of the
Videhas, gave away his kingdom, Jamadagni's son (Rama) gave away the
whole earth; and Gaya gave away the earth with all her towns and cities,
unto the Brahmanas. Once when the clouds ceased to pour, Vasishtha,
resembling Brahman himself, kept alive all creatures like Prajapati
keeping them alive (by his energy and kindness). Karandhama's son
Marutta of cleansed soul, by giving away his daughter to Angiras,
speedily ascended to heaven. Brahmadatta, the ruler of the Panchalas,
possessed of superior intelligence, by giving away two precious jewels
called *Nidhi* and *Sankha* unto some of the foremost of the Brahmanas,
obtained many regions of felicity. King Mitrasaha, having given his own
dear wife Madayanti unto the high-souled Vasishtha, ascended to heaven
with that wife of his. The royal sage Sahasrajit, possessed of great
fame having cast off dear life itself for the sake of a Brahmana,
ascended to regions of great felicity. King Satadyumna, having given to
Mudgala a mansion made of gold and full of every object of comfort and
use, ascended to heaven. The king of the Salwas, known by the name of
Dyutimat, possessed of great prowess, gave unto Richika his entire
kingdom and ascended to heaven. The Royal sage Madiraswa, by giving away
his daughter of slender waist to Hiranyahasta, ascended to such regions
as are held in esteem by the very gods. The royal sage Lomapada, of
great prowess, by giving away his daughter Santa to Rishyasringa,
obtained the fruition of all his wishes. King Prasenajit, of great
energy, by giving away a hundred thousand kine with calves, ascended to
excellent regions of felicity. These and many others, possessed of great
and well-ordered souls and having their senses under control, ascended,
by means Of gifts and penances, to heaven. Their fame will last as long
as the earth herself will last. All of them have, by gifts, sacrifices
and procreation of issue, proceeded to heaven.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_394"></span>[163:2](m12b061.htm#fr_394) Jatakarma is the
ceremony that is performed with certain Vedic *mantras* immediately
after a child's birth. There are many such ceremonies to be performed
till *Samavartana* or return from the preceptor's home after completion
of the period of [pupilage](errata.htm#89). These ceremonies are
necessarily such that they must be performed by the child's father or
somebody else whom the latter might call in.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[163:3](m12b061.htm#fr_395) In this country, no
fees are charged for tuition. The pupil, however, after completing his
studies, may give his preceptor a final fee which is determined by the
choice of the preceptor himself and which varies according to the means
of the pupil leaving the preceptor's home for his own.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[164:1](m12b061.htm#fr_396) By begetting
children, one pays off one's debt to ancestors; by studying the Vedas,
one pays off one's debt to the *Rishis*; and by performing sacrifices
one pays off one's debt to the deities.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[164:2](m12b061.htm#fr_397) It is a deadly sin
to take anything from the father-in-law or other relatives (by marriage)
of a daughter. What is got from such sources is, to this day, spent
freely. Those persons that sell their daughters in marriage are
universally reckoned as fallen.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[164:3](m12b061.htm#fr_398) The fact is, the
duty of the householder obliges him to worship the deities and the
*Pitris*, and to become [hospitable](errata.htm#90) to the others named.
The Brahmana, however, has no ostensible means for discharging this
duty. The only means open to him is acceptance of gifts. In this case,
acceptance, therefore, for such ends is not productive of demerit.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[164:4](m12b061.htm#fr_399) *Kritadapi* is
explained by the commentator as *pakvannadapi*.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[164:5](m12b061.htm#fr_400) The sense is that
there is no gift which is too valuable for such persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXXV](m12b062)
