[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b112) 
[Next](m12b114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXXXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, what is Adhyatma with respect
to man and whence it arises.'

"Bhishma said, 'Aided by the science of Adhyatma one may know
everything. It is, again, superior to all things. I shall, with the help
of my intelligence, explain to thee that Adhyatma about which thou
askest me. Listen, O son, to my explanation. Earth, Wind, Space, Water,
and Light forming the fifth, are the great essences. These are (the
causes of) the origin and the destruction of all creatures. The bodies
of living creatures (both subtile and gross), O bull of Bharata's race,
are the result of the combination of the virtues of these five. Those
virtues (whose combinations produce the bodies of creatures) repeatedly
start into existence and repeatedly merge into the original cause of all
things, *viz*., the Supreme Soul. <span id="fr_942"></span>[1](#fn_942)
From those five primal essences are created all creatures, and into
those five great elements all creatures resolve themselves, repeatedly,
like the infinite waves of the Ocean rising from the Ocean and subsiding
into that which causes them. As a tortoise stretches forth its legs and
withdraws them again into itself, even so the infinite number of
creatures spring from (and enter) these five great fixed essences.
Verily, sound springs from Space, and all dense matter is the attribute
of earth. Life is from Wind. Taste is from Water. Form is said to be the
property of Light. The entire mobile and immobile universe is thus these
five great essences existing together in various proportions. When
Destruction comes, the infinite diversity of creatures resolve
themselves into those five, and once more, when Creation begins, they
spring from the same five. The Creator places in all creatures the same
five great essences in proportions that He thinks proper. Sound, the
ears, and all cavities,--these three,--have Space for their producing
cause. Taste, all watery or juicy substances, and the tongue, are said
to be the properties of water. Form, the eye, and the digestive fire in
the stomach, are said to partake of the nature of

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Light. Scent, the organ of smelling, and the
body, are the properties of earth. Life, touch, and action are said to
be the properties of Wind. I have thus explained to thee, O king, all
the properties of the five primal essences. Having created these, the
Supreme Deity, O Bharata, united with them Sattwa, Rajas, Tamas, Time,
Consciousness of functions, and Mind forming the sixth. <span
id="fr_943"></span>[1](#fn_943) That which is called the Understanding
dwells in the interior of what thou seest above the soles of the feet
and below the crown of the head. In man the senses (of knowledge) are
five. The sixth (sense) is the Mind. The seventh is called the
Understanding. The Kshetrajna or Soul is the eighth. The senses and that
which is the Actor should be ascertained by apprehension of their
respective functions. The conditions or states called Sattwa, Rajas, and
Tamas, depend upon the senses for their refuge or formation. The senses
exist for simply seizing the impressions of their respective objects.
The Mind has doubt for its function. The Understanding is for
ascertainment. The Kshetrajna is said to be only an inactive witness (of
the functions of the others). Sattwa, Rajas, Tamas, Time, and Acts, O
Bharata, these attributes direct the Understanding. The Understanding is
the senses and the five fore-mentioned attributes. <span
id="fr_944"></span>[2](#fn_944) When the Understanding is wanting, the
senses with the mind, and the five other attributes (*viz*., Sattwa,
Rajas, Tamas, Time, and Acts) cease to be. That by which the
Understanding sees is called the eye. When the Understanding hears, it
is called the ear. When she smells, she becomes the sense of scent; and
when she tastes the various objects of taste, she comes to be called by
the name of tongue. When again she feels the touch of the various
objects of touch, she becomes the sense of touch. It is the
Understanding that becomes modified diversely and frequently. When the
Understanding desires anything, she becomes Mind. The five senses with
the Mind, which separately constitute the foundations (of the
Understanding), are the creations of the Understanding. They are called
*Indriyas*. When they become stained, the Understanding also becomes
stained. <span id="fr_945"></span>[3](#fn_945) The Understanding,
dwelling in Jiva, exists in three states. Sometimes she obtains joy;
sometimes she indulges in grief; and sometimes she exists in a state
that is neither pleasure nor pain. Having for her essence these
conditions or states (*viz*., Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas), the
Understanding resolves through these three states. <span
id="fr_946"></span>[4](#fn_946) As the lord of rivers, *viz*., the
surging Ocean, always keeps within his continents, even so the
Understanding, which exists in connection with the (three)

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

states, exists in the Mind (including the senses). When the state of
Rajas is awakened, the Understanding becomes modified into Rajas.
Transport of delight, joy, gladness, happiness, and contentedness of
heart, these, when somehow excited, are the properties of Sattwa.
Heart-burning, grief, sorrow, discontentedness, and
unforgivingness, <span id="fr_947"></span>[1](#fn_947) arising from
particular causes, are the result of Rajas. Ignorance, attachment and
error, heedlessness, stupefaction, and terror, meanness, cheerlessness,
sleep, and procrastination,--these, when brought about by particular
causes, are the properties of Tamas. Whatever state of either body or
mind, connected with joy or happiness, arises, should be regarded as due
to the state of Sattwa. Whatever, again, is fraught with sorrow and is
disagreeable to oneself should be regarded as arising from Rajas.
Without commencing any such act, one should turn one's attention to it
(for avoiding it). Whatever is fraught with error or stupefaction in
either body or mind, and is inconceivable and mysterious, should be
known as connected with Tamas. Thus, have I explained to thee that
things in this world dwell in the Understanding. By knowing this one
becomes wise. What else can be the indication of wisdom? Know now the
difference between these two subtile things, *viz*., Understanding and
Soul. One of these, *viz*., the Understanding, creates attributes. The
other, *viz*., the Soul, does not create them. Although they are, by
nature, distinct from each other, yet they always exist in a state of
union. A fish is different from the water in which it dwells, but the
fish and the water must exist together. The attributes cannot know the
Soul. The Soul, however, knows them. They that are ignorant regard the
Soul as existing in a state of union with the attributes like qualities
existing with their possessors. This, however, is not the case, for the
Soul is truly only an inactive Witness of everything. The Understanding
has no refuge. <span id="fr_948"></span>[2](#fn_948) That which is
called life (involving the existence of the Understanding) arises from
the effects of the attributes coming together. Others (than these
attributes which are created by the Understanding), acting as causes,
create the Understanding that dwells in the body. No one can apprehend
the attributes in their real nature or form of existence. The
Understanding, as already said, creates the attributes. The Soul simply
beholds them (as an inactive Witness). This union that exists between
the Understanding and the Soul is eternal. The indwelling Understanding
apprehends all things through the Senses which are themselves inanimate
and unapprehending. Really the senses are only like lamps (that throw
their light for discovering objects to others without themselves being
able to see them). Even this is the nature (of the Senses, the
Understanding, and the Soul). Knowing this, one should live cheerfully,
without yielding to either grief or joy. Such a man is said to be beyond
the influence of pride. That the Understanding creates all these
attributes is due to her own nature,--even as a spider weaves threads in

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

consequence of her own nature. These attributes should be known as the
threads the spider weaves. When destroyed, the attributes do not cease
to exist; their existence ceases to be visible. When, however, a thing
transcends the ken of the senses, its existence (or otherwise) is
affirmed by inference. This is the opinion of one set of persons. Others
affirm that with destruction the attributes cease to be. Untying this
knotty problem addressed to the understanding and reflection, and
dispelling all doubt, one should cast off sorrow and live in
happiness. <span id="fr_949"></span>[1](#fn_949) As men unacquainted
with its bottom become distressed when they fall upon this earth which
is like a river filled with the waters of stupefaction, even so is that
man afflicted who falls away from that state in which there is a union
with the Understanding. <span id="fr_950"></span>[2](#fn_950) Men of
knowledge, however, conversant with Adhyatma and armed with fortitude,
are never afflicted, because they are capable of crossing to the other
shore of those waters. Indeed, Knowledge is an efficient raft (in that
river). Men of knowledge have not to encounter those frightful terrors
which alarm them that are destitute of knowledge. As regards the
righteous, none of them attains to an end that is superior to that of
any other person amongst them. Indeed, the righteous show, in this
respect, an equality. As regards the man of Knowledge, whatever acts
have been done by him in past times (while he was steeped in Ignorance)
and whatever acts fraught with great iniquity he does (after attainment
of Knowledge), he destroys both by Knowledge as his sole means. Then
again, upon the attainment of Knowledge he ceases to perpetrate these
two evils, *viz*., censuring the wicked acts of others and doing any
wicked acts himself under the influence of attachment.'" <span
id="fr_951"></span>[3](#fn_951)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_942"></span>[329:1](m12b113.htm#fr_942) By gunah which I
have rendered 'virtues,' is, of course, intended all that constitute the
body, including mind and understanding, all, in fact, that become the
accompaniments of the Soul.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[330:1](m12b113.htm#fr_943) *Karma-buddhi* is
to be taken as one. It means the consciousness or apprehension of
functions. Each sense or organ instinctively knows what its object is
and apprehends that object immediately. This apprehension of its own
functions, which every sense possesses, is here designated as
*Karma-buddhi*. *Mana-shashththani* here simply means 'mind completing
the tale of six.' It has no reference to the five senses having the mind
for the sixth, for the senses have already, been named in the previous
verses.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[330:2](m12b113.htm#fr_944) Acts here means the
acts of past lives, or the desire dwelling in an incipient form, due to
the acts of past lives. The commentator explains that the *cha* in the
second line means the five attributes indicated in the first line.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[330:3](m12b113.htm#fr_945) The word *Buddhya*
in the first line is taken by the commentator as an instrumental and not
as a genitive. Hence he takes it that *Kalpitani* is understood after
it.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[330:4](m12b113.htm#fr_946) *i.e.*, occupies
them one after another.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[331:1](m12b113.htm#fr_947) *Murti* is a
misreading for *apurti* or discontentedness. The Burdwan translator
retains *murti* in his Bengali version. It is not clear which reading
K.P. Singha adopts. The Bengali substitute he gives is *murchccha* or
stupefaction.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[331:2](m12b113.htm#fr_948) *i.e.*, there are
no materials of which it is constituted. Hence *Sattwa* or *Buddhi* has
no *asrayah* or *upadana*.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[332:1](m12b113.htm#fr_949) What the speaker
inculcates in verses 41 and 42 is this: some are of opinion that with
the apparent destruction of the body, the attributes that make up the
body do not cease to exist. It is true that they cease to become
apprehensible by the senses; but then, though removed from the ken of
the senses, their existence may be affirmed by inference. The argument
is that, if destroyed, their reappearance would be impossible. The
reappearance, however, is certain. (For rebirth is a doctrine that is
believed to be a solemn truth requiring no argument to prove it). Hence,
the attributes, when apparently destroyed, do continue to exist. They
are regarded as then inhering in the *linga* or subtile body. The
counter opinion is that, when destroyed, they are destroyed for ever.
The latter opinion is condemned by the speaker.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[332:2](m12b113.htm#fr_950) In the second line
the word is *Gadhamavidwansah*, *i.e.*, 'ignorant of its bottom or
depth.' K.P. Singha gives the meaning correctly, without translating the
verse literally, The Burdwan translator makes nonsense of it. Both
however, wrongly take *agadha* as the final word in *yathagadha*,
forgetting that *agadham* is a masculine adjective incapable of
qualifying *nadim* which is feminine. *Ayam* is Jiva. The last clause is
to be taken as *buddhiyogam anuprachyuta ayam tatha*.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[332:3](m12b113.htm#fr_951) This is not a
difficult verse, yet both the vernacular translators have misunderstood
it. What is said in the first line is this: *yat vahudosham karoti, yat*
(*cha*) *purakritam, ekatah cha dushyati*. Both the finite verbs have
*jnanin* (the man of knowledge) for their nominative understood.
*Dushyati* means *nasyati* or destroys. The meaning then is that the man
of Knowledge destroys his sinful acts of both this and past lives. The
commentator cites the well-known simile of the lotus leaf not being
drenched or soaked with water even when dipped in water. Now, this is
that unseen fruit of Knowledge. In the second line, the visible fruits
are indicated. The man of Knowledge refrains from censuring the wicked
acts of others and from perpetrating any wicked act himself. *Yat cha
dushyati* means *yat parakritam* <span id="page_333">p. 333</span>
*anishtam dushyati* or *nindati, yat karoti* means *yat swayam
ragadi-doshat karoti; tadubhayam apriyam* (*sa*) *na karoti*, the reason
being *dwaitadarsana-bhavah*. Such a man truly regards the universe as
identifiable with himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXXVII](m12b114)
