[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b086) 
[Next](m12b088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLX

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou sayest that righteousness or duty depends upon
delicate considerations, that is indicated by the conduct of those that
are called good, that it is fraught with restraints (from numerous
acts), and that its indications are also contained in the Vedas. It
seems to me, however, that I have a certain inward light in consequence
of which I can discriminate between

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

right and wrong by inferences. <span id="fr_627"></span>[1](#fn_627)
Numerous questions that I had intended to ask thee have all been
answered by thee. There is one question, however, that I shall presently
ask. It is not prompted, O king, by desire of empty disputation. All
these embodied creatures, it seems, take birth, exist, and leave their
bodies, of their own nature. Duty and its reverse, therefore, cannot be
ascertained, O Bharata, by study of the scriptures alone. <span
id="fr_628"></span>[2](#fn_628) The duties of a person who is well off
are of one kind. Those of a person who has fallen into distress are of
another kind. How can duty respecting seasons of distress be ascertained
by reading the scriptures alone? <span id="fr_629"></span>[3](#fn_629)
The acts of the good, thou hast said, constitute righteousness (or
duty). The good, however, are to be ascertained by their acts. The
definition, therefore, has for its foundation, a begging of the
question, with the result that what is meant by conduct of the good
remains unsettled. It is seen that some ordinary person commits
unrighteousness while apparently achieving righteousness. Some
extraordinary persons again may be seen who achieve righteousness by
committing acts that are apparently unrighteous. <span
id="fr_630"></span>[4](#fn_630) Then, again, the proof (of what I say)
has been furnished by even those that are well conversant with the
scriptures themselves, for it has been heard by us that the ordinances
of the Vedas disappear gradually in every successive age. The duties in
the Krita age are of one kind. Those in the Treta are of another kind,
and those in the Dwapara are again different. The duties in the Kali
age, again, are entirely of another kind. It seems, therefore, that
duties have been laid down for the respective ages according to the
powers of human beings in the respective ages. When, therefore, all the
declarations in the Vedas do not apply equally to all the ages, the
saying that the declarations of the Vedas are true is only a popular
form of speech indulged in for popular satisfaction. From the *Srutis*
have originated the *Smritis* whose scope again is very wide. If the
Vedas be authority for everything, then authority would attach to the
*Smritis* also for the latter are

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

based on the former. When, however, the *Srutis* and the *Smritis*
contradict each other, how can either be authoritative? Then again, it
is seen that when some wicked persons of great might cause certain
portions of certain courses of righteous acts to be stopped, these are
destroyed for ever. <span id="fr_631"></span>[1](#fn_631) Whether we
know it or know it not, whether we are able to ascertain it or not to
ascertain it, the course of duty is finer than the edge of a razor and
grosser than even a mountain. Righteousness (in the form of sacrifices
and other religious acts) at first appears in the form of the romantic
edifices of vapour seen in the distant sky. When, however, it is
examined by the learned, it disappears and becomes invisible. <span
id="fr_632"></span>[2](#fn_632) Like the small ponds at which the cattle
drink or the shallow aqueducts along cultivated fields that dry up very
soon, the eternal practices inculcated in the *Smritis*, falling into
discontinuance, at last disappear totally (in the Kali age). Amongst men
that are not good some are seen to become hypocrites (in respect of the
acquisition of righteousness) by suffering themselves to be urged by
desire. Some become so, urged by the wishes of others. Others, numbering
many, tread in the same path, influenced by diverse other motives of a
similar character. <span id="fr_633"></span>[3](#fn_633) It cannot be
denied that such acts (though accomplished by persons under the
influence of evil passions) are righteous. Fools, again, say that
righteousness is an empty sound among those called good. They ridicule
such persons and regard them as men destitute of reason. Many great men,
again, turning back (from the duties of their own order) betake
themselves to the duties of the kingly order. No such conduct,
therefore, is to be seen (as observed by any man), which is fraught with
universal benevolence. <span id="fr_634"></span>[4](#fn_634) By a
certain course of conduct one becomes really meritorious. That very
course of conduct obstructs another in the acquisition of merit.
Another, by practising at his pleasure that conduct, it is seen, remains
unchanged. <span id="fr_635"></span>[5](#fn_635) Thus that conduct by
which one becomes meritorious impedes another in the acquisition of
merit. One may thus see

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

that all courses of conduct are seen to lose singleness of purpose and
character. It seems, therefore, that only that which the learned of
ancient times called righteousness is righteousness to this day: and
through that course of conduct (which the learned so settled) the
distinctions and limitations (that govern the world) have become
eternal.'" <span id="fr_636"></span>[1](#fn_636)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_627"></span>[228:1](m12b087.htm#fr_627) I am not sure that
I have understood the original correctly. Nilakantha says that the sense
intended to be conveyed is that Yudhishthira finds fault with Bhishma's
previous course on the indications of righteousness.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[228:2](m12b087.htm#fr_628) The argument, as
explained by the commentator is this: Bhishma has said that
righteousness and its reverse arise from one's acts producing happiness
or misery to others, and that they both affect one's future life in
respect to the happiness and misery enjoyed or endured therein. But
living creatures, says Yudhishthira, are seen to take their births,
exist, and die, of their own nature. Nature, therefore, seems to be the
efficient cause of birth, existence, and death, and not the declarations
in the Srutis, consistent though those declarations be with
considerations of felicity or the reverse. The study of the Vedas,
therefore, cannot alone lead to a knowledge of righteousness and its
reverse.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[228:3](m12b087.htm#fr_629) Distress may be of
infinite variety. Derogation also from duty may, therefore, be of
infinite variety. It is impossible to note these derogations
(justifiable in view of the degree of distress felt) in any code of
morals, however comprehensive.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[228:4](m12b087.htm#fr_630) The commentator
cites the example of Sudras listening to forbidden scriptures in
expectation of merit. They commit sin by such acts. Then again high
Brahmanas like Agastya, by cursing the denizens of the Dandaka forest,
achieved great merit. In persons universally called ordinary or even
low, indications are observable of good behaviour, and in those
acknowledged to be good and respectable, acts may be noticed that are
not good. That therefore, which is called the conduct of the good is
extremely unascertainable.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[229:1](m12b087.htm#fr_631) The commentator
cites the instance of the stoppage of the Horse-sacrifice in consequence
of the interference of Indra with Janamejaya while the latter was bent
upon celebrating one for the acquisition of merit.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[229:2](m12b087.htm#fr_632) The vapoury
edifices and forms seen in the distant sky are called *Gandharva-nagara*
from the peculiar belief that they are cities or towns inhabited by the
Gandharvas, a class of beings superior to men. They appear to the view
only to disappear very soon. What the speaker wishes to say is that
sacrifices and religious acts at first appear romantic and delightful in
consequence of the fruits they hold forth, *viz*., heaven and felicity.
But when they are examined by the light of philosophy, they disappear or
shrink into nothingness, for as acts, they are transitory and their
consequences too are of the same character.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[229:3](m12b087.htm#fr_633) The object of this
verse is to show that it is extremely difficult to ascertain who the
good are whose conduct should be taken as the standard of righteousness.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[229:4](m12b087.htm#fr_634) The commentator
cites the instance of Drona and others of that class. These men must be
regarded as Mahajanas and Sadhus, but how can their conduct be regarded
as righteous? What Yudhishthira means to say is that the standards of
righteousness or that by which a good man may be known, is difficult of
ascertainment.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[229:5](m12b087.htm#fr_635) The example of
Viswamitra, Jamadagnya, and Vasishtha are cited by the commentator. The
first won pre-eminence by his mastery over weapons. The second lost his
character as a Brahmana by the profession of arms. The third lost
nothing although he punished Viswamitra's insolence by using even carnal
weapons.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[230:1](m12b087.htm#fr_636) What Yudhishthira
says here is that righteousness or virtue or duty does not depend upon
the *Srutis* or the *Smritis*, nor upon considerations of happiness or
misery. On the other hand, righteousness is arbitrary in respect of its
standard, that being called righteous which was called so by the learned
of ancient times. As regards happiness or misery, its cause is eternal
nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXI](m12b088)
