[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b076) 
[Next](m12b078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCL

"Suka said, 'Let thy reverence tell me of that which is the foremost of
all duties, indeed, of that duty above which no higher one exists in
this world.'

"Vyasa said, 'I shall now tell thee of duties having a very ancient
origin and laid down by the *Rishis*, duties that are distinguished
above all others.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Listen to me with undivided attention. The
senses that are maddening should carefully be restrained by the
understanding like a sire restraining his own inexperienced children
liable to fall into diverse evil habits. The withdrawal of the mind and
the senses from all unworthy objects and their due concentration (upon
worthy objects) is the highest penance. That is the foremost of all
duties. Indeed, that is said to be the highest duty. Directing, by the
aid of the understanding, the senses having the mind for their sixth,
and without, indeed, thinking of worldly objects which have the virtue
of inspiring innumerable kinds of thought, one should live contented
with one's own self. When the senses and the mind, withdrawn from the
pastures among which they usually run loose, come back for residing in
their proper abode, it is then that thou wilt behold in thy own self the
Eternal and Supreme Soul. <span id="fr_564"></span>[1](#fn_564) Those
high-souled Brahmanas that are possessed of wisdom succeed in beholding
that Supreme and Universal Soul which is like unto a blazing fire in
effulgence. As a large tree endued with numerous branches and possessed
of many flowers and fruits does not know in which part it has flowers
and in which it has fruits, after the same manner the Soul as modified
by birth and other attributes, does not know whence it has come and
whither it is to go. There is, however, an inner Soul, which beholds
(knows) everything. <span id="fr_565"></span>[2](#fn_565) One sees the
Soul oneself with the aid of the lighted lamp of knowledge. Beholding,
therefore, thyself with thy own self, cease to regard thy body as
thyself and attain thou to omniscience. Cleansed of all sins, like unto
a snake that has cast off its slough, one attains to high intelligence
here and becomes free from every anxiety and the obligation of acquiring
a new body (in a subsequent birth). Its current spreading in diverse
directions, frightful is this river of life bearing the world onward in
its course. The five senses are its crocodiles. The mind and its
purposes are the shores. Cupidity and stupefaction of judgment are the
grass and straw that float on it, covering its bosom. Lust and wrath are
the fierce reptiles that live in it. Truth forms the *tirtha* by its
miry banks. Falsehood forms its surges, anger its mire. Taking its rise
from the Unmanifest, rapid is its current, and incapable of being
crossed by persons of uncleansed souls. Do thou, with the aid of the
understanding cross that river having desires for its alligators. The
world and its concerns constitute the ocean towards which that river
runs. Genus and species constitute its unfathomable depth that none can
understand. One's birth, O child, is the source from which that stream
takes its rise. Speech constitutes its eddies. Difficult to cross, only
men of learning and

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

wisdom and understanding succeed in crossing it. Crossing it, thou wilt
succeed in freeing thyself from every attachment, acquiring a tranquil
heart, knowing the Soul, and becoming pure in every respect. Relying
them on a purged and elevated understanding, thou wilt succeed in
becoming *Brahma's* self. Having dissociated thyself from every worldly
attachment, having acquired a purified Soul and transcending every kind
of sin, look thou upon the world like a person looking from the mountain
top upon creatures creeping below on the earth's surface. Without giving
way to wrath or joy, and without forming any cruel wish, thou wilt
succeed in beholding the origin and the destruction of all created
objects. They that are endued with wisdom regard such an act to be the
foremost of all things. Indeed, this act of crossing the river of life
is regarded by the foremost of righteous persons, by ascetics conversant
with the truth, to be the highest of all acts that one can accomplish.
This knowledge of the all-pervading Soul is intended to be imparted to
one's son. It should be inculcated unto one that is of restrained
senses, that is honest in behaviour, and that is docile or submissive.
This knowledge of the Soul, of which I have just now spoken to thee, O
child, and the evidence of whose truth is furnished by the Soul itself,
is a mystery,--indeed, the greatest of all mysteries, and the very
highest knowledge that one can attain. *Brahma* hath no sex,--male,
female, or neuter. It is neither sorrow nor happiness. It hath for its
essence the past, the future, and the present. Whatever one's sex, male
or female, the person that attains to the knowledge of *Brahma* hath
never to undergo rebirth. This duty (of Yoga) hath been inculcated for
attaining to exemption from rebirth. <span
id="fr_566"></span>[1](#fn_566) These words that I have used for
answering thy question lead to Emancipation in the same way as the
diverse other opinions advanced by diverse other sages that have treated
of this subject. I have expounded the topic to thee after the manner in
which it should be expounded. Those opinions sometimes become productive
of fruit and sometimes not. (The words, however, that I have used are of
a different kind, for these are sure to lead to success). <span
id="fr_567"></span>[2](#fn_567) For this reason, O good child, a
preceptor, when asked by a contented, meritorious, and self-restrained
son or disciple, should, with a delighted heart, inculcate, according to
their true import, these instructions that I have inculcated for the
benefit of thee, my son!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_564"></span>[209:1](m12b077.htm#fr_564) *Gocharaebhyah*,
literally, pastures, is used here to signify all external and internal
objects upon which the senses and the mind are employed. Their proper
home or abode is said to be *Brahma*.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[209:2](m12b077.htm#fr_565) The absence of
anything like precision in the language employed in such verses
frequently causes confusion. The word *atma* as used in the first line
is very indefinite. The commentator thinks it implies *achetanabuddhi*,
*i.e.*, the perishable understanding. I prefer, however, to take it as
employed in the sense of *Chit* as modified by birth. It conies, I
think, to the same thing in the end. The 'inner Soul' is, perhaps, the
Soul or *Chit* as unmodified by birth and attributes.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[210:1](m12b077.htm#fr_566)
*Abhavapratipattyartham* is explained by the commentator as 'for the
attainment of the unborn or the soul.'

<span id="fn_567"></span>[210:2](m12b077.htm#fr_567) The commentator
explains the first line thus: *yatha sarvani matani tatha etani vachansi
me*. He takes the words: *yatha tatha kathitani maya* as implying that
'I have treated of the topic *yathatathyena*.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLI](m12b078)
