[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b096) 
[Next](m12b098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXX

"Kapila said, 'The Vedas are regarded as authoritative by all. People
never

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

disregard them. Brahma is of two kinds, *viz*., Brahma as represented by
sound, and Brahma as Supreme (and intangible). <span
id="fr_756"></span>[1](#fn_756) One conversant with Brahma represented
by sound succeeds in attaining to Supreme Brahma. Commencing with the
rites of *Garbhadhana*, that body which the sire creates with the aid of
Vedic *mantras* is cleansed (after birth) by Vedic *mantras*. <span
id="fr_757"></span>[2](#fn_757) When the body has been cleansed with
purificatory rites (performed with the aid of Vedic *mantras*), the
owner there of come to be called a Brahmana and becomes a vessel fit for
receiving knowledge of Brahma. Know that the reward of acts is purity of
heart which only leads to Emancipation. I shall presently speak to thee
of that. Whether purity of heart has been attained or not (by
performance of acts) is what can be known to the person himself who has
attained it. It can never be known with the aid of either the Vedas or
inference. They that cherish no expectation, that discard every kind of
wealth by not storing anything for future use, that are not covetous,
and that are free from every kind of affection and aversion, perform
sacrifices because of the conviction that their performance is a duty.
To make gifts unto deserving persons is the end (right use) of all
wealth. Never addicted at any time to sinful acts, observant of those
rites that have been laid down in the Vedas, capable of crowning all
their wishes with fruition, endued with certain conclusions through pure
knowledge, never giving way to wrath,--never indulging in envy, free
from pride and malice, firm in Yoga, <span
id="fr_758"></span>[3](#fn_758) of unstained birth, unstained conduct,
and unstained learning, devoted to the good of all creatures, there were
in days of yore many men, leading lives of domesticity and thoroughly
devoted to their own duties, there were many kings also of the same
qualifications, devoted to Yoga (like Janaka, etc.), and many Brahmanas
also of the same character ([like](errata.htm#111) Yajnavalkya and
others). <span id="fr_759"></span>[4](#fn_759) They behaved equally
towards all creatures and were endued with perfect sincerity.
Contentment was theirs, and certainty of knowledge. Visible were the
rewards of their righteousness, and pure were they in behaviour and
heart. They were possessed of faith in Brahma of both forms. <span
id="fr_760"></span>[5](#fn_760) At first making their hearts pure, they
duly observed all (excellent) vows. They were observant of the duties of
righteousness on even occasions of distress and difficulty, without
failing off in any particular. Uniting together they used to perform
meritorious acts. In this they found great happiness. And inasmuch as
they never tripped, they had never to perform any expiation. Relying as
they did

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

upon the true course of righteousness, they became endued with
irresistible energy. They never followed their own understandings in the
matter of earning merit but followed the dictates of the scriptures
alone for that end. Accordingly they were never guilty of guile in the
matter of performing acts of righteousness. <span
id="fr_761"></span>[1](#fn_761) In consequence of their observing
unitedly the absolute ordinances of the scriptures without betaking
themselves ever to the rites laid down in the alternative, they were
never under the necessity of performing expiation. <span
id="fr_762"></span>[2](#fn_762) There is no expiation for men living in
the observance of the ordinances laid down in the scriptures. The
*Sruti* declares that expiation exists for only men that are weak and
unable to follow the absolute and substantive provisions of the sacred
law. Many Brahmanas there were of this kind in days of old, devoted to
the performance of sacrifices, of profound knowledge of the Vedas,
possessed of purity and good conduct, and endued with fame. They always
worshipped Brahma in the sacrifices, and were free from desire.
Possessed of learning they transcended all the bonds of life. The
sacrifices of these men, their (knowledge of the) Vedas, their acts
performed in obedience to the ordinances, their study of the scripture
at the fixed hours, and the wishes they entertained, freed as they were
from lust and wrath, observant as they were of pious conduct and acts
[notwithstanding](errata.htm#112) all difficulties, renowned as they
were for performing the duties of their own order and mode of life,
purified as their souls were in consequence of their very nature,
characterised as they were by thorough sincerity, devoted as they were
to tranquillity, and mindful as they were of their own practices, were
identical with Infinite Brahma. Even this is the eternal *Sruti* heard
by us. <span id="fr_763"></span>[3](#fn_763) The penances of men that
were so high-souled, of men whose conduct and acts were so difficult of
observance and accomplishment, of men whose wishes were crowned with
fruition in consequence of the strict discharge of their duties, became
efficacious weapons for the destruction of all earthly desires. The
Brahmanas say that that Good Conduct, which is wonderful, whose origin
may be traced to very ancient times, which is eternal and whose
characteristics are unchangeable, which differs from the practices to
which even the good resort in seasons of distress and represents their
acts in other situations, which is identical with heedfulness, over
which lust and wrath and other evil passions can never prevail, and in
consequence of which there was (at one time) no transgression in all
mankind, subsequently came to be distributed into four subdivisions,
corresponding with the four modes of life by persons unable to

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

practise its duties in minute detail and entirety. <span
id="fr_764"></span>[1](#fn_764) They that are good, by duly observing
that course of Good Conduct after adoption of the Sannyasa mode of life,
attain to the highest end. They also that betake themselves to the
forest mode reach the same high end (by duly observing that conduct).
They too that observe the domestic mode of life attain to the highest
end (by duly practising the same conduct); and, lastly, those that lead
the Brahmacharya mode obtain the same (end by a due observance of the
same conduct). <span id="fr_765"></span>[2](#fn_765) Those Brahmanas are
seen to shine in the firmament as luminaries shedding beneficent rays of
light all around. Those myriads of Brahmanas have become stars and
constellations set in their fixed tracks. In consequence of contentment
(or Renunciation) they have all attained to Infinity as the Vedas
declare. If such men have to come back to the world through the wombs of
living creatures, they are never stained by sins which have the
unexhausted residue of previous acts for their originating cause.
Indeed, one who has led the life of a Brahmacharin and waited dutifully
upon his preceptor, who has arrived at settled conclusions (in respect
of the soul), and who has devoted himself to Yoga thus, is truly a
Brahmana. Who else would deserve to be called a Brahmana? When acts
alone determine who is a Brahmana and who is not, acts (good or bad)
must be held to indicate the happiness or misery of a person. As regards
those that have by conquering all evil passions acquired purity of
heart, we have heard the eternal Sruti that in consequence of the
Infinity to which they attain (through beholding the universal soul) and
of the knowledge of Brahma (they acquire through the declarations of
Srutis), they behold everything to be Brahma. The duties (of
tranquillity, self-restraint, abstention from acts, renunciation,
devotion, and the abstraction of Samadhi) followed by those men of pure
hearts, that are freed from desire, and that have Emancipation only for
their object, for acquisition of the knowledge of Brahma, are equally
laid down for all the four orders of men and all the four modes of life.
Verily, that knowledge is always acquired by Brahmanas of pure hearts
and restrained soul. <span id="fr_766"></span>[3](#fn_766) One whose
soul is for Renunciation

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

based upon contentment is regarded as the refuge of true knowledge.
Renunciation, in which is that knowledge which leads to Emancipation,
and which is highly necessary for a Brahmana, is eternal (and comes down
from preceptor to pupil for ever and ever). <span
id="fr_767"></span>[1](#fn_767) Renunciation sometimes exists mixed with
the duties of other modes. But whether existing in that state or by
itself, one practises it according to the measure of one's strength
(that depends upon the degree of one's absence of worldly desires).
Renunciation is the cause of supreme benefit unto every kind of person.
Only he that is weak, fails to practise it. That pure-hearted man who
seeks to attain to Brahma becomes rescued from the world (with its
misery).' <span id="fr_768"></span>[2](#fn_768)

"Syumarasmi said, 'Amongst those that are given up to enjoyment (of
property), they that make gifts, they that perform sacrifices, they that
devote themselves to the study of the Vedas, and they that betake
themselves to a life of Renunciation after having acquired and enjoyed
wealth and all its pleasures, when they depart from this world, who is
it that attains to the foremost place in heaven? I ask thee this, O
Brahmana! Do thou tell me truly.'

"Kapila said, 'Those who lead a life of domesticity are certainly
auspicious and acquire excellence of every kind. They are unable,
however, to enjoy the felicity that attaches to Renunciation. Even thou
mayst see this.' <span id="fr_769"></span>[3](#fn_769)

"Syumarasmi said, 'Ye depend upon knowledge as the means (for the
attainment of Emancipation). Those who lead lives of domesticity have
planted their faith in acts. It has, however, been said that the end of
all modes of life is Emancipation. <span id="fr_770"></span>[4](#fn_770)
No difference, therefore, is observable between them in respect of
either their superiority or inferiority of puissance. O illustrious one,
do thou tell me then how stands the matter truly.'

"Kapila said, 'Acts only cleanse the body. Knowledge, however, is the
highest end (for which one strives). <span
id="fr_771"></span>[5](#fn_771) When all faults of the heart are cured
(by acts), and when the felicity of Brahma becomes established in
knowledge,

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

benevolence, forgiveness, tranquillity, compassion, truthfulness, and
candour, abstention from injury, absence of pride, modesty,
renunciation, and abstention from work are attained. These constitute
the path that lead to Brahma. By those one attains to what is the
Highest. That the cure of all faults of the heart is the result of acts
becomes intelligible to the wise man when these are attained. That,
indeed, is regarded as the highest end which is obtained by Brahmanas
endued with wisdom, withdrawn from all acts, possessed of purity and the
certitude of knowledge. One who succeeds in acquiring a knowledge of the
Vedas, of that which is taught by the Vedas (*viz*., Brahma as
represented in acts), and the minutiae of acts, is said to be conversant
with the Vedas. Any other man is only a bag of wind. <span
id="fr_772"></span>[1](#fn_772) One who is conversant with the Vedas
knows everything, for everything is established on the Vedas. Verity,
the present, past, and future all exist in the Vedas. <span
id="fr_773"></span>[2](#fn_773) This one conclusion is deducible from
all the scriptures, *viz*., that this universe exists and does not
exist. To the man of knowledge this (all that is perceived) is both
*sat* and *asat*. To him, this all is both the end and the middle. <span
id="fr_774"></span>[3](#fn_774) This truth rests upon all the Vedas,
*viz*., that when complete Renunciation takes place one obtains what is
sufficient. Then again the highest contentment follows and rests upon
Emancipation, <span id="fr_775"></span>[4](#fn_775) which is absolute,
which exists as the soul of all mortal and immortal things, which is
well-known as such universal soul, which is the highest object of
knowledge as being identical with all mobile and immobile things, which
is full, which is perfect felicity, which is without duality, which is
the foremost of all things, which is Brahma, which is Unmanifest and the
cause also, whence the Unmanifest has sprung, and which is without
deterioration of any kind. <span id="fr_776"></span>[5](#fn_776) Ability
to subdue the senses, forgiveness, and abstention from work in
consequence of the absence of desire,--these three are the cause of
perfect felicity. With the aid of these three qualities, men having
understanding for their eyes succeed in reaching that Brahma which is

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

uncreate, which is the prime cause of the universe, which is
unchangeable and which is beyond destruction. I bow to that Brahma,
which is identical with him that knows it.'" <span
id="fr_777"></span>[1](#fn_777)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_756"></span>[267:1](m12b097.htm#fr_756) The Vedas are
*Savda-Brahma* or Brahma as represented by sound.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[267:2](m12b097.htm#fr_757) I have expanded
this verse, following the lead of the commentator. Some idea may be
given of the extreme terseness of such verses by offering a literal
rendering: 'That lump of matter which is made a (human) body by what is
contained in the Veda, is (afterwards) made (a body by the same means).'
One approaches one's wife after performing the rite of *Garbhadhana*. In
this rite, different deities are invoked to develop different organs and
parts of the body of the child to be begotten. Thus begotten, the body
of the child is, subsequent to birth, cleansed or purified. All this
requires the aid of the Vedic *mantras*. What Kapila wishes to teach is
that commencing with acts, knowledge should finally be acquired.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[267:3](m12b097.htm#fr_758) Yoga is the only
way to true knowledge, hence *Jnana-nishthah* is *Yoga-nishthah*.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[267:4](m12b097.htm#fr_759) These and men like
these are pointed out as persons deserving of gifts.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[267:5](m12b097.htm#fr_760) *i.e.*, in Brahma
as possessed of attributes and as freed from attributes.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[268:1](m12b097.htm#fr_761) *Matra* is
explained as *miyante vishya anya* *i.e.*, the understanding. What is
meant by guile in the practice of [righteousness](errata.htm#113) may be
exemplified as follows. Individual grains of barley may be given away
instead of cloths by one unable to obtain clothes for gift. But one
giving away barley grains when perfectly able to give away clothes would
be guilty of guile.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[268:2](m12b097.htm#fr_762) The scriptures
frequently lay down ordinances in the alternative. The absolute or
substantive provisions are for the able. Those in the alternative are
for them that are unable.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[268:3](m12b097.htm#fr_763) What is meant by
the sacrifices, etc., of such men being identical with infinite Brahma
is that these men were identical with Brahma and whatever they did was
Brahma. They had no consciousness of self, or they did nothing for self.
They were the Soul of the universe.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[269:1](m12b097.htm#fr_764) What is said here
in effect is that at first there was only one course of duties, called
*sadachara* or good conduct, for all men. In progress of time men became
unable to obey all its dictates in their entirety. It then became
necessary to distribute those duties into four subdivisions
corresponding with the four modes of life.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[269:2](m12b097.htm#fr_765) Both K.P. Singha
and the Burdwan translator have completely misunderstood verse 23 and
the first line of 24, which, as the commentator explains, should be
construed together. The construction is *Tam* (sadacharam) *santah
grihebhyah nishkramya eva* (sannyasam kritwaiva) *vidhivatprapya paramam
gatim gachcchanti. Anye santo vanamasritah tam vidhivat prapya*, *etc*.
Similarly, *Grihameva bhisamsritya anye santah*, etc.' *Jato-anye*, etc.
Thus, all the four modes, commencing with the last, are spoken of.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[269:3](m12b097.htm#fr_766) It is impossible
for any one to read the Burdwan version of such verses without pitying
the Pandit responsible for its accuracy. Without understanding the
commentary in the least, the words of the great commentator have been
reproduced in the Burdwan version in a strange order, rejecting some of
the connecting links without any excuse, and making the Collocation
utterly unintelligible. K.P. Singha gives the substance very briefly
without endeavouring to translate the words. And yet the verse presents
almost no difficulty. The last line of 29 and the first line of 30 make
one sentence. *Chaturthopanishaddharmah* is explained by the commentator
as implying *paramatma-vishayini vidya, tadartham dharmah*. There <span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> are four states of consciousness: 1st,
wakefulness; 2nd, dream; 3rd, dreamless slumber (sushupti); and 4th,
*Turiya*, which is reached by *Samadhi* (abstraction of
Yoga-meditation), and in which *Brahma* becomes realisable. What is said
in these two lines is simply this: the duties (dharmah), relating to the
*Chaturthopanishat* or, the Knowledge of Paramatman, are *sadharanah* or
common to all the four orders of men and modes of life. Those duties, of
course, are *sama*, *dama*, *uparama*, *titiksha*, *sraddha*, *samadhi*.
What is said in the last line of 30 is that Brahmanas of pure hearts and
restrained souls always succeed (by the help of those duties) in
acquiring or attaining to that *Turiya* or consciousness of *Brahma*.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[270:1](m12b097.htm#fr_767) *Apavargamiti* is
explained by the commentator as *apavargaprada vidya* or
*Brahmasakshatkararupa vrittiryasmin iti*. *Nityin* is *avasyakah*.
*Yatidharmah* is a life of Renunciation. What is meant by *sanatanah* is
*sampradayagatah*.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[270:2](m12b097.htm#fr_768) *Sadharana* is
opposed to *kevala*. *Yathavalam* implies *yathavaira-gyam*,
*Gachcchatam Gachcchatam* means *purushamatrasyavanigvya-dhadeh*. The
Burdwan translator misses the sense altogether and K.P. Singha quietly
passes over the entire second line of this triplet. *Durvala* means he
who is wanting in *vairagya*.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[270:3](m12b097.htm#fr_769) The commentator
explains that the object of this verse is to show that even if there be
equality in respect of the end that is attained in next life, there is
more of real felicity in a life of Renunciation than in a life of
enjoyment. The Burdwan translator misses the sense entirely.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[270:4](m12b097.htm#fr_770) The Burdwan
translator gives a very erroneous version of this verse.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[270:5](m12b097.htm#fr_771) For by Knowledge
Emancipation is obtained.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[271:1](m12b097.htm#fr_772) *Vatarechaka* is
*bhastra* or a bellows. What is implied is, perhaps, that such a man
breathes or lives in vain.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[271:2](m12b097.htm#fr_773) *Nasti* is
explained by the commentator as the past and the future. *Nishtha* is
*swarupam*. Literally, what is said is that everything is the Vedas, or
the Vedas are everything, This is, perhaps, only an exaggerated mode of
saying that the Vedas deal with everything.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[271:3](m12b097.htm#fr_774) The sense seems to
be that while they that are ignorant regard the universe to be as
existent and durable as the thunder or adamant, the man of knowledge
regards it to be truly non-existent though it puts forth the appearance
of existence.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[271:4](m12b097.htm#fr_775) I have endeavoured
to give a literal version of verse 45. It is difficult, however, to
seize the meaning from such versions. The word used in the first line is
*Tyaga* implying Renunciation. The commentator correctly explains that
this is that complete Renunciation which takes place in *Samadhi* or the
perfect abstraction of Yoga. *Samaptam* is *samyak aptam* (*bhavati*).
This *samyak* is *Brahma*. Similarly, *santosha* is not ordinary
contentment but *Brahmananda* or the *Supreme felicity* of one who has
attained to *Brahma*. The meaning, then, is this: in the complete
abstraction of Yoga (*i.e.*, Samadhi) is *Brahma*. This all the Vedas
teach. In Emancipation again is the Supreme felicity of *Brahma*.
*Apavargah* is not annihilation but Emancipation, which is existence in
*Brahma* without the dual consciousness of knower and known.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[271:5](m12b097.htm#fr_776) I have followed the
commentator in his exposition of almost all the adjectives in the text.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[272:1](m12b097.htm#fr_777) The grammatical
construction of this verse is very difficult to catch. There can be no
doubt that the commentator is right. Tehjah, *kshama*, *santih*,--these
are *anamayam subham*, *i.e.*, *nirdukhasya sukhasyapraptau hetuh*.
*Tatha*, separates these from what follows. *Abidham Vyoma Santanam*,
and *dhruvam* are governed by *gamyate*, *Etaih sarvaih* refers to
*Tejah* and the two others. *Abidham* is explained as *akittrimam*;
*vyoma* as *jagatkaranam*. The Burdwan translator gives a correct
version, although his punctuation is incorrect. He errs, however, in not
taking *anamayam subham* as one and the same. K.P. Singha errs in
connecting *anamayam* with what follows *tatha*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXI](m12b098)
