[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b079) 
[Next](m12b081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLIII

"Vyasa said, 'Those that are conversant with the scriptures behold, with
the aid of acts laid down in the scriptures, the Soul which is clothed
in a subtile body and is exceedingly subtile and which is dissociated
from the gross body

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

in which it resides. <span id="fr_587"></span>[1](#fn_587) As the rays
of the Sun that course in dense masses through every part of the
firmament are incapable of being seen by the naked eye though their
existence is capable of being inferred by reason, after the same manner,
existent beings freed from gross bodies and wandering in the universe
are beyond the ken of human vision. <span
id="fr_588"></span>[2](#fn_588) As the effulgent disc of the Sun is
beheld in the water in a counter-image, after the same manner the Yogin
beholds within gross bodies the existent self in its
counter-image. <span id="fr_589"></span>[3](#fn_589) All those souls
again that are encased in subtile forms after being freed from the gross
bodies in which they resided, are perceptible to Yogins who have
subjugated their senses and who are endued with knowledge of the soul.
Indeed, aided by their own souls, Yogins behold those invisible beings.
Whether asleep or awake, during the day as in the night, and during the
night as in day time, they who apply themselves to Yoga after casting
off all the creations of the understanding and the *Rajas* born of acts,
as also the very puissance that Yoga begets, succeed in keeping their
*linga* form under complete control. <span
id="fr_590"></span>[4](#fn_590) The *Jiva* that dwells in such Yogins,
always endued with the seven subtile entities (*viz*., Mahat,
consciousness, and the five tanmatras of the five elemental entities),
roves in all regions of bliss, freed from decrepitude and death. I say
'always', and 'freed from death' only in accordance with the common form
of speech, for in reality, that *linga* form is terminable. <span
id="fr_591"></span>[5](#fn_591) That man, however, who (without having
been able to transcend them) is under the influence of his mind and
understanding, discriminates, even in his dreams, his own body from that
of another and experiences (even then) both pleasure and pain. <span
id="fr_592"></span>[6](#fn_592) Yes, in even his dreams he enjoys
happiness and

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

suffers misery; and yielding to wrath and cupidity, meets with
calamities of various kinds. In his dreams he acquires great wealth and
feels highly gratified: accomplishes meritorious acts, and (sees and
hears, etc.) as he does in his wakeful hours. Wonderful it is to note
that *jiva*, which has to lie within the uterus and amid much internal
heat, and which has to pass a period of full ten months in that place,
is not digested and reduced to destruction like food within the stomach.
Men overwhelmed by the qualities of Rajas and Tamas never succeed in
beholding within the gross body: the Jiva-soul which is a portion of the
Supreme Soul of transcendent effulgence and which lies within the heart
of every creature. They who betake themselves to the science of Yoga for
the purpose of obtaining (a knowledge) of that Soul transcending the
inanimate and gross body, the imperceptible *linga* body, and the
*karana* body that is not destroyed on the occasion of even the
universal destruction. <span id="fr_593"></span>[1](m12b081.htm#fn_593)
Amongst the duties that have been laid down for the different modes of
life including the fourth mode (or Sannyasa), these to which I have
adverted, which have *yoga* for their foremost, and which imply a
cessation of every operation of the Mind and the understanding, have
been laid down by Sandilya (in the Chandogya Upanishad). <span
id="fr_594"></span>[2](m12b081.htm#fn_594) Having comprehended the seven
subtile entities (*viz*., the senses, the objects of the mind, Mind,
Understanding, Mahat, Unmanifest or Prakriti, and Purusha), having
comprehended also the Supreme cause of the universe with the six
attributes (*viz*., omniscience, contentment, unlimited comprehension,
independence, eternal wakefulness, and omnipotence), and lastly having
understood that the universe is only a modification of Avidya endued
with the three qualities, one succeeds in beholding (guided by the
scriptures), high Brahma.'" <span
id="fr_595"></span>[3](m12b081.htm#fn_595)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_587"></span>[215:1](m12b080.htm#fr_587) 'Conversant with
the scriptures,' *i.e.*, Yogin; 'acts laid down in the scriptures' are
the practices connected with Yoga. *Saririnam*, the commentator takes,
implies the Soul as invested with a subtile body; of course, *Saririn*
as distinguished from *Sariram* generally means the Soul or the owner of
the *Sariram* without reference to the body. Hence, the word cannot be
taken as referring to the Soul as uninvested with the *lingasarira*.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[215:2](m12b080.htm#fr_588) I follow the
commentator in his exposition of this verse. *Sahitah* is *nividah*;
*drisyamanah* is explained as 'though unseen by the eye is yet realised
through instruction and by the aid of reason.'

<span id="fn_589"></span>[215:3](m12b080.htm#fr_589) *Tapah* is
*rasmi-mandalam*. *Prati-rupam* is *pratyupa-dhi*. *Sattwam* is
*sattwapradhanalingam*. The sense, in simple words, seems to be that the
Yogin beholds within his own body and those of others the Souls or Chits
residing there as invested in subtile forms.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[215:4](m12b080.htm#fr_590) Both
*atmachintitam* and *karmajam* *rajas* are governed by *Jahatam*. The
first means all that is: '*kalpitah* in self' *i.e.*, the creations of
the understanding or the mind, implying, of course, the objects of the
senses or the external world. The second means *kamadi vyasanam*,
*i.e.*, the calamities constituted by desire, etc.
*Pradhanadwaidhamuktah* is one who is freed from identity with Pradhana
or the Universal cause; hence, the puissance that Yoga brings about.
Such Yogins have their subtile forms under complete control under all
conditions and at all times. They can enter at will into other forms.
*Sattwatma* is *linga-dehah*.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[215:5](m12b080.htm#fr_591) *Satatam* qualifies
*anwitah*. *Nityam* qualifies *charishnuh*. *Sadanityah* is explained by
the commentator as in reality terminable, though the words always etc.,
have been used. The plain meaning of the verse is that Yogins, in their
linga body, rove everywhere, not excluding the most blissful regions in
heaven itself.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[215:6](m12b080.htm#fr_592) The meaning is
this: like Yogins, ordinary men even have the *linga-sariram*. In
dreams, the gross body is inactive. Only the subtile body acts and
feels. The Burdwan translator misunderstands this verse completely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLIV](m12b081)
