[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b101) 
[Next](m12b103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLXXV

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse that took place between Narada and Asita-Devala. Once on a
time Narada, beholding that foremost of intelligent men, *viz*., Devala
of venerable years,

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

seated at his ease, questioned him about the origin and the destruction
of all creatures.'

"Narada said, 'Whence, O Brahmana, hath this universe, consisting of
mobile and immobile objects, been created? When again doth the
all-embracing destruction come, into whom doth it merge? Let thy learned
self discourse to me on this.'

"Asita said, 'Those from which the Supreme Soul, when the time comes,
moved by the desire of existence in manifold, forms, creates all
creatures, are said by persons conversant with objects to be the five
great essences. <span id="fr_809"></span>[1](#fn_809) (After this) Time,
[impelled](errata.htm#122) by the Understanding creates other objects
from those (five primal essences).' <span
id="fr_810"></span>[2](#fn_810) He that says that there is anything else
besides these (*i.e.*, the five primal essences, Kala, and the
Understanding), says what is not true. Know, O Narada, that these five
are eternal, indestructible, and without beginning and without end. With
Kala as their sixth, these five primal essences are naturally possessed
of mighty energy. Water, Space, Earth, Wind, and Heat,--these are those
five essences. Without doubt, there is nothing higher or superior to
these (in point of puissance or energy). The existence of nothing else
(than five) can be affirmed by any one agreeably to the conclusions
derivable from the *Srutis* or arguments drawn from reason. If any one
does assert the existence of anything else, then his assertion would
verily be idle or vain. Know that these six enter into the production of
all effects. That of which are all these (which thou perceivest) is
called *Asat*. <span id="fr_811"></span>[3](#fn_811) These five, and
Kala (or Jiva), the potencies of past acts, and ignorance,--these eight
eternal essences are the causes of the birth and destruction of all
creatures. <span id="fr_812"></span>[4](#fn_812) When creatures are
destroyed it is into these that they enter; and when they take birth, it
is again from them they do so. Indeed, after destruction, a creature
resolves itself into those five primal essences. His body is made of
earth; his ear has its origin in space; his eye hath light for its
cause; his life (motion) is of wind, and his blood is of water, without
doubt. The two eyes, the nose, the two ears, the skin, and the tongue
(constituting

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

the fifth), are the senses. These, the learned know, exist for
perception of their respective objects. <span
id="fr_813"></span>[1](#fn_813) Vision, hearing, smelling, touching, and
tasting are the functions of the senses. The five senses are concerned
with five objects in five ways. Know, by the inference of reason, their
similitude of attributes. <span id="fr_814"></span>[2](#fn_814) Form,
scent, taste, touch, and sound, are the five properties that are
(respectively) apprehended by the five senses in five different ways.
These five properties, *viz*., form, scent, taste, touch, and sound, are
not really apprehended by the *senses* (for these are inert), but it is
the Soul that apprehends them *through* the senses. That which is called
Chitta is superior to the multitude of senses. Superior to Chitta is
Manas. Superior to Manas is Buddhi, and superior to Buddhi is
*Kshetrajna*. <span id="fr_815"></span>[3](#fn_815) At first a living
creature perceives different objects through the senses. With Manas he
reflects over them, and then with the aid of Buddhi he arrives at
certitude of knowledge. Possessed of Buddhi, one arrives at certainty of
conclusions in respect of objects perceived through the senses. The five
senses, Chitta, Mind and Understanding (which is the eighth in the
tale),--these are regarded as organs of knowledge by those conversant
with the science of Adhyatma. The hands, the feet, the anal duct, the
membrum virile, the mouth (forming the fifth in the tale), constitute
the five organs of action. The mouth is spoken of as an organ of action
because it contains the apparatus of speech, and that of eating. The
feet are organs of locomotion and the hands for doing various kinds of
work. The anal duct and the membrum virile are two organs that exist for
a similar purpose, *viz*., for evacuation. The first is for evacuation
of stools, the second for that of urine as also of the vital seed when
one feels the influence of desire. Besides these, there is a sixth organ
of action. It is called muscular power. These then are the names of the
six organs of action according to the (approved) treatises bearing on
the subject. I have now mentioned to thee the names of all the organs of
knowledge and of action, and all the attributes of the five (primal)
essences. <span id="fr_816"></span>[4](#fn_816) When in consequence of
the organs being fatigued, they cease to perform their respective
functions, the owner of those organs, because of their suspension, is
said to sleep. If, when the functions of these organs are suspended, the
functions of the mind do not cease, but on the other hand the mind
continues to concern itself with its objects, the condition of
consciousness is called Dream. During

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

wakefulness there are three states of the mind, *viz*., that connected
with Goodness, that with Passion, and that with Darkness. In dream also
the mind becomes concerned with the same three states. Those very
states, when they appear in dreams, connected with pleasurable actions,
come to be regarded with applause. Happiness, success, knowledge, and
absence of attachment are the indications of (the wakeful man in whom is
present) the attribute of Goodness. Whatever states (of Goodness,
Passion, or Darkness) are experienced by living creatures, as exhibited
in acts, during their hours of Wakefulness, reappear in memory during
their hours of steep when they dream. The passage of our notions as they
exist during wakefulness into those of dreams, and that of notions as
they exist in dreams into those of wakefulness, become directly
apprehensible in that state of consciousness which is called dreamless
slumber. That is eternal, and that is desirable. <span
id="fr_817"></span>[1](#fn_817) There are five organs of knowledge, and
five of actions; with muscular power, mind, understanding, and Chitta,
and with also the three attributes of *Sattwa*, *Rajas*, and *Tamas*,
the tale, it has been said, comes up to seventeen. The eighteenth in the
enumeration is he who owneth the body, Indeed, he who lives in this body
is eternal. All those seventeen (with *Avidya* or Ignorance making
eighteen), dwelling in the body, exist attached to him who owns the
body. When the owner disappears from the body, those eighteen (counting
*Avidya*) cease to dwell together in the body. Or, this body made up of
the five (primal) essences is only a combination (that must dissolve
away). The eighteen attributes (including *Avidya*), with him that
owneth the body, and counting stomachic heat numbering twentieth in the
tale, form that which is known as the Combination of the Five. There is
a Being called Mahat, which, with the aid of the wind (called *Prana*),
upholds this combination containing the twenty things that have been
named, and in the matter of the destruction of that body the wind (which
is generally spoken of as the cause) is only the instrument in the hands
of that same Mahat. Whatever creature is born is resolved once more into
the five constituent elements upon the exhaustion of his merits and
demerits; and urged again by the merits and demerits won in that life
enters into another body resulting from his acts. <span
id="fr_818"></span>[2](#fn_818) His abodes always resulting from Avidya,
desire, and acts, he migrates from body to body, abandoning one after
another repeatedly, urged on by Time, like a person abandoning house
after house in succession. They that are wise, and

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

endued with certainty of knowledge, do not give way to grief upon
beholding this (migration). Only they that are foolish, erroneously
supposing relationships (where relationship in reality there is none)
indulge in grief at sight of such changes of abode. This *Jiva* is no
one's relation; there is none again that may be said to belong to him.
He is always alone, and he himself creates his own body and his own
happiness and misery. This *Jiva* is never born, nor doth he ever die.
Freed from the bond of body, he succeeds sometimes in attaining to the
highest end. Deprived of body, because freed through the exhaustion of
acts from bodies that are the results of merits and demerits, Jiva at
last attains to *Brahma*. For the exhaustion of both merits and
demerits, Knowledge has been ordained as the cause in the Sankhya
school. Upon the exhaustion of merit and demerit, when *Jiva* attains to
the status of *Brahma*, <span id="fr_819"></span>[1](#fn_819) (they that
are learned in the scriptures) behold (with the eye of the scriptures)
the attainment of *Jiva* to the highest end.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_809"></span>[282:1](m12b102.htm#fr_809) *Yebhyah* means
'the materials from which. (*Srijati*) has *Paramatma* for its
nominative ([understood](errata.htm#123)). *Kale* is the time of
creation as selected by the Supreme Soul in his own wisdom.
*Bhavaprachoditah* is 'induced by the desire of becoming many, or led by
the desire of existence as many or in infinite diversity.'

<span id="fn_810"></span>[282:2](m12b102.htm#fr_810) *Kala* here is,
perhaps, the embodiment of the abstract idea of life of living
creatures. Impelled by the Understanding, *Kala* or life sets itself to
the creation of other creatures. These last also are equally the result
of the same five primal essences.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[282:3](m12b102.htm#fr_811) The construction of
the second line is this: *etan shad abhinivrittan* (*sarveshu karyeshu
anugatam*) *vettha*; then *ete yasya rasayah* (*karyani, tat asat*). The
sense of the last clause is that all this is the effect of those primal
essences. All this, therefore, is of those essences. The latter are
included in the word *asat*, or unreal, as distinguished from *sat* or
real of substantial. The soul is *sat*, everything else is *asat*.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[282:4](m12b102.htm#fr_812) In previous
Sections it has been explained how when the Chit, which has pure
knowledge for its attribute, becomes invested with Ignorance, it begins
to attract the primal essences towards itself in consequence of the
potencies of past acts and take birth in various shapes. (The idea of
past acts is due to the infinite cycles of creation and destruction, the
very first creation being inconceivable). The causes of creation are,
therefore, the five primal essences, Jiva (or *chit*), the potencies of
past acts, and Ignorance.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[283:1](m12b102.htm#fr_813) *Jnanani* is
*Jnana-karanani*, *i.e.*, perceptions for causes of perception.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[283:2](m12b102.htm#fr_814) The second line of
13 is very condensed. The meaning is this: the eye is the sense of
vision. Vision or sight is its function. The object it apprehends is
form. The eye has light for its cause, and form is an attribute of
light. Hence the eye seizes or apprehends form. By the inference of
reason, there is similitude, in respect of attribute or property,
between the eye, vision, and form. The commentator explains this clearly
*Drashtri-darsanadrisya nam trayanamapi gunatamatyam upapannam*. This is
indicated with a little variation in the next verse. K.P. Singha skips
over the line. The Burdwan translator gives an incorrect version.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[283:3](m12b102.htm#fr_815) *Manas* is mind,
*Buddhi* is Understanding, and *Kshetrajna* is the Soul. What, however,
is *Chitta* is difficult to ascertain, unless it means vague or
indefinite perception. In some systems of philosophy the Chitta is
placed above the Understanding.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[283:4](m12b102.htm#fr_816) The Bengal reading
*yathagantam* is preferable to the Bombay reading *yatha mama*.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[284:1](m12b102.htm#fr_817) The first line of
27 is grammatically connected with the last line of 26. The second line
of 27 is very abstruse. The grammatical construction is this:
*tayorbhavayogamanam* (*sushuptau*) *pratyaksham* (*drishtam*);
(*tadeva*) *nityam*, *ipsitam* (*cha*). What is meant by this is that in
ordinary men, the notions during wakefulness are not the notions they
cherish during dreams: nor are their notions during dreams identifiable
with those they entertain while wakeful. There is similarity but not
identity. In eternal Sushupti, however, which is Emancipation, the
notions of wakefulness pass into those of dream and those of dream pass
into those of wakefulness, *i.e.*, both (or, rather, the same, for there
is then perfect identity between them) become directly apprehensible in
Sushupti or Emancipation. Sushupti Or Emancipation, therefore, is a
state, in which there is neither the consciousness of wakefulness nor
that of dream, but both run together, their differences disappearing
totally.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[284:2](m12b102.htm#fr_818) This is a triplet.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[285:1](m12b102.htm#fr_819) *Brahmabhava* is
explained as follows: when one succeeds in understanding Brahma, one is
said to attain to Brahma, as the *Srutis* declare. The commentator
explains that Pasyanti is used with reference to those that are learned
in the scriptures. They behold the attainment of the highest end by Jiva
*not* with their physical eyes but with the eye of the scriptures, for
they that are themselves emancipated cannot be said to behold the
emancipation of another. This is grave trifling for explaining the use
of the word *pasyanti*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLXXVI](m12b103)
