[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b051) 
[Next](m12b053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCXXV

"Bhishma said, 'After this, he of hundred sacrifices beheld the goddess
of Prosperity, in her own embodied form that blazed splendour, issue out
of the form of the high-souled Vali. The illustrious chastiser of Paka,
beholding the goddess blazing with radiance, addressed Vali in these
words, with eyes expanded in wonder.'

"Sakra said, 'O Vali, who is this one, thus shining with splendour, thus
decked with head plumes, thus adorned with golden bracelets on her upper

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

arms, and thus emitting a halo of glory on all sides in consequence of
her energy that is issuing out of thy body.'

"Vali said, 'I do not know whether she is an *Asura* damsel or a
celestial one or a human one. Thou mayst not ask her thyself. Do what
pleases thee.'

"Sakra said, 'O thou of sweet smiles, who art thou that art possessed of
such radiance and adorned with plumes that thus issuest from the body of
Vali. I do not know thee. Kindly tell me thy name. Who, indeed, art thou
that thus standest here as Maya herself, blazing with thy own splendour,
after having deserted the lord of the *Daityas*? O, tell me this as I
question thee.'

"Sree said, 'Virochana did not know me. This Vali also that is the son
of Virochana knows me not. The learned called me by the name of
*Duhshaha*. <span id="fr_344"></span>[1](#fn_344) Some knew me by the
name of *Vidhitsa*. <span id="fr_345"></span>[2](#fn_345) I have other
names also, O Vasava! They are *Bhuti*, *Lakshmi*, and *Sree*. <span
id="fr_346"></span>[3](#fn_346) Thou knowest me not, O Sakra, nor doth
any one among the deities know me.'

"Sakra said, 'O lady that is difficult of being borne, why do you desert
Vali now after having lived in him for a long time? Is it due to any act
of mine or is it due to any act that Vali has done?'

"Sree said, 'Neither the Creator nor the Ordainer rules me. It is Time
that moves me from one place to another. Do not, O Sakra, disregard
Vali.'

"Sakra said, 'For what reason, O goddess adorned with plumes, do you
desert Vali? Why also do you approach me (for living in me)? Tell me
this, O thou of sweet smiles!'

'Sree said, 'I live in truth, in gifts, in good vows, in penances, in
prowess, and in virtue. Vali hath fallen off from all these. Formerly,
he was devoted to the Brahmanas. He was truthful and had controlled his
passions. Latterly, however, he began to cherish feelings of animosity
towards the Brahmanas and touched clarified butter with soiled
hands. <span id="fr_347"></span>[4](#fn_347) Formerly, he was always
engaged in the performance of sacrifices. At last, blinded by ignorance
and afflicted by Time he began to boast before all persons, saying that
his adorations towards me were ceaseless. Deserting him (for these
faults) I shall henceforth, O Sakra, dwell in thee. Thou shouldst bear
me without heedlessness, and with penances and prowess.'

"Sakra said, 'O thou that dwellest amid lotuses, there is not a single
person among gods, men, and all creatures, that can bear thee for ever.'

"Sree said, 'Truly, O Purandara, there is none among gods, *Gandharvas*,
*Asuras*, or *Rakshasas*, that can bear me for ever.'

"Sakra said, 'O auspicious lady, tell me how I should conduct myself so
that thou mayst dwell in me always. I shall certainly obey thy behests.
It behoveth thee to answer me truly.'

"Sree said, 'O chief of the deities, I shall tell thee as to how I may
be

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

enabled to dwell in thee always. Divide me into four parts according to
the ordinance laid down in the Vedas.'

"Sakra said, 'I shall assign the habitations according to their strength
and power in bearing thee. As regards myself, I shall always take care,
O Lakshmi, that I may not offend thee in any way. Amongst men, the
earth, that progenitrix of all things, bear them all. She shall bear a
fourth part of thyself. I think she hath the strength to do it.'

"Sree said, 'Here, I yield up a quarter of myself. Let it be established
on the earth. Do thou, after this, make a proper disposition, O Sakra,
for my second quarter.'

"Sakra said, 'The waters, among men, in their liquid form, do various
services to human beings. Let the waters bear a fourth part of thy
person. They have the strength to bear a portion of thine.'

"Sree said, 'I yield up another quarter of mine that is to be
established in the waters. Do thou, after this, O Sakra, assign a proper
place for my third quarter.'

"Sakra said, 'The Vedas, the sacrifices, and the deities are all
established in Fire. Fire will bear thy third quarter, when it is placed
therein.'

"Sree said, 'Here I yield up my third quarter which is to be placed in
Fire. Do thou, O Sakra, after this, assign a proper place for my last
quarter.'

"Sakra said, 'They that are good among men, devoted to Brahmanas, and
truthful in speech, may bear thy fourth quarter. The good have the power
to bear it.'

"Sree said, 'Here I yield up my fourth quarter that is to be placed
among the good. My portions thus assigned to different creatures, do
thou continue to protect me, O Sakra.'

"Sakra said, 'Listen to these words of mine. I have thus distributed
thee among different creatures. Those among creatures that will offend
against thee shall be chastised by me. The chief of the *Daityas*,
*viz*., Vali, thus deserted by Sree, then said these words.'

"Vali said, 'At present the Sun shines as much in the east as in the
west, and as much in the north as in the south. When, however, the Sun,
withdrawing himself from all sides, will shine only upon the region of
Brahman situated in the middle of Sumeru, then will again occur a great
battle between the gods and the *Asuras*, and in that fight I shall
certainly vanquish all of you. When the Sun, withdrawing himself from
all sides, will shine fixedly upon only the region of Brahman, then will
again occur a great battle between the gods and the *Asuras*, and in
that fight I shall surely conquer all of you.' <span
id="fr_348"></span>[1](#fn_348)

"Sakra said, 'Brahman hath commanded me saying that I should never

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

kill thee. It is for this reason, O Vali, that I do not hurl my
thunderbolt upon thy head. Go whithersoever thou wishest, O chief of the
*Daityas*! O great *Asura*, peace to thee! No time will come when the
Sun will shine from only the meridian. The Self-born (Brahman) hath
before this ordained the laws that regulate the Sun's motions. Giving
light and heat to all creatures, he goes on ceaselessly. For six months
he travels in a northward course and then for the other six in a
southward course. The sun travels by these courses (one after another),
creating winter and summer for all creatures.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by Indra, O Bharata, Vali, the chief
of the *Daityas*, proceeded towards the south. Purandara proceeded
towards the north. The thousand-eyed Indra, after having listened to
this speech of Vali which was characterised by an entire absence of
pride, then ascended the skies.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_344"></span>[134:1](m12b052.htm#fr_344) One that is borne
with great difficulty.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[134:2](m12b052.htm#fr_345) Literally, the
desire for action; hence abundance or plenty that is the result of
action or labour.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[134:3](m12b052.htm#fr_346) All these names
imply plenty and prosperity.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[134:4](m12b052.htm#fr_347) *i.e.*, with hands
not washed after rising from his meals or while going on with his meals.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[135:1](m12b052.htm#fr_348) The commentator
explains that according to the Pauranic theory, the world stands all
around the mountains of *Meru*. The region of Brahman stands on its top.
The Sun travels round *Meru* and shines over all the directions or
points of the compass. This happens in the age called the *Vaivaswata
Manwantara* (the age or epoch of Manu the son of Vivaswat). But after
the lapse of this age, when the *Savarnika Manwantara* comes, the sun
will shine upon only the region on the top of *Meru*, and all around
there will be darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCXXVI](m12b053)
