[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12b081) 
[Next](m12b083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCLV

"Bhishma said, 'Do thou, O son, O sinless one, listen once more, with
feelings of great pride, to the words that fell from the lips of the
Island-born *Rishi* on the subject of the enumeration of the entities.
Like unto a blazing fire (for having transcended all ignorance), the
great *Rishi* said these words unto his son who resembled a fire wrapped
in smoke. <span id="fr_604"></span>[3](#fn_604) Instructed by what he
said, I also, O son, shall again expound to thee that certain knowledge
(which dispels ignorance). The properties possessed by earth are
immobility, weight, hardness, productiveness, scent, density, capacity
to absorb scents of all kinds, cohesion, habitableness (in respect of
vegetables and animals), and that attribute of the mind which is called
patience of the capacity to bear. The properties of water are coolness,
taste, moisture, liquidity, softness, agreeableness, tongue, fluidity,
capacity to be congealed, and power to melt many earthly products. <span
id="fr_605"></span>[4](#fn_605) The properties of fire are irresistible
energy, inflammability, heat, capacity t o soften, light, sorrow,
disease, speed, fury, and invariably upward motion. The properties of
the wind are touch that is neither hot nor cool, capacity to assist the
organ of speech, independence

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (in respect of motion), strength, celerity,
power to assist all kinds of emission or discharge, power to raise other
objects, breaths inhaled and exhaled, life (as the attribute of Chit)
and birth (including death). The properties of space are sound,
extension, capacity of being enclosed, absence of refuge for resting
upon absence of all necessity for such refuge, status of being
unmanifest, capacity for modification, incapacity for producing
resistance, material cause for producing the sense of hearing, and the
unoccupied portions of the human body. These are the fifty properties,
as declared, that constitute, the essence of the five elementary
entities. <span id="fr_606"></span>[1](#fn_606) Patience, reasoning or
disputation, remembrance, forgetfulness or error, imagination,
endurance, propensity towards good, propensity towards evil, and
restlessness,--these are the properties of the mind. Destruction of both
good and evil thoughts (*i.e.*, dreamless slumber), perseverance,
concentration, decision, and ascertainment of all things resting upon
direct evidence, constitute the five properties of the understanding.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'How can the understanding be said to have five
properties? How again, can the five senses be spoken of as properties
(of the five elementary entities)? Expound to me, O grandsire, all this
that seems to be very abstruse.'

"Bhishma said, 'The understanding is said to possess altogether sixty
properties, for the understanding includes the five elements. <span
id="fr_607"></span>[2](#fn_607) All those properties exist in a state of
union with the Soul. The Vedas declare, O son, that the elements, their
(fifty) properties (together with the mind and the understanding and
their nine and five properties) are all created by Him who is above all
deterioration. These (one and seventy) entities, therefore, are not
eternal (like the Soul). The theories contradicting the Revelation that
have in the previous Vedas, O son, been placed before thee (about the
origin of the Universe and its other incidents) are all defective in the
eye of reason. Carefully attending, however, in this world to all that I
have said unto thee about the Supreme *Brahma*, do thou, after attaining
to the puissance that the knowledge of *Brahma* offers, seek to win
tranquillity of heart.'" <span id="fr_608"></span>[3](#fn_608)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_604"></span>[218:3](m12b082.htm#fr_604) Because the son had
not yet obtained the light of full knowledge.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[218:4](m12b082.htm#fr_605) It is curious to
note how carelessly this verse is rendered in the Burdwan version. In
the Bengal texts there is a misprint, *viz*., *tatha* for *rasah*. The
Burdwan translator does not notice it, but gives just eight qualities
instead of ten. Capacity to be congealed is to be inferred from *cha*.
K.P. Singha is correct.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[219:1](m12b082.htm#fr_606) The *Rishis*, it is
evident, regarded an entity not as an unknown substance in which certain
known properties inhered, but as the sum total of those properties
themselves. So far as the human mind is concerned, there is no warrant
for the proposition that matter is an unknown substance in which
extension, and divisibility etc., inhere; on the other hand, matter, as
it appears to us, is only extension, divisibility, etc., existing in a
combined state.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[219:2](m12b082.htm#fr_607) The elements are
five in number. Their properties number fifty. The five especial
properties of the understanding should be added to those five and fifty.
The total, therefore, of the properties of the understanding comes up to
sixty.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[219:3](m12b082.htm#fr_608) This is a difficult
verse. *Anagatam* is *agama-viruddham*. The grammatical construction, as
explained by the commentator, is this: *tat* (tasmin or purvaslokokokte
vishaya yat) *anagatam tava uktam tat chintakalilam*. (Twam tu)
*samprati iha* (loke) *tat* (maduktam) *bhutarthatattwamsarvam avapya
bhuta-prabhavat santabuddhi bhava*. *Bhutarthah* is Brahma, and
*bhutaprabhavat* is *Brahmaiswaryat*. (This is an instance of the
ablative with 'lyap' understood). What Bhishma wishes Yudhishthira to do
is not so much to attend to the various theories about the origin of the
universe but to carefully attend to the method of attaining to *Brahma*.
To be of tranquil heart, of course, implies the possession of a
*nirvrittika buddhi*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCLVI](m12b083)
