[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c030) 
[Next](m12c032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### SECTION CCCXXXII

"'Narada said, When the vicissitudes of happiness and sorrow appear or
disappear, the transitions are incapable of being prevented by either
wisdom or policy or exertion. Without allowing oneself to fall away from
one's true nature, one should strive one's best for protecting one's own
Self. He who betakes himself to such care and exertion, has never to
languish. Regarding Self as something dear, one should always seek to
rescue oneself from decrepitude, death, and disease. Mental and physical
diseases afflict the body, like keen-pointed shafts shot from the bow by
a strong bowman. The body of a person that is tortured by thirst, that
is agitated by agony, that is perfectly helpless, and that is desirous
of prolonging his life, is dragged towards destruction. <span
id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_184) Days and nights are ceaselessly running
bearing away in their current the periods of life of all human beings.
Like currents of rivers, these flow ceaselessly without ever turning
back. <span id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_185) The ceaseless succession of
the lighted and the dark fortnights is wasting all mortal creatures
without stopping for even a moment in this work. Rising and setting day
after day, the Sun, who is himself undecaying, is continually cooking
the joys and sorrows of all men. The nights are ceaselessly going away,
taking with them the good and bad incidents that befall man, that depend
on destiny, and that are unexpected by him. If the fruits of man's acts
were not dependent on other circumstances, then one would obtain
whatever object one would desire. Even men of restrained senses, of
cleverness, and of intelligence, if destitute of acts, never succeed in
earning any fruits. <span id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_186) Others, though
destitute of intelligence and unendued with accomplishments of any kind,
and who are really the lowest of men, are seen, even when they do not
long after success, to be crowned with the fruition of all their
desires. <span id="fr_187"></span>[4](#fn_187) Some one else, who is
always ready to do acts of injury to all creatures, and who is engaged
in deceiving all the world, is seen to wallow in happiness. Some one
that sits idly, obtains great prosperity; while another, by exerting
earnestly, is seen to miss desirable fruits almost within his
reach. <span id="fr_188"></span>[5](#fn_188) Do thou
[ascribe](errata.htm#180) it as one of the faults of man! The vital
seed, originating in one's nature from sight of one person, goes to
another person. When imparted to the womb, it sometimes produces an
embryo and sometimes fails. When sexual congress fails, it resembles a
mango tree that puts forth a great many flowers

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

without, however, producing a single fruit. <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189) As regards some men who are desirous of
having offspring and who, for the fruition of their object, strive
heartily (by worshipping diverse deities), they fail to procreate an
embryo in the womb. Some person again, who fears the birth of an embryo
as one fears a snake of virulent poison, finds a long-lived son born
unto him and who seems to be his own self come back to the stages
through which he has passed. Many persons with ardent longing for
offspring and cheerless on that account, after sacrificing to many
deities and undergoing severe austerities, at last beget children, duly
borne for ten long months (in the wombs of their spouses), that prove to
be veritable wretches of their race. Others, who have been obtained
through virtue of such blessed rites and observances, at once obtain
wealth and grain and diverse other sources of enjoyment earned and
stored by their sires. In an act of congress, when two persons of
opposite sexes come into contact with one another, the embryo takes
birth in the womb, like a calamity afflicting the mother. Very soon
after the suspension of the vital breaths, other physical forms possess
that embodied creature whose gross body has been destroyed but whose
acts have all been performed with that gross body made of flesh and
phlegm. <span id="fr_190"></span>[2](#fn_190) Upon the dissolution of
the body, another body, which is as much destructible as the one that is
destroyed, is kept ready for the burnt and destroyed creature (to
migrate into) even as one boat goes to another for transferring to
itself the passengers of the other. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[3](#fn_191) In consequence of an act of congress, a
drop of the vital seed, that is inanimate, is cast into the womb. I ask
thee, through whose or what care is the embryo kept alive? That part of
the body into which the food that is eaten goes and where it is
digested, is the place where the embryo resides, but it is not digested
there. In the womb, amid urine and faeces, one's sojourn is regulated by
Nature. In the matter of residence therein or escape therefrom, the born
creature is not a free agent. In fact, in these respects, he is
perfectly helpless. Some

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

embryos fall from the womb (in an undeveloped state). Some come out
alive (and continue to live). While as regards some, they meet with
destruction in the womb, after being quickened with life, in consequence
of some other bodies being ready for them (through the nature of their
acts). <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192) That man who, in an act of
sexual congress, injects the vital fluid, obtains from it a son or
daughter. The offspring thus obtained, when the time comes, takes part
in a similar act of congress. When the allotted period of a person's
life is at its close, the five primal elements of his body attain to the
seventh and the ninth stages and then cease to be. The person, however,
undergoes no change. <span id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_193) Without
doubt, when persons are afflicted by [diseases](errata.htm#181) as
little animals assailed by hunters, they then lose the powers of rising
up and moving about. If when men are afflicted by diseases, they wish to
spend even vast wealth, physicians with their best efforts fail to
alleviate their pain. Even physicians, that are well-skilled and well-up
in their scriptures and well-equipt with excellent medicines, are
themselves afflicted by disease like animals assailed by hunters. Even
if men drink many astringents and diverse kinds of medicated *ghee*,
they are seen to be broken by decrepitude like trees by strong
elephants. When animals and birds and beasts of prey and poor men are
afflicted by ailments, who treats them with medicines? Indeed, these are
not seen to be ill. Like larger animals assailing smaller ones, ailments
are seen to afflict even terrible kings of fierce energy and invincible
prowess. All men, reft of the power of even uttering cries indicate of
pain, and overwhelmed by error and grief, are seen to be borne away
along the fierce current into which they have been thrown. Embodied
creatures, even when seeking to conquer nature, are unable to conquer it
with the aid of wealth, of sovereign power, or of the austerest
penances. <span id="fr_194"></span>[3](#fn_194) If all attempts men make
were crowned with success, then men would never be subject to
decrepitude, would never come upon anything disagreeable, and lastly
would be crowned with fruition in respect of all their wishes. All men
wish to attain to gradual superiority of position. To gratify this wish
they strive to the

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

best of their power. The result, however, does not agree with
wish. <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195) Even men that are perfectly
heedful, that are honest, and brave and endued with prowess, are seen to
pay their adorations to men intoxicated with the pride of affluence and
with even alcoholic stimulants. <span id="fr_196"></span>[2](#fn_196)
Some men are seen whose calamities disappear before even these are
marked or noticed by them. Others there are who are seen to possess no
wealth but who are free from misery of every kind. A great disparity is
observable in respect of the fruits that wait upon conjunctions of acts.
Some are seen to bear vehicles on their shoulders, while some are seen
to ride on those vehicles. All men are desirous of affluence and
prosperity. A few only have cars (and elephants and steeds) dragged (or
walking) in their processions. Some there are that fail to have a single
spouse when their first-wedded ones are dead; while others have hundreds
of spouses to call their own. Misery and happiness are the two things
that exist side by side. Men have either misery or happiness. Behold,
this is a subject of wonder! Do not, however, suffer thyself to be
stupefied by error at such a sight! Cast off both righteousness and sin!
Cast off also truth and falsehood! Having cast off truth and falsehood,
do thou then cast off that with whose aid thou shalt cast off the
former! O best of Rishis, I have now told thee that which is a great
misery! With the aid of such instructions, the deities (who were all
human beings) succeeded in leaving the Earth for becoming the denizens
of heaven!

"'Hearing these words of Narada Suka, endued with great intelligence and
possessed of tranquillity of mind, reflected upon the drift of the
instructions he received, but could not arrive at any certainty of
conclusion. He understood that one suffers great misery in consequence
of the accession of children and spouses; that one has to undergo great
labour for the acquisition of science and Vedic lore. He, therefore,
asked himself, saying,--What is that situation which is eternal and
which is free from misery of every kind but in which there is great
prosperity?--Reflecting for a moment upon the course ordained for him to
run through, Suka, who was well acquainted with the beginning and the
end of all duties, resolved to attain to the highest end that is fraught
with the greatest felicity. He questioned himself, saying,--How shall I,
tearing all attachments and becoming perfectly free, attain to that
excellent end? How, indeed, shall I attain to that excellent situation
whence there is no return into the ocean of diverse kinds of birth! I
desire to obtain that condition of existence whence there is no return!
Casting off all kinds of attachments, arrived at certainty by reflection
with the aid of the mind, I shall attain to that end! I shall attain to
that situation in which thy

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Soul will nave tranquillity, and when I shall be
able to dwell for eternity without being subject to decrepitude or
change. It is, however, certain that that high end cannot be attained
without the aid of Yoga. One that has attained to the state of perfect
knowledge and enlightenment never receives an accession of low
attachments through acts. <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197) I shall,
therefore, have recourse to Yoga, and casting off this body which is my
present residence, I shall transform myself into wind and enter that
mass of effulgence which is represented by the sin. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_198) When Jiva enters that mass of
effulgence, he no longer suffers like Shoma who, with the gods, upon the
exhaustion of merit, falls down on the Earth and having once more
acquired sufficient merit returns to heavens. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[3](#fn_199) The moon is always seen to wane and once
more wax. Seeing this waning and waxing that go on repeatedly, I do not
wish to have a form of existence in which there are such changes. The
Sun warms all the worlds by means of his fierce rays. His disc never
undergoes any diminution. Remaining unchanged, he drinks energy from all
things. Hence, I desire to go into the Sun of blazing effulgence. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[4](#fn_200) There I shall live, invincible by all,
and in my inner soul freed from all fear, having cast off this body of
mine in the solar region. With the great Rishis I shall enter the
unbearable energy of the Sun. I declare unto all creatures, unto these
trees, these elephants, these mountains, the Earth herself, the several
points of the compass, the welkin, the deities, the Danavas, the
Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the Uragas, and the Rakshasas, that I shall,
verily, enter all creatures in the world. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[5](#fn_201) Let all the gods with the Rishis behold
the prowess of my Yoga today!--Having said these words, Suka, informed
Narada of world wide celebrity of his intention. Obtaining Narada's
permission, Suka then proceeded to

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

where his sire was. Arrived at his presence, the great Muni, *viz*., the
high-souled and Island-born Krishna, Suka walked round him and addressed
him the usual enquiries. Hearing of Suka's intention, the highsouled
Rishi became highly pleased. Addressing him, the great Rishi said,--O
son, O dear son, do thou stay here to-day so that I may behold thee for
some time for gratifying my eyes,--Suka, however, was indifferent to
that request. Freed from affection and all doubt, he began to think only
of Emancipation, and set his heart on the journey. Leaving his sire,
that foremost of Rishis then proceeded to the spacious breast of Kailasa
which was inhabited by crowds of ascetics crowned with success.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[105:1](m12c031.htm#fr_184) *Vidhitsabhih* is
*pipasabhih*. It comes from *dhe* meaning drinking.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[105:2](m12c031.htm#fr_185) Vyasa lived in
northern India and was evidently unacquainted with the tides that appear
in the Bengal rivers.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[105:3](m12c031.htm#fr_186) The object of this
verse is to show the utility and necessity of acts. Without acting no
one, however clever, can earn any fruit. Both the vernacular translators
give ridiculous versions of this plain aphorism.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[105:4](m12c031.htm#fr_187) Asi is used in the
sense of *akansha*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[105:5](m12c031.htm#fr_188)
*Naprapyanadhigachchati* is *na aprayam* etc.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[106:1](m12c031.htm#fr_189) I do not quite
understand in what the fault lies that is referred to here. Perhaps the
sense is this. In Hindu philosophy, the vital seed is said to be
generated by the sight of a desirable woman. When sexual congress takes
place with one whose sight has not originated the vital seed but with
another it fails to be productive. Whoever indulges in such intercourse
is to blame.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[106:2](m12c031.htm#fr_190) *Parasarirani* has
*prapnuvanti* understood after it. *Chinnavijam* means whose seed has
broken, that is the creature whose gross body has met with destruction.
The gross body is called the *Vijam* or seed of (heaven and hell). The
sense of the verse is that every one, after death, attains to a new
body. A creature can never exist without the bonds of body being
attached to him. Of course, the case is otherwise with persons who
succeed in achieving their Emancipation by the destruction of all acts.
The Burdwan translator, following the commentator faithfully, renders
this verse correctly. K. P. Singha skips over it entirely.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[106:3](m12c031.htm#fr_191) This is a not a
difficult verse. Then, again, the commentator explains it carefully. K.
P. Singha gives a ridiculous version. The Burdwan translator is correct.
*Nirddagdham* and *vinasyantam* imply the dying or dead. *Jivar
paradeham chalachalam ahitam bhavati* means another body, as much
subject to destruction, is kept ready.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[107:1](m12c031.htm#fr_192) I expand this verse
a little for bringing out its meaning. What is said here is that some
come out of the womb alive; some die there before being quickened with
life, the reason being that their acts of past lives bring for them
other bodies even at that stage.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[107:2](m12c031.htm#fr_193) This verse is
certainly a 'crux.' The commentator, I think, displays considerable
ingenuity in explaining it. The order of the words is *Gatayushah tasya
sahajatasya pancha saptamim navamim dasam prapnuvanti; tatah na
bhavanti; sa na*. The ten stages of a person's life are (1) residence
within the womb, (2) birth, (3) infancy, up to 5 years, (4) childhood,
up to 12 years, (5) *Pauganda* up to 16 years, (6) youth, up to 48
years, (7) old age, (8) decrepitude, (9) suspension of breath, (10)
destruction of body.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[107:3](m12c031.htm#fr_194) *Niyuktah* means
employed. I take it to imply employed in the task of conquering Nature.
It may also mean, set to their usual tasks by the influence of past
acts. Nature here means, of course the grand laws to which human
existence is subject, *viz*., the law of birth, of death, of disease and
decrepitude etc.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[108:1](m12c031.htm#fr_195) *Uparyupari*
implies gradual superiority. If one becomes wealthy, one desires to be a
councillor; if a councillor, one wishes to be prime minister; and so on.
The sense of the verse is that man's desire to rise is
[insatiable](errata.htm#182).

<span id="fn_196"></span>[108:2](m12c031.htm#fr_196) The reading I
prefer is *asathah* and not *sathah*. If the latter reading be kept, it
would mean of both descriptions are seen to pay court to the wicked.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[109:1](m12c031.htm#fr_197) *Avavandhah* is low
attachments, implying those that appertain to the body. In fact, the
acquisition of the body itself is such an attachment. What is said here
is that *Jiva* who has become enlightened becomes freed from the
obligation of rebirth or contact with body once more.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[109:2](m12c031.htm#fr_198) The mass of
effulgence constituting the Sun is nothing else than Brahma. Brahma is
pure effulgence. *Savitri-mandala-madhyavartir-Narayanah* does not mean
a deity with a physical form in the midst of the solar effulgence but
incorporeal and universal Brahma. That effulgence is adored in the
Gayatri.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[109:3](m12c031.htm#fr_199) The commentator
takes *Shomah* to mean *Shomagath Jivah*. He does not explain the rest
of the verse. The grammatical construction presents no difficulty. If,
*Shomah* be taken in the sense in which the Commentator explains it, the
meaning would be this. He who enters the solar effulgence has not to
undergo any change, unlike *Shomah* and the deities who have to undergo
changes, for they fall down upon the exhaustion of their merit and
re-ascend when they once more acquire merit. Both the vernacular
translators have made a mess of the verse. The fact is, there are two
paths, *archiradi-margah* and *dhumadi-margah*. They who go by the
former, reach Brahma and have never to return. While they who go by the
latter way, enjoy felicity for some time and then come back.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[109:4](m12c031.htm#fr_200) Here, the words Sun
and Moon are indicative of the two different paths mentioned in the note
immediately before.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[109:5](m12c031.htm#fr_201) What *Suka* says
here is that he would attain to universal Brahma and thus identify
himself with all things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCXXXIII](m12c032)
