[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c034) 
[Next](m12c036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCCXXXVI

"Bhishma said, 'Addressed by Narayana, that foremost of beings, in these
words, Narada, the foremost of men, then said these words unto Narayana
for the good of the world.

"Narada said, Let that object be accomplished for which thou, O
self-born Being, hast taken birth in four forms in the house of Dharma!
I shall now repair (to the White Island) for beholding thy original
nature. I always worship my seniors. I have never divulged the secrets
of others. O lord of the universe, I have studied the Vedas with care. I
have undergone austere penances. I have never spoken an untruth. As
ordained in the scriptures, I have always protected the four that should
be protected. <span id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_208)

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I have always behaved equally towards friends
and foes. Wholly and conclusively devoted to Him, that first of deities,
*viz*., the Supreme Soul, I incessantly adore Him. Having cleansed my
soul by these acts of special merit, why shall I not succeed in
obtaining a sight of that Infinite Lord of the universe?--Hearing these
words of Parameshthi's son, Narayana, that protector of the scriptures,
dismissed him, saying,--Go, O Narada!--Before dismissing him, however,
the great deity worshipped the celestial Rishi with those rites and
ceremonies which have been laid down in the scriptures by himself.
Narada also gave due honours to the ancient Rishi Narayana. After such
honours had been mutually given and received, the son of Parameshthi
departed from that spot. Endued with high Yoga-puissance, Narada
suddenly soared into the firmament and reached the summit of the
mountains of Meru. Proceeding to a retired spot on that summit, the
great ascetic took rest for a short while. He than cast his eyes towards
the north western direction and beheld an exceedingly wonderful sight.
Towards the north, in the ocean of milk, there is a large island named
the White Island. The learned say that its distance from the mountains
of Meru is greater than two and thirty thousand Yojanas. The denizens of
that realm have no senses. They live without taking food of any kind.
Their eyes are winkless. They always emit excellent perfumes. Their
complexions are white. They are cleansed from every sin. They blast the
eyes of those sinners that look at them. Their bones and bodies are as
hard as thunder. They regard honour and dishonour in the same light.
They all look as if they are of celestial origin. Besides, all of them
are endued, with auspicious marks and great strength. Their heads seem
to be like umbrellas. Their voices are deep like that of the clouds.
Each of them has four Mushkas. <span id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_209) The
soles of their feet are marked by hundreds of lines. They have sixty
teeth all of which are white (and large), and eight smaller ones. They
have many tongues. With those tongues they seem to lick the very Sun
whose face is turned towards every direction. Indeed, they seem to be
capable of devouring that deity from whom hath sprung the entire
universe, the Vedas, the deities, and the Munis wedded to the attribute
of tranquillity.

"Yudhishthira said,--'O grandsire, thou hast said that those beings have
no senses, that they do not eat anything for supporting their lives;
that their eyes are winkless; and that they always emit excellent
perfumes. I ask, how were they born? What also is the superior end to
which they attain? O chief of Bharata's race, are the indications of
those men that become emancipate the same as those by which the denizens
of the White Island are distinguished? Do thou dispel my doubts? The
curiosity I feel is very great. Thou art the
[repository](errata.htm#185) of all histories and discourses. As regards
ourselves, we entirely depend on thee for knowledge and

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

instruction!

"Bhishma continued,--'This narrative, O monarch, which I have heard from
my sire, is extensive. I shall now recite it to thee. Indeed, it is
regarded as the essence of all narratives. There was, in times past, a
king on Earth of the name of Uparichara. He was known to be the friend
of Indra, the chief of the celestials. He was devoted to Narayana known
also by the name of Hari. He was observant of all the duties laid down
in the scriptures. Ever devoted to his sire, he was always heedful and
ready for action. He won the sovereignty of the world in consequence of
a boon he had obtained from Narayana. Following the *Sattwata* ritual
that had been declared in days of yore by Surya himself, king Uparichara
used to worship the God of gods (Narayana), and when his worship was
over, he used to adore (with what remained) the grandsire of the
universe. <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210) After worshipping the
Grandsires (Pitris), he worshipped the Brahmanas. He then divided the
offerings among those that were dependent on him. With what remained
after serving those, the king satisfied his own hunger. Devoted to
truth, the monarch abstained from doing any injury to any creature. With
his whole soul, the king was devoted to that God of gods, *viz*.,
Janarddana, who is without beginning and middle and end, who is the
Creator of the universe, and who is without deterioration of any kind.
Beholding the devotion to Narayana of that slayer of foes, the divine
chief of the celestials himself shared with him his own seat and bed.
His kingdom and wealth and spouses and animals were all regarded by him
as obtained from Narayana. He, therefore, offered all his possessions to
that great deity. <span id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_211) Adopting the
*Sattwata* ritual, king Uparichara, with concentrated soul, used to
discharge all his sacrificial acts and observances, both optional and
obligatory. In the place of that illustrious king, many foremost
Brahmanas, well conversant with the *Pancharatra* ritual, used to eat
before all others the food offered to the god Narayana. As long as that
slayer of foes continued to rule his kingdom righteously, no untruth
ever escaped his lips and no evil thought ever entered his mind. With
his limbs he never committed even the slightest sin. The seven
celebrated Rishis, *viz*., Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, and Vasishta of great energy, who came to be known by the name of
Chitra-sikhandins, uniting together on the breast of that foremost of
mountains, *viz*., Meru, promulgated an excellent treatise on duties and
observances that was consistent with the four Vedas. The contents of
that treatise were uttered by seven mouths, and constituted the best
compendium of human duties and observances. Known, as already stated, by
the name of Chitra-sikhandins, those seven

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Rishis constitute the seven (Pravriti) elements
(of Mahat, Ahankara, etc.) and the Selfborn Manu, who is the eighth in
the enumeration, constituted original Prakriti. These eight uphold the
universe, and it was these eight that promulgated the treatise adverted
to. With their senses and minds under complete control, and ever devoted
to Yoga, these eight ascetics, with concentrated souls, are fully
conversant with the Past, the Present and the Future, and are devoted to
the religion of Truth.--This is good this is Brahma,--this is highly
beneficial,--reflecting in their minds in this way, those Rishis created
the worlds, and the science of morality and duty that governs those
worlds. In that treatise the authors discoursed on Religion and Wealth
and Pleasure, and subsequently on Emancipation also. They also laid down
in it the various restrictions and limitations intended for the Earth as
also for Heaven. They composed that treatise after having worshipped
with penances the puissant and illustrious Narayana called also Hari,
for a thousand celestial years, in company with many other Rishis.
Gratified with their penances and worship, Narayana commanded the
goddess of speech, *viz*. Saraswati, to enter into the person of those
Rishis. The goddess, for the good of the worlds did what she was
ordered. In consequence of the entrance of the goddess of speech into
their persons, those Rishis, well conversant with penances, succeeded in
composing that foremost of treatises in respect of vocables, import, and
reason. <span id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_212) Having composed that
treatise sanctified with the syllable *Om*, the Rishis first of all read
it to Narayana who became highly pleased with what he heard. The
foremost of all Beings then addressed those Rishis in an incorporeal
voice and said,--Excellent is this treatise that ye have composed
consisting of a hundred thousand verses. The duties and observances of
all the worlds will flow from this your work! In complete accordance
with the four Vedas, *viz*., the Yajushes, the Samans, and the Atharvans
of Angiras, the treatise of yours will be an authority in all the worlds
in respect of both Pravritti and Nivritti. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[2](#fn_213) Agreeably to the authority of the
scriptures I have created Brahman from the attribute of Grace, Rudra
from my Wrath, and yourselves, Ye Brahmanas, as representing the
Pravriti-elements (of Mahat, Ahankara, etc.), Surya, and Chandramas,
Wind, and Earth, and Water and Fire, all the stars and planets and
constellations, all else that is called by the name of creatures, and
utterers of Brahma (or the Vedas), they all live and act in their
respective spheres and are all respected as authorities. Even this
treatise that ye have composed shall be regarded by all persons in the
same light, *viz*., as a work of the highest authority. This is my
command. Guided by this treatise, the

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Self-born Manu himself will declare to the world
its course of duties and observances. When Usanas and Vrihaspati will
arise, they also will promulgate their respective treatises on morality
and religion, guided by and quoting from this your treatise. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_214) After the publication of his treatise by
the Self-born Manu and of that by Usanas, and after the publication of
the treatise also by Vrihaspati, this science composed by you will be
acquired by king Vasu (otherwise known by the name of Uparichara).
Indeed ye foremost of regenerate ones, that king will acquire this
knowledge of this work from Vrihaspati. That King, filled with all good
thoughts, will become deeply devoted to me. Guided by this treatise, he
will accomplish all his religious acts and observances. Verily, this
treatise composed by you will be the foremost of all treatise on
morality and religion. Possessed of the excellence, this treatise is
fraught with instructions for acquiring both Wealth and Religious merit,
and is full of mysteries. In consequence of the promulgation of this
treatise of yours, ye will be progenitors of an extensive race. King
Uparichara also will become endued with greatness and prosperity. Upon
the death, however, of that king, this eternal treatise will disappear
from the world. I tell you all this.--Having said these words unto all
those Rishis, the invisible Narayana left them and proceeded to some
place that was not known to them. Then those sires of the world, those
Rishis that bestowed their thoughts on the ends pursued by the world,
duly promulgated that treatise which is the eternal origin of all duties
and observances. Subsequently, when Vrihaspati was born in Angiras's
race in the first or the Krita age, those seven Rishis charged him with
the task of promulgating their treatise which was consistent with the
Upanishads and the several branches of the Vedas. They themselves who
were upholders of the universe and the first promulgators of duties and
religious observances, then proceeded to the place they chose, resolved
to devote themselves to penances.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[117:1](m12c035.htm#fr_208) *i.e.*, the hands,
the feet, the stomach, and the organ of pleasure. The hands are said to
be protected when they are restrained from the commission of all
improper acts; the feet are said to be duly protected when they are
restrained from touching all improper places. The stomach is said to be
protected when one never takes any kind of improper food, and when one
abstains from all evil acts for appeasing one's hunger. And lastly, one
is said to restrain the organ of pleasure when one abstains from all
acts of improper congress.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[118:1](m12c035.htm#fr_209) The word *Mushka*
as ordinarily understood, implies the scrotum or testes. The commentator
Nilakantha supposes that it may stand for the shoulder-knot. He believes
that the phrase implies that the people of this island had each four
arms.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[119:1](m12c035.htm#fr_210) The *Sattwata*
ritual is explained by the Commentator to mean the *Pancharatra* ritual.
*Tachecheshena* implies with what remained after Vishnu's worship was
over.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[119:2](m12c035.htm#fr_211) *i.e.*, dedicated
his possessions to the service of Narayana, and held them as the great
God's custodian. In other words, he never regarded his wealth as his
own, but was always ready to devote it to all good and pious purposes.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[120:1](m12c035.htm#fr_212) *i.e.*, the
treatise those *Rishis* composed was the foremost of its kind in respect
of choice and harmony of vocables, of import or sense and of reasons
with which every assertion was fortified.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[120:2](m12c035.htm#fr_213) There are two
religions, *viz*., that of *Pravritti*, implying act and observances,
and that of *Nivritti*, implying a complete abstention from all acts and
observances. The last is also called the religion of Emancipation.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[121:1](m12c035.htm#fr_214) Whether any work on
morality and religion was over actually composed by the seven *Rishis*
or not, no such work, it is certain, is in existence now. Besides this
mention of the work in the *Mahabharata*, no reference to it has been
made anywhere else. As to *Sukra-niti* it is extant, Vrihaspati's
*niti-sastram* is defunct. It is probable, however, that before
*Saba-niti* there was an anterior work, brief if not exhaustive on the
same subjects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCXXXVII](m12c036)
