[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m12c052) 
[Next](m12c054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CCCLIV

"Bhishma said, 'In an excellent town called by the name of Mahapadma
which was situate on the southern side of the river Ganga, there lived,

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

O, best of men, a Brahmana of concentrated soul. Born in the race of
Atri, he was endued with amiability. All his doubts had been dispelled
(by faith and contemplation) and he was well conversant with the path he
was to follow. Ever observant of the religious duties, he had his anger
under perfect control. Always contented, he was the, complete master of
his senses. Devoted to penances and study of the Vedas, he was honoured
by all good men. He earned wealth by righteous means and his conduct in
all things corresponded with the mode of life he led and the order to
which he belonged. The family to which he belonged was large and
celebrated. He had many kinsmen and relatives, and many children and
spouses. His behaviour was always respectable and faultless. Observing
that he had many children, the Brahmana betook himself to the
accomplishment of religious acts on a large scale. His religious
observances, O king, had reference to the customs of his own
family. <span id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_341) The Brahmana reflected
that three kinds of duties have been laid down for observances. There
were first, the duties ordained in the Vedas in respect of the order in
which he was born and the mode of life he was leading (*viz*., a
Brahmana in the observance of domesticity). There were secondly, the
duties prescribed in the scriptures, *viz*., those especially called the
Dharmasastras. And, thirdly, there were those duties that eminent and
revered men of former times have followed though not occurring either in
the Vedas or the scriptures. <span id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_342) Which
of these duties should I follow? Which of them, again, followed by me,
are likely to lead to my benefit? Which, indeed, should be my
refuge?--Thoughts like these always troubled him. He could not solve his
doubts. While troubled with such reflections, a Brahmana of concentrated
soul and observant of a very superior religion, came to his house as a
guest. The house-holder duly honoured his guest according to those
ordinances of worship that are laid down in the scriptures. Beholding
his guest refreshed and seated at ease, the host addressed him in the
following words."

"The Brahmana said, 'O sinless one, I have become exceedingly attached
to thee in consequence of the sweetness of thy conversation. Thou hast
become my friend. Listen to me, for I wish to say something unto thee. O
foremost of Brahmanas, after making over the duties of a householder to
my son, I wish to discharge the highest duties of man.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

\[paragraph continues\] What, O regenerate one, should be my path?
Relying upon the Jiva soul, I wish to achieve existence in the one
(supreme) soul. Alas, bound up in the ties of attachment, I have not the
heart to actually set myself to the accomplishment of that task. <span
id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_343) And since the best portion of my life
has passed away in the observance of domesticity, I desire to devote the
remnant of my life in earning the means of defraying the expenses of my
journey in respect of the time to come. The desire has arisen in my mind
of crossing the ocean of the world. Alas, whence shall I get the raft of
religion (with which to accomplish my purposes)? Hearing that even the
very deities are persecuted and made to endure the fruits of their acts,
and beholding the rows of Yama's standards and flags floating over the
heads of all creatures, my heart fails to derive pleasure from the
diverse objects of pleasure with which it comes into contact. Beholding
also that the Yatis depend for their sustenance upon alms obtained in
course of their rounds of mendicancy, I have no respect for the religion
of the Yatis as well. O my reverend guest, do thou, aided by that
religion which is founded upon the basis of intelligence and reason, set
me to the observance of a particular course of duties and
observance! <span id="fr_344"></span>[2](#fn_344)'

"Bhishma continued, 'Endued with great wisdom, the guest, hearing this
speech of his host which was consistent with righteousness, said these
sweet words in a melodious voice.'

"The guest said, 'I myself also am confounded with respect to this
topic. The same thought occupies my mind. I am unable to arrive at
definite conclusions. Heaven has many doors. There are some that applaud
Emancipation. Some regenerate persons praise the fruits attainable by
the performance of sacrifices. Some there are that take refuge in the
forest mode of life. Some, again, betake themselves to the domestic mode
of life. Some rely upon the merits attainable by an observance of the
duties of kings. Some rely upon the fruits of that culture which
consists in restraining the soul. Some think that the merits resulting
from a dutiful obedience to preceptors and seniors are efficacious. Some
betake themselves to restraints imposed on speech. Some by waiting
dutifully upon their mothers and fathers, have gone to heaven. Some have
ascended to heaven by practising the duty of compassion, and some by

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

practising Truth. Some rush to battle, and after laying down their
lives, have attained to heaven. Some, again, attaining to success by
practising the vow called Unccha, have betaken themselves to the path of
heaven. Some have devoted themselves to the study of the Vedas. Endued
with auspiciousness and wedded to such study, these men, possessed of
intelligence, with tranquil souls, and having their senses under
complete control, attain to heaven. Others characterised by simplicity
and truth, have been slain by men of wickedness. Endued with pure souls,
such men of truth and simplicity, have become honoured denizens of
heaven. In this world, it is seen, that men betake themselves to heaven,
through a thousand doors of duty, all standing wide open. My
understanding has been troubled by thy question, like a fleecy cloud
before the wind.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_341"></span>[204:1](m12c053.htm#fr_341) Family customs are
always observed with great care. Even when inconsistent with the
ordinances of the scriptures, such customs do not lose their binding
force. Reprehensible as the sale of a daughter or sister is, the great
king Salya, when he bestowed his sister Madri on Pandu, insisted upon
taking a sum of money, alleging family custom not only as an excuse but
as something that was obligatory. To this day, animals are slain in the
sacrifices of many families which follow the Vaishnava faith, the
justification being family custom.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[204:2](m12c053.htm#fr_342) The Vedas are,
strictly speaking, not scriptures, for they are *heard* the scriptures
being those ordinances that are written down. Of course, the Vedas have
been reduced into writing, but for all that, they continue to be called
the Srutis, as the Common Law of England, though reduced into writing,
is still called the unwritten law etc. etc.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[205:1](m12c053.htm#fr_343) Some texts
erroneously read *sthitah* for *sthitim*. *Eka eva atmani sthitim
kartum* literally rendered, is to achieve existence in the one soul.
This means to realise the union of the *Jiva*-soul with the 'Supreme
Soul.' 'Relying upon the Soul I shall try to exist in the one Soul,' in
brief, means, I shall try to unite the *Jiva* with Supreme Soul. The
difference between Kankhami and Ichcchemi is well illustrated by the
commentator by referring to the case of the man of weak stomach who
craves for food of every kind but who does not wish to actually eat from
fear of increasing his illness.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[205:2](m12c053.htm#fr_344) *Sattwikani*
implies the deities and others that are endued with the attribute of
Sattwa. *Samyujyamanani* refers to their births and deaths as deities
and men in consequence of the fruits reaped of acts done.
*Niryyatyamanani* is distressed or afflicted in consequence of such
birth and deaths'. The rows of Yama's standards and flags refer to the
diverse diseases that afflict all creatures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CCCLV](m12c054)
