[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Shinto](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](kgsh2) [Next](kgsh4.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# PART I <span class="small">INTRODUCTORY REMARKS BY THE TRANSLATORS</span>

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

## ABBREVIATIONS

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em>E.T.N.</em>—W. G. Aston’s English translation of the <em>Nihongi</em><br />
<em>E.T.K.</em>—B. H. Chamberlain’s English translation of the <em>Kojiki</em><br />
<em>T.A.S.J.</em>—<em>Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan</em></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# GLEANINGS FROM ANCIENT STORIES

## CHAPTER l

### THE AIM AND OBJECT OF THE BOOK KOGOSHŪI

 According to a time-honoured tradition, when our Imperial Ancestors
were still in the Plain of High Heaven, there were certain families in
whose special care the rites of Shintō were preserved. Namely, the
Nakatomi, the Imbe and also the Sarume, of whom we may reasonably
believe that the Nakatomi and the Imbe were equally entrusted with the
Imperial religious functions. The Imbe family is lineally descended from
Takami-Musubi-no-Kami through Futotama-no-Mikoto and
Ame-no-Tomi-no-Mikoto, while the Nakatomi family is descended from
Kamumi-Musubi-no-Kami through Ame-no-Koyane-no-Mikoto and
Ame-no-Taneko-no-Mikoto. Together with these two Musubi-no-Kami, stands
Ame-no-Minakanushi-no-Kami, and thus is formed a divine triad in the
Japanese Pantheon at the opening of the *Kojiki* or *Records of Ancient
Matters*.

 According to Japanese mythology, the “eternal night” of darkness or
pitch-darkness prevailed after the withdrawal of the Sun-Goddess into
the Heavenly Rock-Cave, and then Futotama-no-Mikoto (whom the Imbe
family claim as their ancestor) and <span id="page_2">p. 2</span>
Ame-no-Koyane-no-Mikoto (the ancestor of the Nakatomi family), aided by
Ame-no-Uzume-no-Mikoto (the ancestor of the Sarume family), were
summoned to perform due ceremonies essential to draw forth the
Sun-Goddess from her retreat. On this momentous occasion, neither the
Nakatomi nor the Imbe played the chief rôle to the other’s
disparagement, but both were equally important and essential to the
proper performance of the religious rites in the Plain of High Heaven.

 When the Heavenly Grandson descended to earth, and the Emperor Jimmu
established the Imperial Court in Yamato after his triumphant entrance
into that province, both the above families enjoyed equal privileges in
the religious ceremonies observed at the Court.

 Kamatari, the renowned ancestor of the Fujiwara family (which sprang
from the same root as the Nakatomi), gained supremacy in the political
arena, after the Soga family had been annihilated in <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 645 during the reign of the Empress Kōkyoku.
Later on, through its marital relations with the Imperial House, the
Fujiwara family practically governed Japan *de facto* and the authority
of the Nakatomi gradually superseded that of the rival Imbe family in
the religious rites observed at the Imperial Court. Thus, for example,
in <span class="small">A.D.</span> 684 (the reign of the Emperor Temmu),
the Asomi, *i.e.*, the newly established Second Court Rank, was
conferred on the Nakatomi, whilst only the Sukune, or Third Court Rank,
was bestowed on the Imbe. This incident clearly <span id="page_3">p.
3</span> proves that the Imbe then ranked below the Nakatomi, quite
contrary to our time-honoured tradition that the Nakatomi and the Imbe
were originally treated on exactly the same level at the Imperial Court,
both in the Plain of High Heaven and in this Land of Luxuriant Reed
Plains.

 Only those shrines which were closely related to the Nakatomi family
enjoyed special prerogatives as to the official offerings, whilst, no
matter how superior, according to the sacred traditions of ancient
Japan, the other shrines were, they were neglected for the receipt of
the Imperial offerings, if they had no relationship with the Nakatomi
family. The prejudices and partiality of the Nakatomi naturally aroused
the righteous indignation of Imbe-no-Hironari and forced him, when
replying to the Emperor Heijō’s gracious message, to call His Majesty’s
attention to the “Eleven Things” neglected by the Imperial Government,
as told in the book *Kogoshūi*, which under these circumstances and with
such a purpose was inscribed by Imbe-no-Hironari at the beginning of the
9th century in the reign of the Emperor Heijō (<span
class="small">A.D.</span> 806-809).

## CHAPTER II

### THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF THE BOOK CRITICIZED

 In substance the *Kogoshūi* is chiefly a protest written by
Imbe-no-Hironari against a rival family. Hence, one naturally presumes
that the work breathes a spirit of rivalry and jealousy, <span
id="page_4">p. 4</span> and in some respects this is an undeniable fact.
For example, in the *Kogoshūi* the part taken by Takami-Musubi-no-Kami
is fairly prominent in the issue of Divine Commands in High Heaven
together with Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami, whereas the *Nihongi* directs those
commands to Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami alone. Why is this? Because
Takami-Musubi-no-Kami being regarded as the divine ancestor of the Imbe
family, it is reasonable to suppose that Imbe-no-Hironari desired to
claim the same high position for his own divine ancestor
Takami-Musubi-no-Kami as that of the Divine Imperial Ancestress
Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami herself. Therefore, Nasa (or Kusakabe-Katsutaka)
published his contradiction of the *Kogoshūi* account styling his book
*Gisai* or *My Inability to Agree with Imbe-no-Hironari* (*i.e.*,
briefly, *Kusakabe’s Critique on Imbe-no-Hironari’s Kogoshūi*). At the
same time one must remember that the *Kogoshūi* records a tradition
specially transmitted to and preserved by the Imbe family, just as the
*Nihongi* preserves various traditions as different versions of one and
the same event, and so one may reasonably conclude that the value of the
*Kogoshūi* is equal to that of the family records preserved by the
Takahashi family, the Hata family,<span
id="page_4_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_4_note_*.md) and so forth. From this
standpoint, it appears that Moto-Ori and Hirata greatly sympathize with
Imbe-no-Hironari’s attitude and are against the author Kusakabe (*Vide*
Moto-Ori, The *Gisai-Ben*. The *Collected Works*, Japanese edition, vol.
v, pp. 1445-1447).

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

## CHAPTER III

### THE DATE OF THE BOOK EXAMINED

 The most popular edition of the *Kogoshūi* circulated in Japan relates
that the *Kogoshūi* was first written by Imbe-no-Hironari himself on the
13th day of the 2nd month in the 2nd year of Daidō (<span
class="small">A.D.</span> 807), when he held the Lower Grade of the
Junior Fifth Court Rank, but one of the most authentic Japanese
histories (the *Ruiju-Kokushi*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">XCIX</span>, 11th month, 3rd year of Daidō) states that
Imbe-no-Hironari was actually in the Higher Grade of the Senior Sixth
Court Rank (a degree inferior to the Lower Grade of the Junior Fifth
Court Rank), and so, in order to harmonize the date with this historical
fact, a certain edition of the *Kogoshūi* puts the date 13th day of the
12th month in the 3rd year of Daidō, as that when Imbe-no-Hironari
submitted the *Kogoshūi* to the Imperial Throne. We believe, however,
that the variations, both in the dates and in Hironari’s Court Rank,
were inserted later by some unknown scribes and therefore the date on
which the *Kogoshūi* was actually tendered to His Imperial Majesty may
in all probability be that which is popularly accepted, namely, the 13th
day of the 2nd month in the 2nd year of Daidō.

 It is an historical fact that in the 1st year of Daidō, <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 806, there was a controversy between the Imbe
and the Nakatomi <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> on the powers entrusted
to their respective families in the matter of religious ceremonies held
at the Imperial Court, and therefore it is with good reason concluded
with the unknown writer whose notes are inscribed in the Yakumoshō
(Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">I</span>) written by the
Emperor Juntoku (+ <span class="small">A.D.</span> 1242)—the Maeda
manuscripts also tell us that the date is the 1st year of Daidō—that
Hironari made his first draft of the *Kogoshūi* during the 1st year of
Daidō (806), or at the beginning of the following year (807)—as stated
in the passage of our *Kogoshūi* text—and submitted it to the Emperor
Heijō against his rival Nakatomi, thus making the best use of the
opportunity afforded by the controversy between those two rival Houses.
Therefore one of the most authentic official Japanese histories
records:—

 “Prior to this (the 10th day of the 8th month in the lst year of
Daidō), there had been a law-suit between the Nakatomi and the Imbe when
they set forth their respective claims thus. The Nakatomi family
complained:

 “ ‘It was the Imbe family that was wont to manufacture official
offerings for the gods, but as they never enjoyed the privilege of
reciting a liturgy, that family should not be sent as Imperial Envoys to
bring official offerings to any shrine.’

 “The Imbe family, however, protested against the accusation, saying:

 “ ‘It is the right of the Imbe family to present the Imperial
sacrificial gifts to a shrine and offer prayer, therefore one or <span
id="page_7">p. 7</span> more members of that family should be appointed
as Imperial messengers to offer sacrifices at a shrine, and the Nakatomi
family should be entrusted with the expiatory rites.’

 “As the arguments of both parties were fairly well founded on
historical grounds, the issue still hung in the balance. But on the same
day, an Imperial Edict was issued, saying:

 “ ‘According to the *Nihonshoki* (*Nihongi*) or *Chronicles of Japan*,
when Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami concealed herself in the Heavenly Rock-Cave,
Ame-no-Koyane-no-Mikoto, ancestor of the Nakatomi family, and
Futotama-no-Mikoto, ancestor of the Imbe family, both united in offering
prayer to Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami to persuade her to leave the cave, and hung
five hundred large jewels linked together by an august string, on the
upper branch of a fine sacred Sakaki<span
id="page_7_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_7_note_*.md) tree with five hundred
branches, which had been brought from the Heavenly Mt. Kagu; an
eight-hand-span mirror or large mirror on the central branches, and
offerings of fine cloth both blue and white in colour on the lower
branches.<span id="page_7_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_7_note_dagger.md)
Hence it is correct that the Nakatomi and the Imbe should share together
in offering prayers to the Gods.’

 “And again, according to the *Jingiryō* (*Book of Administrative Law
for the Shintō Religion*), ‘On the occasion of the Prayer Service for
the Yearly Harvest and of the Monthly Service at a <span id="page_8">p.
8</span> shrine an official of the Nakatomi family is to recite a
liturgy and one of the Imbe is to deliver the Amatsu-Kami-no-Yogoto<span
id="page_8_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_8_note_*.md) or Congratulatary Address
for the new Emperor in reference to the auspicious events of the Divine
Age in Heaven, whilst the function of the Imbe is to present the Emperor
with both the Mirror and the Sword—the Divine Imperial Regalia.

 “ ‘In the Ōharai or Great Purification Ceremony on the last days of the
6th and 12th months, an official of the Nakatomi family is to present
the expiatory offerings to the Emperor, while an official of the Fumi
family on the East and West of the Capital is to present the expiatory
sword and recite the expiatory prayer (in Chinese), and then an official
of the Nakatomi family is to deliver a congratulatory address (in
Japanese). An Imperial Envoy who brings offerings to any shrine other
than those shrines regularly appointed to be worshipped by the
Administrative Law for the Shintō Religion shall be a person holding the
Fifth, or a higher, Court Rank, and also at the same time he should
always be appointed by divination.’

 “So in sending Imperial Envoys to a shrine to present offerings other
than the regular sacrifices established by the Administrative Law, both
the Nakatomi and the Imbe should be appointed, and all other things
divine be conducted in strict <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> accordance
with the Shintō Administrative Law” (The *Nihonkōki*, vol. <span
class="small">XIV</span>. The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol.
<span class="small">III</span>, p. 77).

## CHAPTER IV

### THE TEXT AND ITS COMMENTARIES

 There are different manuscripts of the *Kogoshūi*; for instance, the
Urabe manuscript (derived from the Heiman manuscript), the Ise, the
Hirano, and the Hōryūji manuscript existing as early as <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 1238. The facsimile of the Hōryūji or Ryakunin
manuscript was made by Mikannagi-Kiyonao of Ise in <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 1847. The facsimile of the Temmon manuscript
was made by the late Dr. Inoue-Yorikuni some years ago. The oldest
manuscript still extant and preserved in the Yoshida family of Kyōto is
a manuscript written in <span class="small">A.D.</span> 1225 (the 1st
year of Karoku). The next oldest manuscripts, which are now preserved by
Marquis Maeda-Toshinari in Tōkyō, seem to have been made a little later
than the Yoshida manuscript in the Karoku Era. We can say for certain
that the block-printed book of *Kogoshūi* was already in existence in
<span class="small">A.D.</span> 1685, when, at the latest,
Tatsuno-Hirochika published the *Kogoshūi-Genyoshō*, and one must
remember that this was the first block-printed *Kogoshūi* in which
together with the text a valuable commentary in Chinese is found. Later
on, however, some of the succeeding commentaries are worth reading when
we study the *Kogoshūi* text. The following commentaries <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> are always useful companions to the student,
and of them, those written by Ikebe and by Kubo are the best:—

|      |                                                                                                                      |
|------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (1)  | Ikebe-no-Mahari, The *Kogoshūi-Shinchū*, or *A New Commentary on the Kogoshūi*.                                      |
| (2)  | Kubo-Sueshige, The *Kogoshūi-Kōgi*, or *Studies and Notes on the Kogoshūi*.                                          |
| (3)  | Takada-Hakuō, The *Kogoshūi-Jimō-Setsuge*, or *A Companion to the Beginner Studying the Kogoshūi*.                   |
| (4)  | Hirata-Atsutane, The *Koshichō*, or *An Essay Concerning the Ancient Histories* (vol. <span class="small">I</span>). |
| (5)  | Tatsuno-Hirochika, The *Kogoshūi-Genyoshō*, or *Some Notes in Chinese Characters on the Kogoshūi*.                   |

## CHAPTER V

### THE BOOK WRITTEN IN A CONSERVATIVE SPIRIT AGAINST THE THEN OVERWHELMING INFLUENCE OF CHINESE CULTURE

 The opening of the 9th century was a time when Chinese culture gained
great influence in Japan. The mother of the Emperor Kammu was descended
from Shumō (or Tobo), the first King of Kudara or Pèkché (The
*Shoku-Nihongi*, vol. <span class="small">XI</span>. The
*Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">II</span>,
p. 763), and the two celebrated Japanese Buddhist monks Dengyō-Daishi
(Saichō), Kōbō-Daishi (Kūkai), and others were more or less affected by
<span id="page_11">p. 11</span> Chinese thought and civilization,
especially after visiting China. The Emperor Kammu in <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 785 and 787 gave orders that worship be
offered to the Heavenly God, or rather to Heaven Itself, at Katano in
Kawachi Province, but this is a Chinese religious custom which is
entirely alien to the original Shintō cult of old Japan (The
*Shoku-Nihongi*, vol. <span class="small">XXXVIII</span>, vol. <span
class="small">XXXIX</span>. The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol.
<span class="small">II</span>, pp. 720, 735. The
*Nihon-Montoku-Tennō-Jitsuroku*, vol. <span class="small">VIII</span>.
The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">III</span>, p. 539). There was another trend of thought,
however, which ran counter to the spirit of the times that blindly
accepted the Chinese civilization then overpowering the country with its
irresistible force—Nationalism *versus* foreign influence! Conservatism
*versus* liberalism! So, according to the *Nihonkōki*, an historical
book compiled under Government auspices, an Imperial Edict was issued in
<span class="small">A.D.</span> 809, forbidding the circulation of a
spurious work, written from the standpoint of Chinese and Korean
immigrants and entitled *Wakan-Sōrekitei-Fuzu* or the *Book of the
Genealogies of All the Sovereigns both at Home and Abroad*, it being
injurious to social order in Japan, because it falsely asserts that the
Imperial families of China and Japan and the royal house of Korea are
all sprung from one and the same God, Ame-no-Minakanushi-no-Kami, one of
the greatest deities worshipped by the ancient Japanese, and thus
blasphemes the highest heavenly ancestral God of the Imperial family of
Japan (*Vide* the *Nihonkōki*, vol. <span class="small">XVII</span>. The
*Kokushi-Taikei*, <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> Japanese edition, vol.
<span class="small">III</span>, p. 93). Moreover, the appearance of the
*Shinsen-Shōjiroku* or *Catalogue* (*Register*) *of Family* (*or Clan*)
*Names* compiled in <span class="small">A.D.</span> 815 by the Imperial
Prince Manta, the *Daidō-Ruijuhō* or *Work on the Japanese Medical
Prescriptions Classified in the Daidō Era* compiled in <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 808 by Abe-no-Sanenao, Izumo-no-Hirosada,
etc., and the *Daidō-Hongi*, or *A Japanese History Compiled in the
Daidō Era* (the beginning of the 9th century), whose fragments—a
description of some Shintō rites performed at the Ise Shrine—are still
extant in the books entitled *Jingū-Zatsureishū* and *Kōji-Satabumi*
(*Vide* the *Gunsho-Ruijū*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">IV</span>, and the *Zoku-Gunsho-Ruijū*, Japanese edition,
vol. <span class="small">IV</span>), is the surest evidence of the
activity of counter-currents of the conservative nationalism to which
Imbe-no-Hironari belonged. Hence his book *Kogoshūi* was written in
antagonism to and conflict with the “new tendency to ostentation and
frivolity,” as stated in his preface to the *Kogoshūi*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](kgsh4.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_4">p. 4</span>

<span id="page_4_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_4_fr_*.md) For example, the
*Takahashi-Ujibumi*, the *Hata-Uji-no-Honkeichō*, *etc*.

<span id="footnotes_page_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="page_7_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_7_fr_*.md) *Eurya Ochnacea
Szyse* (*Cleyera Japonica*). This tree is still revered as sacred to the
Gods of Shintō. Some commentators opine that “sakaki” was a name
originally given to all evergreens.

<span id="page_7_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_7_fr_dagger.md) *Vide* W. G.
Aston. *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>. pp. 43, 44.

<span id="footnotes_page_8">p. 8</span>

<span id="page_8_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_8_fr_*.md) Amatsu-Kami-no-Yogoto
otherwise called “Nakatomi-no-Yogoto” or “Congratulatory Address by the
Nakatomi Family” (*Vide* Fujiwara-no-Yorinaga’s Diary, called
“Taiki-Bekki” in the Japanese edition).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
