<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsgr02)  [Next](fsgr04) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Five Stages of Greek Religion*, by Gilbert Murray, \[1925\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

## PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

This small book has taken a long time in growing. Though the first two
essays were only put in writing this year for a course of lectures which
I had the honour of delivering at Columbia University in 1912, the
third, which was also used at Columbia, had in its main features
appeared in the *Hibbert Journal* in 1910, the fourth in part in the
*English Review* in 1908; the translation of Sallustius was made in 1907
for use with a small class at Oxford. Much of the material is much older
in conception, and all has been reconsidered. I must thank the editors
of both the above-named periodicals for their kind permission to
reprint.

I think it was the writings of my friend Mr. Andrew Lang that first
awoke me, in my undergraduate days, to the importance of anthropology
and primitive religion to a Greek scholar. Certainly I began then to
feel that the great works of the ancient Greek imagination are
penetrated habitually by religious conceptions and postulates which
literary scholars like myself had not observed or understood. In the
meantime the situation has changed. Greek religion is being studied
right and left, and has revealed itself as a surprisingly rich and
attractive, though somewhat controversial, subject. It used to be a
deserted territory; now it is at least a battle-ground. If ever the
present differences resolved themselves into a simple fight with
shillelaghs between the scholars and the anthropologists, I should
without doubt wield my <span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> reluctant
weapon on the side of the scholars. Scholarship is the rarer, harder,
less popular and perhaps the more permanently valuable work, and it
certainly stands more in need of defence at the moment. But in the
meantime I can hardly understand how the purest of 'pure scholars' can
fail to feel his knowledge enriched by the savants who have compelled us
to dig below the surface of our classical tradition and to realize the
imaginative and historical problems which so often lie concealed beneath
the smooth security of a verbal 'construe'. My own essays do not for a
moment claim to speak with authority on a subject which is still
changing and showing new facets year by year. They only claim to
represent the way of regarding certain large issues of Greek Religion
which has gradually taken shape, and has proved practically helpful and
consistent with facts, in the mind of a very constant, though
unsystematic, reader of many various periods of Greek literature.

In the first essay my debt to Miss Harrison is great and obvious. My
statement of one or two points is probably different from hers, but in
the main I follow her lead. And in either case I cannot adequately
describe the advantage I have derived from many years of frequent
discussion and comparison of results with a Hellenist whose learning and
originality of mind are only equalled by her vivid generosity towards
her fellow-workers.

The second may also be said to have grown out of Miss Harrison's
writings. She has by now made the title of 'Olympian' almost a term of
reproach, and thrown down so many a scornful challenge to the canonical
gods of Greece, that I have ventured on <span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>
this attempt to explain their historical origin and plead for their
religious value. When the essay was already written I read Mr.
Chadwick's impressive book on *The Heroic Age* (Cambridge, 1912), and
was delighted to find in an author whose standpoint and equipment are so
different from mine so much that confirmed or clarified my own view.

The title of the third essay I owe to a conversation with Professor J.
B. Bury. We were discussing the change that took place in Greek thought
between, say, Plato and the Neo-Platonists, or even between Aristotle
and Posidonius, and which is seen at its highest power in the Gnostics.
I had been calling it a rise of asceticism, or mysticism, or religious
passion, or the like, when my friend corrected me. 'It is not a rise; it
is a fall or failure of something, a sort of failure of nerve.'—We are
treading here upon somewhat firmer ground than in the first two essays.
The field for mere conjecture is less: we are supported more
continuously by explicit documents. Yet the subject is a very difficult
one owing to the scattered and chaotic nature of the sources, and even
where we get away from fragments and reconstructions and reach definite
treatises with or without authors' names, I cannot pretend to feel
anything like the same clearness about the true meaning of a passage in
Philo or the Corpus Hermeticum that one normally feels in a writer of
the classical period. Consequently in this essay I think I have hugged
my modern authorities rather close, and seldom expressed an opinion for
which I could not find some fairly authoritative backing, my debt being
particularly great to Reitzenstein, Bousset, and the brilliant
*Hellenistisch-römische Kultur* of <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> P.
Wendland. I must also thank my old pupil, Mr. Edwyn Bevan, who was kind
enough to read this book in proof, for some valuable criticisms. The
subject is one of such extraordinary interest that I offer no apology
for calling further attention to it.

A word or two about the last brief revival of the ancient religion under
'Julian the Apostate' forms the natural close to this series of studies.
But here our material, both historical and literary, is so abundant that
I have followed a different method. After a short historical
introduction I have translated in full a very curious and little-known
ancient text, which may be said to constitute something like an
authoritative Pagan creed. Some readers may regret that I do not give
the Greek as well as the English. I am reluctant, however, to publish a
text which I have not examined in the MSS., and I feel also that, while
an edition of Sallustius is rather urgently needed, it ought to be an
edition with a full commentary.<span
id="an_fr_xvi_1"></span>[xvi\_1](fsgr03.htm#an_fn_xvi_1)

I was first led to these studies by the wish to fill up certain puzzling
blanks of ignorance in my own mind, and doubtless the little book bears
marks of this origin. It aims largely at the filling of interstices. It
avoids the great illuminated places, and gives its mind to the stretches
of intervening twilight. It deals little with the harvest of flowers or
fruit, but watches the inconspicuous seasons when the soil is beginning
to stir, the seeds are falling or ripening.

G. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOOTNOTES:

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_xvi_1"></span>[xvi\_1](fsgr03.htm#an_fr_xvi_1) Professor
Nock's edition (Cambridge 1926) has admirably filled this gap.

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](fsgr04)

</div>
