<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsgr07)  [Next](fsgr09) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Five Stages of Greek Religion*, by Gilbert Murray, \[1925\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

## IV

### THE FAILURE OF NERVE

Any one who turns from the great writers of classical Athens, say
Sophocles or Aristotle, to those of the Christian era must be conscious
of a great difference in tone. There is a change in the whole relation
of the writer to the world about him. The new quality is not
specifically Christian: it is just as marked in the Gnostics and
Mithras-worshippers as in the Gospels and the Apocalypse, in Julian and
Plotinus as in Gregory and Jerome. It is hard to describe. It is a rise
of asceticism, of mysticism, in a sense, of pessimism; a loss of
self-confidence, of hope in this life and of faith in normal human
effort; a despair of patient inquiry, a cry for infallible revelation;
an indifference to the welfare of the state, a conversion of the soul to
God. It is an atmosphere in which the aim of the good man is not so much
to live justly, to help the society to which he belongs and enjoy the
esteem of his fellow creatures; but rather, by means of a burning faith,
by contempt for the world and its standards, by ecstasy, suffering, and
martyrdom, to be granted pardon for his unspeakable unworthiness, his
immeasurable sins. There is an intensifying of certain spiritual
emotions; an increase of sensitiveness, a failure of nerve.

Now this antithesis is often exaggerated by the admirers of one side or
the other. A hundred people write as if Sophocles had no mysticism and
practically speaking no conscience. Half a dozen retort as if <span
id="page_124">p. 124</span> St. Paul had no public spirit and no common
sense. I have protested often against this exaggeration; but, stated
reasonably, as a change of proportion and not a creation of new hearts,
the antithesis is certainly based on fact. The historical reasons for it
are suggested above, in the first of these essays.

My description of this complicated change is, of course, inadequate, but
not, I hope, one-sided. I do not depreciate the religions that followed
on this movement by describing the movement itself as a 'failure of
nerve'. Mankind has not yet decided which of two opposite methods leads
to the fuller and deeper knowledge of the world: the patient and
sympathetic study of the good citizen who lives in it, or the ecstatic
vision of the saint who rejects it. But probably most Christians are
inclined to believe that without some failure and sense of failure,
without a contrite heart and conviction of sin, man can hardly attain
the religious life. I can imagine an historian of this temper believing
that the period we are about to discuss was a necessary softening of
human pride, a *Praeparatio Evangelica*.<span
id="an_fr_124_1"></span>[124\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_124_1)

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

I am concerned in this paper with the lower country lying between two
great ranges. The one range is Greek Philosophy, culminating in Plato,
Aristotle, the Porch, and the Garden; the other is Christianity,
culminating in St. Paul and his successors. The one is the work of
Hellas, using some few foreign elements; the second is the work of
Hellenistic culture on a Hebrew stock. The books of Christianity are
Greek, the philosophical background is Hellenistic, the result of the
interplay, in the free atmosphere of Greek philosophy, of religious
ideas derived from Egypt, Anatolia, Syria, and Babylon. The preaching is
carried on in Greek among the Greek-speaking workmen of the great
manufacturing and commercial cities. The first preachers are Jews: the
central scene is set in Jerusalem. I wish in this essay to indicate how
a period of religious history, which seems broken, is really continuous,
and to trace the lie of the main valleys which lead from the one range
to the other, through a large and imperfectly explored territory.

The territory in question is the so-called Hellenistic Age, the period
during which the Schools of Greece were 'hellenizing' the world. It is a
time of great <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> enlightenment, of
vigorous propaganda, of high importance to history. It is a time full of
great names: in one school of philosophy alone we have Zeno, Cleanthes,
Chrysippus, Panaetius, Posidonius. Yet, curiously enough, it is
represented in our tradition by something very like a mere void. There
are practically no complete books preserved, only fragments and indirect
quotations. Consequently in the search for information about this age we
must throw our nets wide. Beside books and inscriptions of the
Hellenistic period proper I have drawn on Cicero, Pliny, Seneca, and the
like for evidence about their teachers and masters. I have used many
Christian and Gnostic documents and works like the Corpus of Hermetic
writings and the Mithras Liturgy. Among modern writers I must
acknowledge a special debt to the researches of Dieterich, Cumont,
Bousset, Wendland, and Reitzenstein.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hellenistic Age seems at first sight to have entered on an
inheritance such as our speculative Anarchists sometimes long for, a
*tabula rasa*, on which a new and highly gifted generation of thinkers
might write clean and certain the book of their discoveries about
life—what Herodotus would call their '*Historiê*'. For, as we have seen
in the last essay, it is clear that by the time of Plato the traditional
religion of the Greek states was, if taken at its face value, a bankrupt
concern. There was hardly one aspect in which it could bear criticism;
and in the kind of test that chiefly matters, the satisfaction of men's
ethical requirements and aspirations, it was if anything weaker than
elsewhere. Now a religious <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> belief that
is scientifically preposterous may still have a long and comfortable
life before it. Any worshipper can suspend the scientific part of his
mind while worshipping. But a religious belief that is morally
contemptible is in serious danger, because when the religious emotions
surge up the moral emotions are not far away. And the clash cannot be
hidden.

This collapse of the traditional religion of Greece might not have
mattered so much if the form of Greek social life had remained. If a
good Greek had his Polis, he had an adequate substitute in most respects
for any mythological gods. But the Polis too, as we have seen in the
last essay, fell with the rise of Macedon. It fell, perhaps, not from
any special spiritual fault of its own; it had few faults except its
fatal narrowness; but simply because there now existed another social
whole, which, whether higher or lower in civilization, was at any rate
utterly superior in brute force and in money. Devotion to the Polis lost
its reality when the Polis, with all that it represented of rights and
laws and ideals of Life, lay at the mercy of a military despot, who
might, of course, be a hero, but might equally well be a vulgar sot or a
corrupt adventurer.

What the succeeding ages built upon the ruins of the Polis is not our
immediate concern. In the realm of thought, on the whole, the Polis
triumphed. Aristotle based his social theory on the Polis, not the
nation. Dicaearchus, Didymus, and Posidonius followed him, and we still
use his language. Rome herself was a Polis, as well as an Empire. And
Professor Haverfield has pointed out that a City has more chance of
taking in the whole world to its freedoms and privileges <span
id="page_128">p. 128</span> than a Nation has of making men of alien
birth its compatriots. A Jew of Tarsus could easily be granted the civic
rights of Rome: he could never have been made an Italian or a Frenchman.
The Stoic ideal of the World as 'one great City of Gods and Men' has not
been surpassed by any ideal based on the Nation.

What we have to consider is the general trend of religious thought from,
say, the Peripatetics to the Gnostics. It is a fairly clear history. A
soil once teeming with wild weeds was to all appearance swept bare and
made ready for new sowing: skilled gardeners chose carefully the best of
herbs and plants and tended the garden sedulously. But the bounds of the
garden kept spreading all the while into strange untended ground, and
even within the original walls the weeding had been hasty and
incomplete. At the end of a few generations all was a wilderness of
weeds again, weeds rank and luxuriant and sometimes extremely beautiful,
with a half-strangled garden flower or two gleaming here and there in
the tangle of them. Does that comparison seem disrespectful to religion?
Is philosophy all flowers and traditional belief all weeds? Well, think
what a weed is. It is only a name for all the natural wild vegetation
which the earth sends up of herself, which lives and will live without
the conscious labour of man. The flowers are what we keep alive with
difficulty; the weeds are what conquer us.

It has been well observed by Zeller that the great weakness of all
ancient thought, not excepting Socratic thought, was that instead of
appealing to objective experiment it appealed to some subjective <span
id="page_129">p. 129</span> sense of fitness. There were exceptions, of
course: Democritus, Eratosthenes, Hippocrates, and to a great extent
Aristotle. But in general there was a strong tendency to follow Plato in
supposing that people could really solve questions by an appeal to their
inner consciousness. One result of this, no doubt, was a tendency to lay
too much stress on mere agreement. It is obvious, when one thinks about
it, that quite often a large number of people who know nothing about a
subject will all agree and all be wrong. Yet we find the most radical of
ancient philosophers unconsciously dominated by the argument *ex
consensu gentium*. It is hard to find two more uncompromising thinkers
than Zeno and Epicurus. Yet both of them, when they are almost free from
the popular superstitions, when they have constructed complete systems
which, if not absolutely logic-proof, are calculated at least to keep
out the weather for a century or so, open curious side-doors at the last
moment and let in all the gods of mythology.<span
id="an_fr_129_1"></span>[129\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_129_1) True, they are
admitted as suspicious characters, and under promise of good behaviour.
Epicurus explains that they do not and cannot do anything whatever to
anybody; Zeno explains that they are not anthropomorphic, and are only
symbols or emanations or subordinates of the all-ruling Unity; both
parties get rid of the myths. But the two great reformers have admitted
a dangerous principle. The general consensus of humanity, they say,
shows that there are gods, and gods which in mind, if not also in visual
<span id="page_130">p. 130</span> appearance, resemble man. Epicurus
succeeded in barring the door, and admitted nothing more. But the Stoics
presently found themselves admitting or insisting that the same
consensus proved the existence of daemons, of witchcraft, of divination,
and when they combined with the Platonic school, of more dangerous
elements still.

I take the Stoics and Epicureans as the two most radical schools. On the
whole both of them fought steadily and strongly against the growth of
superstition, or, if you like to put it in other language, against the
dumb demands of man's infra-rational nature. The glory of the Stoics is
to have built up a religion of extraordinary nobleness; the glory of the
Epicureans is to have upheld an ideal of sanity and humanity stark
upright amid a reeling world, and, like the old Spartans, never to have
yielded one inch of ground to the common foe.

The great thing to remember is that the mind of man cannot be
enlightened permanently by merely teaching him to reject some particular
set of superstitions. There is an infinite supply of other superstitions
always at hand; and the mind that desires such things—that is, the mind
that has not trained itself to the hard discipline of reasonableness and
honesty, will, as soon as its devils are cast out, proceed to fill
itself with their relations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let us first consider the result of the mere denial of the Olympian
religion. The essential postulate of that religion was that the world is
governed by a number of definite personal gods, possessed of a human
sense of justice and fairness and capable of being <span
id="page_131">p. 131</span> influenced by normal human motives. In
general, they helped the good and punished the bad, though doubtless
they tended too much to regard as good those who paid them proper
attention and as bad those who did not.

Speaking broadly, what was left when this conception proved inadequate?
If it was not these personal gods who made things happen, what was it?
If the Tower of Siloam was not deliberately thrown down by the gods so
as to kill and hurt a carefully collected number of wicked people, while
letting the good escape, what was the explanation of its falling? The
answer is obvious, but it can be put in two ways. You can either say:
'It was just chance that the Tower fell at that particular moment when
So-and-so was under it.' Or you can say, with rather more reflection but
not any more common sense: 'It fell because of a definite chain of
causes, a certain degree of progressive decay in the building, a certain
definite pressure, &c. It was bound to fall.'

There is no real difference in these statements, at least in the meaning
of those who ordinarily utter them. Both are compatible with a
reasonable and scientific view of the world. But in the Hellenistic Age,
when Greek thought was spreading rapidly and superficially over vast
semi-barbarous populations whose minds were not ripe for it, both views
turned back instinctively into a theology as personal as that of the
Olympians. It was not, of course, Zeus or Apollo who willed this; every
one knew so much: it happened by Chance. That is, Chance or Fortune
willed it. And <u>Τύχη</u> became a goddess like the rest. The great
catastrophes, the great transformations of the <span id="page_132">p.
132</span> mediterranean world which marked the Hellenistic period, had
a strong influence here. If Alexander and his generals had practised
some severely orthodox Macedonian religion, it would have been easy to
see that the Gods of Macedon were the real rulers of the world. But they
most markedly did not. They accepted hospitably all the religions that
crossed their path. Some power or other was disturbing the world, that
was clear. It was not exactly the work of man, because sometimes the
good were exalted, sometimes the bad; there was no consistent purpose in
the story. It was just Fortune. Happy is the man who knows how to
placate Fortune and make her smile upon him!

It is worth remembering that the best seed-ground for superstition is a
society in which the fortunes of men seem to bear practically no
relation to their merits and efforts. A stable and well-governed society
does tend, speaking roughly, to ensure that the Virtuous and Industrious
Apprentice shall succeed in life, while the Wicked and Idle Apprentice
fails. And in such a society people tend to lay stress on the reasonable
or visible chains of causation. But in a country suffering from
earthquakes or pestilences, in a court governed by the whim of a despot,
in a district which is habitually the seat of a war between alien
armies, the ordinary virtues of diligence, honesty, and kindliness seem
to be of little avail. The only way to escape destruction is to win the
favour of the prevailing powers, take the side of the strongest invader,
flatter the despot, placate the Fate or Fortune or angry god that is
sending the earthquake or the pestilence. The Hellenistic period pretty
certainly <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> falls in some degree under
all of these categories. And one result is the sudden and enormous
spread of the worship of Fortune. Of course, there was always a protest.
There is the famous

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i0">*Nullum numen habes si sit prudentia: nos te,*  
</span> <span class="i0">*Nos facimus, Fortuna, deam*,  
</span>

</div>

</div>

taken by Juvenal from the Greek. There are many unguarded phrases and at
least three corrections in Polybius.<span
id="an_fr_133_1"></span>[133\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_133_1) Most
interesting of all perhaps, there is the first oration of Plutarch on
the Fortune of Alexander.<span
id="an_fr_133_2"></span>[133\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_133_2) A sentence in
Pliny's *Natural History*, ii. 22, seems to go back to Hellenistic
sources:

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<div class="blockquot">

'Throughout the whole world, at every place and hour, by every voice
Fortune alone is invoked and her name spoken: she is the one defendant,
the one culprit, the one thought in men's minds, the one object of
praise, the one cause. She is worshipped with insults, counted as fickle
and often as blind, wandering, inconsistent, elusive, changeful, and
friend of the unworthy. . . . We are so much at the mercy of chance that
Chance is our god.'

</div>

The word used is first *Fortuna* and then *Sors*. This shows how little
real difference there is between the two apparently contradictory
conceptions.—'Chance would have it so.' 'It was fated to be.' The sting
of both phrases—their pleasant bitterness when played with, their
quality of poison when believed—lies in their denial of the value of
human endeavour.

Yet on the whole, as one might expect, the believers in Destiny are a
more respectable congregation than the worshippers of Chance. It
requires a certain amount of thoughtfulness to rise to the conception
that nothing really happens without a cause. It is the beginning,
perhaps, of science. Ionic philosophers of the fifth century had laid
stress on the <u>Ἀνάγκη φύσιος</u>,<span
id="an_fr_134_1"></span>[134\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_134_1) what we should
call the Chain of causes in Nature. After the rise of Stoicism Fate
becomes something less physical, more related to conscious purpose. It
is not *Anankê* but *Heimarmenê*. Heimarmenê, in the striking simile of
Zeno,<span id="an_fr_134_2"></span>[134\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_134_2) is
like a fine thread running through the whole of existence—the world, we
must remember, was to the Stoics a live <span id="page_135">p.
135</span> thing—like that invisible thread of life which, in heredity,
passes on from generation to generation of living species and keeps the
type alive; it runs causing, causing for ever, both the infinitesimal
and the infinite. It is the <u>Λόγος τοῦ Κόσμου</u>,<span
id="an_fr_135_1"></span>[135\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_135_1) the <u>Νοῦς
Διός</u>, the Reason of the World or the mind of Zeus, rather difficult
to distinguish from the Pronoia or Providence which is the work of God
and indeed the very essence of God. Thus it is not really an external
and alien force. For the human soul itself is a fragment or effluence of
the divine, and this Law of God is also the law of man's own Phusis. As
long as you act in accordance with your true self you are complying with
that divine <u>Εἱμαρμένη</u> or <u>Πρόνοια</u>, whose service is perfect
freedom. Only when you are false to your own nature and become a rebel
against the kingdom of God which is within you, are you dragged perforce
behind the chariot-wheels. The doctrine is implied in Cleanthes'
celebrated Hymn to Destiny and is explained clearly by Plotinus.<span
id="an_fr_135_2"></span>[135\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_135_2)

That is a noble conception. But the vulgar of course can turn Kismet
into a stupid idol, as easily as they can Fortune. And Epicurus may have
had some excuse for exclaiming that he would sooner be a slave to the
old gods of the vulgar, than to the Destiny of the philosophers.<span
id="an_fr_135_3"></span>[135\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_135_3)

So much for the result in superstitious minds of the denial, or rather
the removal, of the Olympian Gods. It landed men in the worship of
Fortune or of Fate.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

Next, let us consider what happened when, instead of merely rejecting
the Gods *en masse*, people tried carefully to collect what remained of
religion after the Olympian system fell.

Aristotle himself gives us a fairly clear answer. He held that the
origins of man's idea (<u>ἔννοια</u>) of the Divine were twofold,<span
id="an_fr_136_1"></span>[136\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_136_1) the phenomena
of the sky and the phenomena of the human soul. It is very much what
Kant found two thousand years later. The spectacle of the vast and
ordered movements of the heavenly bodies are compared by him in a famous
fragment with the marching forth of Homer's armies before Troy. Behind
such various order and strength there must surely be a conscious mind
capable

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i0"><u>Κοσμῆσαι ἵρρους τε καὶ ἀνέρας ἀσπιδιώτας</u>,  
</span>

</div>

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i0">To order steeds of war and mailèd men.  
</span>

</div>

</div>

It is only a step from this to regarding the sun, moon, and stars as
themselves divine, and it is a step which both Plato and Aristotle,
following Pythagoras and followed by the Stoics, take with confidence.
Chrysippus gives practically the same list of gods: 'the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; and Law: and men who have become Gods.'<span
id="an_fr_136_2"></span>[136\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_136_2) Both the
wandering stars and the fixed stars are 'animate beings, divine and
eternal', self-acting subordinate gods. As to the divinity of the soul
or the mind of man, the earlier generations are shy about it. But in the
later Stoics it is itself a portion of the divine life. It shows this
ordinarily by its power of reason, and more conspicuously by becoming
<u>ἔνθεος</u>, or 'filled with God', in its exalted <span
id="page_137">p. 137</span> moments of prevision, ecstasy, and prophetic
dreams. If reason itself is divine, there is something else in the soul
which is even higher than reason or at least more surprisingly divine.

Let us follow the history of both these remaining substitutes for the
Olympian gods.

First for the Heavenly bodies. If they are to be made divine, we can
hardly stop there. The Earth is also a divine being. Old tradition has
always said so, and Plato has repeated it. And if Earth is divine, so
surely are the other elements, the *Stoicheia*, Water, Air, and above
all, Fire. For the Gods themselves are said by Plato to be made of fire,
and the Stars visibly are so. Though perhaps the heavenly Fire is really
not our Fire at all, but a <u>πέμπτον σῶμα</u>, a 'Fifth Body', seeing
that it seems not to burn nor the Stars to be consumed.

This is persuasive enough and philosophic; but whither has it led us?
Back to the Olympians, or rather behind the Olympians; as St. Paul puts
it (Gal. iv. 9), to 'the beggarly elements'. The old Korê, or Earth
Maiden and Mother, seems to have held her own unshaken by the changes of
time all over the Aegean area. She is there in prehistoric Crete with
her two lions; with the same lions orientalized in Olympia and Ephesus;
in Sparta with her great marsh birds; in Boeotia with her horse. She
runs riot in a number of the Gnostic systems both pre-Christian and
post-Christian. She forms a divine triad with the Father and the Son:
that is ancient and natural. But she also becomes the Divine Wisdom,
Sophia, the Divine Truth, Aletheia, the Holy Breath or Spirit, the
Pneuma. Since the word <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> for 'spirit' is
neuter in Greek and masculine in Latin, this last is rather a surprise.
It is explained when we remember that in Hebrew the word for Spirit,
'Ruah', is mostly feminine. In the meantime let us notice one curious
development in the life of this goddess. In the old religion of Greece
and Western Asia, she begins as a Maiden, then in fullness of time
becomes a mother. There is evidence also for a third stage, the
widowhood of withering autumn.<span
id="an_fr_138_1"></span>[138\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_138_1) To the
classical Greek this motherhood was quite as it should be, a due
fulfilment of normal functions. But to the Gnostic and his kind it
connoted a 'fall', a passage from the glory of Virginity to a state of
Sin.<span id="an_fr_138_2"></span>[138\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_138_2) The
Korê becomes a fallen Virgin, sometimes a temptress or even a female
devil; sometimes she has to be saved by her Son the Redeemer.<span
id="an_fr_138_3"></span>[138\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_138_3) As far as I
have observed, she loses most of her earthly agricultural quality,
though as Selene or even Helen she keeps up her affinity with the Moon.

Almost all the writers of the Hellenistic Age agree in regarding the
Sun, Moon, and Stars as gods. The rationalists Hecataeus and Euhemerus,
before going on to their deified men, always start with the heavenly
bodies. When Plutarch explains in his beautiful and kindly way that all
religions are really attempts towards the same goal, he clinches his
argument by <span id="page_139">p. 139</span> observing that we all see
the same Sun and Moon though we call them by different names in all
languages.<span id="an_fr_139_1"></span>[139\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_139_1)
But the belief does not seem to have had much religious intensity in it,
until it was reinforced by two alien influences.

First, we have the ancient worship of the Sun, implicit, if not
explicit, in a great part of the oldest Greek rituals, and then
idealized by Plato in the *Republic*, where the Sun is the author of all
light and life in the material world, as the Idea of Good is in the
ideal world. This worship came gradually into contact with the
traditional and definite Sun-worship of Persia. The final combination
took place curiously late. It was the Roman conquests of Cilicia,
Cappadocia, Commagene, and Armenia that gave the decisive moment.<span
id="an_fr_139_2"></span>[139\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_139_2) To men who had
wearied of the myths of the poets, who could draw no more inspiration
from their Apollo and Hyperion, but still had the habits and the craving
left by their old Gods, a fresh breath of reality came with the entrance
of <u>Ἥλιος ἀνίκητος Μίθρας</u>, 'Mithras, the Unconquered Sun'. But
long before the triumph of Mithraism as the military religion of the
Roman frontier, Greek literature is permeated with a kind of intense
language about the Sun, which seems derived from Plato.<span
id="an_fr_139_3"></span>[139\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_139_3) In later times,
in the fourth century <span class="smcap">a. d.</span> for instance, it
has absorbed some more full-blooded and less critical element as well.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

Secondly, all the seven planets. These had a curious history. The
planets were of course divine and living bodies, so much Plato gave us.
Then come arguments and questions scattered through the Stoic and
eclectic literature. Is it the planet itself that is divine, or is the
planet under the guidance of a divine spirit? The latter seems to win
the day. Anthropomorphism has stolen back upon us: we can use the old
language and speak simply of the planet Mercury as <u>Ἑρμοῦ ἀστήρ</u>.
It is the star of Hermes, and Hermes is the spirit who guides it.<span
id="an_fr_140_1"></span>[140\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_140_1) Even Plato in
his old age had much to say about the souls of the seven planets.
Further, each planet has its sphere. The Earth is in the centre, then
comes the sphere of the Moon, then that of the Sun, and so on through a
range of seven spheres. If all things are full of gods, as the wise
ancients have said, what about those parts of the sphere in which the
shining planet for the moment is not? Are they without god? Obviously
not. The whole sphere is filled with innumerable spirits everywhere. It
is all Hermes, all Aphrodite. (We are more familiar with the Latin
names, Mercury and Venus.) But one part only is visible. The voice of
one school, as usual, is raised in opposition. One veteran had seen
clearly from the beginning whither all this sort of thing was sure to
lead. 'Epicurus approves none of these things.'<span
id="an_fr_140_2"></span>[140\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_140_2) It was no <span
id="page_141">p. 141</span> good his having destroyed the old
traditional superstition, if people by deifying the stars were to fill
the sky with seven times seven as many objects of worship as had been
there before. He allows no *Schwärmerei* about the stars. They are *not*
divine animate beings, or guided by Gods. Why cannot the astrologers
leave God in peace? When their orbits are irregular it is *not* because
they are looking for food. They are just conglomerations of ordinary
atoms of air or fire—it does not matter which. They are not even very
large—only about as large as they look, or perhaps smaller, since most
fires tend to look bigger at a distance. They are not at all certainly
everlasting. It is quite likely that the sun comes to an end every day,
and a new one rises in the morning. All kinds of explanations are
possible, and none certain. <u>Μόνον ὁ μῦθος ἀπέστω.</u> In any case, as
you value your life and your reason, do not begin making myths about
them!

On other lines came what might have been the effective protest of real
Science, when Aristarchus of Samos (250 <span class="smcap">b.
c.</span>) argued that the earth was not really the centre of the
universe, but revolved round the Sun. But his hypothesis did not account
for the phenomena as completely as the current theory with its
'Epicycles'; his fellow astronomers were against him; Cleanthes the
Stoic denounced him for 'disturbing the Hearth of the Universe', and his
heresy made little headway.<span
id="an_fr_141_1"></span>[141\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_141_1)

The planets in their seven spheres surrounding the earth continued to be
objects of adoration. They had their special gods or guiding spirits
assigned them. Their ordered movements through space, it was held, <span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> produce a vast and eternal harmony. It is
beautiful beyond all earthly music, this Music of the Spheres, beyond
all human dreams of what music might be. The only pity is that—except
for a few individuals in trances—nobody has ever heard it. Circumstances
seem always to be unfavourable. It may be that we are too far off,
though, considering the vastness of the orchestra, this seems
improbable. More likely we are merely deaf to it because it never stops
and we have been in the middle of it since we first drew breath.<span
id="an_fr_142_1"></span>[142\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_142_1)

The planets also become Elements in the Kosmos, *Stoicheia*. It is
significant that in Hellenistic theology the word Stoicheion, Element,
gets to mean a Daemon—as Megathos, Greatness, means an Angel.<span
id="an_fr_142_2"></span>[142\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_142_2) But behold a
mystery! The word *Stoicheia*, 'elementa', had long been used for the
Greek A B C, and in particular for the seven vowels <u>α</u> <u>ε</u>
<u>η</u> <u>ι</u> <u>ο</u> <u>υ</u> <u>ω</u>. That is no chance, no mere
coincidence. The vowels are the mystic signs of the Planets; they have
control over the planets. Hence strange prayers and magic formulae
innumerable.

Even the way of reckoning time changed under the influence of the
Planets. Instead of the old division of the month into three periods of
nine days, we find gradually establishing itself the week of seven days
with each day named after its planet, Sun, Moon, Ares, Hermes, Zeus,
Aphrodite, Kronos. The history of the Planet week is given by Dio
Cassius, xxxvii. 18, <span id="page_143">p. 143</span> in his account of
the Jewish campaign of Pompeius. But it was not the Jewish week. The
Jews scorned such idolatrous and polytheistic proceedings. It was the
old week of Babylon, the original home of astronomy and
planet-worship.<span
id="an_fr_143_1"></span>[143\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_143_1)

For here again a great foreign religion came like water in the desert to
minds reluctantly and superficially enlightened, but secretly longing
for the old terrors and raptures from which they had been set free. Even
in the old days Aeschylus had called the planets 'bright potentates,
shining in the fire of heaven', and Euripides had spoken of the 'shaft
hurled from a star'.<span
id="an_fr_143_2"></span>[143\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_143_2) But we are told
that the first teaching of astrology in Hellenic lands was in the time
of Alexander, when Bêrôssos the Chaldaean set up a school in Cos and,
according to Seneca, *Belum interpretatus est*. This must mean that he
translated into Greek the '*Eye of Bel*', a treatise in seventy tablets
found in the library of Assur-bani-pal (686-626 <span class="smcap">b.
c.</span>) but composed for Sargon I in the third millennium <span
class="smcap">b. c.</span> Even the philosopher Theophrastus is reported
by Proclus<span id="an_fr_143_3"></span>[143\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_143_3)
as saying that 'the most extraordinary thing of his age was the lore of
the Chaldaeans, who foretold not only events of public interest but even
the lives and deaths of individuals'. One wonders slightly whether
Theophrastus spoke with as much implicit faith as Proclus suggests. But
the chief account is given by Diodorus, ii. 30 (perhaps from Hecataeus).

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<div class="blockquot">

'Other nations despise the philosophy of Greece. It is so recent and so
constantly changing. They have traditions which come from vast antiquity
and never change. Notably the Chaldaeans have collected observations of
the Stars through long ages, and teach how every event in the heavens
has its meaning, as part of the eternal scheme of divine forethought.
Especially the seven Wanderers, or Planets, are called by them
Hermêneis, Interpreters: and among them the Interpreter in chief is
Saturn. Their work is to interpret beforehand <u>τὴν τῶν θεῶν
ἔννοιαν</u>, the thought that is in the mind of the Gods. By their
risings and settings, and by the colours they assume, the Chaldaeans
predict great winds and storms and waves of excessive heat, comets, and
earthquakes, and in general all changes fraught with weal or woe not
only to nations and regions of the world, but to kings and to ordinary
men and women. Beneath the Seven are thirty Gods of Counsel, half below
and half above the Earth; every ten days a Messenger or Angel star
passes from above below and another from below above. Above these gods
are twelve Masters, who are the twelve signs of the Zodiac; and the
planets pass through all the Houses of these twelve in turn. The
Chaldaeans have made prophecies for various kings, such as Alexander who
conquered Darius, and Antigonus and Seleucus Nikator, and have always
been right. And private persons who have consulted them consider their
wisdom as marvellous and above human power.'

</div>

Astrology fell upon the Hellenistic mind as a new disease falls upon
some remote island people. The tomb of Ozymandias, as described by
Diodorus (i. 49, 5), was covered with astrological symbols, and that of
Antiochus I, which has been discovered in Commagene, is of the same
character. It was natural for monarchs to believe that the stars watched
<span id="page_145">p. 145</span> over them. But every one was ready to
receive the germ. The Epicureans, of course, held out, and so did
Panaetius, the coolest head among the Stoics. But the Stoics as a whole
gave way. They formed with good reason the leading school of philosophy,
and it would have been a service to mankind if they had resisted. But
they were already committed to a belief in the deity of the stars and to
the doctrine of Heimarmenê, or Destiny. They believed in the pervading
Pronoia,<span id="an_fr_145_1"></span>[145\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_145_1)
or Forethought, of the divine mind, and in the <u>Συμπάθεια τῶν
ὅλων</u>—the Sympathy of all Creation,<span
id="an_fr_145_2"></span>[145\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_145_2) whereby
whatever happens to any one part, however remote or insignificant,
affects all the rest. It seemed only a natural and beautiful
illustration of this Sympathy that the movements of the Stars should be
bound up with the sufferings of man. They also appealed to the general
belief in prophecy and divination.<span
id="an_fr_145_3"></span>[145\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_145_3) If a prophet
can foretell that such and such an event will happen, then it is
obviously fated to happen. Foreknowledge implies Predestination. This
belief in prophecy was, in reality, a sort of appeal to fact and to
common sense. People could produce then, as they can now, a large number
of striking cases of second sight, presentiment, clairvoyance, actual
prophecy and the like;<span
id="an_fr_145_4"></span>[145\_4](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_145_4) and it was more
difficult then to test them.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

The argument involved Stoicism with some questionable allies. Epicureans
and sceptics of the Academy might well mock at the sight of a great man
like Chrysippus or Posidonius resting an important part of his religion
on the undetected frauds of a shady Levantine 'medium'. Still the Stoics
could not but welcome the arrival of a system of prophecy and
predestination which, however the incredulous might rail at it,
possessed at least great antiquity and great stores of learning, which
was respectable, recondite, and in a way sublime.

In all the religious systems of later antiquity, if I mistake not, the
Seven Planets play some lordly or terrifying part. The great Mithras
Liturgy, unearthed by Dieterich from a magical papyrus in Paris,<span
id="an_fr_146_1"></span>[146\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_146_1) repeatedly
confronts the worshipper with the seven vowels as names of 'the Seven
Deathless Kosmokratores', or Lords of the Universe, and seems, under
their influence, to go off into its 'Seven Maidens with heads of
serpents, in white raiment', and its divers other Sevens. The various
Hermetic and Mithraic communities, the Naassenes described by
Hippolytus,<span
id="an_fr_146_2"></span>[146\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_146_2) and other
Gnostic bodies, authors like Macrobius and even Cicero in his *Somnium
Scipionis*, are full of the influence of the seven planets and of the
longing to escape beyond them. For by some simple psychological law the
stars which have inexorably pronounced our fate, and decreed, or at
least registered <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> the decree, that in
spite of all striving we must needs tread their prescribed path; still
more perhaps, the Stars who know in the midst of our laughter how that
laughter will end, become inevitably powers of evil rather than good,
beings malignant as well as pitiless, making life a vain thing. And
Saturn, the chief of them, becomes the most malignant. To some of the
Gnostics he becomes Jaldabaoth, the Lion-headed God, the evil
Jehovah.<span id="an_fr_147_1"></span>[147\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_147_1)
The religion of later antiquity is overpoweringly absorbed in plans of
escape from the prison of the seven planets.

In author after author, in one community after another, the subject
recurs. And on the whole there is the same answer. Here on the earth we
are the sport of Fate; nay, on the earth itself we are worse off still.
We are beneath the Moon, and beneath the Moon there is not only Fate but
something more unworthy and equally malignant, Chance—to say nothing of
damp and the ills of earth and bad daemons. Above the Moon there is no
chance, only Necessity: there is the will of the other six
Kosmokratores, Rulers of the Universe. But above them all there is an
Eighth region—they call it simply the Ogdoas—the home of the ultimate
God,<span id="an_fr_147_2"></span>[147\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_147_2)
whatever He is named, whose being was before the Kosmos. In this Sphere
is true Being and Freedom. And more than freedom, there is the ultimate
Union with God. For that spark of divine life which is man's soul is not
merely, as some have said, an <u>ἀπόρροια τῶν ἄστρων</u>, an effluence
of the stars: it comes direct from the first and ultimate <span
id="page_148">p. 148</span> God, the Alpha and Omega, who is beyond the
Planets. Though the Kosmokratores cast us to and fro like their slaves
or dead chattels, in soul at least we are of equal birth with them. The
Mithraic votary, when their wrathful and tremendous faces break in upon
his vision, answers them unterrified: <u>ἐγώ εἰμι σύμπλανος ὑμῖν
ἀστήρ</u>, 'I am your fellow wanderer, your fellow Star.' The Orphic
carried to the grave on his golden scroll the same boast: first, 'I am
the child of Earth and of the starry Heaven'; then later, 'I too am
become God'.<span
id="an_fr_148_1"></span>[148\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_148_1) The Gnostic
writings consist largely of charms to be uttered by the Soul to each of
the Planets in turn, as it pursues its perilous path past all of them to
its ultimate home.

That journey awaits us after death; but in the meantime? In the meantime
there are initiations, sacraments, mystic ways of communion with God. To
see God face to face is, to the ordinary unprepared man, sheer death.
But to see Him after due purification, to be led to Him along the true
Way by an initiating Priest, is the ultimate blessing of human life. It
is to die and be born again. There were regular official initiations. We
have one in the Mithras-Liturgy, more than one in the Corpus Hermeticum.
Apuleius<span id="an_fr_148_2"></span>[148\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_148_2)
tells us at some length, though in guarded language, how he was
initiated to Isis and became 'her image'. After much fasting, clad in
holy garments and led by the High Priest, he crossed the threshold of
Death and passed through all the Elements. The Sun shone upon him at
midnight, and he saw the Gods of Heaven and of Hades. In the morning he
was clad <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> in the Robe of Heaven, set up
on a pedestal in front of the Goddess and worshipped by the congregation
as a God. He had been made one with Osiris or Horus or whatever name it
pleased that Sun-God to be called. Apuleius does not reveal it.

There were also, of course, the irregular personal initiations and
visions of god vouchsafed to persons of special prophetic powers. St.
Paul, we may remember, knew personally a man who had actually been
snatched up into the Third Heaven, and another who was similarly rapt
into Paradise, where he heard unspeakable words;<span
id="an_fr_149_1"></span>[149\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_149_1) whether in the
body or not, the apostle leaves undecided. He himself on the road to
Damascus had seen the Christ in glory, not after the flesh. The
philosopher Plotinus, so his disciple tells us, was united with God in
trance four times in five years.<span
id="an_fr_149_2"></span>[149\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_149_2)

We seem to have travelled far from the simplicity <span id="page_150">p.
150</span> of early Greek religion. Yet, apart always from Plotinus, who
is singularly aloof, most of the movement has been a reaction under
Oriental and barbarous influences towards the most primitive
pre-Hellenic cults. The union of man with God came regularly through
*Ekstasis*—the soul must get clear of its body—and *Enthousiasmos*—the
God must enter and dwell inside the worshipper. But the means to this
union, while sometimes allegorized and spiritualized to the last degree,
are sometimes of the most primitive sort. The vagaries of religious
emotion are apt to reach very low as well as very high in the scale of
human nature. Certainly the primitive Thracian savages, who drank
themselves mad with the hot blood of their God-beast, would have been
quite at home in some of these rituals, though in others they would have
been put off with some substitute for the actual blood. The primitive
priestesses who waited in a bridal chamber for the Divine Bridegroom,
even the Cretan Kourêtes with their Zeus Kourês<span
id="an_fr_150_1"></span>[150\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_150_1) and those
strange hierophants of the 'Men's House' whose initiations are written
on the rocks of Thera, would have found rites very like their own
reblossoming on earth after the fall of Hellenism. 'Prepare thyself as a
bride to receive her bridegroom,' says Markos the Gnostic,<span
id="an_fr_150_2"></span>[150\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_150_2) 'that thou
mayst be what I am and I what thou art.' 'I in thee, and thou in me!' is
the ecstatic cry of one of the Hermes liturgies. Before that the prayer
has been 'Enter into me as a babe into the womb of a woman'.<span
id="an_fr_150_3"></span>[150\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_150_3)

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

In almost all the liturgies that I have read need is felt for a mediator
between the seeker after God and his goal. Mithras himself saw a
Mesîtês, a Mediator, between Ormuzd and Ahriman, but the ordinary
mediator is more like an interpreter or an adept with inner knowledge
which he reveals to the outsider. The circumstances out of which these
systems grew have left their mark on the new gods themselves. As usual,
the social structure of the worshippers is reflected in their objects of
worship. When the Chaldaeans came to Cos, when the Thracians in the
Piraeus set up their national worship of Bendis, when the Egyptians in
the same port founded their society for the Egyptian ritual of Isis,
when the Jews at Assuan in the fifth century <span class="smcap">b.
c.</span> established their own temple, in each case there would come
proselytes to whom the truth must be explained and interpreted,
sometimes perhaps softened. And in each case there is behind the
particular priest or initiator there present some greater authority in
the land he comes from. Behind any explanation that can be made in the
Piraeus, there is a deeper and higher explanation known only to the
great master in Jerusalem, in Egypt, in Babylon, or perhaps in some
unexplored and ever-receding region of the east. This series of
revelations, one behind the other, is a characteristic of all these
mixed Graeco-Oriental religions.

Most of the Hermetic treatises are put in the form of initiations or
lessons revealed by a 'father' to a 'son', by Ptah to Hermes, by Hermes
to Thoth or Asclepios, and by one of them to us. It was an ancient
formula, a natural vehicle for traditional wisdom in Egypt, where the
young priest became regularly the 'son' of the old priest. It is a form
<span id="page_152">p. 152</span> that we find in Greece itself as early
as Euripides, whose Melanippe says of her cosmological doctrines,

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i0">'It is not my word but my Mother's word'.<span
id="an_fr_152_1"></span>[152\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_152_1)  
</span>

</div>

</div>

It was doubtless the language of the old Medicine-Man to his disciple.
In one fine liturgy Thoth wrestles with Hermes in agony of spirit, till
Hermes is forced to reveal to him the path to union with God which he
himself has trodden before. At the end of the Mithras liturgy the
devotee who has passed through the mystic ordeals and seen his god face
to face, is told: 'After this you can show the way to others.'

But this leads us to the second great division of our subject. We turn
from the phenomena of the sky to those of the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

If what I have written elsewhere is right, one of the greatest works of
the Hellenic spirit, and especially of fifth-century Athens, was to
insist on what seems to us such a commonplace truism, the difference
between Man and God. Sophrosynê in religion was the message of the
classical age. But the ages before and after had no belief in such a
lesson. The old Medicine-Man was perhaps himself the first *Theos*. At
any rate the primeval kings and queens were treated as divine.<span
id="an_fr_152_2"></span>[152\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_152_2) Just for a few
great generations, it would seem, humanity rose to a sufficient height
of self-criticism <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> and self-restraint
to reject these dreams of self-abasement or megalomania. But the effort
was too great for the average world; and in a later age nearly all the
kings and rulers—all people in fact who can command an adequate number
of flatterers—become divine beings again. Let us consider how it came
about.

First there was the explicit recognition by the soberest philosophers of
the divine element in man's soul.<span
id="an_fr_153_1"></span>[153\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_153_1) Aristotle
himself built an altar to Plato. He did nothing superstitious; he did
not call Plato a god, but we can see from his beautiful elegy to
Eudemus, that he naturally and easily used language of worship which
would seem a little strange to us. It is the same emotion—a noble and
just emotion on the whole—which led the philosophic schools to treat
their founders as 'heroes', and which has peopled most of Europe and
Asia with the memories and the worship of saints. But we should remember
that only a rare mind will make its divine man of such material as
Plato. The common way to dazzle men's eyes is a more brutal and obvious
one.

To people who were at all accustomed to the conception of a God-Man it
was difficult not to feel that the conception was realized in Alexander.
His tremendous power, his brilliant personality, his achievements
beggaring the fables of the poets, put people in the right mind for
worship. Then came the fact that the kings whom he conquered were, as a
matter of fact, mostly regarded by their subjects as <span
id="page_154">p. 154</span> divine beings.<span
id="an_fr_154_1"></span>[154\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_154_1) It was easy, it
was almost inevitable, for those who worshipped the 'God'<span
id="an_fr_154_2"></span>[154\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_154_2) Darius to feel
that it was no man but a greater god who had overthrown Darius. The
incense which had been burned before those conquered gods was naturally
offered to their conqueror. He did not refuse it. It was not good policy
to do so, and self-depreciation is not apt to be one of the weaknesses
of the born ruler.<span
id="an_fr_154_3"></span>[154\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_154_3) But besides all
this, if you are to judge a God by his fruits, what God could produce
better credentials? Men had often seen Zeus defied with impunity; they
had seen faithful servants of Apollo come to bad ends. But those who
defied Alexander, however great they might be, always rued their
defiance, and those who were faithful to him always received their
reward. With his successors the worship became more official. Seleucus,
Ptolemaeus, Antigonus, Demetrius, all in different degrees and different
styles are deified by the acclamations of adoring subjects. Ptolemy
Philadelphus seems to have been the first to claim definite divine
honours during his own life. On the death of his wife in 271 he
proclaimed her deity and his own as well in the worship of the Theoi
Adelphoi, the 'Gods Brethren'. Of course there was flattery in all this,
ordinary self-interested lying flattery, and its <span id="page_155">p.
155</span> inevitable accompaniment, megalomania. Any reading of the
personal history of the Ptolemies, the Seleucidae or the Caesars shows
it. But that is not the whole explanation.

One of the characteristics of the period of the Diadochi is the
accumulation of capital and military force in the hands of individuals.
The Ptolemies and Seleucidae had at any moment at their disposal powers
very much greater than any Pericles or Nicias or Lysander.<span
id="an_fr_155_1"></span>[155\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_155_1) The folk of the
small cities of the Aegean hinterlands must have felt towards these
great strangers almost as poor Indian peasants in time of flood and
famine feel towards an English official. There were men now on earth who
could do the things that had hitherto been beyond the power of man. Were
several cities thrown down by earthquake; here was one who by his nod
could build them again. Famines had always occurred and been mostly
incurable. Here was one who could without effort allay a famine.
Provinces were harried and wasted by habitual wars: the eventual
conqueror had destroyed whole provinces in making the wars; now, as he
had destroyed, he could also save. 'What do you mean by a god,' the
simple man might say, 'if these men are not gods? The only difference is
that these gods are visible, and the old gods no man has seen.'

The titles assumed by all the divine kings tell the story clearly.
Antiochus Epiphanês—'the god made manifest'; Ptolemaios Euergetês,
Ptolemaios Sôtêr. Occasionally we have a Keraunos or a Nikator, a <span
id="page_156">p. 156</span> 'Thunderbolt' or a 'God of Mana', but mostly
it is Sôtêr, Euergetês and Epiphanês, the Saviour, the Benefactor, the
God made manifest, in constant alternation. In the honorific
inscriptions and in the writings of the learned, philanthropy
(<u>φιλανθρωπία</u>) is by far the most prominent characteristic of the
God upon earth. Was it that people really felt that to save or benefit
mankind was a more godlike thing than to blast and destroy them?
Philosophers have generally said that, and the vulgar pretended to
believe them. It was at least politic, when ministering to the
half-insane pride of one of these princes, to remind him of his mercy
rather than of his wrath.

Wendland in his brilliant book, *Hellenistisch-römische Kultur*, calls
attention to an inscription of the year 196 <span class="smcap">b.
c.</span> in honour of the young Ptolemaios Epiphanês, who was made
manifest at the age of twelve years.<span
id="an_fr_156_1"></span>[156\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_156_1) It is a typical
document of Graeco-Egyptian king-worship:

<div class="blockquot">

'In the reign of the young king by inheritance from his Father, Lord of
the Diadems, great in glory, pacificator of Egypt and pious towards the
gods, superior over his adversaries, Restorer of the life of man, Lord
of the Periods of Thirty Years, like Hephaistos the Great, King like the
Sun, the Great King of the Upper and Lower Lands; offspring of the Gods
of the Love of the Father, whom Hephaistos has approved, to whom the Sun
has given Victory; living image of Zeus; Son of the Sun, Ptolemaios the
ever-living, beloved by Phtha; in the ninth year of Aëtos son of Aëtos,
Priest of Alexander and the Gods Saviours and the Gods Brethren and the
Gods <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> Benefactors and the Gods of the
Love of the Father and the God Manifest for whom thanks be given:'

</div>

The Priests who came to his coronation ceremony at Memphis proclaim:

<div class="blockquot">

'Seeing that King Ptolemaios ever-living, beloved of Phtha, God Manifest
for whom Thanks be given, born of King Ptolemaios and Queen Arsinoe, the
Gods of the Love of the Father, has done many benefactions to the
Temples and those in them and all those beneath his rule, being from the
beginning God born of God and Goddess, like Horus son of Isis and
Osiris, who came to the help of his father Osiris (and?) in his
benevolent disposition towards the Gods has consecrated to the temples
revenues of silver and of corn, and has undergone many expenses in order
to lead Egypt into the sunlight and give peace to the Temples, and has
with all his powers shown love of mankind.'

</div>

When the people of Lycopolis revolted, we hear:

<div class="blockquot">

'in a short time he took the city by storm and slew all the Impious who
dwelt in it, even as Hermes and Horus, son of Isis and Osiris, conquered
those who of old revolted in the same regions . . . in return for which
the Gods have granted him Health Victory Power and all other good
things, the Kingdom remaining to him and his sons for time
everlasting.'<span
id="an_fr_157_1"></span>[157\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_157_1)

</div>

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

The conclusion which the Priests draw from these facts is that the young
king's titles and honours are insufficient and should be increased. It
is a typical and terribly un-Hellenic document of the Hellenistic
God-man in his appearance as King.

Now the early successors of Alexander mostly professed themselves
members of the Stoic school, and in the mouth of a Stoic this doctrine
of the potential divinity of man was an inspiring one. To them virtue
was the really divine thing in man; and the most divine kind of virtue
was that of helping humanity. To love and help humanity is, according to
Stoic doctrine, the work and the very essence of God. If you take away
Pronoia from God, says Chrysippus,<span
id="an_fr_158_1"></span>[158\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_158_1) it is like
taking away light and heat from fire. This doctrine is magnificently
expressed by Pliny in a phrase that is probably translated from
Posidonius: 'God is the helping of man by man; and that is the way to
eternal glory.'<span
id="an_fr_158_2"></span>[158\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_158_2)

The conception took root in the minds of many Romans. A great Roman
governor often had the chance of thus helping humanity on a vast scale,
and liked to think that such a life opened the way to heaven. 'One
should conceive', says Cicero (*Tusc.* i. <span id="page_159">p.
159</span> 32), 'the gods as like men who feel themselves born for the
work of helping, defending, and saving humanity. Hercules has passed
into the number of the gods. He would never have so passed if he had not
built up that road for himself while he was among mankind.'

I have been using some rather late authors, though the ideas seem
largely to come from Posidonius.<span
id="an_fr_159_1"></span>[159\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_159_1) But before
Posidonius the sort of fact on which we have been dwelling had had its
influence on religious speculation. When Alexander made his conquering
journey to India and afterwards was created a god, it was impossible not
to reflect that almost exactly the same story was related in myth about
Dionysus. Dionysus had started from India and travelled in the other
direction: that was the only difference. A flood of light seemed to be
thrown on all the traditional mythology, which, of course, had always
been a puzzle to thoughtful men. It was impossible to believe it as it
stood, and yet hard—in an age which had not the conception of any
science of mythology—to think it was all a mass of falsehood, and the
great Homer and Hesiod no better than liars. But the generation which
witnessed the official deification of the various Seleucidae and
Ptolemies seemed suddenly to see light. The traditional gods, from
Heracles and Dionysus up to Zeus and Cronos and even Ouranos, were
simply old-world rulers and benefactors of mankind, who had, by their
own <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> insistence or the gratitude of
their subjects, been transferred to the ranks of heaven. For that is the
exact meaning of making them divine: they are classed among the true
immortals, the Sun and Moon and Stars and Corn and Wine, and the
everlasting elements.

The philosophic romance of Euhemerus, published early in the third
century <span class="smcap">b. c.</span>, had instantaneous success and
enormous influence.<span
id="an_fr_160_1"></span>[160\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_160_1) It was one of
the first Greek books translated into Latin, and became long afterwards
a favourite weapon of the Christian fathers in their polemics against
polytheism. 'Euhemerism' was, on the face of it, a very brilliant
theory; and it had, as we have noticed, a special appeal for the Romans.

Yet, if such a conception might please the leisure of a statesman, it
could hardly satisfy the serious thought of a philosopher or a religious
man. If man's soul really holds a fragment of God and is itself a divine
being, its godhead cannot depend on the possession of great riches and
armies and organized subordinates. If 'the helping of man by man is
God', the help in question cannot be material help. The religion which
ends in deifying only kings and millionaires may be vulgarly popular but
is self-condemned.

As a matter of fact the whole tendency of Greek philosophy after Plato,
with some illustrious exceptions, especially among the Romanizing
Stoics, was away from the outer world towards the world of the soul. We
find in the religious writings of this period that the real Saviour of
men is not he who protects <span id="page_161">p. 161</span> them
against earthquake and famine, but he who in some sense saves their
souls. He reveals to them the *Gnôsis Theou*, the Knowledge of God. The
'knowledge' in question is not a mere intellectual knowledge. It is a
complete union, a merging of beings. And, as we have always to keep
reminding our cold modern intelligence, he who has 'known' God is
himself thereby deified. He is the Image of God, the Son of God, in a
sense he *is* God.<span
id="an_fr_161_1"></span>[161\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_161_1) The stratum of
ideas described in the first of the studies will explain the ease with
which transition took place. The worshipper of Bacchos became Bacchos
simply enough, because in reality the God Bacchos was originally only
the projection of the human Bacchoi. And in the Hellenistic age the
notion of these secondary mediating gods was made easier by the analogy
of the human interpreters. Of course, we have abundant instances of
actual preachers and miracle-workers who on their own authority posed,
and were accepted, as gods. The adventure of Paul and Barnabas at
Lystra<span id="an_fr_161_2"></span>[161\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_161_2)
shows how easily such things could happen. But as a rule, I suspect, the
most zealous priest or preacher preferred to have his God in the
background. He preaches, he heals the sick and casts out devils, not in
his own name but in the name of One who sent him. This actual present
priest who initiates you or me is himself already an Image of God; but
above him there are greater and <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> wiser
priests, above them others, and above all there is the one eternal
Divine Mediator, who being in perfection both man and God can alone
fully reveal God to man, and lead man's soul up the heavenly path,
beyond Change and Fate and the Houses of the Seven Rulers, to its
ultimate peace. I have seen somewhere a Gnostic or early Christian
emblem which indicates this doctrine. Some Shepherd or Saviour stands,
his feet on the earth, his head towering above the planets, lifting his
follower in his outstretched arms.

The Gnostics are still commonly thought of as a body of Christian
heretics. In reality there were Gnostic sects scattered over the
Hellenistic world before Christianity as well as after. They must have
been established in Antioch and probably in Tarsus well before the days
of Paul or Apollos. Their Saviour, like the Jewish Messiah, was
established in men's minds before the Saviour of the Christians. 'If we
look close', says Professor Bousset, 'the result emerges with great
clearness, that the figure of the Redeemer as such did not wait for
Christianity to force its way into the religion of Gnôsis, but was
already present there under various forms.'<span
id="an_fr_162_1"></span>[162\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_162_1) He occurs
notably in two pre-Christian documents, discovered by the keen analysis
and profound learning of Dr. Reitzenstein: the Poimandres revelation
printed in the *Corpus Hermeticum*, and the sermon of the Naassenes in
Hippolytus, *Refutatio Omnium Haeresium*, which is combined with
Attis-worship.<span
id="an_fr_162_2"></span>[162\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_162_2) The violent
anti-Jewish bias of most of the sects—they <span id="page_163">p.
163</span> speak of 'the accursed God of the Jews' and identify him with
Saturn and the Devil—points on the whole to pre-Christian conditions:
and a completely non-Christian standpoint is still visible in the
Mandaean and Manichean systems.

Their Redeemer is descended by a fairly clear genealogy from the 'Tritos
Sôtêr' of early Greece, contaminated with similar figures, like Attis
and Adonis from Asia Minor, Osiris from Egypt, and the special Jewish
conception of the Messiah of the Chosen people. He has various names,
which the name of Jesus or 'Christos', 'the Anointed', tends gradually
to supersede. Above all he is, in some sense, Man, or 'the Second Man'
or 'the Son of Man'. The origin of this phrase needs a word of
explanation. Since the ultimate unseen God, spirit though He is, made
man in His image, since holy men (and divine kings) are images of God,
it follows that He is Himself Man. He is the real, the ultimate, the
perfect and eternal Man, of whom all bodily men are feeble copies. He is
also the Father; the Saviour is his Son, 'the Image of the Father', 'the
Second Man', 'the Son of Man'. The method in which he performs his
mystery of Redemption varies. It is haunted by the memory of the old
Suffering and Dying God, of whom we spoke in the first of these studies.
It is vividly affected by the ideal 'Righteous Man' of Plato, who 'shall
be scourged, tortured, bound, his eyes burnt out, and at last, after
suffering every evil, shall be impaled or crucified'.<span
id="an_fr_163_1"></span>[163\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_163_1) But in <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> the main he descends, of his free will or by
the eternal purpose of the Father, from Heaven through the spheres of
all the Archontes or Kosmokratores, the planets, to save mankind, or
sometimes to save the fallen Virgin, the Soul, Wisdom, or 'the
Pearl'.<span id="an_fr_164_1"></span>[164\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_164_1)
The Archontes let him pass because he is disguised; they do not know him
(cf. 1 Cor. ii. 7 ff.). When his work is done he ascends to Heaven to
sit by the side of the Father in glory; he conquers the Archontes, leads
them captive in his triumph, strips them of their armour (Col. ii. 15;
cf. the previous verse), sometimes even crucifies them for ever in their
places in the sky.<span
id="an_fr_164_2"></span>[164\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_164_2) The epistles to
the Colossians and the Ephesians are much influenced by these doctrines.
Paul himself constantly uses the language of them, but in the main we
find him discouraging the excesses of superstition, reforming, ignoring,
rejecting. His Jewish blood was perhaps enough to keep him to strict
monotheism. Though he admits Angels and Archontes, Principalities and
Powers, he scorns the Elements and he seems deliberately to reverse the
doctrine of the first and second Man.<span
id="an_fr_164_3"></span>[164\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_164_3) He says nothing
about the Trinity of Divine Beings that was usual in Gnosticism, nothing
about the Divine Mother. His mind, for all its vehement mysticism, has
something of that clean antiseptic quality that makes such early
Christian works as the Octavius of Minucius Felix and the Epistle to
Diognetus so infinitely refreshing. He is certainly one of the great
figures in Greek literature, but his system lies <span id="page_165">p.
165</span> outside the subject of this essay. We are concerned only with
those last manifestations of Hellenistic religion which probably formed
the background of his philosophy. It is a strange experience, and it
shows what queer stuff we humans are made of, to study these obscure
congregations, drawn from the proletariate of the Levant, superstitious,
charlatan-ridden, and helplessly ignorant, who still believed in Gods
begetting children of mortal mothers, who took the 'Word', the 'Spirit',
and the 'Divine Wisdom', to be persons called by those names, and turned
the Immortality of the Soul into 'the standing up of the corpses';<span
id="an_fr_165_1"></span>[165\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_165_1) and to reflect
that it was these who held the main road of advance towards the greatest
religion of the western world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I have tried to sketch in outline the main forms of belief to which
Hellenistic philosophy moved or drifted. Let me dwell for a few pages
more upon the characteristic method by which it reached them. It may be
summed up in one word, Allegory. All Hellenistic philosophy from the
first Stoics onward is permeated by allegory. It is applied to Homer, to
the religious traditions, to the ancient rituals, to the whole world. To
Sallustius after the end of our period the whole material world is only
a great myth, a thing whose value lies not in itself but in the
spiritual meaning which it hides and reveals. To Cleanthes at the
beginning of it the Universe was a mystic pageant, in which the immortal
stars were the dancers and the Sun the priestly torch-bearer.<span
id="an_fr_165_2"></span>[165\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_165_2) <span
id="page_166">p. 166</span> Chrysippus reduced the Homeric gods to
physical or ethical principles; and Crates, the great critic, applied
allegory in detail to his interpretation of the all-wise poet.<span
id="an_fr_166_1"></span>[166\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_166_1) We possess two
small but complete treatises which illustrate well the results of this
tendency, Cornutus <u>ρεπὶ θεῶν</u> and the *Homeric Allegories* of
Heraclitus, a brilliant little work of the first century <span
class="smcap">b. c.</span> I will not dwell upon details: they are
abundantly accessible and individually often ridiculous. A by-product of
the same activity is the mystic treatment of language: a certain Titan
in Hesiod is named Koios. Why? Because the Titans are the elements and
one of them is naturally the element of <u>Κοιότης</u>, the Ionic Greek
for 'Quality'. The Egyptian Isis is derived from the root of the Greek
<u>εἰδέναι</u>, Knowledge, and the Egyptian Osiris from the Greek
<u>ὅσιος</u> and <u>ἱρός</u> ('holy' and 'sacred', or perhaps more
exactly 'lawful' and '*tabu*'). Is this totally absurd? I think not. If
all human language is, as most of these thinkers believed, a divine
institution, a cap filled to the brim with divine meaning, so that by
reflecting deeply upon a word a pious philosopher can reach the secret
that it holds, then there is no difficulty whatever in supposing that
the special secret held by an Egyptian word may be found in Greek, or
the secret of a Greek word in Babylonian. Language is One. The Gods who
made all these languages equally could use them all, and wind them all
intricately in and out, for the building up of their divine enigma.

We must make a certain effort of imagination to understand this method
of allegory. It is not the <span id="page_167">p. 167</span> frigid
thing that it seems to us. In the first place, we should remember that,
as applied to the ancient literature and religious ritual, allegory was
at least a *vera causa*—it was a phenomenon which actually existed.
Heraclitus of Ephesus is an obvious instance. He deliberately expressed
himself in language which should not be understood of the vulgar, and
which bore a hidden meaning to his disciples. Pythagoras did the same.
The prophets and religious writers must have done so to an even greater
extent.<span id="an_fr_167_1"></span>[167\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_167_1)
And we know enough of the history of ritual to be sure that a great deal
of it is definitely allegorical. The Hellenistic Age did not wantonly
invent the theory of allegory.

And secondly, we must remember what states of mind tend especially to
produce this kind of belief. They are not contemptible states of mind.
It needs only a strong idealism with which the facts of experience
clash, and allegory follows almost of necessity. The facts cannot be
accepted as they are. They must needs be explained as meaning something
different.

Take an earnest Stoic or Platonist, a man of fervid mind, who is
possessed by the ideals of his philosophy and at the same time feels his
heart thrilled by the beauty of the old poetry. What is he to do? On one
side he can find Zoilus, or Plato himself, or the Cynic preachers,
condemning Homer and the poets without remorse, as teachers of
foolishness. He can treat poetry as the English puritans treated the
stage. But is that a satisfactory solution? Remember that these
generations were trained habitually to give great weight to the voice of
their inner <span id="page_168">p. 168</span> consciousness, and the
inner consciousness of a sensitive man cries out that any such solution
is false: that Homer is not a liar, but noble and great, as our fathers
have always taught us. On the other side comes Heraclitus the
allegorist. 'If Homer used no allegories he committed all impieties.' On
this theory the words can be allowed to possess all their old beauty and
magic, but an inner meaning is added quite different from that which
they bear on the surface. It may, very likely, be a duller and less
poetic meaning; but I am not sure that the verses will not gain by the
mere process of brooding study fully as much as they lose by the
ultimate badness of the interpretation. Anyhow, that was the road
followed. The men of whom I speak were not likely to give up any
experience that seemed to make the world more godlike or to feed their
spiritual and emotional cravings. They left that to the barefooted
cynics. They craved poetry and they craved philosophy; if the two spoke
like enemies, their words must needs be explained away by one who loved
both.

The same process was applied to the world itself. Something like it is
habitually applied by the religious idealists of all ages. A fundamental
doctrine of Stoicism and most of the idealist creeds was the perfection
and utter blessedness of the world, and the absolute fulfilment of the
purpose of God. Now obviously this belief was not based on experience.
The poor world, to do it justice amid all its misdoings, has never lent
itself to any such barefaced deception as that. No doubt it shrieked
against the doctrine then, as loud as it has always shrieked, so that
even a Posidonian or a Pythagorean, his ears straining for the music of
the spheres, was <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> sometimes forced to
listen. And what was his answer? It is repeated in all the literature of
these sects. 'Our human experience is so small: the things of the earth
may be bad and more than bad, but, ah! if you only went beyond the Moon!
That is where the true Kosmos begins.' And, of course, if we did ever go
there, we all know they would say it began beyond the Sun. Idealism of a
certain type will have its way; if hard life produces an ounce or a
pound or a million tons of fact in the scale against it, it merely
dreams of infinite millions in its own scale, and the enemy is
outweighed and smothered. I do not wish to mock at these Posidonian
Stoics and Hermetics and Gnostics and Neo-Pythagoreans. They loved
goodness, and their faith is strong and even terrible. One feels rather
inclined to bow down before their altars and cry: *Magna est Delusio et
praevalebit.*

Yet on the whole one rises from these books with the impression that all
this allegory and mysticism is bad for men. It may make the emotions
sensitive, it certainly weakens the understanding. And, of course, in
this paper I have left out of account many of the grosser forms of
superstition. In any consideration of the balance, they should not be
forgotten.

If a reader of Proclus and the *Corpus Hermeticum* wants relief, he will
find it, perhaps, best in the writings of a gentle old Epicurean who
lived at Oenoanda in Cappadocia about <span class="smcap">a. d.</span>
200. His name was Diogenes.<span
id="an_fr_169_1"></span>[169\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_169_1) His works are
preserved, in a fragmentary state, not on papyrus or parchment, but on
the wall of a large portico where he engraved them for passers-by to
read. He lived in a world of <span id="page_170">p. 170</span>
superstition and foolish terror, and he wrote up the great doctrines of
Epicurus for the saving of mankind.

<div class="blockquot">

'Being brought by age to the sunset of my life, and expecting at any
moment to take my departure from the world with a glad song for the
fullness of my happiness, I have resolved, lest I be taken too soon, to
give help to those of good temperament. If one person or two or three or
four, or any small number you choose, were in distress, and I were
summoned out to help one after another, I would do all in my power to
give the best counsel to each. But now, as I have said, the most of men
lie sick, as it were of a pestilence, in their false beliefs about the
world, and the tale of them increases; for by imitation they take the
disease from one another, like sheep. And further it is only just to
bring help to those who shall come after us—for they too are ours,
though they be yet unborn; and love for man commands us also to help
strangers who may pass by. Since therefore the good message of the Book
has this wall and to set forth in public the medicine of the healing of
mankind.'

</div>

The people of his time and neighbourhood seem to have fancied that the
old man must have some bad motive. They understood mysteries and
redemptions and revelations. They understood magic and curses. But they
were puzzled, apparently, by this simple message, which only told them
to use their reason, their courage, and their sympathy, and not to be
afraid of death or of angry gods. The doctrine was condensed into four
sentences of a concentrated eloquence that make a translator
despair:<span id="an_fr_170_1"></span>[170\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fn_170_1)
'Nothing <span id="page_171">p. 171</span> to fear in God: Nothing to
feel in Death: Good can be attained: Evil can be endured.'

Of course, the doctrines of this good old man do not represent the whole
truth. To be guided by one's aversions is always a sign of weakness or
defeat; and it is as much a failure of nerve to reject blindly for fear
of being a fool, as to believe blindly for fear of missing some
emotional stimulus.

There is no royal road in these matters. I confess it seems strange to
me as I write here, to reflect that at this moment many of my friends
and most of my fellow creatures are, as far as one can judge, quite
confident that they possess supernatural knowledge. As a rule, each
individual belongs to some body which has received in writing the
results of a divine revelation. I cannot share in any such feeling. The
Uncharted surrounds us on every side and we must needs have some
relation towards it, a relation which will depend on the general
discipline of a man's mind and the bias of his whole character. As far
as knowledge and conscious reason will go, we should follow resolutely
their austere guidance. When they cease, as cease they must, we must use
as best we can those fainter powers of apprehension and surmise and
sensitiveness by which, after all, most high truth has been reached as
well as most high art and poetry: careful always really to seek for
truth and not for our own emotional satisfaction, careful not to neglect
the real needs of men and women through basing our life on dreams; and
remembering above all to walk gently in a world where the lights are dim
and the very stars wander.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

#### <span class="smcap">Bibliographical Note</span>

It is not my purpose to make anything like a systematic bibliography,
but a few recommendations may be useful to some students who approach
this subject, as I have done, from the side of classical Greek.

For Greek Philosophy I have used besides Plato and Aristotle, Diogenes
Laertius and Philodemus, Diels, *Fragmente der Vorsokratiker*; Diels,
*Doxographi Graeci*; von Arnim, *Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta*; Usener,
*Epicurea*; also the old *Fragmenta Philosophorum* of Mullach.

For later Paganism and Gnosticism, Reitzenstein, *Poimandres*;
Reitzenstein, *Die hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen*; Dieterich,
*Eine Mithrasliturgic* (also *Abraxas*, *Nekyia*, *Muttererde*, &c.); P.
Wendland, *Hellenistisch-Römische Kultur*; Cumont, *Textes et Monuments
relatifs aux Mystères de Mithra* (also *The Mysteries of Mithra*,
Chicago, 1903), and *Les Religions Orientales dans l'Empire Romain*;
Seeck, *Untergang der antiken Welt*, vol. iii; Philo, *de Vita
Contemplativa*, Conybeare; Gruppe, *Griechische Religion and
Mythologie*, pp. 1458-1676; Bousset, *Hauptprobleme der Gnosis*, 1907,
with good bibliography in the introduction; articles by E. Bevan in the
*Quarterly Review*, No. 424 (June 1910), and the *Hibbert Journal*, xi.
1 (October 1912). *Dokumente der Gnosis*, by W. Schultz (Jena, 1910),
gives a highly subjective translation and reconstruction of most of the
Gnostic documents: the *Corpus Hermeticum* is translated into English by
G. R. S. Meade, *Thrice Greatest Hermes*, 1906. The first volume of Dr.
Scott's monumental edition of the *Hermetica* (Clarendon Press, 1924)
has appeared just too late to be used in the present volume.

For Jewish thought before the Christian era Dr. Charles's *Testaments of
the Twelve Patriarchs*; also the same writer's *Book of Enoch*, and the
*Religionsgeschichtliche Erklärung des Neuen Testaments* by Carl Clemen,
Giessen, 1909.

Of Christian writers apart from the New Testament those that come most
into account are Hippolytis (<u>✝</u> <span class="smcap">a. d.</span>
250), *Refutatio Omnium Haeresium*, Epiphanius (367-403), *Panarion*,
and Irenaeus (<u>✝</u> <span class="smcap">a. d.</span> 202), *Contra
Haereses*, i, ii. For a simple introduction to the problems presented by
the New Testament literature I would venture to recommend Prof. Bacon's
*New Testament*, in the Home University Library, and Dr. Estlin
Carpenter's *First Three Gospels*. In such a vast literature I dare not
make any further recommendations, but for a general introduction to the
History of Religions with a good and brief bibliography I would refer
the reader to Salomon Reinach's *Orpheus* (Paris, 1909; English
translation the same year), a book of wide learning and vigorous
thought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOOTNOTES:

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_124_1"></span>[124\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_124_1) Mr.
Marett has pointed out that this conception has its roots deep in
primitive human nature: *The Birth of Humility*, Oxford, 1910, p. 17.
'It would, perhaps, be fanciful to say that man tends to run away from
the sacred as uncanny, to cower before it as secret, and to prostrate
himself before it as tabu. On the other hand, it seems plain that to
these three negative qualities of the sacred taken together there
corresponds on the part of man a certain negative attitude of mind.
Psychologists class the feelings bound up with flight, cowering, and
prostration under the common head of "asthenic emotion". In plain
English they are all forms of heart-sinking, of feeling unstrung. This
general type of innate disposition would seem to be the psychological
basis of Humility. Taken in its social setting, the emotion will, of
course, show endless shades of complexity; for it will be excited, and
again will find practical expression, in all sorts of ways. Under these
varying conditions, however, it is reasonable to suppose that what Mr.
McDougall would call the "central part" of the experience remains very
much the same. In face of the sacred the normal man is visited by a
heart-sinking, a wave of asthenic emotion.' Mr. Marett continues: 'If
that were all, however, Religion would be a matter of pure fear. But it
is not all. There is yet the positive side of the sacred to be taken
into account.' It is worth remarking also that Schleiermacher
(1767-1834) placed the essence of religion in the feeling of absolute
dependence without attempting to define the object towards which it was
directed.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_129_1"></span>[129\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_129_1) Usener,
*Epicurea* (1887), pp. 232 ff.; Diels, *Doxographi Graeci* (1879), p.
306; Arnim, *Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta* (1903-5), Chrysippus 1014,
1019.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_133_1"></span>[133\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_133_1) Juv. x.
365 f.; Polyb. ii. 38, 5; x. 5, 8; xviii. 11, 5.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_133_2"></span>[133\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_133_2) Cf. also
his *Consolatio ad Apollonium*. The earliest text is perhaps the
interesting fragment of Demetrius of Phalerum (fr. 19, in *F. H. G.* ii.
368), written about 317 <span class="smcap">b. c.</span> It is quoted
with admiration by Polybius xxix. 21, with reference to the defeat of
Perseus of Macedon by the Romans:

'One must often remember the saying of Demetrius of Phalerum . . . in
his Treatise on Fortune. . . . "If you were to take not an indefinite
time, nor many generations, but just the fifty years before this, you
could see in them the violence of Fortune. Fifty years ago do you
suppose that either the Macedonians or the King of Macedon, or the
Persians or the King of Persia, if some God had foretold them what was
to come, would ever have believed that by the present time the Persians,
who were then masters of almost all the inhabited world, would have
ceased to be even a geographical name, while the Macedonians, who were
then not even a name, would be rulers of all? Yet this Fortune, who
bears no relation to our method of life, but transforms everything in
the way we do not expect and displays her power by surprises, is at the
present moment showing all the world that, when she puts the Macedonians
into the rich inheritance of the Persian, she has only lent them these
good things until she changes her mind about them." Which has now
happened in the case of Perseus. The words of Demetrius were a prophecy
uttered, as it were, by inspired lips.'

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_134_1"></span>[134\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_134_1) Eur.,
*Tro.* 886. Literally it means 'The Compulsion in the way Things grow'.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_134_2"></span>[134\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_134_2) Zeno, fr.
87, Arnim.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_135_1"></span>[135\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_135_1)
Chrysippus, fr. 913, Arnim.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_135_2"></span>[135\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_135_2)
Cleanthes, 527, Arnim. <u>Ἂγου δέ μ', ὦ Ζεῦ, καὶ σύ γ' ἡ Πεπρωμένη,
κτλ.</u> Plotinus, *Enn.* <span class="smcap">iii.</span> i. 10.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_135_3"></span>[135\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_135_3) Epicurus,
Third Letter. Usener, p. 65, 12 = Diog. La. x. 134.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_136_1"></span>[136\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_136_1)
Aristotle, fr. 12 ff.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_136_2"></span>[136\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_136_2) e. g.
Chrysippus, fr. 1076, Arnim.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_138_1"></span>[138\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_138_1) *Themis*,
p. 180, n. 1.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_138_2"></span>[138\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_138_2) Not to
Plotinus: *Enn.* <span class="smcap">ii.</span> ix against the
Valentinians. Cf. Porphyry, <u>Ἀφορμαί</u>, 28.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_138_3"></span>[138\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_138_3) Bousset,
*Hauptprobleme der Gnosis*, 1907, pp. 13, 21, 26, 81, &c.; pp. 332 ff.
She becomes Helen in the beautiful myth of the Simonian Gnostics—a Helen
who has forgotten her name and race, and is a slave in a brothel in
Tyre. Simon discovers her, gradually brings back her memory and redeems
her. Irenaeus, i. 23, 2.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_139_1"></span>[139\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_139_1) *De Iside
et Osiride*, 67. (He distinguishes them from the real God, however, just
as Sallustius would.)

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_139_2"></span>[139\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_139_2) Mithras
was worshipped by the Cilician Pirates conquered by Pompey. Plut., *Vit.
Pomp.* 24.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_139_3"></span>[139\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_139_3)
<u>ἔκγονος τοῦ πρώτου θεοῦ.</u> Plato (Diels, 305); Stoics, ib. 547, l.
8.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_140_1"></span>[140\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_140_1) Aristotle
(Diels, 450). <u>ὅσας δὲ εἶναι τὰς σφαίρας,</u> <u>τοσούτους ὑπάρχειν
καὶ τοὺς κινοῦντας θεούς.</u> Chrysippus (Diels 466); Posidonius, ib.
(cf. Plato, *Laws*. 898 ff.). See Epicurus's Second Letter, especially
Usener, pp. 36-47 = Diog. La. x. 86-104. On the food required by the
heavenly bodies cf. Chrysippus, fr. 658-61, Arnim.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_140_2"></span>[140\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_140_2) <u>ὁ δὲ
Ἐπίκουρος οὐδὲν τούτων ἐγκρίνει.</u> Diels, 307<sup>a</sup> 15. Cf.
432<sup>a</sup> 10.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_141_1"></span>[141\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_141_1) Heath,
*Aristarchos of Samos*, pp. 301-10.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_142_1"></span>[142\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_142_1)
Pythagoras in Diels, p. 555, 20; the best criticism is in Aristotle, *De
Caelo*, chap. 9 (p. 290 b), the fullest account in Macrobius, *Comm. in
Somn. Scipionis*, ii.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_142_2"></span>[142\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_142_2) See
Diels, *Elementium*, 1899, p. 17. These magic letters are still used in
the Roman ritual for the consecration of churches.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_143_1"></span>[143\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_143_1) A
seven-day week was known to Pseudo-Hippocrates <u>περὶ σαρκῶν</u> *ad
fin.*, but the date of that treatise is very uncertain.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_143_2"></span>[143\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_143_2) Aesch.,
*Ag.* 6; Eur., *Hip.* 530. Also *Ag.* 365, where <u>ἀστρῶν βέλος</u>
goes together and <u>μήτε πρὸ καιροῦ μήθ' ὕπερ</u>.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_143_3"></span>[143\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_143_3) Proclus,
*In Timaeum*, 289 <span class="smcap">f</span>; Seneca, *Nat. Quaest.*
iii. 29, 1.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_145_1"></span>[145\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_145_1)
Chrysippus, 1187-95. Esse divinationem si di sint et providentia.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_145_2"></span>[145\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_145_2) Cicero,
*De Nat. De.* iii. 11, 28; especially *De Divinatione*, ii. 14, 34; 60,
124; 69, 142. 'Qua ex coniunctione naturae et quasi concentu atque
consensu, quam <u>συμπάθειαν</u> Graeci appellant, convenire potest aut
fissum iecoris cum lucello meo aut meus quaesticulus cum caelo, terra
rerumque natura?' asks the sceptic in the second of these passages.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_145_3"></span>[145\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_145_3)
Chrysippus, 939-44. Vaticinatio probat fati necessitatem.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_145_4"></span>[145\_4](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_145_4)
Chrysippus, 1214, 1200-6.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_146_1"></span>[146\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_146_1) *Eine
Mithrasliturgie*, 1903. The MS. is 574 Supplément grec de la Bibl.
Nationale. The formulae of various religions were used as instruments of
magic, as our own witches used the Lord's Prayer backwards.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_146_2"></span>[146\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_146_2)
*Refutatio Omnium Haeresium*, v. 7. They worshipped the Serpent, Nāhāsh
(<u>נָחָשׁ</u>).

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_147_1"></span>[147\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_147_1) Bousset,
p. 351. The hostility of Zoroastrianism to the old Babylonian planet
gods was doubtless at work also. Ib. pp. 37-46.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_147_2"></span>[147\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_147_2) Or, in
some Gnostic systems, of the Mother.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_148_1"></span>[148\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_148_1) Harrison,
*Prolegomena*, Appendix on the Orphic tablets.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_148_2"></span>[148\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_148_2) Ap.
*Metamorphoses*, xi.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_149_1"></span>[149\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_149_1) 2 Cor.
xii. 2 and 3 (he may be referring in veiled language to himself); Gal.
i. 12 ff.; Acts ix. 1-22. On the difference of tone and fidelity between
the Epistles and the Acts see the interesting remarks of Prof. P.
Gardner, *The Religious Experience of St. Paul*, pp. 5 ff.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_149_2"></span>[149\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_149_2) Porphyry,
*Vita Plotini*, 23. 'We have explained that he was good and gentle, mild
and merciful; we who lived with him could feel it. We have said that he
was vigilant and pure of soul, and always striving towards the Divine,
which with all his soul he loved. . . . And thus it happened to this
extraordinary man, constantly lifting himself up towards the first and
transcendent God by thought and the ways explained by Plato in the
*Symposium*, that there actually came a vision of that God who is
without shape or form, established above the understanding and all the
intelligible world. To whom I, Porphyry, being now in my sixty-eighth
year, profess that I once drew near and was made one with him. At any
rate he appeared to Plotinus "a goal close at hand." For his whole end
and goal was to be made One and draw near to the supreme God. And he
attained that goal four times, I think, while I was living with him—not
potentially but in actuality, though an actuality which surpasses
speech.'

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_150_1"></span>[150\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_150_1) *C. I.
G.*, vol. xii, fasc. 3; and Bethe in *Rhein. Mus.*, N. F., xlii, 438-75.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_150_2"></span>[150\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_150_2) Irenaeus,
i. 13, 3.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_150_3"></span>[150\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_150_3) Bousset,
chap. vii; Reitzenstein, *Mysterienreligionen*, p. 20 ff., with
excursus; *Poimandres*, 226 ff.; Dieterich, *Mithrasliturgie*, pp. 121
ff.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_152_1"></span>[152\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_152_1) Eur. fr.
484.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_152_2"></span>[152\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_152_2) *R. G.
E.*<sup>3</sup>, pp. 135-40. I do not touch on the political side of
this apotheosis of Hellenistic kings; it is well brought out in
Ferguson's *Hellenistic Athens*, e. g. p. 108 f., also p. 11 f. and
note. Antigonus Gonatas refused to be worshipped (Tarn, p. 250 f.). For
Sallustius's opinion, see below, p. 223, chap. xviii *ad fin.*

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_153_1"></span>[153\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_153_1) Cf.
<u>ψυχὴ οἰκητήριον δαίμονος</u>, Democr. 171, Diels, and Alcmaeon is
said by Cicero to have attributed divinity to the Stars and the Soul.
Melissus and Zeno <u>θείας οἴεται τὰς ψυχάς</u>. The phrase <u>τινὲς τὴν
ψυχὴν ἀπὸ τῶν ἄστρων ῥέουσαν</u>, Diels 651, must refer to some Gnostic
sect.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_154_1"></span>[154\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_154_1) See for
instance Frazer, *Golden Bough*<sup>3</sup>, part I, i. 417-19.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_154_2"></span>[154\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_154_2) Aesch.
*Pers.* 157, 644 (<u>θεός</u>), 642 (<u>δαίμων</u>). Mr. Bevan however
suspects that Aeschylus misunderstood his Persian sources: see his
article on 'Deification' in Hastings's *Dictionary of Religion*.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_154_3"></span>[154\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_154_3) Cf.
Aristotle on the <u>Μεγαλόψυχος</u>, *Eth. Nic.* 1123 b. 15. <u>εἰ δὲ δὴ
μεγάλων ἑαμτὸν ἀξιοῖ ἄξιος ὤν,</u> <u>καὶ μάλιστα τῶν μεγίστων,</u>
<u>περὶ ἓν μάλιστα ἂν εἲη</u>. . . . <u>μέγιστον δὲ τοῦτ' ἂν θείημεν ὃ
τοῖς θεοῖς ἀπονέμομεν.</u> But these kings clearly transgressed the
mean. For the satirical comments of various public men in Athens see Ed.
Meyer, *Kleine Schriften*, 301 ff., 330.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_155_1"></span>[155\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_155_1) Lysander
too had altars raised to him by some Asiatic cities.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_156_1"></span>[156\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_156_1)
Dittenberger, *Inscr. Orientis Graeci*, 90; Wendland,
*Hellenistisch-römische Kultur*, 1907, p. 74 f. and notes.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_157_1"></span>[157\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_157_1) Several
of the phrases are interesting. The last gift of the heavenly gods to
this Theos is the old gift of Mana. In Hesiod it was <u>Κάρτος τε Βίη
τε</u>, the two ministers who are never away from the King Zeus. In
Aeschylus it was Kratos and Bia who subdue Prometheus. In Tyrtaeus it
was <u>Νίκη καὶ Κάρτος</u>. In other inscriptions of the Ptolemaic age
it is <u>Σωτηρία καὶ Νίκη</u> or <u>Σωτηρία καὶ Νίκη αἰώνιος</u>. In the
current Christian liturgies it is 'the Kingdom, the Power, and the
Glory'. *R. G. E.*<sup>3</sup>, p. 135, n. The new conception, as
always, is rooted in the old. 'The Gods Saviours, Brethren', &c., are of
course Ptolemy Soter, Ptolemy Philadelphus, &c., and their Queens. The
phrases <u>εἰκὼν ζῶσα τοῦ Διός</u>, <u>υἱὸς τοῦ Ἡλίου</u>, <u>ἠγαπημένος
ὑπὸ τοῦ Φθᾶ</u>, are characteristic of the religious language of this
period. Cf. also Col. i. 14, <u>εἰκὼν τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ἀοράτου</u>; 2 Cor.
iv. 4; Ephes. i. 5, 6.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_158_1"></span>[158\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_158_1) Fr. 1118.
Arnim. Cf. Antipater, fr. 33, 34, <u>τὸ εὐποιητικόν</u> is part of the
definition of Deity.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_158_2"></span>[158\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_158_2) Plin.,
*Nat. Hist.* ii. 7, 18. Deus est mortali iuvare mortalem et haec ad
aeternam gloriam via. Cf. also the striking passages from Cicero and
others in Wendland, p. 85, n. 2.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_159_1"></span>[159\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_159_1) The Stoic
philosopher, teaching at Rhodes, *c.* 100 <span class="smcap">b.
c.</span> A man of immense knowledge and strong religious emotions, he
moved the Stoa in the direction of Oriental mysticism. See Schwartz's
sketch in *Characterköpfe*<sup>a</sup>, pp. 89-98. Also Norden's
*Commentary on Aeneid* vi.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_160_1"></span>[160\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_160_1) Jacoby in
Pauly-Wissowa's *Realencyclopädie*, vi. 954. It was called <u>Ἱερὰ
Ἀναγραφή</u>.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_161_1"></span>[161\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_161_1) Cf.
Plotin. *Enn.* <span class="smcap">i</span>, ii. 6 <u>ἀλλ' ἡ σπουδὴ οὐκ
ἔξω ἁμαρτίας εἶναι, ἀλλὰ θεὸν εἶναι</u>.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_161_2"></span>[161\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_161_2) Acts xiv.
12. They called Barnabas Zeus and Paul Hermes, because he was <u>ὁ
ἡγούμενος τοῦ λόγου</u>.—Paul also writes to the Galatians (iv. 14): 'Ye
received me *as a messenger of God, as Jesus Christ*.'

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_162_1"></span>[162\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_162_1) Bousset,
p. 238.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_162_2"></span>[162\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_162_2)
Hippolytus, 134, 90 ff., text in Reitzenstein's *Poimandres*, pp. 83-98.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_163_1"></span>[163\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_163_1)
*Republic*, 362 <span class="smcap">a</span>. <u>Ἀνασχινδυλεύω</u> is
said to = <u>ἀνασκολοπίζω</u>, which is used both for 'impale' and
'crucify'. The two were alternative forms of the most slavish and cruel
capital punishment, impalement being mainly Persian, crucifixion Roman.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_164_1"></span>[164\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_164_1) See *The
Hymn of the Soul*, attributed to the Gnostic Bardesanes, edited by A. A.
Bevan, Cambridge, 1897.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_164_2"></span>[164\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_164_2) Bousset
cites Acta Archelai 8, and Epiphanius, *Haeres*. 66, 32.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_164_3"></span>[164\_3](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_164_3) Gal. iv.
9; 1 Cor. xv. 21 f., 47; Rom. v. 12-18.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_165_1"></span>[165\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_165_1) <u>ἡ
ἀνάστασις τῶν νεκρῶν.</u> Cf. Acts xvii. 32.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_165_2"></span>[165\_2](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_165_2)
Cleanthes, 538, Arnim; Diels, p. 592, 30. Cf. Philolaus, Diels, p. 336
f.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_166_1"></span>[166\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_166_1) See
especially the interpretation of Nestor's Cup, Athenaeus, pp. 489 c. ff.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_167_1"></span>[167\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_167_1) I may
refer to the learned and interesting remarks on the Esoteric Style in
Prof. Margoliouth's edition of Aristotle's *Poetics*. It is not, of
course, the same as Allegory.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_169_1"></span>[169\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_169_1) Published
in the Teubner series by William, 1907.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_170_1"></span>[170\_1](fsgr08.htm#an_fr_170_1)

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i0"><u>Ἄφοβον ὁ θεός.</u> <u>Ἀναίσθητον ὁ θάνατος.</u>  
</span> <span class="i0"><u>Τὸ ἀγαθὸν εὔκτητον.</u> <u>Τὸ δεινὸν
εὐεκκαρτέρητον.</u>  
</span>

</div>

</div>

I regret to say that I cannot track this Epicurean 'tetractys' to its
source.

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Last Protest](fsgr09)

</div>
