[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29004)  [Next](cc29006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="iii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Ninth

<span id="iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** I will stand upon my watch, and
set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me,
and what I shall answer when I am reproved.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Super speculam meam stabo, et
statuam me super arcem, et speculabor ad videndum quid loquatur mecum,
et quid respondeam ad increpationem meam.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>We have seen in the first chapter <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>[Hab
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span> that the Prophet said in the name of all
the faithful. It was indeed a hard struggle, when all things were in a
perplexed state and no outlet appeared. The faithful might have thought
that all things happened by chance, that there was no divine providence;
and even the Prophet uttered complaints of this kind. He now begins to
recover himself from his perplexities; and he ever speaks in the person
of the godly, or of the whole Church. For what is done by some
interpreters, who confine what is said to the prophetic office, I do not
approve; and it may be easy from the contempt to learn, that the Prophet
does not speak according to his private feeling, but that he represents
the feelings of all the godly. So then we ought to collect this verse
with the complaints, which we have before noticed; for the Prophet,
finding himself sinking, and as it were overwhelmed in the deepest
abyss, raises himself up above the judgement and reason of men, and
comes nearer to God, that he might see from on high the things which
take place on earth, and not judge according to the understanding of his
own flesh, but by the light of the Holy Spirit. For the tower of which
he speaks is patience arising from hope. If indeed we would struggle
perseveringly to the last, and at length obtain the victory over all
trials and conflicts, we must rise above the world.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p7"></span>Some understand by *tower* and *citadel*
the Word of God: and this may in some measure be allowed, though not in
every respect suitable. If we more fully weigh the reason for the
metaphor, we shall be at no loss to know that the tower is the recess of
the mind, where we withdraw ourselves from the world; for we find how
disposed we are all to entertain distrust. When, therefore, we follow
our own inclination, various temptations immediately lay hold on us; nor
can we even for a moment exercise hope in God: and many things are also
suggested to us, which take away and deprive us of all confidence: we
become also involved in variety of thoughts, for when Satan finds men
wandering in their imaginations and blending many things together, he so
entangles them that they cannot by any means come nigh to God. If then
we would cherish faith in our hearts, we must rise above all these
difficulties and hindrances. And the Prophet by tower means this, that
he extricated himself from the thoughts of the flesh; for there would
have been no end nor termination to his doubts, had he tried to form a
judgement according to his own understanding; *I will stand, he says, on
my tower,*  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) *I and I will set
myself on the citadel*. In short, the sentence carries this meaning —
that the Prophet renounced the judgement of men, and broke through all
those snares by which Satan entangles us and prevents us to rise above
the earth.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p11"></span>He then adds, *I will watch to see what
he may say to me*, that is, I will be there vigilant; for by watching he
means vigilance and waiting, as though he had said, “Though no hope
should soon appear, I shall not despond; nor shall I forsake my station;
but I shall remain constantly in that tower, to which I wish now to
ascend: *I will watch then to see what he may say to me*.” The reference
is evidently to God; for the opinion of those is not probable, who apply
this “saying” to the ministers of Satan. For the Prophet says first, ‘I
will see what he may say to me,’ and then he adds, ‘and what I shall
answer.’ They who explain the words ‘what he may say,’ as referring to
the wicked who might oppose him for the purpose of shaking his faith,
overlook the words of the Prophet, for he speaks here in the singular
number; and as there is no name expressed, the Prophet no doubt meant
God. But were the words capable of admitting this explanation, yet the
very drift of the argument shows, that the passage has the meaning which
I have attached to it. For how could the faithful answer the calumnies
by which their faith was assailed, when the profane opprobriously mocked
and derided them — how could they satisfactorily disprove such
blasphemies, did they not first attend to what God might say to them?
For we cannot confute the devil and his ministers, except we be
instructed by the word of God. We hence see that the Prophet observes
the best order in what he states, when he says in the first place, ‘I
will see what God may say to me;’ and in the second place, ‘I shall then
be taught to answer to my chiding;’  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) that is, “If the wicked deride my faith,
I shall be able boldly to confute them; for the Lord will suggest to me
such things as may enable me to give a full answer.” We now perceive the
simple and real meaning of this verse. It remains for us to accommodate
the doctrine to our own use.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p15"></span>It must be first observed, that there
is no remedy, when such trials as those mentioned by the Prophet in the
first chapter <span id="iii.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Hab
1:4-17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p15.1"></span> meet us, except we learn to raise up our
minds above the world. For if we contend with Satan, according to our
own view of things, he will a hundred times overwhelm us, and we can
never be able to resist him. Let us therefore know, that here is shown
to us the right way of fighting with him, when our minds are agitated
with unbelief, when doubts respecting God’s providence creep in, when
things are so confused in this world as to involve us in darkness, so
that no light appears: we must bid adieu to our own reason; for all our
thoughts are nothing worth, when we seek, according to our own reason,
to form a judgement. Until then the faithful ascend to their tower and
stand in their citadel, of which the Prophet here speaks, their
temptations will drive them here and there, and sink them as it were in
a bottomless gulf. But that we may more fully understand the meaning, we
must know, that there is here an implied contrast between the tower and
the citadel, which the Prophet mentions, and a station on earth. As long
then as we judge according to our own perceptions, we walk on the earth;
and while we do so, many clouds arise, and Satan scatters ashes in our
eyes, and wholly darkens our judgement, and thus it happens, that we lie
down altogether confounded. It is hence wholly necessary, as we have
before said, that we should tread our reason under foot, and come nigh
to God himself.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p16"></span>We have said, that the tower is the
recess of the mind; but how can we ascend to it? even by following the
word of the Lord. For we creep on the earth; nay, we find that our flesh
ever draws us downward: except then the truth from above becomes to us
as it were wings, or a ladder, or a vehicle, we cannot rise up one foot;
but, on the contrary, we shall seek refuges on the earth rather than
ascend into heaven. But let the word of God become our ladder, or our
vehicle, or our wings, and, however difficult the ascent may be, we
shall yet be able to fly upward, provided God’s word be allowed to have
its own authority. We hence see how unsuitable is the view of those
interpreters, who think that the tower and the citadel is the word of
God; for it is by God’s word, as I have already said, that we are raised
up to this citadel, that is, to the safeguard of hope; where we may
remain safe and secure while looking down from this eminence on those
things which disturb us and darken all our senses as long as we lie on
the earth. This is one thing.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p17"></span>Then the repetition is not without its
use; for the Prophet says, *On my tower will I stand, on the citadel
will I set myself*. He does not repeat in other words the same thing,
because it is obscure; but in order to remind the faithful, that though
they are inclined to sloth, they must yet strive to extricate
themselves. And we soon find how slothful we become, except each of us
stirs up himself. For when any perplexity takes hold on our minds, we
soon succumb to despair. This, then, is the reason why the Prophet,
after having spoken of the tower, again mentions the citadel.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p18"></span>But when he says, *I will watch to
see*, he refers to perseverance; for it is not enough to open our eyes
once, and by one look to observe what happens to us; but it is necessary
to continue our attention. This constant attention is, then, what the
Prophet means by watching; for we are not so clear-sighted as
immediately to comprehend what is useful to be known. And then, though
we may once see what is necessary, yet a new temptation can obliterate
that view. It thus happens, that all our observations become evanescent,
except we continue to watch, that is, except we persevere in our
attention, so that we may ever return to God, whenever the devil raises
new storms, and whenever he darkens the heavens with clouds to prevent
us to see God. We hence see how emphatical is what the Prophet says
here, I will watch to see. The Prophet evidently compares the faithful
to watchmen, who, though they hear nothing, yet do not sleep; and if
they hear any noise once or twice, they do not immediately sound an
alarm, but wait and attend. As, then, they who keep watch ought to
remain quiet, that they may not disturb others, and that they may duly
perform their office; so it behaves the faithful to be also tranquil and
quiet, and wait patiently for God during times of perplexity and
confusion.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p19"></span>Let us now inquire what is the purpose
of this watching: *I will watch to see*, he says, *what he may say to
me*. There seems to be an impropriety in the expression; for we do not
properly see what is said. But the Prophet connects together here two
metaphors. To speak strictly correct, he ought to have said, “I will
continue attentive to hear what he may say;” but he says, *I will watch
to see what he may say*. The metaphor is found correctly used in <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ps
85:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p20"></span>“I will hear what God may say; for he
will speak peace to his people.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p21"></span>There also it is a metaphor, for the
Prophet speaks not of natural hearing: “I will hear what God may speak,”
what does that hearing mean? It means this, “I will quietly wait until
God shows his favor, which is now hid; for he will speak peace to his
people;” that is, the Lord will never forget his own Church. But the
Prophet, as I have said, joins together here two metaphors; for to
speak, or to say, means no other thing than that God testifies to our
hearts, that though the reason for his purpose does not immediately
appear to us, yet all things are wisely ruled, and that nothing is
better than to submit to his will. But when he says, “I will see, and I
will watch what he may say,” the metaphor seems incongruous, and yet
there appears a reason for it; for the Prophet intended to remind us,
that we ought to employ all our senses for this end, — to be wholly
attentive to God’s word. For though one may be resolved to hear God, we
yet find that many temptations immediately distract us. It is not then
enough to become teachable, and to apply our ears to hear his voice,
except also our eyes be connected with them, so that we may be
altogether attentive.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p22"></span>We hence see the object of the Prophet;
for he meant to express the greatest attention, as though he had said,
that the faithful would ever wander in their thoughts, except they
carefully concentrated both their eyes and their ears, and all their
senses, on God, and continually restrained themselves, lest vagrant
speculations or imaginations should lead them astray. And further, the
Prophet teaches us, that we ought to have such reverence for God’s word
as to deem it sufficient for us to hear his voice. Let this, then, be
our understanding, to obey God speaking to us, and reverently to embrace
his word, so that he may deliver us from all troubles, and also keep our
minds in peace and tranquillity.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p23"></span>God’s speaking, then, is opposed to all
the obstreperous clamours of Satan, which he never ceases to sound in
our ears. For as soon as any temptation takes place, Satan suggests many
things to us, and those of various kinds: — “What will you do? what
advice will you take? see whether God is propitious to you from whom you
expect help. How can you dare to trust that God will assist you? How can
he extricate you? What will be the issue?” As Satan then disturbs us in
various ways, the Prophet shows that the word of God alone is sufficient
for us all, then, who indulge themselves in their own counsels, deserve
to be forsaken by God, and to be left by him to be driven up and down,
and here and there, by Satan; for the only unfailing security for the
faithful is to acquiesce in God’s word.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p24"></span>But this appears still more clear from
what is expressed at the close of the verse, when the Prophet adds, *and
what I may answer to the reproof given me*; for he shows that he would
be furnished with the best weapons to sustain and repel all assaults,
provided he patiently attended to God speaking to him, and fully
embraced his word: “Then,” he says, “I shall have what I may answer to
all reproofs, when the Lord shall speak to me”. By “reproofs,” he means
not only the blasphemies by which the wicked shake his faith, but also
all those turbulent feelings by which Satan secretly labors to subvert
his faith. For not only the ungodly deride us and mock at our
simplicity, as though we presumptuously and foolishly trusted in God,
and were thus over-credulous; but we also reprove ourselves inwardly,
and disturb ourselves by various internal contentions; for whatever
comes to our mind that is in opposition to God’s word, is properly a
chiding or a reproof, as it is the same thing as if one accused himself,
as though he had not found God to be faithful. We now, then see that the
word “reproof” extends farther than to those outward blasphemies by
which the unbelieving are wont to assail the children of God; for, as we
have already said, though no one attempted to try our faith, yet every
one is a tempter to himself; for the devil never ceases to agitate our
minds. When, therefore, the Prophet says, *what I may answer to
reproof*, he means, that he would be sufficiently fortified against all
the assaults of Satan, both secret and external, when he heard what God
might say to him.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p25"></span>We may also gather from the whole
verse, that we can form no judgement of God’s providence, except by the
light of celestial truth. It is hence no wonder that many fall away
under trials, yea, almost the whole world; for few there are who ascend
into the citadel of which the Prophet speaks, and who are willing to
hear God speaking to them. Hence, presumption and arrogance blind the
minds of men, so that they either speak evil of God who addresses them,
or accuse fortune, or maintain that there is nothing certain: thus they
murmur within themselves, and arrogate to themselves more than they
ought, and never submit to God’s word. Let us proceed, -

<span id="iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hab.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p2"></span>**2.** And the LORD answered me, and
said, Write the vision, and make *it* plain upon tables, that he may run
that readeth it.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Et respondit mihi Jehova et
dixit, Scribe visionem, et explana super tabulas, ut currat legens in
ea:

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p4"></span>**3.** For the vision *is* yet for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it
tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p5"></span>**3.** Quia adhue visio ad tempus
statutum, et loquetur ad finem, et non mentietur; si moram fecerit,
expecta eam; quia veniendo veniet, et non tardabit.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p7"></span><span id="iii.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p8"></span>The Prophet now shows by his own
example that there is no fear but that God will give help in time,
provided we bring our minds to a state of spiritual tranquillity, and
constantly look up to him: for the event which the Prophet relates,
proves that there is no danger that God will frustrate their hope and
patience, who lift up their minds to heaven, and continue steadily in
that attitude. *Answer me*, he says, *did Jehovah, and said*. There is
no doubt but that the Prophet accommodates here his own example to the
common instruction of the whole Church. Hence, by testifying that an
answer was given him by God, he intimates that we ought to entertain a
cheerful hope, that the Lord, when he finds us stationed in our
watch-tower, will in due season convey to us the consolation which he
sees we need.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p9"></span>But he afterwards comes to the
discharge of his prophetic office; for he was bid to write the vision on
tables, and to write it in large letters, that it might be read, and
that any one, passing by quickly, might be able by one glance to see
what was written: and by this second part he shows still more clearly
that he treated of a common truth, which belonged to the whole body of
the Church; for it was not for his own sake that he was bid to write,
but for the edification of all.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p10"></span>*Write*, then, *the vision*, and *make
it plain*; for <span id="iii.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>באר, *bar* properly
means, to declare plainly.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) Unfold
it then, he says, *on tables, that he may run who reads it*; that is,
that the writing may not cause the readers to stop. Write it in large
characters, that any one, in running by, may see what is written. Then
he adds, *for the vision shall be for an appointed time*

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p12"></span>This is a remarkable passage; for we
are taught here that we are not to deal with God in too limited a
manner, but room must be given for hope; for the Lord does not
immediately execute what he declares by his mouth; but his purpose is to
prove our patience, and the obedience of our faith. Hence he says, *the
vision, is for a time*, and a fixed time: for <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>מועד, *muod* means a time which has been
determined by agreement. But as it is God who fore appoints the time,
the constituted time, of which the Prophet speaks, depends on his will
and power. *The vision*, then, *shall be for a time*. He reproves here
that immoderate ardor which takes hold on us, when we are anxious that
God should immediately accomplish what he promises. The Prophet then
shows that God so speaks as to be at liberty to defer the execution of
his promise until it seems good to him.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p13"></span>*At the end*, he says, *it will speak*
 <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) In a word, the Prophet intimates,
that honor is to be given to God’s word, that we ought to be fully
persuaded that God speaks what is true, and be so satisfied with his
promises as though what is promised were really possessed by us. *At the
end*, then, *it will speak and it will not lie*  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) Here the Prophet means, that fulfillment
would take place, so that experience would at length prove, that God had
not spoken in vain, nor for the sake of deceiving; but yet that there
was need of patience; for, as it has been said, God intends not to
indulge our fervid and importunate desires by an immediate fulfillment,
but his design is to hold us in suspense. And this is the true sacrifice
of praise, when we restrain ourselves, and remain firm in the persuasion
that God cannot deceive nor lie, though he may seem for a time to trifle
with us. *It will not, then, lie*

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, *If it will delay,
wait for it*. He again expresses still more clearly the true character
of faith, that it does not break forth immediately into complaints, when
God connives at things, when he suffers us to be oppressed by the
wicked, when he does not immediately succor us; in a word, when he does
not without delay fulfill what he has promised in his word. If, then,
*it delays, wait for it*. He again repeats the same thing, *coming it
will come*; that is, however it may be, God, who is not only true, but
truth itself, will accomplish his own promises. The fulfillment, then,
of the promise will take place in due time.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p17"></span>But we must notice the contrariety,
*If it will delay, it will come, it will not delay*. The two clauses
seem to be contrary the one to the other. But delay, mentioned first,
has a reference to our haste. It is a common proverb, “Even quickness is
delay to desire.” We indeed make such haste in all our desires, that the
Lord, when he delays one moment, seems to be too slow. Thus it may come
easily to our mind to expostulate with him on the ground of slowness.
God, then, is said on this account to delay in his promises; and his
promises also as to their accomplishment may be said to be delayed. But
if we have regard to the counsel of God, there is never any delay; for
he knows all the points of time, and in slowness itself he always
hastens, however this may be not comprehended by the flesh. We now,
then, apprehend what the Prophet means.  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p24"></span>He is now bidden to *write the vision,
and to explain it on tables*. Many confine this to the coming of Christ;
but I rather think that the Prophet ascribes the name of vision to the
doctrine or admonition, which he immediately subjoins. It is indeed
true, that the faithful under the law could not have cherished hope in
God without having their eyes and their minds directed to Christ: but it
is one thing to take a passage in a restricted sense as applying to
Christ himself, and another thing to set forth those promises which
refer to the preservation of the Church. As far then as the promises of
God in Christ are yea and amen, no vision could have been given to the
Fathers, which could have raised their minds, and supported them in the
hope of salvation, without Christ having been brought before them. But
the Prophet here intimates generally, that a command was given to him to
supply the hearts of the godly with this support, that they were, as we
shall hereafter more clearly see, to wait for God. The vision, then, is
nothing else than an admonition, which will be found in the next and the
following verses.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p25"></span>He uses two words, to *write* and to
*explain*; which some pervert rather than rightly distinguish: for as
the Prophets were wont to write, and also to set forth the summaries or
the heads of their discourses, they think that it was a command to
Habakkuk to write, that he might leave on record to posterity what he
had said; and then to publish what he taught as an edict, that it might
be seen by the people passing by, not only for a day or for a few days.
But I do not think that the Prophet speaks with so much refinement: I
therefore consider that to write and to explain on tables mean the same
thing. And what is added, *that he may run who reads it*, is to be
understood as I have already explained it; for God intended to set forth
this declaration as memorable and worthy of special notice. It was not
usual with the Prophets to write in long and large characters; but the
Prophet mentions here something peculiar, because the declaration was
worthy of being especially observed. What is similar to this is said in
<span id="iii.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>[Isa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>, ‘Write on at table with a man’s pen.’ By
a man’s pen is to be understood common writing, such as is comprehended
by the rudest and the most ignorant. To the same purpose is what God
bids here his servant Habakkuk to do. *Write*, he says how? Not as
Prophecies are wont to be written, for the Prophets set before the
people the heads of their discourses; but write, he says, so that he who
runs may read, and that though he may be inattentive, he may yet see
what is written; for the table itself will plainly show what it
contains.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p26"></span>We now see that the Prophet commends,
by a peculiar eulogy, what he immediately subjoins. Hence this passage
ought to awaken all our powers, as God himself testifies that he
announces what is worthy of being remembered: for he speaks not of a
common truth; but his purpose was to reveal something great and
unusually excellent; as he bids it, as I have already said, to be
written in large characters, so that those who run might read it.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p27"></span>And by saying that *the vision is yet
for a time*, he shows, as I have briefly explained, what great reverence
is due to heavenly truth. For to wish God to conform to our rule is
extremely preposterous and unreasonable: and there is no place for
faith, if we expect God to fulfill immediately what he promises. It is
hence the trial of faith to acquiesce in God’s word, when its
accomplishment does in no way appear. As then the Prophet teaches us,
that *the vision is yet for a time*, he reminds us that we have no
faith, except we are satisfied with God’s word alone, and suspend our
desires until the seasonable time comes, that which God himself has
appointed. *The vision*, then, *yet* shall be. But we are inclined to
reduce, as it were, to nothing the power of God, except he accomplishes
what he has said: “Yet, yet,” says the Prophet, “the vision shall be;”
that is, “Though God does not stretch forth his hand, still let what he
has spoken be sufficient for you: let then the vision itself be enough
for you; let it be deemed worthy of credit, so that the word of God may
on its own account be believed; and let it not be tried according to the
common rule; for men charge God with falsehood, except he immediately
yields to their desires. Let then the vision itself be counted
sufficiently solid and firm, until the suitable time shall come.” And
the word <span id="iii.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>מועד, *muod*, ought to be
noticed; for the Prophet does not speak simply of time, but, as I have
already said, he points out a certain and a preordained time. When men
make an agreement, they on both sides fix the day: but it would be the
highest presumption in us to require that God should appoint the day
according to our will. It belongs, then, to him to appoint the times,
and so to govern all things, that we may approve of whatever he does.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p28"></span>He afterwards says, *And it will speak
at the end, and it will not lie*. The same is the import of the
expression, *it will speak at the end*; that is, men are very perverse,
if they wish God to close his mouth, and if they wish to deny faith to
his word, except he instantly fulfill what he speaks. *It will* then
*speak*; that is, let this liberty of speaking be allowed to God. And
there is always an implied contrast between the voice of God and its
accomplishment; for we are to acquiesce in God’s word, though he may
conceal his hand: though he may afford no proof of his power, yet the
Prophet commands this honor to be given to his word. *The vision*, then,
*will speak at the end*

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p29"></span>He now expresses more clearly what he
had before said of the preordained time; and thus he meets the
objections which Satan is wont to suggest to us: “How long will that
time be delayed? Thou indeed namest it as the preordained time; but when
will that day come?” “The Lord,” he says, “will speak at the end;” that
is, “Though the Lord protracts time, and though day after day we seem to
live on vain promises, yet let God speak, that is, let him have this
honor from you, and be ye persuaded that he is true, that he cannot
disappoint you; and in the meantime wait for his power; wait, so that ye
may yet remain quiet, resting on his word, and let all your thoughts be
confined within this stronghold — that it is enough that God has spoken.
The rest we shall defer until to-morrow.

<span id="iii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou sees
us laboring under so much weakness, yea, with our minds so blinded that
our faith falters at the smallest perplexities, and almost fails
altogether, — O grant that by the power of thy Spirit we may be raised
up above this world, and learn more and more to renounce our own
counsels, and so to come to thee, that we may stand fixed in our watch
tower, ever hoping, through thy power, for whatever thou hast promised
to us, though thou shouldst not immediately make it manifest to us that
thou hast faithfully spoken; and may we thus give full proof of our
faith and patience, and proceed in the course of our warfare, until at
length we ascend, above all watch towers, into that blessed rest, where
we shall no more watch with an attentive mind, but see, face to face, in
thine image, whatever can be wished, and whatever is needful for our
perfect happiness, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Tenth

<span id="iii.iii.v-p2"></span>The Prophet taught us yesterday, that we
ought to allow God his right of speaking to us, and of sustaining us by
his own word, until the ripe time shall come, when he shall really
fulfill what he has promised. Then an exhortation follows, added at the
close of the verse — that we are to exercise patience; and the Apostle
also, referring to this passage in <span id="iii.iii.v-p2.1"></span>[Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p2.1"></span>, makes a similar application. He indeed
quotes what we shall find in the next verse, ‘The just by his faith
shall live;’ but he had in view the whole context; and at the same time
he reminds us of the Prophet’s object here in exalting the authority of
God’s word. The exhortation, then, is briefly this — that though God may
keep us in suspense, we yet ought not to cast away hope, for he knows
when it is expedient for us that he should stretch forth his hand. And
as there are two clauses, as I said yesterday, which seem at first sight
to be inconsistent the one with the other, the Prophet very fitly joins
them together, and considers them to be in perfect harmony; for though
God may appear to delay, yet he is not slower than what is necessary and
expedient. Let us then be fully persuaded that there is in God prudence
and wisdom enough to assist us as soon as it may be needful. The Prophet
now reminds us that it is no wonder if God seems to us to delay, for we
are too hasty in our desires. Let therefore this fervor be restrained,
so that we may subject our feelings to the providence and purpose of
God. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p2"></span>**4.** Behold, his soul *which* is
lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shall live by his faith.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Ecce exaltatio, (*vel*, qui se
munit, *ut alii vertunt*,) non recta est anima ejus in ipso: justus
autem in fide sua vivet.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p6"></span>This verse stands connected with the
last, for the Prophet means to show that nothing is better than to rely
on God’s word, how much soever may various temptations assault our
souls. We hence see that nothing new is said here, hut that the former
doctrine is confirmed — that our salvation is rendered safe and certain
through God’s promise alone, and that therefore we ought not to seek any
other haven, where we might securely sustain all the onsets of Satan and
of the world. But he sets the two clauses the one opposed to the other:
every man who would fortify himself would ever be subject to various
changes, and never attain a quiet mind; then comes the other clause —
that man cannot otherwise obtain rest than by faith.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p7"></span>But the former part is variously
explained. Some interpreters think the word <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>עפלה, *ophle*, to be a noun, and render it
elevation, which is not unsuitable; and indeed I hesitate not to regard
this as its real meaning, for the Hebrews call a citadel <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p7.2"></span>עופל, *ouphel*, rightly deriving it from
<span id="iii.iii.vi-p7.3"></span>עפל, *ophle*, to ascend. What some
others maintain, that it signifies to strengthen, is not well founded.
Some again give this explanation — that the unbelieving seek a
stronghold for themselves, that they may fortify themselves; and this
makes but little difference as to the thing itself. But interpreters
vary, and differ as to the meaning of the sentence; for some substitute
the predicate for the subject, and the subject for the predicate, and
elicit this meaning from the Prophet’s words — "Every one whose mind is
not at ease seeks a fortress, where he may safely rest and strengthens
himself;” and others give this view — “He who is proud, or who thinks
himself well fortified, shall ever be of an unquiet mind.” And this
latter meaning is what I approve, only that I retain the import of the
word <span id="iii.iii.vi-p7.4"></span>עפלה, *ophle*, as though it was
said — “where there is an elation of mind there is no tranquillity.”

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p8"></span>Let us see first what their view is who
give the other explanation. They say that the unbelieving, being
obstinate and perverted in their minds, ever seek where they may be in
safety, for they are full of suspicions, and having no regard to God
they resort to the world for those remedies, by which they may escape
evils and dangers. This is their view. But the Prophet, as I have
already said, does here, on the contrary, denounce punishment on the
unbelieving, as though he had said — “This reward, which they have
deserved, shall be repaid to them — that they shall always torment
themselves.” The contrast will thus be more obvious; and when we say
that God punishes the unbelieving, when he suffers them to be driven
here and there, and also harasses their minds with various tormenting
thoughts, a more fruitful doctrine is elicited. When therefore the
Prophet says that there is no calmness of mind possessed by those who
deem themselves well fortified, he intimates that they are their own
executioners, for they seek for themselves many troubles, many sorrows,
many anxieties, and contrive and mingle together many designs and
purposes; now they think of one thing, then they turn to another; for
the Hebrews say that the soul is made right when we acquiesce in a thing
and continue in a tranquil state of mind; but when confused thoughts
distract us, then they say that our soul is not right in us. We now
perceive the real meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p9"></span>*Behold*, he says: by this demonstrative
particle he intimates that what he teaches us may be clearly seen if we
attend to daily events. The meaning then is, that a proof of this fact
exists evidently in the common life of men — that he who fortifies
himself, and is also elated with self confidence, never finds a tranquil
haven, for some new suspicion or fear ever disturbs his mind. Hence it
comes that the soul entangles itself in various cares and anxieties.
This is the reward, as I have said, which is allotted by God’s just
judgement to the unbelieving; for God, as he testifies by Isaiah, offers
to us rest; and they who reject this invaluable benefit, freely offered
to them by God, deserve that they should not only be tormented in one
way, but be also harassed by endless agitations, and that they should
also vex and torment themselves. It is indeed true that he who is
fortified may also acquiesce in God’s word; but the word <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>עפלה, *ophle*, refers to the state of the
mind. Whosoever, then, swells with vain confidence, when he finds that
he has many auxiliaries according to the flesh, shall ever be agitated,
and will at length find that there is nowhere rest, except the mind
recumbs on God’s grace alone. We now understand the import of this
clause.  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p16"></span>It follows, *but the just shall live by
his faith*. The Prophet, I have no doubt, does here place faith in
opposition to all those defences by which men so blind themselves as to
neglect God, and to seek no aid from him. As men therefore rely on what
the earth affords, depending on their fallacious supports, the Prophet
here ascribes life to faith. But faith, as it is well known, and as we
shall presently show more at large, depends on God alone. That we may
then live by faith, the Prophet intimates that we must willingly give up
all those defences which are wont to disappoint us. He then who finds
that he is deprived of all protections, will live by his faith, provided
he seeks in God alone what he wants, and leaving the world, fixes his
mind on heaven.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p17"></span>As <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p17.1"></span>אמוגת, *amunat*, is in Hebrew truth, so
some regard it as meaning integrity; as though the Prophet had said,
that the just man has more safety in his faithfulness and pure
conscience, than there is to the children of this world in all those
munitions in which they glory. But in this case they frigidly extenuate
the Prophet’s declaration; for they understand not what that
righteousness of faith is from which our salvation proceeds. It is
indeed certain that the Prophet understands by the word <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p17.2"></span>אמוגת, *amunat*, that faith which strips us
of all arrogance, and leads us naked and needy to God, that we may seek
salvation from him alone, which would otherwise be far removed from us.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p18"></span>Now many confine the first part to
Nebuchadnezzar, but this is not suitable. The Prophet indeed speaks to
the end of the chapter of Babylon and its ruin; but here he makes a
distinction between the children of God, who cast all their cares on
him, and the unbelieving, who cannot go forth beyond the world, where
they seek to be made secure, and gather hence their defences in which
they confide. And this is especially worthy of being observed, for it
helps us much to understand the meaning of the Prophet; if this part —
“Behold the proud, his soul is not right in him,” be applied to
Nebuchadnezzar, the other part will lose much of its import; but if we
consider that the Prophet, as it were, in these two tablets, shows what
it is to glory in our own powers or in earthly aids, then what it is to
repose on God alone will appear much more clear, and this truth will
with more force penetrate into our minds; for we know how much such
comparisons illustrate a subject which would be otherwise obscure or
less evident. For if the Prophet had only declared that our faith is the
cause of life and salvation, it might indeed be understood; but as we
are disposed to entertain worldly hopes, the former truth would not have
been sufficient to correct this evil, and to free our minds from all
vain confidence. But when he affirms that all the unbelieving are
deceived, while they fortify or elate themselves, be cause God will ever
confound them, and that though no one disturbs them outwardly, they will
yet be their own tormentors, as they have nothing that is right, nothing
that is certain; when therefore all this is said to us, it is as though
God drew us forcibly to himself, while seeing us deluded by the
allurements of Satan, and seeing us too inclined to be taken with
deceptions, which would at length lead us to destruction.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p19"></span>We now, then, perceive why Habakkuk has
put these two things in opposition the one to the other — that the
defences of this world are not only evanescent, but also bring always
with them many tormenting fears — and then, that the just lives by his
faith. And hence also is found a confirmation of what I have already
touched upon, that faith is not to be taken here for man’s integrity,
but for that faith which sets man before God emptied of all good things,
so that he seeks what he needs from his gratuitous goodness: for all the
unbelieving try to fortify themselves; and thus they strengthen
themselves, thinking that anything in which they trust is sufficient for
them. But what does the just do? He brings nothing before God except
faith: then he brings nothing of his own, because faith borrows, as it
were, through favor, what is not in man’s possession. He, then, who
lives by faith, has no life in himself; but because he wants it, he
flies for it to God alone. The Prophet also puts the verb in the future
tense, in order to show the perpetuity of this life: for the unbelieving
glory in a shadowy life; but the Lord will at last discover their folly,
and they themselves shall really know that they have been deceived. But
as God never disappoints the hope of his people, the Prophet promises
here a perpetual life to the faithful.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p20"></span>Let us now come to Paul, who has
applied the Prophet’s testimony for the purpose of teaching us that
salvation is not by works, but by the mercy of God alone, and therefore
by faith. Paul *seems* to have misapplied the Prophet’s words, and to
have used them beyond what they import; for the Prophet speaks here of
the state of the present life, and he has not previously spoken of the
celestial life, but exhorted, as we have seen, the faithful to patience,
and at the same time testified that God would be their deliverer; and
now he adds, *the just shall live by faith*, though he may be destitute
of all help, and though he may be exposed to all the assaults of
fortune, and of the wicked, and of the devil. What has this to do, some
one may say, with the eternal salvation of the soul? It seems, then,
that Paul has with too much refinement introduced this testimony into
his discussion respecting gratuitous justification by faith. But this
principle ought ever to be remembered — that whatever benefits the Lord
confers on the faithful in this life, are intended to confirm them in
the hope of the eternal inheritance; for however liberally God may deal
with us, our condition would yet be indeed miserable, were our hope
confined to this earthly life. As God then would raise up our minds to
the hopes of eternal salvation whenever he aids us in this world, and
declares himself to be our Father; hence, when the Prophet says that the
faithful shall live, he certainly does not confine this life to so
narrow limits, that God will only defend us for a day or two, or for a
few years; but he proceeds much farther, and says, that we shall be made
really and truly happy; for though this whole world may perish or be
exposed to various changes, yet the faithful shall continue in permanent
and real safety. Hence, when Habakkuk promises life in future to the
faithful, he no doubt overleaps the boundaries of this world, and sets
before the faithful a better life than that which they have here, which
is accompanied with many sorrows, and proves itself by its shortness to
be unworthy of being much desired.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p21"></span>We now perceive that Paul wisely and
suitably accommodates to his subject the Prophet’s words — that the just
lives by faith; for there is no salvation for the soul except through
God’s mercy.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p22"></span>Quoting this place in <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p22.1"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p22.1"></span>, he says that the righteousness of God is
in the gospel revealed from faith to faith, and then adds,

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p23"></span>“As it is written, The just shall live
by faith.”

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p24"></span>Paul very rightly connects these things
together that righteousness is made known in the Gospel — and that it
comes to us by faith only; for he there contends that men cannot obtain
righteousness by the law, or by the works of the law; it follows that it
is revealed in the Gospel alone: how does he prove this? By the
testimony of the Prophet Habakkuk —

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p25"></span>“If by faith the just lives, then he is
just by faith; if he is just by faith, then he is not so by the works of
the law.”

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p26"></span>And Paul assumes this principle, to
which I have before referred — that men are emptied of all works, when
they produce their faith before God: for as long as man possesses
anything of his own, he does not please God by faith alone, but also by
his own worthiness.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p27"></span>If then faith alone obtains grace, the
law must necessarily be relinquished, as the apostle also explains more
clearly in the third chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p27.1"></span>[Ga
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p27.1"></span>:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p28"></span>‘That righteousness,’ he says, ‘is not
by the works of the law, is evident; for it is written, The just shall
live by faith, and the law is not of faith.’

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p29"></span>Paul assumes that these, even faith and
law, are contrary, the one to the other; contrary as to the work of
justifying. The law indeed agrees with the gospel; nay, it contains in
itself the gospel. And Paul has solved this question in the first
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p29.1"></span>[Ro
1:1-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p29.1"></span> by saying, that the law cannot assist us
to attain righteousness, but that it is offered to us in the gospel, and
that it receives a testimony from the law and the Prophets. Though then
there is a complete concord between the law and the gospel, as God, who
is not inconsistent with himself, is the author of both; yet as to
justification, the law accords not with the gospel, any more than light
with darkness: for the law promises life to those who serve God; and the
promise is conditional, dependent on the merits of works. The gospel
also does indeed promise righteousness under condition; but it has no
respect to the merits of works. What then? It is only this, that they
who are condemned and lost are to embrace the favor offered to them in
Christ.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p30"></span>We now then see how, by the testimony
of our Prophet, Paul rightly confirms his own doctrine, that eternal
salvation is to be attained by faith only; for we are destitute of all
merits by works, and are constrained to stand naked and needy before
God; and then the Lord justifies us freely.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p31"></span>But that this may be more evident, let
us first consider why men must come altogether naked before God; for
were there any worthiness in them, the Lord would by no means deprive
them of such an honor. Why then does the Lord justify us freely, except
that he may thereby appear just? He has indeed no need of this glory, as
though he could not himself be glorified except by doing wrong to men.
But we obtain righteousness by faith alone for this reason, because God
finds nothing in us which he can approve, or what may avail to obtain
righteousness. Since it is so, we then see that to be true which the
Holy Spirit everywhere declares respecting the character of men. Men
indeed glory in a foolish conceit as to their own righteousness: but all
philosophic virtues, as they call them, which men think they possess
through free-will, are mere fumes; nay, they are the delusions of the
devil, by which he bewitches the minds of men, so that they come not to
God, but, on the contrary, precipitate themselves into the lowest deep,
where they seek to exalt themselves beyond measure. However this may be,
let us be fully convinced, that in man there is not even a particle
either of rectitude or of righteousness; and that whatever men may try
to do of themselves, is an abomination before God. This is one thing.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p32"></span>Now after God has stretched forth his
hand to his elect, it is still necessary that they should confess their
own want and nakedness, as to justification; for though they have been
regenerated by the Spirit of God, yet in many things they are deficient,
and thus in innumerable ways they become exposed to eternal death in the
sight of God; so that they have in themselves no righteousness. The
Papists differ from us in the first place, imagining as they do, that
there are certain preparations necessary; for that false notion about
free-will cannot be eradicated from their hearts. As then they will have
man to be endued with free- will, they always connect with it some
power, as though they could obtain grace by their own doings. They
indeed confess that man of himself can do nothing, except by the helping
grace of God; but in the meantime they blend, as I have said, their own
fictitious preparations. Others confess, that until God anticipates us
by his grace, there is no power whatever in free-will; but afterwards
they suppose that free-will concurs with God’s grace, as it would be by
itself inefficient, except received by our consent. Thus they always
reserve for men some worthiness; but a greater difference exists as to
the second subject: for after we have been regenerated through God’s
grace, the Papists imagine that we are justified by the merits of works.
They confess, that until God anticipates us by his grace, we are
condemned and cannot attain salvation except through the assisting grace
of God; but as soon as God works in us, we are then, they say, able to
attain righteousness by our own works.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p33"></span>But we object and say, that the
faithful, after having been regenerated by the Spirit of God, do not
fulfill the law: they allow this to be true, but say that they might if
they would, for that God has commanded nothing which is above what men
are capable of doing. And this also is a most pernicious error. They are
at the same time forced to confess, that experience itself teaches us
that no man is wholly free from sin: then some guilt always remains. But
they say, that if we kept half the law, we could obtain righteousness by
that half. Hence, if one by adultery offended God and thus becomes
exposed to eternal death, and yet abstains from theft, he is just, they
say, because he is no thief. He is an adulterer, it is true; but he is
yet just in part, because he keeps a part of the law; and they call this
partial righteousness. But God has not promised salvation to men, except
they fully and really fulfill whatever he has commanded in his law. For
it is not said, “He that fulfill a part of the law shall live;” but he
who shall do these things shall live in them. Moses does not point out
two or three commandments, but includes the whole law (<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p33.1"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p33.1"></span>.) There is also a declaration made by
James,

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p34"></span>‘He who has forbidden to commit
adultery, has also forbidden to steal: whosoever then transgresses the
law in one particular, is a transgressor of the whole law’ (<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p34.1"></span>[Jas.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p34.1"></span>):

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p35"></span>he is then excluded from any hope of
righteousness. We hence see that the papists are most grossly mistaken,
who imagine, that men, when they keep the law only in part, are just.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p36"></span>Were there indeed any one found who
strictly kept God’s law, he could not be counted just, except by virtue
of a promise. And here also the Papists stumble, and are at the same
time inconsistent with themselves; for they confess that merits do not
obtain righteousness for men by their own intrinsic worth, but only by
the covenant of the law. But as soon as they have said this, they
immediately forget themselves, and say what is contrary, like men
carried away by passion. Were then the Papists to join together these
two things — that there is no righteousness except by covenant, and that
there is a partial righteousness they would see that they are
inconsistent: for where is this partial righteousness? If we are not
righteous except according to the covenant of the law, then we are not
righteous except through a full and perfect observance of the law. This
is certain.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p37"></span>They go astray still more grievously as
to the remission of sins; for as it is well known, they obtrude their
own satisfactions, and thus seek to expiate the sins of men by their own
merits, as though the sacrifice of Christ was not sufficient for that
purpose. Hence it is that they will not allow that we are gratuitously
justified by faith; for they cannot be brought to acknowledge a free
remission of sins; and except the remission of sins be gratuitous, we
must confess that righteousness is not by faith alone, but also by
merits. But the whole Scripture proves that expiation is nowhere else to
be sought, except through the sacrifice of Christ alone. This error,
then, of the Papists is extremely gross and false. They further err in
pleading for the merits of works; for they boast of their own
inventions, the works of supererogation, or as they call them,
satisfactions. And these meritorious works, under the Papacy, are gross
errors and worthless superstitions, and yet they toil in them and
lacerate themselves, nay, they almost wear out themselves. If they
mutter many short prayers, if they run to altars and to various
churches, if they buy masses, in a word, if they accumulate all these
fictitious acts of worship, they think that they merit righteousness
before God. Thus they forget their own saying, that righteousness is by
covenant; for if it be by covenant, it is certain that God does not
promise it to fictitious works, which men of themselves invent and
contrive. It then follows, that what men bring to God, devised by
themselves, cannot do anything towards the attainment of righteousness.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p38"></span>There is also another error which must
be noticed, for in good works they perceive not those blemishes which
justly displease God, so that our works might be deservedly condemned
were they strictly examined and tried. The Papists rightly say, that we
are not justified by the intrinsic worthiness of works, but afterwards
they do not consider how imperfect our works are, for no work proceeds
from mortal man which can fully answer to what God’s covenant requires.
How so? For no work proceeds from the perfect love of God, and where the
perfect love of God does not exist, there is corruption there. It hence
follows, that all our works are polluted before God; for they flow not
except from the impure fountain of the heart. Were any to object and
say, that the hearts of men are cleansed by the regeneration of the
Spirit, we allow this; but at the same time much filth always remains in
our hearts, and it ought to be sufficient for us to know that nothing is
pure and genuine before God except where the perfect love of him exists.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p39"></span>As, then, the Papists are blind to all
these things, it is no wonder that they with so much hostility contend
with us about righteousness, and can by no means allow that the
righteousness of faith is gratuitous, for from the beginning this
figment about free- will has been resorted to — “if men of themselves
come to God, then they are not freely justified.” They, then, as I have
said, imagine a partial righteousness, they suppose the deficiency to be
made up by satisfactions, they have also, as they say, their devotions,
that is, their own contrived modes of worship. Thus it comes, that they
ever persuade themselves that the righteousness of man, at least in
part, is made up by himself or by works. They indeed allow that we are
justified by faith, but when it is added, by faith alone, then they
begin to be furious; but they consider not that righteousness, if
obtained by faith, cannot be by works, for Paul, as I have shown above,
reasons from the contrary, when he says, that righteousness, if it be by
the works of the law, is not by faith, for faith, as it has been said,
strips man of everything, that he may seek of God what he needs. But the
Papists, though they think that man has not enough for himself, do not
yet acknowledge that he is so needy and miserable, that righteousness
must be sought in God alone. But yet sufficiently clear is the doctrine
of Paul, and if Paul had never spoken, reason itself is sufficient to
convince us that men cannot be justified by faith until they cast away
every confidence in their own works, for if righteousness be of faith,
then it is of grace alone, and if by grace alone, then it cannot be by
works. It is wholly puerile in the Papists to think, that it is partly
by grace and partly by the merits of works; for as salvation cannot be
divided, so righteousness cannot be divided, by which we attain
salvation itself. As, then, faith acquires for us favor before God, and
by this favor we are counted just, so all works must necessarily fall to
the ground, when righteousness is ascribed to faith.

<span id="iii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as the
corruption of our flesh ever leads us to pride and vain confidence, we
may be illuminated by thy word, so as to understand how great and how
grievous is our poverty, and be thus taught wholly to deny ourselves,
and so to present ourselves naked before thee, that we may not hope for
righteousness or for salvation from any other source than from thy mercy
alone, nor seek any rest but only in Christ; and may we cleave to thee
by the sacred and inviolable bond of faith, that we may boldly despise
all those empty boastings by which the ungodly exult over us, and that
we may also so cast ourselves down in true humility, that thereby we may
be carried upward above all heavens, and become partakers of that
eternal life which thine only begotten Son has purchased for us by his
own blood. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Eleventh

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p2"></span>We yesterday compared this passage of
Habakkuk with the interpretation of Paul, who draws this inference, that
we are justified by faith without the works of the law, because the
Prophet teaches us that we are to live by faith, for the way of life and
of righteousness is the same, inasmuch as life is not to be otherwise
sought by us than through the paternal favor of God. This then is our
life — to be united to God; but this union with God cannot be hoped for
by us while he imputes sins to us; for as he is just and cannot deny
himself, iniquity must be ever hated by him. Then as long as he regards
us as sinners, he must necessarily hold us as hateful to him. Where the
hatred of God is, there is death and ruin. It then follows, that we can
have no hope of life until we be reconciled to God, and there is no
other way by which God can restore us to favor, but by regarding and
counting us as just. It hence follows, that Paul reasons correctly, when
he leads us from life to righteousness; for they are two things which
are connected and inseparable.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p3"></span>Hence the error of the Papists comes
to light, who think that to be justified is nothing else but to be
renewed in righteousness, in order that we may lead a pious and a holy
life. Hence their righteousness is a quality. But Paul’s view is very
different, for he connects our justification and salvation together,
inasmuch as God cannot be propitious to us without being reconciled to
us. And how is this done even by not imputing to us our sins. Hence they
speak correctly and truly express what the Holy Spirit everywhere
teaches us, who call it imputative righteousness, for they thus show
that it is not a quality, but, on the contrary, a relative
righteousness, and therefore we said yesterday that he who lives by
faith derives life from another, and that every one who is just by
faith, is just through what is not in himself, even through the
gratuitous mercy of God.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p4"></span>We now then see how suitably Paul
joins righteousness with life, and adduces the Prophet’s testimony to
prove gratuitous justification, who affirms that we are to live by
faith. But it is no wonder that the Papists go in so many ways astray in
this instance, for they even differ with us in the meaning of the word
faith. Hence it is that they so obstinately deny that we are justified
by faith alone. They are forced, as we have said yesterday, to admit the
righteousness of faith; but the exclusive particle they cannot endure;
for they imagine that it is a moulded faith that justifies, and this
moulded or formed faith is piety, or the fear of God. And by calling
faith unformed they seem to think that we can embrace the promises of
God without the fruit of regeneration, which is very absurd, as though
faith were not the peculiar gift of the Spirit, and a pledge of our
adoption. But these are principles of which the Papists are wholly
ignorant; for they are given up to a reprobate mind, so that they
stumble at the very first elements of religion.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p5"></span>But it is sufficient for us, in order
to understand this passage, to know that we live by faith; for our life
is a shadow or a passing cloud; and hence our only remedy is to seek
life from God alone. And how does God communicate this life to us? even
by gratuitous promises which we embrace by faith; hence salvation is by
faith. Now, salvation cannot be ascribed to faith and to works too; for
faith refers the praise for life and salvation to God alone, and works
show that something is due to man. Faith, then, as to justification,
entirely excludes all works, so that they come to no account before God;
and hence I have said that salvation is by faith; for we are accepted of
God by gratuitous remission of sins. The union of God with us is true
and real salvation; but no one can be united to God without
righteousness, and there is found in us no righteousness; hence God
himself freely imputes it to us; and as we are justified freely, so our
salvation is said to be gratuitous.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p6"></span>I will not now repeat what may be said
of justification by faith; for it is better to proceed with the
Prophet’s subject, only it may be necessary to add two things to what
has been said. The Prophet testified to the men of his age that
salvation is by faith; it then follows that they had regard to Christ;
for without relying on a mediator they could not have trusted in God.
For as our righteousness is said to be the remission of sins, so a
sacrifice must necessarily intervene, by which God is pacified, so as
not to impute our sins. They had indeed their sacrifices according to
the law; but these were to direct their minds to Christ; for they were
by no means acceptable to God, except through that Mediator on whom our
faith at this day is founded. There is also another thing: the Prophet,
by distinctly expressing that the just live by faith, clearly shows,
that through the whole course of this life we cannot be deemed just in
any other way than by a gratuitous imputation. He does not say that the
children of Adam, born in a state exposed to eternal death, do recover
life by faith; but that the just, who are now endued with the true fear
of God, live by faith; and thus refuted is the romance about initial
justification. Let us now then proceed -

<span id="iii.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p2"></span>**5.** Yea also, because he
transgresseth by wine, *he is* a proud man, neither keepeth at home, who
enlargeth his desire as hell, and *is* as death, and cannot be
satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all
people.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p3"></span>**5.** Quanto magis (*vel*, etiam certe)
vino transgrediens vir superbus, et non habitabit, quid dilatat quasi
sepulchrum animam suam, et est similis morti, (ipse quasi mors, *ad
verbum*,) et non satiabitur (non satiatur, *significat actum
continuum*,) et colliget ad se omnes gentes, et coacervabit ad se omnes
populos.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet has taught us that a
tranquil state of mind cannot be otherwise had than by recumbing on the
grace of God alone; and that they who elate themselves, and fly in the
air, and feed on the wind, procure for themselves many sorrows and
inquietudes. But he now comes to the king of Babylon, and also to his
kingdom; for in my judgement he speaks not only of the king, but
includes also that tyrannical empire with its people, and represents
them as a great company of robbers. He then says in short, that though
the Babylonians, like drunken men, hurried here and there without any
control, yet God’s vengeance, by which they were to be brought to
nothing, was nigh at hand. What ever therefore the Prophet subjoins to
the end of the chapter tends to confirm his doctrine, which we have
already explained — that the just shall live by faith. We cannot indeed
be fully convinced of this except we hold firmly this principle — that
God cares for us, and that the whole world is governed by his
providence; so that it cannot be but that he will at length check the
wicked, and punish their sins, and deliver the innocent who call upon
him. Unless this be our conviction, there can be no benefit derived from
our faith; we might indeed be a hundred times deceived; for experience
teaches us that the hopes of men, as long as they are fixed on the
earth, are vain and delusive, as they are only mere imaginations. Except
then God governs the world there is no salvation to the faithful; for
God in that case would delude them with vain promises, and they would
flatter themselves with an empty prospect, or hope for that which is
not. Hence the Prophet shows how it is that the just shall live by
faith; and that is because the Lord will defend all who call upon him,
and that inasmuch as he is the just Judge of all the world, he will
finally execute judgement on all the wicked, though for a time they act
wantonly, and think that they shall escape punishment, because God does
not execute upon them immediate vengeance. We now perceive the design of
the Prophet.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p7"></span>As to the words, these two particles,
<span id="iii.iii.ix-p7.1"></span>אף כי, *aph* *ki*, when joined
together, amplify the meaning; and some render them — "how much more;”
others take them as a simple affirmative, and render them “truly.” I
approve of a middle course, and render them “yea, truly;” (*Etiam*
*certe*;) and they are so taken as I think, in <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p7.2"></span>[Ge
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.ix-p7.2"></span>,
Satan thus asked the woman — yea, truly! *Est-ce pour vrai?* for the
question is that of one doubting, and yet it refers to what is certain,
— “How comes it that God should interdict the eating of the fruit? yea,
is it so truly? can it be so? So it is in this place, *yea, truly*, says
the Prophet. That it is an amplification may be gathered from the
context. He had said before that they who elevate themselves, or seem to
themselves to be well fortified, are fearful in their minds, and driven
backwards and forwards. He now advances another step — that when men are
borne along by unrestrained wantonness, and promise themselves all
things, as though there was no God, they surpass even the drunken, being
hurried on by blind cupidity. When therefore men thus abandon
themselves, can they escape the judgement of God? Far less bearable is
such a madness than that simple arrogance of which he had spoken in the
last verse. Thus then are the two verses connected together, — “Yea,
truly, he who in his pride is like a drunken man, and restrains not
himself, and who is even like to wild beasts or to the grave, devouring
whatever meets them — he surely will not at length be endured by God.”
Vengeance, then, is nigh to all the proud, who are cruelly furious,
passing all bounds and without any fear.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p8"></span>But interpreters differ as to the import
of the words which follow. Some render <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p8.1"></span>בוגד, *bugad*, to deceive, and it means so
in some places; and they render the clause thus — “Wine deceives a proud
man, and he will not dwell.” This is indeed true, but the meaning is
strained; I therefore prefer to follow the commonly received
interpretation — that the proud man transgresses as it were through
wine. At the same time I do not agree with others as to the expression
“transgressing as through wine.” Some give this version — “Man addicted
to wine or to drunkenness transgresses;” and then they add — “a proud
man will not inhabit;” but they pervert the sentence, and mangle the
words of the Prophet; for his words are — *By wine transgressing the
proud man*: he does not say that a man addicted to wine transgresses;
but he compares the proud to drunken men, who, forgetting all reason and
shame, abandon themselves unto all that is disgraceful; for the drunken
distinguishes nothing, and becomes like a brute animal, so that he shuns
nothing that is base and unbecoming. This is the reason why the Prophet
compares proud men to the drunken, who transgress through wine, that is,
who observe no moderation, but indulge themselves in excesses. We now
then understand the real meaning of the Prophet, which many have not
perceived.  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p21"></span>As to the word *inhabiting* I take it
in a metaphorical sense, as signifying to rest or to continue in the
same place. The drunken are borne along by a certain excitement; so they
do not restrain themselves, for they have no power over their feet or
their hands: but as wine excites them, so they ramble here and there
like insane persons. As then such an unruly temper lays hold on and
bewilders drunken men, so the Prophet very aptly says that the proud man
never rests.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p22"></span>And the reason follows, (provided the
meaning be approved,) *because he enlarges as the grave his soul he is
like to death*. This is then the insatiableness which he had mentioned —
that the proud cannot be satisfied, and therefore include heaven and
earth and sea within the compass of their desires. Since then they thus
run here and there, it is no wonder that the Prophet says that they do
not rest. *He enlarges* then *as the grave his soul*; and then he adds —
*he heaps together*, or congregates, or collects *to himself all
nations, and accumulates to himself all people*; that is, the proud man
keeps within no moderate limits; for though he were able to make one
heap of all nations, he would yet think that not enough, like Alexander,
who wept because he had not then enjoyed the empire of the whole world;
and had he enjoyed it his tears would not have been dried; for he had
heard that, according to the opinion of Democritus, there were many
worlds. What did he mean? even this “Were I to obtain the empire of the
world, I should still be poor; for if there are more worlds I should
still wish to devour them all.” These proud men surpass every kind of
drunkenness.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p23"></span>We now apprehend the meaning of the
words; and though they contain a general truth, yet the Prophet no doubt
applies them to the king of Babylon and to all the Chaldeans; for as it
has been said, he includes the whole nation. He shows then here, that
the Chaldeans were much worse and less excusable than those who with
great fierceness elated themselves, for their rage carried them farther,
as they wished to swallow up the whole world. But in order to express
this more fully, he says that they were like drunken men; and he no
doubt indirectly derides here the counsels of princes, who think
themselves to be very wise, when either by deceit they oppress their
neighbors, or by artful means seize for themselves on the lands of
others, or by some contrivance, or even by force of arms, take
possession of them. As princes take wonderful delight in their
iniquities, so the Prophet says that they are like drunken men *who
transgress by wine*, that is, who are completely overcome by excessive
drinking; and at the same time he shows the cause of this drunkenness by
mentioning the words <span id="iii.iii.ix-p23.1"></span>גבר יהיר, “proud
man.” As then they are proud, so all their crafts are like the freaks of
drunkenness, that is, furious, as when a man is deprived of reason by
wine. Having thus spoken of the Babylonians he immediately adds —

<span id="iii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p2"></span>**6.** Shall not all these take up a
parable against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to
him that increaseth *that which is* not his! how long? and to him that
ladeth himself with thick clay!

<span id="iii.iii.x-p3"></span>**6.** Annon ipsi omnes super eum
parabolam (*vel* apophthegma) tollent? et dicterium aenigmaticum (*vel*
aenigmatum; *alii* \[הצילמ\] *vertunt* interpretationem; *sed dicemus de
vocibus*) ei (*vel* super eum,) et dicet, Vae qui mutiplicat non sua
(*vel* ex non suis, *qui sese locupletat ex alieno*); quousque? et qui
accumulat (*vel* aggravat) super se densum lutum.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p6"></span>Now at length the Prophet denounces
punishment on the Babylonian king and the Chaldeans; for the Lord would
render them a sport to all. But some think that a punishment is also
expressed in the preceding verse, such as awaits violent robbers, who
devour the whole world. But I, on the contrary, think that the Prophet
spoke before of proud cruelty, and simply showed what a destructive evil
it is, being an insatiable cupidity; and now, as I have stated, he comes
to its punishment; and he says first, that all the people who had been
collected as it were into a heap, would take up a parable or a taunt, in
order to scoff at the king of Babylon. When therefore the Chaldeans
should possess the empire of almost the whole world, and subject to
their power all their neighboring nations, all these would at length
take up against them parables and taunts; and what would be said
everywhere would be this — *Woe to him who increases and enriches
himself by things not his own. How long?* that is, Is this to be
perpetual? All then who thus increase themselves heap on themselves
thick clay, by which they shall at last be overthrown.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p7"></span>With regard to the words, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p7.1"></span>משל, *meshil* is a short saying or a pithy
sentence, and worthy to be remembered, as we have noticed elsewhere.
Some render it parable. As to the word <span
id="iii.iii.x-p7.2"></span>מליצה, *melitse*, it probably signifies a
scoff or a taunt, by which any one is reproved; for it comes from <span
id="iii.iii.x-p7.3"></span>לוף, *luts*, which means to laugh at one or
to deride him. It is indeed true, that the Hebrews call a rhetorician or
an interpreter <span id="iii.iii.x-p7.4"></span>מליף, *melits*; and
hence some render <span id="iii.iii.x-p7.5"></span>מליצה, *melitse*,
interpretation; but it is not suitable to this passage; for the Prophet
speaks here of taunts that would be cast against the king of Babylon.
For as he had as with an open mouth swallowed up all, so also all would
eagerly prick him with their goads, and disdainfully deride him. The
word he afterwards adds <span id="iii.iii.x-p7.6"></span>חידות,
*chidut*, is to be read, I have no doubt, in the genitive case.  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) I therefore do not approve of adding a
copulative, as many do, and read thus — “a taunt and an enigma.” This
word comes from the verb <span id="iii.iii.x-p10.3"></span>חוד, *chud*,
which is to speak enigmatically; hence <span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.4"></span>חידות, *chidut*, are enigmas, or metaphors,
or obscure sentences; and we know that when we wish to touch a man to
the quick, there is more sharpness when we use an obscure word, which
contains a metaphor or ambiguity, or something of this kind. It is not
therefore without reason that the Prophet calls taunts, enigmas, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.5"></span>חידות, *chidut*, that is, obscure words,
which bite or prick men sharply, as it were with goads. Hence in all
scoffs a figurative language ought to be used; and except the expression
be ambiguous or alliterative, or, in short, contain such metaphors as it
is not necessary to recite here, there would be in it no beauty, no
aptness. When therefore men wish to form biting taunts, they obscure
what might be plainly said by some indirect metaphor; and this is the
reason why the Prophet speaks here of a taunt that is enigmatical, for
it is on that account more severe.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p11"></span>*And he shall say*. There is a change of
number in this verb, but it does not obscure the sense.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) The particle <span
id="iii.iii.x-p12.3"></span>הוי may be rendered “woe”; or it may be an
exclamation, as when one is attracted by some particular sight, *caca or
sus*; and so it is taken often by the Hebrews, and the context seems to
favor this meaning, for “woe” would be frigid. When the Prophets
pronounce a curse on the wicked, it is no doubt a dreadful threat; but
what is found here is a taunt, by which the whole world would deride
those haughty tyrants who thought that they ought to have been
worshipped as gods. He! they say, where is he who *multiplies himself by
what belongs to another?* and then, *How long* is this to be? even *such
accumulate on themselves thick clay*; that is, they sink themselves in
deep caverns, and heap on themselves mountains, by which they become
overwhelmed. We now understand the meaning of the Prophet’s words.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p13"></span>What seems here to be the singing of
triumph before the victory is no matter of wonder; for our faith, as it
is well known, depends not on the judgement of the flesh, nor regards
what is openly evident; but it is a vision of hidden things, as it is
called in <span id="iii.iii.x-p13.1"></span>[Heb
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p13.1"></span>, and the substance of things not seen. As
then the firmness of faith is the same, though what it apprehends is
remote, and as faith ceases not to see things hidden, — for through the
mirror of God’s word it ascends above heaven and earth, and penetrates
into the spiritual kingdom of God, — as faith, then, possesses a view so
distant, it is not to be wondered that the Prophet here boldly triumphs
over the Babylonians, and now prescribes a derisive song for all
nations, that the proud, who had previously with so much cruelty exalted
themselves, might be scoffed at and derided.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p14"></span>But were any to ask, whether it be right
to assail even the wicked with scoffs and railleries, the question is
unsuitable here; for the Prophet does not here refer to what is lawful
for the faithful to do, but speaks only of what is commonly done by men:
and we know that it is almost natural to men, that when those whom they
had feared and dared not to blame as long as they were in power, are
overthrown, they break forth against them not only with many complaints
and accusations, but also with wanton rudeness. As, then, it usually
happens, that all triumph over fallen tyrants, and throw forth their
taunts, and all seek in this way to bite, the Prophet describes this
regular course of things. It is not, however, to be doubted, but that he
composed this song according to the nature of the case, when he says,
that they were men who multiplied their own by what belonged to others;
that is, that they gathered the wealth of others. It is indeed true,
that many things are commonly spread abroad, for which there is no
reason nor justice; but as some principles of equity and justice remain
in the hearts of men, the consent of all nations is as it were the voice
of nature, or the testimony of that equity which is engraven on the
hearts of men, and which they can never obliterate. Such is the reason
for this saying; for Habakkuk, by introducing the people as the
speakers, propounded, as it were, the common law of nature, in which all
agree; and that is, — that whosoever enriches himself by another’s
wealth, shall at length fall, and that when one accumulates great
riches, these will become like a heap to cover and overwhelm him. And if
any one of us will consult his own mind, he will find that this is
engraven on his very nature.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p15"></span>How, then, does it happen, that many
should yet labor to get for themselves the wealth of others, and strive
for nothing else through their whole life, but to spoil others that they
may enrich themselves? It hence appears that men’s minds are deprived of
reason by sottishness, whenever they thus addict themselves to unjust
gain, or when they give themselves loose reins to commit frauds,
robberies, and plunders. And thus we perceive that the Prophet had not
without reason represented all the proud and the cruel as drunken.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p16"></span>Then follow the words, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p16.1"></span>עד-מתי, *od-mati*, *how long?* This also is
the dictate of nature; that is, that an end will some time be to unjust
plunders, though God may not immediately check plunderers and wicked
men, who proceed and effect their purposes by force and slaughters, and
frauds and evil-doings. In the mean time the Prophet also intimates,
that tyrants and their cruelty cannot be endured without great weariness
and sorrow; for indignity on account of evil deeds kindles within the
breasts of all, so that they become wearied when they see that wicked
men are not soon restrained. Hence almost the whole world sound forth
these words, How long, how long? When any one disturbs the whole world
by his ambition and avarice, or everywhere commits plunders, or
oppresses miserable nations, — when he distresses the innocent, all cry
out, How long? And this cry, proceeding as it does from the feeling of
nature and the dictate of justice, is at length heard by the Lord. For
how comes it that all, being touched with weariness, cry out, How long?
except that they know that this confusion of order and justice is not to
be endured? And this feeling, is it not implanted in us by the Lord? It
is then the same as though God heard himself, when he hears the cries
and greenings of those who cannot bear injustice.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p17"></span>But let us in the meantime see that no
one of us should have to say the same thing to himself, which he brings
forward against others. For when any avaricious man proceeds through
right or wrong, as they say, when an ambitious man, by unfair means,
advances himself, we instantly cry, How long? and when any tyrant
violently oppresses helpless men, we always say, How long? Though every
one says this as to others, yet no one as to himself. Let us therefore
take heed that, when we reprove injustice in others, we come without
delay to ourselves, and be impartial judges. Self love so blinds us,
that we seek to absolve ourselves from that fault which we freely
condemn in others. In general things men are always more correct in
their judgement, that is, in matters in which they themselves are not
concerned; but as soon as they come to themselves, they become blind,
and all rectitude vanishes, and all judgement is gone. Let us then know,
that this song is set forth here by the Prophet, drawn, as it were, from
the common feeling of nature, in order that every one of us may put a
restraint on himself when he discharges the office of a judge in
condemning others, and that he may also condemn himself, and restrain
his desires, when he finds them advancing beyond just bounds.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p18"></span>We must also observe what he subjoins, —
that the avaricious *accumulate on themselves thick clay*. This at first
may appear incredible; but the subject itself plainly shows what the
Prophet teaches here, provided our minds are not so blinded as not to
see plain things. Hardly indeed an avaricious man can be found who is
not a burden to himself, and to whom his wealth is not a source of
trouble. Every one who has accumulated much, when he comes to old age,
is afraid to use what he has got, being ever solicitous lest he should
lose any thing; and then, as he thinks nothing is sufficient, the more
he possesses the more grasping he becomes, and frugality is the name
given to that sordid, and, so to speak, that servile restraint within
which the rich confine themselves. In short, when any one forms a
judgement of all the avaricious of this world, and is himself free from
all avarice, having a free and unblessed mind, he will easily apprehend
what the Prophet says here, — that all the wealth of this world is
nothing else but a heap of clay, as when any one puts himself of his own
accord under a great heap which he had collected together.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p19"></span>Some refer this to the walls of Babylon,
which were built of baked bricks, as it is well known; but this is too
farfetched. Others think that the Prophet speaks of the last end of us
all; for they who possess the greatest riches, being at last thrown into
the grave, are covered with earth: but this also is not suitable here,
any more than when they apply it to Nebuchadnezzar, that is, to that
sottishness by which he had inebriated himself almost through his whole
life; or when others apply it to Belshazzar, his grandson, because when
he drank from the sacred vessels of the temple, he uttered slanders and
blasphemies against God. These explanations are by no means suitable;
for the Prophet does not here speak of the person of the king alone,
but, as it has been solid, he, on the contrary, summons to judgement the
whole nation, which had given itself up to plunders and frauds and other
evil deeds.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p20"></span>Then a general truth is to be drawn from
this expression that all the avaricious, the more they heap together,
the more they lade themselves, and, as it were, bury themselves under a
great load. Whence is this? Because riches, acquired by frauds and
plunders, are nothing else than a heavy and cumbrous lump of earth: for
God returns on the heads of those who thus seek to enrich themselves,
whatever they have plundered from others. Had they been contented with
some moderate portion, they might have lived cheerfully and happily, as
we see to be the case with all the godly; who though they possess but
little, are yet cheerful, for they live in hope, and know that their
supplies are in God’s hand, and expect everything from his blessing.
Hence, then, their cheerfulness, because they have no anxious fears. But
they who inebriate themselves with riches, find that they carry a
useless burden, under which they lie down, as it were, sunk and buried.

<span id="iii.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
deignest so far to condescend as to sustain the care of this life, and
to supply us with whatever is needful for our pilgrimage — O grant that
we may learn to rely on thee, and so to trust to thy blessing, as to
abstain not only from all plunder and other evil deeds, but also from
every unlawful coveting; and to continue in thy fear, and so to learn
also to bear our poverty on the earth, that being content with those
spiritual riches which thou offerest to us in thy gospel, and of which
thou makes us now partakers, we may ever cheerfully aspire after that
fullness of all blessings which we shall enjoin when at length we shall
reach the celestial kingdom, and be perfectly united to thee, through
Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twelfth

<span id="iii.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p2"></span>**7.** Shall they not rise up suddenly
that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and thou shalt be
for booties unto them?

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p3"></span>**7.** Annon repente consurgent qui te
mordeant, et evigilabunt qui te exagitent, et eris in conculcationes
ipsis?

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet proceeds with the subject
which we have already begun to explain; for he introduces here the
common taunts against the king of Babylon and the whole tyrannical
empire, by which many nations had been cruelly oppressed. He therefore
says that enemies, who should *bite him*,  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) would suddenly and unexpectedly *rise*
*up*. Some expound this of worms, but not rightly: for God not only
inflicted punishment on the king when dead, but he intended also that
there should be on earth an evident and a memorable proof of his
vengeance on the Babylonians, by which it might be made known to all
that their cruelty could not be suffered to go unpunished.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p11"></span>The words, *Shall not they rise
suddenly*, are emphatical, both as to the question and as to the word,
<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>פתע, *peto*, suddenly. We indeed
know that interrogations are more common in Hebrew than in Greek and
Latin, and that they are stronger and more forcible. Our Prophet then
speaks of what was indubitable. He adds, *suddenly*; for the
Babylonians, relying on their own power, did not think that any evil was
nigh them; and if any one dared to rise up against them, this could not
have been so sudden, but they could have in time resisted and driven far
away every danger. They indeed ruled far and wide; and we know that the
wicked often sleep when they find themselves fortified on all sides. But
the Prophet declares here that evil was nigh them, which would suddenly
overwhelm them. It now follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p2"></span>**8.** Because thou hast spoiled many
nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee; because of
men’s blood, and *for* the violence of the land, of the city, and of all
that dwell therein.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p3"></span>**8.** Quia tu spoliasti gentes multas,
spoliabunt te omnes reliquiae populorum propter sanguines hominis et
violentiam terrae, urbis et omnium habitantium in ea.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet here expresses more clearly
why the Babylonians were to be so severely dealt with by God. He shows
that it would be a just reward that they should be plundered in their
turn, who had previously given themselves up to plunder, violence, and
cruelty. Since, then, they had exercised so much inhumanity towards all
people, the Prophet intimates here that God could not be deemed as
treating them cruelly, by inflicting on them so severe a punishment: he
also confirms the former truth, and recalls the attention of the
faithful to the judgement of God, as a main principle to be remembered;
for when things in the world are in a state of confusion, we despond,
and all hope vanishes, except this comes to our mind — that as God is
the judge of the world it cannot be otherwise but that at length all the
wicked must appear before his tribunal, and give there an account of all
their deeds; and Scripture, also, is wont to set God before us as a
judge, whenever the purpose is to allay our troubles. The Prophet now
does the same thing: for he says, that robbers should soon come upon the
Babylonians, who would plunder them; for God, the judge of the world,
would not at last suffer so many plunders to be unpunished.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p7"></span>But it was everywhere known that the
Babylonians had, beyond all bounds and moderation, given themselves up
to plunder, so that they spared no nations. Hence he says, *because thou
hast plundered many nations*; and on this he enlarges; because the
Babylonians had not only done wrongs to a few men, or to one people, but
had marched through many countries. As, then, they had taken to
themselves so much liberty in doing evil, the Prophet draws this
conclusion — that they could not escape the hand of God, but that they
were at length to find by experience that there was a God in heaven, who
would repay them for their wrongs.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p8"></span>He says also, *Spoil thee shall the
remnant of all people*. This admits of two expositions; it may mean,
that the people, who had been plundered by the Chaldeans, would take
revenge on them: and he calls them a remnant, because they were not
entire; but yet he intimates that they would be sufficient to take
vengeance on the Babylonians. This view may be admitted, and yet we may
suppose, that the Prophet takes in other nations, who had never been
plundered; as though he had said — “Thou hast indeed spoiled many
nations; but there are other nations in the world whom thy cruelty could
not have reached. All the people then who remain in the world shall
strive to outdo one another in attacking thee; and canst thou be strong
enough to resist so great a power?” Either of these views may be
admitted; that is, that in the wasted and plundered countries there
would be still a remnant who would take vengeance, — or that the world
contained other people who would willingly undertake this cause and
execute vengeance on the Babylonians; for God would by his secret
influence fulfill by their means his purpose of punishing them.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p9"></span>He then adds, *on account of man’s
blood*; that is, because thou hast shed innocent blood, and because thou
hast committed many plunders; for thou hast not only injured a few men,
but thy daringness and cruelty have also extended to many nations. He
indeed mentions the *earth*, and also the *city*. Some confine these
words to the land of Judea and to Jerusalem, but not rightly; for the
Prophet speaks here generally; and to the land, he joins cities and
their inhabitants.  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p11"></span>But this verse contains a truth which
applies to all times. Let us then learn, during the licentious success
of tyrants, to raise up our minds to heaven’s tribunal, and to nourish
our patience with this confidence, that the Lord, who is the judge of
the world, will recompense these cruel and bloody robbers, and that the
more licentious they are, the heavier judgement is nigh them; for the
Lord will awaken and raise up as many to execute vengeance as there are
men in the world, who by shedding blood will inflict punishment, though
they may not intend to fulfill his purpose. God can indeed (as it has
been often observed) execute his judgements in a wonderful and sudden
manner. Let us hence also learn to restrain our evil desires; for none
shall go unpunished who will allow themselves to injure their brethren;
though they may seem to be unpunished for a time, yet God, who is ever
the same, will at length return on their heads whatever they have
devised against others, as we shall presently see again. He now adds —

<span id="iii.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009)<span id="iii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p2"></span>**9.** Woe to him that coveteth an evil
covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may
be delivered from the power of evil!

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p3"></span>**9.** Vae concupiscenti concupiscentiam
malam domui suae, ut ponat in excelso nidum suum, quo se eripiat e manu
(id est, e potestate) infortunii (mali, ad verbum.)

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p6"></span>Habakkuk proceeds in exciting the king
of Babylon by taunts; which were not scurrilous jests, but contained
serious threatening; for, as it has been already said, the Prophet here
introduces indeed the common people, but in that multitude we are to
recognize the innumerable heralds of God’s vengeance: and hence he says,
*Woe to him who coveteth*, etc.; or we may say, He! for it is a particle
of exclamation, as it has been said: He! thou, he says, who covetest an
evil covetousness to thy house, and settest on high thy nest: but what
shall happen? The next verse declares the punishment.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p7"></span>The clause, *Woe to him who covets an
evil covetousness to his house*, may be read by itself, — that this
cupidity shall be injurious to his house; as though he had said, “Thou
indeed wouldest provide for thy house by accumulating great riches; but
thy house shall find this to be evil and ruinous. So the word <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p7.1"></span>רעה, *roe*, evil, might be referred to the
house; but the verse is best connected by reading the whole together;
that is, that the Babylonians not only provided for themselves, while
they with avidity plundered and collected much wealth from all quarters;
but that they wished also to make provisions for their sons and
grandsons: and we also see, that avarice has this object in view; for
they who are anxiously bent on the accumulation of riches do not only
regard what is needful for themselves to pass through life, but also
wish to leave their heirs rich. Since then the avaricious are desirous
of enriching for ever their houses, the prophet, deriding this madness,
says, *Woe to him who covets an evil covetousness to his house*; that
is, who wishes not only to abound and be satiated himself, but also to
supply his posterity with abundance.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p8"></span>He adds another vice, which is almost
ever connected with the former — *that he may set*, he says, *his nest
on high*; for the avaricious have a regard to this — to fortify
themselves; for as an evil conscience is always fearful, many dangers
come across their minds — “This may happen to me,” and then, “My wealth
will procure for me the hatred and envy of many. If then some danger be
at hand, I shall be able to redeem my life many times;” and he also
adds, “Were I satisfied with a moderate portion, many would become my
rivals; but when my treasures surpass what is common, then I shall be as
it were beyond the reach of men; and when others envy one another, I
shall escape.” So the avaricious think within themselves when they are
ardently bent on accumulating riches, and form for themselves a great
heap like a nest; for they think that they are raised above the world,
and are exempt from the common lot of men, when surrounded by their
riches.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p9"></span>We now then see what the Prophet means:
*Woe*, he says, *to him who wickedly and intemperately covets*. And why
does he so do? To enrich his posterity. And then he adds, to him who
covets that *he may set his nest on high*; that is, that he may by
wealth fortify himself, that he may be able to drive away every danger,
and be thus exempt from every evil and trouble. And he adds, *that he
may deliver himself from the power of evil*; he expresses now more
clearly what I have said — that the rich are inebriated with false
confidence, when they surpass all others; for they think not themselves
to be mortals, but imagine that they have another life, as though they
had a world of their own, free from all dangers. But while the
avaricious thus elevate themselves by a proud confidence, the Prophet
derides their madness. He then subjoins their punishment —

<span id="iii.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p2"></span>**10.** Thou hast consulted shame to
thy house by cutting off many people, and hast sinned *against* thy
soul.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p3"></span>**10.** Consultasti in ignominiam domui
tuae (vel, conflasti tuo consilio probrum et dedecus domui tuae)
exidendo populos multos; et peccasti in animam tuam.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet again confirms the truth,
that those who count themselves happy, imagining that they are like God,
busy themselves in vain; for God will turn to shame whatever they think
to be their glory, derived from their riches. The avaricious indeed
wish, as it appears from the last verse, to prepare splendor for their
posterity, and they think to render illustrious their race by their
wealth; for this is deemed to be nobility, that the richer any one is
the more he excels, as he thinks, in dignity, and the more is he to be
esteemed by all. Since, then, this is the object of almost all the
avaricious, the Prophet here reminds them, that they are greatly
deceived; for the Lord will not only frustrate their hopes, but will
also convert their glory into shame. Hence he says, that they consult
shame to their family.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p7"></span>He includes in the word *consult*, all
the industry, diligence, skill, care, and labor displayed by the
avaricious. We indeed see how very sagacious they are; for if they smell
any gain at a distance, they draw it to themselves, night and day they
form new designs, that they may circumvent this person and plunder that
person, and accumulate into their heap whatever money they can find, and
also that they may join fields to fields, built great palaces, and
secure great revenues. This is the reason why the Prophet says, that
they *consult shame*. What is the object of all their designs? for they
are, as we have said, very sharp and keen-sighted, they are also
industrious, and torment themselves day and night with continual labor;
for what purpose are all these things? even for this, that their
posterity may be eminent, that their nobility may be in the mouth of
all, and spread far and wide. But the Prophet shows that they labor in
vail; for God will turn to shame whatever they in their great wisdom
contrived for the honor of their families. The more provident then the
avaricious are, the more foolish they are, for they consult nothing but
disgrace to their posterity.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p8"></span>He adds, *though thou cuttest off many
people*. This seems to have been expressed for the sake of anticipating
an objection; for it might have seemed incredible that the Babylonians
should form designs disgraceful to their posterity, when their fame was
so eminent, and Babylon itself was like an idol, and the king was
everywhere regarded with great reverence and also fear. Since then the
Babylonians had made such advances, who could have thought it possible
that what the Prophet declares here should take place? But, as I have
already said, he meets these objections, and says, “Though the
Babylonians shall conquer many enemies, and overthrow strong people, yet
this will be of no advantage to them; nay, even that will turn out to
their disgrace which they think will be to their glory.”

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9"></span>To the same purpose is what he adds,
*thou hast sinned against thy soul*. Some give this version, “Thou hast
sinned licentiously” or immoderately; others, “Thy soul has sinned,” but
these pervert the Prophet’s meaning; for what he intended was nothing
else but the evils which the avaricious and the cruel bring on
themselves, and which will return on their own heads. When therefore the
Babylonians contrived ruin for the whole world, the Prophet predicts
that an end, very different from what they thought, would be to them:
*thou hast sinned*, he says, *against thine own soul*;  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) that is, the evil which thou didst
prepare to bring on others, shall be made by God to fall on thine own
head.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p11"></span>And this kind of declaration ought to
be carefully noticed; that is, that the ungodly, while they trouble all,
and harass all, while they torment one, plunder another, oppress
another, do always sin against their own souls; that is, they do not
cause so such loss and sorrow to others as to themselves: for the Lord
will make the evil they intend for others to return on themselves. He
does not speak here of guilt, but of punishment, when he says, “Thou
hast sinned against thy soul;” that is, thou shalt receive the reward
due to all thy sins. We now then see what the Prophet means. It now
follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p2"></span>**11.** For the stone shall cry out of
the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p3"></span>**11.** Quia lapis ex muro clamabit,
et lignum ex tabulato (ad verbum est, ex ligno,) respondebit ei.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p4"></span>**12.** Woe to him that buildeth a
town with blood, and stablisheth a city by iniquity!

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p5"></span>**12.** Vae aedificanti urbem in
sanguinibus, et paranti civitatem in iniquitate.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p6"></span>**13.** Behold, *is it* not of the
LORD of hosts that the people shall labour in the very fire, and the
people shall weary themselves for very vanity?

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p7"></span>**13.** Annon ecce a Jehova
exercituum? ideo laborabunt populi in igne et gentes in vanitate (hoc
est, frustra fatigabuntur.)

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p9"></span><span id="iii.iii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p10"></span>There is here introduced by the
Prophet a new personification. He had before prepared a common song,
which would be in the mouth of all. He now ascribes speech to stones and
wood, of which buildings are formed. *The stone, he says, shall cry from
the wall, and the wood from the chamber*; that is, there is no part of
the building that will not cry out that it was built by plunder, by
cruelty, and, in a word, by evil deeds. The Prophet not only ascribes
speech to wood and stone, but he makes them also respond one to the
other as in a chorus, as in lyrics there are voices which take up the
song in turns. *The stone, he says, shall cry from the wall, and the
wood shall respond to it from the chamber*;  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) as though he said, “There will be a
striking harmony in every part of the building; for the wall will begin
and will utter its song, ‘Behold I have been built by blood and by
iniquity;’ and the wood will utter the same, and will cry, ‘Woe;’ but
all in due order; there will be no confused noise, but as music has
distinct sounds, so also the stones will respond to the wood and the
wood to the stones, so that there may be, as they say, corresponding
voices.”

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p14"></span><span id="iii.iii.xvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p15"></span>*The stone*, then, *from the wall
shall cry, and the wood shall answer* — what will it answer? — *Woe to
him who builds a city by blood*, and who adorns *his city by iniquity*.
By blood and by iniquity he understands the same thing; for though the
avaricious do not kill innocent men, they yet suck their blood, and what
else is this but to kill them by degrees, by a slow tormenting process?
For it is easier at once to undergo death than to pine away in want, as
it happens to helpless men when spoiled and deprived of all their
property. Wherever there is wanton plundering, there is murder committed
in the sight of God; for as it has been said, he who spares not the
helpless, but drinks up their blood, doubtless sins no less than if he
were to kill them.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p16"></span>But if this personification seems to
any one strange, he must consider how incredible seemed to be what the
Prophet here teaches, and how difficult it was to produce a conviction
on the subject. We indeed confess that God is the judge of the world;
nay, there is no one who does not anticipate his judgement by condemning
avarice and cruelty; the very name of avarice is infamous and hated by
all: the same may be said of cruelty. But yet when we see the avaricious
in splendor and in esteem, we are astounded, and no one is able to
foresee by faith what the Prophet here declares. Since, then our
dullness is so great, or rather our sottishness, it is no wonder that
the Prophet should here set before us the stones and the wood, as though
he said, “When all prophecies and all warnings become frigid, and God
himself obtains no credit, while openly declaring what he will do, and
when his servants consume their labor in vain by warning and crying, let
now the stones come forth, and be teachers to you who will not give ear
to the voice of God himself, and let the wood also cry out in its turn.”
This, then, is the reason why the Prophet introduces here mute things as
the speakers, even to awaken our insensibility.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p17"></span><span id="iii.iii.xvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p18"></span>Then he adds, *Shall it not be,
behold, from Jehovah of hosts?*  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37)
Some give a wrong version, “Is not this,” as though <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p23.2"></span>הנה, *ene*, were put here instead of a
pronoun demonstrative; but they extenuate and obscure the beauty of the
expression; nay, they pervert the meaning of the Prophet: for when he
says, <span id="iii.iii.xvii-p23.3"></span>הנה, *ene*, behold, he refers
not to what he had said, nor specifies any particular thing, and yet he
shows, as it were by the finger, the judgement of God, which he bids us
to expect; as though he said, “Shall not God at length have his turn,
when the avaricious and the cruel have obtained their triumphs in the
world, and darkened the minds and thoughts of all, as though no account
were to be given by them before the tribunal of God? Shall not God
sometime show that it is his time to interpose?” When, therefore, he
says, *Shall it not be, behold, from Jehovah?* it is an indefinite mode
of speaking; he does not say, This or that shall be from the God of
hosts; but, *Shall it not be, behold, from Jehovah of hosts?* that is,
God seems now indeed to rest, and on this account men indulge themselves
with greater boldness; but he will not always remain still, Shall not
God then come forth, who seems now to be unconcerned? Something there
will at length be from the God of hosts. And the demonstrative particle
confirms the same thing: *Behold*, he says, as though he would show to
the faithful as in a picture the tribunal of God, which cannot be seen
by us now but by faith. He says, *Behold, will not there be something*
from the God of *hosts?* that is, Will not God at length stretch forth
his hand, to show that he is not unconcerned, but that he cares for the
affairs of men? In a word, by this mode of speaking is pointed out to us
the change, which we are to hole for, inasmuch as it cannot be soon
realised.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p24"></span>Hence he concludes, *The people*,
then, *labor in the fire, and the people weary themselves in vain*. To
labor in the fire means the same thing as to take in hand an
unprofitable work, the fruit of which is immediately consumed. Some say
that people labor in the fire, because Babylon had been built by a great
number of men, and at length perished by fire; but this explanation
seems far-fetched. I take a simpler view — that *people labor in the
fire*, like him who performs a work, and a fire is put under it and
consumes it; or like him, who with great labor polishes his own work,
and a fire is prepared, which destroys it while in the hands of the
artifices. For it is certain that the Prophet repeats the same thing in
another form, when he says, <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p24.1"></span>בדי-ריק, *bedi-rik*, with vanity, or for
vanity. We now then apprehend his object.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p25"></span>We may here collect a useful doctrine
— that not only the fruit of labor shall be lost by all who seek by
wicked means to enrich themselves, but also that were the whole world
favorable and subservient to them, the whole would yet be useless; as it
happened to the king of Babylon, though he had many people ready to obey
him. But the Prophet derides all those great preparation; for God had
fire at hand to consume whatever they had so eagerly contrived who
wished to spend all their labor to please one man. He at length adds —

<span id="iii.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** For the earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Quia replebitur terra
cognitione gloriae Jehovae, sicuti aquae operiunt mare.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet briefly teaches us here,
that so remarkable would be God’s judgement on the Babylonians that his
name would thereby be celebrated through the whole world. But there is
in this verse an implied contrast; for God appeared not in his own glory
when the Jews were led away into exile; the temple being demolished and
the whole city destroyed; and also when the whole easterly regions was
exposed to rapine and plunder. When therefore the Babylonians were,
after the Assyrians, swallowing up all their neighbors, the glory of God
did not then shine, nor was it conspicuous in the world. The Jews
themselves had become mute; for their miseries had, as it were,
stupefied them; their mouths were at least closed, so that they could
not from the heart bless God, while he was so severely afflicting them.
And then, in that manifold confusion of all things, the profane thought
that all things here take place fortuitously, and that there is no
divine providence. God then was at that time hid: hence the Prophet
says, *Filled shall be the earth with the knowledge of* God; that is,
God will again become known, when by stretching forth his hand he will
execute vengeance on the Babylonians; then will the Jews, as well as
other nations, acknowledge that the world is governed by God’s
providence, as it had been once created by him.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p7"></span>We now understand the Prophet’s
meaning, and why he says, that the earth would be filled with the
knowledge of God’s glory; for the glory of God previously disappeared
from the world, with regard to the perceptions of men; but it shone
forth again, when God himself had erected his tribunal by overthrowing
Babylon, and thereby proved that there is no power among men which he
cannot control. We have the same sentence in <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p7.1"></span>.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)
The Prophet there speaks indeed of the kingdom of Christ; for when
Christ was openly made known to the world, the knowledge of God’s glory
at the same time filled the earth; for God then appeared in his own
living image. But yet our Prophet uses a proper language, when he says
that the earth shall then be filled with the knowledge of God’s glory,
when he should execute vengeance on the Babylonians. Hence incorrectly
have some applied this to the preaching of the gospel, as though
Habakkuk made a transition from the ruin of Babylon to the general
judgement: this is a strained exposition. It is indeed a well-known mode
of speaking, and often occurs in the Psalms, that the power, grace, and
truth of God are made known through the world, when he delivers his
people and restrains the ungodly. The same mode the Prophet now adopts;
and he compares this fullness of knowledge to the waters of the sea,
because the sea, as we know, is so deep, that there is no measuring of
its waters. So Habakkuk intimates, that the glory of God would be so
much known that it would not only fill the world, but in a manner
overflow it: as the waters of the sea by their vast quantity cover the
deep, so the glory of God would fill heaven and earth, so as to have no
limits. If, at the same time, there be a wish to extend this sentence to
the coming of Christ, I do not object: for we know that the grace of
redemption flowed in a perpetual stream until Christ appeared in the
world. But the Prophet, I have no doubt, sets forth here the greatness
of God’s power in the destruction of Babylon.  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="iii.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are so
inclined to do wrong, that every one is naturally disposed to consider
his own private advantage — O grant that we may confine ourselves by
that restraint which thou layest on us by thy Prophets, so that we may
not allow our coveting to break forth so as to commit wrong or iniquity,
but confine ourselves within the limits of what is just, and abstain
from what belongs to others: may we also so learn to console ourselves
in all our distresses, that though we may be justly oppressed by the
wicked, we may yet rely on thy providence and righteous judgement, and
patiently wait until thou deliverest us, and makes it manifest that
whatever the wicked devise for our ruin, so cleaves to themselves as to
return and recoil at length on their own heads; and may we so fight
under the banner of the Cross, as to possess our souls in patience,
until we at length shall attain that blessed life which is laid up in
heaven for us, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirteenth

<span id="iii.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Hab.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016)<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p2"></span>**15.** Woe unto him that giveth his
neighbour drink, that puttest thy bottle to *him*, and makest *him*
drunken also, that thou mayest look on their nakedness!

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p3"></span>**15.** Vae qui potat socium suum (vel,
amicum;) conjungis (conjungens) calorem tuum (vel, utrem tuum; alii
vertunt, adhibes venenum tuum, vel, iram tuam; alii intendens iram;)
atque etiam inebrias, ut aspicias super nuditates eorum (id est,
verenda.)

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p4"></span>**16.** Thou art filled with shame for
glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of
the Lord’s right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing
*shall be* on thy glory.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p5"></span>**16.** Saturatus es ignominia ex
gloria (vel, pro gloria;) bibe etiam tu et disco-operire (vel,
sopiares;) fundetur super te calix dexterae Jehovae, et vomitus
ignominiae super gloriam tuam.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p7"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p8"></span>This passage, in which the Prophet
condemns the king of Babylon for his usual practice of rendering drunk
his friends, is frigidly interpreted by most expounders. It has been
already often said how bold the Jews are in contriving what is fabulous;
when nothing certain occurs to them, they divine this or that without
any discrimination or shame. Hence they say, that Nebuchadnezzar was
given to excess, and led all whom he could into a participation of the
same vice. They also think that his associates were captive kings, as
though he bid them for the sake of sport to be brought to his table, and
by drinking to their health, forced them to intoxication, that he might
laugh at them when they made themselves base and ridiculous. But all
this is groundless; for there is no history that relates any such thing.
It is, however, easy to see that another matter is here treated of by
the Prophet; for he does not speak of the king only, but he refers to
the whole empire. I therefore doubt not but that this whole discourse,
in which the Babylonian king is condemned for making drunk his
associates or friends, is metaphorical or allegorical. But before I
proceed further on the subject, I shall say something as to the words;
for the meaning of the Prophet will thereby be made more evident.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p9"></span>*Woe*, he says, *to him who gives his
friend drink*; then he adds, <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.1"></span>מספח
חמתך, *mesephech* *chemetak*, "who joinest and bottle.” <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.2"></span>חמה, *cheme*, is taken in Hebrew for a
bottle; and we know, and it is sufficiently evident from Scripture, that
the Jews used bottles of skin, as there are casks and larger vessels
with us. Since, then, they put their wine into bottles, these were often
taken for their cups, as it is in our language, when one says, *Des
flacons, des bouteilles*. Hence some give this explanation — that the
king of Babylon brought forth his flagons, that he might force to
intoxication, by excessive drinking, those who could not and dared not
to resist his will. But others render <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.3"></span>חמה, *cheme*, wrath, with a preposition
understood: and in order that nothing may be understood, some render the
participle, <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.4"></span>מספח, “displaying,” that
is, “his fury.” But as <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.5"></span>חמה, *cheme*,
means to be hot, we may, therefore, properly give this version, “Uniting
thy heat;” that is, “It is not enough for thee to inebriate others,
except thou implicates them with thyself.” We now perceive the meaning
of this phrase. He adds, *And thou also dost inebriate*. We may hence
learn that the Prophet had no other thing in view, but to show that the
king of Babylon sought for himself many associates in his intemperance
or excess: at the same time he takes, as I have said, excess in a
metaphorical sense. I shall presently explain more fully what all this
means; but now we only expound the words. *And thou*, he says, *dost
also inebriate*: the particle <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.6"></span>אף, as
it is well known, is laid down for the sake of amplifying. After having
said, *Thou unitest thy heat*; that is, thou exhales thine intemperance,
so that others also contract the same heat with thyself, he immediately
adds, *Thou inebriatest them*. It follows, *that their nakedness may be
made open*; that is, that they may disclose themselves with shame. The
following verse I shall defer until we shall see more clearly what the
Prophet had in view.  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p16"></span>As I have already said the Prophet
charges the Babylonian king with having implicated neighboring kings in
his own evil desires, and with having in a manner inebriated them. He
indeed compares the insatiable avarice of that king to intemperance; for
as it is the object of drunken men not to drink what may suffice them,
but to glut themselves with wine, so also when avarice is dominant in
the hearts of men, they are seized with a certain kind of fury, like a
person who has an immoderate love for wine. This is the reason for the
metaphor; for the Babylonian king, when he thirsted for the blood of
men, and also for wealth and kingdoms, led into the same kind of madness
many other kings; for he could not have succeeded except he had allured
the favor of many others, and deceived them with vain expectations. As a
person who gives himself up to drinking wishes to leave associates, so
Habakkuk lays the same thing to the charge of the king of Babylon; for
being himself addicted to insatiable avarice, he procured associates to
be as it were his guests, and quaffed wine to them, that is, elicited
their cupidity, that they might join him in his wars; for each hoped for
a part of the spoil after victory. Since, then, he had thus blinded many
kings, they are said to have been inebriated by him. We indeed know that
such allurements infatuate the minds and hearts of men; for there is no
intoxication that stultifies men more than that eager appetite by which
they devour both lands and seas.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p17"></span>We now then apprehend what the Prophet
meant — that the Babylonian king not only burnt with his own avarice,
but kindled also, as it were, a flame in others, like drunken men who
excite one another. As then he had thus inflamed all the neighboring
kings to rush headlong without any consideration and without any shame,
like a person suffocated and overcome by excessive drinking; so the
Prophet designates this inflaming as quaffing wine to them.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p18"></span>And this metaphor ought to be
carefully observed; for we see at this day as in a mirror what the
Prophet teaches here. For all the great princes, when they devise any
plans of their own, send their ambassadors here and there, and seek to
involve with themselves other cities and princes; and as no one is
willing to endanger himself without reason, they set forth many
fallacious allurements. And when any city fears a neighboring prince, it
will seek to fortify itself by a new protection; so a treaty, when
offered, becomes like a snare to it. And then when any inferior prince
wishes to enlarge his borders, or to revenge himself, he willingly puts
on arms, nay, anxiously, that he may be able, by the help of a greater,
to effect his purpose, which he could not otherwise accomplish. Thus we
see that dukes and counts, as they are called, and free cities, are
daily inebriated. They who are chief kings, abounding in wine, that is,
full of many vain promises, give to drink, as it were with full flagons,
bidding wine to be brought forth on a well furnished table — “I will
make thine enemy to give way to thee, and thou shalt compel him
according to thy wish, and when I shall obtain the victory a part of the
spoil shall be allotted to thee; I desire nothing but the glory. With
regard to you, the free cities, see, ye tremble continually; now if you
lie under my shadow, it will be the best security for you.” Such
quaffing is to be found at this day almost throughout the whole of
Europe.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p19"></span>Then the Prophet does not without
reason commemorate this vice in the king of Babylon — that he made those
associates drunk whom he had bound to himself by perfidious treaties;
for as it has been said, there is no intoxication so dangerous as this
madness; that is, when any one promises this or that to himself, and
imagines what does not exist. Hence he not only says, that the
Babylonian king gave drink to his friends, but also that he *joined his
bottles*; as though he had said that he was very liberal, nay, prodigal,
while seeking associates in his intemperance; for if one condition did
not suffice, another was added — “Behold, my king is prepared; but if he
is not enough another will be joined with him.” They thus then join
together their heat. If we take <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p19.1"></span>חמה,
*cheme*, for a bottle, then to join together their bottles would mean,
that they accumulated promises until they inebriated those whom they
sought to deceive. But if the other interpretation be more approved,
which I am disposed to follow, then the meaning would be — *They join
together their own heat*, that is, they implicate others with
themselves; as they burn themselves with insatiable cupidity, so they
spread this ardor far and wide, so that the desires of many become
united.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p20"></span>He afterwards adds — *that thou mayest
see their nakedness*. It was not indeed an object to the king of Babylon
to disclose the reproach of all those whom he had induced to take part
in his wars; but we know that great kings are wont to neglect their
friends, to whom at first they promise every thing. When a king wishes
to entice to himself a free city or an inferior prince, he will say —
“See, I seek nothing but to be thy friend”. We indeed see how shamefully
they perjure themselves; nor is it enough for them to utter these
perjuries in their courts; but not many years pass away before our great
kings make public their abominable perjuries; and it appears immediately
afterwards that they thus seek, without any shame, to mock both God and
all mankind. After testifying that they seek nothing except to defend by
their protection what is right and just, and to resist the tyranny and
pride of others, they immediately draw back when anything adverse
afterwards happens, and the city, which had hoped everything from so
liberal a king, is afterwards forced to submit and to agree with its
enemies, and to manage matters anyhow; thus its *nakedness is
disclosed*. In the same manner also are inferior princes deprived of
their power. And to whom is this to be imputed but to the principal
author? For when any one, for the sake of ambition or avarice, leads
others to inconvenience or to damage, he may justly and correctly be
said to disclose their nakedness. We now apprehend the Prophet’s real
meaning, which interpreters have not understood. I come now to the next
verse —

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p21"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p22"></span>He says that he is *satiated with
shame instead of glory*. Some give this rendering — “Thou art satiated
with shame more than glory;” but this does not suit the passage; for the
Prophet does not mean that the Babylonian king was satiated with his own
reproach, but rather with that of others. Secondly, the particle <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p22.1"></span>מ, *mem*, is not put here in a comparative
sense, but the clause is on the contrary to be understood thus — “By thy
glory, or, on account of thy glory, thou art satiated with shame”. It
must also in the third place be observed, that punishment is not what
the Prophet describes in these words; for it immediately follows — <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p22.2"></span>שתה גם אחה, *shite gam ate*, “drink thou
also.” He comes now to punishment. By saying, then, that the king of
Babylon was satiated with shame on account of glory, it is the same as
though he had said, that while he was intent on increasing his own glory
he brought all others to shame. It is indeed the common game of great
kings, as it has been said, to enlarge their own power at the expense
and loss of others. They would, indeed, if they could, render their
friends safe; but when any one loses ground in their favor they neglect
him. We see how at this day great kings, raising great armies, shed
innocent blood. When a slaughter is made in war they express their
grief, but it is only on account of their own glory or advantage. They
will in words profess that they sympathise with the miserable men who
faithfully spent their life for them, but they have for them no real
concern. As, then, great kings draw human blood, and care nothing when
many perish for their sake, the Prophet justly says, That the king of
Babylon was satiated with shame on account of glory; that is, that while
he was seeking his own glory he was satiated with the reproaches of
many; for many perished on his account, many had been robbed of their
power, or were afterwards to be robbed — for the Prophet refers not here
to what had taken place, but he speaks of things future; and the past
tense of verbs was intended to express certainty; and we know that this
was a common mode of speaking with the Prophets.  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p28"></span>He now adds — *drink thou also*. We
hence see that the king of Babylon was secure as long as he remained
untouched, though his alliance and friendship had proved ruinous to
many. As long then as his kingdom flourished, the king of Babylon cared
but little for the losses of others. Hence the Prophet says — “Thou
shalt also drink; thou thinkest that others only shall be punished, as
though thou were not exposed to God’s judgement; but thou shalt come in
thy turn and drink;” — in what way? He speaks here allegorically of the
vengeance which was nigh the king of Babylon — “Thou, also,” he says,
“shalt drink and become a reproach,” or, shalt be uncovered.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p29"></span>The word <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p29.1"></span>ערל, *orel*, means in Hebrew the foreskin;
and the foreskinned, or uncircumcised, was the name given to the profane
and the base, or the contaminated; and hence many give this rendering —
“Thou also shalt become ignominious;” but others express more clearly
the Prophet’s meaning by this version — “Thou shalt be uncovered.” Yet
their opinion is not amiss who think that there is here a change of
letters, that <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p29.2"></span>הערל, *eorel*,is put
for <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p29.3"></span>הרעל, *erol*; and <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p29.4"></span>רעל, *rol*, means to be cast asleep; and
it well suits a drunken man to say that he is stupefied. But as the
Prophet had spoken of nakedness, I retain the word as it is; and thus
the two clauses will correspond — *Then thou shalt drink and be
uncovered*

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p30"></span>Then follows the explanation — *Poured
forth*  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) *into thee shall be the cup
of Jehovah’s right hand*; that is, “the Lord shall in his time be thy
cup-bearer; as thou hast inebriated many nations, and under the pretense
of friendship hast defrauded those who, being bound to thee by treaties,
have been ruined; so the Lord will now recompense thee with the reward
which thou hast deserved: As thou hast been a cup-bearer to others, so
the Lord will now become thy cup-bearer, and will inebriate thee, but
after another manner.” We indeed know what the Scripture everywhere
means by the cup of God’s hand — even vengeance of every kind. God
strikes some with giddiness and precipitates them, when deprived of all
humanity, into a state of madness; others he infatuates by
insensibility; some he deprives of all understanding, so that they
perceive nothing aright; against others he rouses up enemies, who treat
them with cruelty. Hence the Lord is said to extend his cup to the
wicked whenever he takes vengeance on them.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p32"></span>Therefore he adds — *the reproach of
spewing shall be on thy glory*. The word <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p32.1"></span>קיקלון, *kikolun*, is a compound.  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) We have already seen that <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p33.6"></span>קלוכ, *kolun*, is shame; and now he speaks
of shameful spewing. And this may be referred to the king of Babylon —
that he himself would shamefully spew out what he had before
intemperately swallowed down; or it might be fitly applied to his
enemies — that they would spew in the face of the king of Babylon.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p34"></span>The end of which Habakkuk speaks,
awaits all tyrants, who disturb the world by their cupidity. Ambition
does indeed so infatuate them, that they neither spare human blood, nor
hesitate to endanger their nearest and most friendly associates. Since
then an insatiable thirst for glory thus inflames them, the Prophet
justly allots to them this reward — that they shall receive filthy and
shameful spewing instead of that glory, in seeking which they observed
no limits. Let us now proceed -

<span id="iii.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p2"></span>**17.** For the violence of Lebanon
shall cover thee, and the spoil of beasts, *which* made them afraid,
because of men’s blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city,
and of all that dwell therein.

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p3"></span>**17.** Quia violentia Libani operiet
te et praedatio animalium, quae terruit ea (*vel*, quae contrivit,)
propter sanguines hominis et violentiam terrae, urbis et omnium
habitantium in ea.

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p6"></span>We may hence easily learn, that the
Prophet has not been speaking of drunkenness, but that his discourse, as
we have explained, was metaphorical; for here follows a reason, why he
had denounced such a punishment on the king of Babylon, and that was,
because he had exercised violence, not only against all nations
indiscriminately, but also against the chosen people of God. He had
before only set forth in general the cruelty with which the king of
Babylon had destroyed many nations; but he now speaks distinctly of the
Jews, in order to show that God would in a peculiar manner be the
avenger of that cruelty which the Chaldeans had employed towards the
Jews, because the Lord had taken that people under his own protection.
Since then the king of Babylon had assailed the children of God, who had
been adopted by him, and whose defender he was, he denounces upon him
here a special punishment. We thus see that this discourse is properly
addressed to the Jews; for he intended to bring them some consolation in
their extreme evils, so that they might strengthen their patience; for
they were thereby made to see that the wrongs done to them were come to
a reckoning before God.

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p7"></span>By *Libanus* then we are to understand
either Judea or the temple; for Libanus, as it is well known, was not
far from the temple; and it is elsewhere found in the same sense. But if
any extends this to the land of Judea, the meaning will be the same;
there will be but little or no difference as to the subject that is
handled. *Because the violence* then *of Libanus shall overwhelm thee*

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p8"></span>Then come the words, *the pillaging of
beasts*. Interpreters think that the Chaldeans and Assyrians are here
called <span id="iii.iii.xxii-p8.1"></span>בהמות, *bemutt*, beasts, as
they had been savage and cruel, like wild beasts, in laying waste Judea;
but I rather understand by the beasts of Libanus those which inhabited
that forest. The Prophet exaggerates the cruelty of the king of Babylon
by this consideration, that he had been an enemy to brute beasts; and I
consider the pronoun relative <span id="iii.iii.xxii-p8.2"></span>אשר,
*asher*, which, to be understood before the verb <span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p8.3"></span>יחיתן, *ichiten*, which may be taken to
mean, to tear, or to frighten, Some give this rendering, “The plundering
of beasts shall tear them;” as though he had said, “The Babylonians are
indeed like savage beasts, but they shall be torn by their own
plundering:” but another sense will be more suitable that the plundering
of beasts, which terrified them, shall overwhelm thee; for the same
verb, <span id="iii.iii.xxii-p8.4"></span>יבס, *icas*, shall cover or
overwhelm the king of Babylon, is to be repeated here. He adds at last
the clause, which was explained yesterday. We now perceive the meaning
of the Prophet to be — that the king of Babylon would be justly
plundered, because he had destroyed the holy land and iniquitously
attacked God’s chosen people, and had also carried on his depredations
through almost the whole of the Easter world.  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) It now follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p2"></span>**18.** What profiteth the graven
image that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, and a
teacher of lies, that the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make
dumb idols?

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p3"></span>**18.** Quid prodest sculptile? quia
sculpsit illud fictor ejus conflatile et doctorem mendacii; quia
confidit fictor figmento suo, ut faciat idola muta.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p6"></span>The Prophet now advances farther, and
shows that whatever he had predicted of the future ruin of Babylon and
of its monarchy, proceeded from the true God, from the God of Israel:
for it would not have been sufficient to hold, that some deity existed
in heaven, who ruled human affairs, so that it could not be, but that
tyrants would have to suffer punishment for their cruelty. We indeed
know that such sayings as these were everywhere common among heathen
nations — that justice sits with Jupiter — that there is a Nemesis —
that there is Divine vengeance. Since then such a conviction had ever
been imprinted on the hearts of men, it would have been a frigid and
almost an empty doctrine, had not the Prophet introduced the God of
Israel. This is the reason why he now derides all idols, and claims for
God the government of the whole world, and clearly shows that he speaks
of the Jews, because they worshipped no imaginary gods, as the heathen
nations, but plainly understood him to be the creator of heaven and
earth, who revealed himself to Abraham, who gave his law by the hand of
Moses. We now perceive the Prophet’s design.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7"></span>As then the king of Babylon did
himself worship his own gods, the Prophet dissipates that vain
confidence, by which he might be deceived and deceive others. Hence he
says, *What avails the graven image?* He speaks here contemptuously of
images formed by men’s hands. And he adds a reason, *because the maker
has graven it*, he says. Interpreters give a sense that is very jejune,
as though the Prophet had said, “What avails a graven image, when it is
graven or melted by its artifices?” But the Prophet shows here the
reason why the worship of idols is useless, and that is, because these
gods are made of dead materials. And then he says, “What deity can the
artifices produce?” We hence see that a reason is given in these words,
and therefore we may more clearly render them thus — “What avails the
graven image, when the framer has graven it?” that is, since the graven
image has its origin from the hand and skill of man, what can it avail?
He then adds, *he has formed a molten image*; that is, though the
artifices has given form to the metal, or to the wood, or to the stone,
yet he could not have changed its nature. He has indeed given it a
certain external appearance; but were any one to ask what it is, the
answer would surely be, “It is a graven image.” Since then its nature is
not changed by the work of man, it evidently appears, how stupid and mad
must all those be who put their trust in graven images.  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p12"></span>He then adds, *and a teacher of
falsehood*. He added this clause, because men previously entertain false
notions, and dare not to form a judgement on the matter itself. For, how
comes it that a piece of wood or a stone is called a god? Had any one
asked the sages at Rome or at Athens, or in other cities, who thought
all other nations barbarous, What is that? on seeing a Jupiter made of
silver; or of wood, or of stone, the answer would have been, “It is
Jupiter, it is God.” But how could this be? It is a stone, a piece of
wood, or of silver. They would yet have asserted that it was God. Whence
came this madness? Even from this, because men were bewitched, so that
seeing they saw not; they wilfully closed their eyes, and resolved to be
blind, being unwilling to understand. This is the reason why the
Prophet, by way of anticipation, says, *the artificer has formed* — what
has he formed? *a graven image and a teacher of falsehood*. The material
remains the same, but a false notion prevails, for men think idols to be
gods. How come they to think so? It is no doubt the teaching of
falsehood, a mere illusion. He then confirms the same thing; *the
fashioner*, or the artificer, he says, *trusts in his own work*, or in
what he has formed. How is this? Must they not be void of sense and
reason who trust in lifeless things? “The workman,” as Isaiah says,
“will take his instruments, will form an idol, and then he will bow the
knee, and call it his god; yet it is the work of his own hands.” What!
art not thou thyself a god? thou knowest thine own frailty, and yet thou
createst new gods! Even in this manner does the Prophet confirm what he
had previously said, that men are extremely stupid, nay, that they are
seized with monstrous sottishness, when they ascribe a kind of deity to
wood, or to a stone, or to metal. How so? because they are, he says,
false imaginations.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p13"></span>And he adds, *that he may make dumb
idols*. He again repeats what he had said, — that the nature of the
material is not changed by men’s workmanship, when they form to
themselves gods either from wood or from stone. How so? because they
cannot speak. To the same purpose is what immediately follows; the next
verse must therefore be added. We shall afterwards say something more on
the general subject.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p2"></span>**19.** Woe unto him that saith to the
wood, Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach! Behold, it *is*
laid over with gold and silver, and *there is* no breath at all in the
midst of it.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p3"></span>**19.** Vae qui dicit ligno,
Expergiscere; excitare, lapidi muto (mortuo,) ipse docebit: Ecce, ipse
(*vel* ipsum *lipsum*, *si vefaremus ad lignum*; ipse *ergo*) opertus
est auro et argento; et nullus spiritus in medio ejus.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p6"></span>He pursues, as I have said, the same
subject, and sharply inveighs against the sottishness of men, that they
call on wood and stone, as though there were some hidden power in them.
*They say to the wood, Awake*; for they implored help from their idols.
*Shall it teach?* Some render it thus as a question; but I take it in a
simpler form, “It will teach;” that is, “It is a wonder that ye are so
wilfully foolish; for were God to send to you no Prophet, were there no
one to instruct you, yet the wood and the stone would be sufficient
teachers to you: ask your idols, that is, ascertain rightly what is in
them. Doubtless, the god that is made of wood or of stone, sufficiently
declares by his silence that he is no god. For there is no motion in
wood and stone. Where there is no vigor and no life, is it not right to
feel assured, that there is no deity? There are, indeed, many creatures
endued with feeling and motion; but the God who gives power, and motion,
and feeling to the whole world, and to all its parts, does he not
surpass in these respects all his creatures? Since, then, wood and stone
are silent, they are teachers sufficient for you, provided ye be apt
scholars.”

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p7"></span>We hence see how the Prophet in this
way amplifies the insensibility of men; for they did not perceive what
was quite manifest. The design of what follows is the same. *Behold, it
is covered over with gold and silver*; that is, it is made splendid: for
idolaters think that their gods are better when adorned with gold and
silver; but yet *there is no breath in the midst of them*. “Look,” he
says, “within; look within, and ye shall see that they are dead.”  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) The rest we shall dilate on to-morrow.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as there is
in us so little of right judgement, and as our minds are blind even at
mid-day, — O grant, that thy Spirit may always shine in us, and that
being attentive to the light of thy word, we may also keep to the right
way through the whole course of our pilgrimage, and subject to thee both
ourselves and every action of our life, so that we may not be led by any
allurements into the same ruin with the ungodly, who would deceive and
entrap us, and who lie in wait on every side; but that being ruled by
the counsel of thy Spirit, we may beware of all their intrigues: and may
we, especially as to our spiritual life, be so given up to thee alone,
as ever to keep ourselves far away from the defilements of all people,
and so remain in the pure worship of thy majesty, that the ungodly may
never draw us away into the same delusions with themselves, by which
Satan so mightily deceives them; but may we follow Him as our leader
whom thou wouldst have to be our ruler, even Christ thy Son, until he at
length gathers us all into that celestial kingdom which he has purchased
for us by his own blood. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fourteenth

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p2"></span>We said yesterday, that the Prophet
speaks now of idols, that he might deprive the king of Babylon of his
vain confidence: for though heathens claim everything to themselves and
to their own powers, yet their superstition in some measure dementates
them. Hence the Prophet shows, that that tyrant in vain trusted in his
idols, since they were things of nought. But the reasons by which he
refutes idolatry ought to be noticed: he says, that the artifices, who
formed gods, were not able to change the nature of the material, for the
wood remained wood, and stone continued to be stone, and that the
workmen and artifices in forming it did nothing more than make a molten
image. The material then remained still the same. As to the image
itself, the Prophet says, that it was mere falsehood and deception; yea,
that gods made of wood or of silver, or of any other material, were
instructors and teachers of falsehood, for they allured simple souls:
and Satan spread his snares before men, when he set before their eyes
these visible figures, and persuaded them that they contained something
divine. Then this reasoning of the Prophet ought to be carefully
observed; for he reminds us, that fictitious gods are made of lifeless
and perishable materials, and that images are only the juggleries of
Satan.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p3"></span>That saying of Gregory is common among
the Papists, that images are the books of the ignorant; for such was his
answer to Serenus, bishop of Marseilles, who turned out images from all
the churches (Lib. 9, Epist. 9.) He said that he approved of his object,
in wishing to correct the superstition which prevailed among the people,
but that he had done what was not right in wholly taking away images,
the books of the ignorant. But let us consider whether more faith is due
to Gregory, a man imbued with many errors, (as that age was very
corrupt), or to the Prophet Habakkuk, and also to Jeremiah, who
announces nearly the same sentiment. Though, then, there is some
speciousness in idols, yet the Prophet here reminds us that they are
nothing but the impostures of Satan; for they teach falsehood. The
reason also that is given is deserving of notice — that the workmen put
their hope in what they themselves have formed. And it is indeed a thing
most preposterous, that a mortal man should form his own god, and then
imagine that something divine is enclosed in the very form, for deity is
not in the material. The material is disregarded when unformed; but not
so when it attains a beautiful shape. While the tree grows, while it
produces flowers and fruit, it is deemed, as it really is, a dead thing;
but when a piece of it is formed in the figure of a man, it is believed
to be a god! But it is extremely absurd to suppose that the hand of the
artifices gives deity to a dead material; for the wood is dead, and
nothing is perceived but the shape given to it by man. Since, then, the
artifices trusts in what he has formed, it is what seems beyond anything
strange. It is hence quite evident, that men are wholly demented by the
devil, when they worship their own workmanship.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p4"></span>But now, in order to press the matter
more fully on idolaters, the Prophet upbraids them for calling on the
wood and on the stone to awake. It is certain, that when idolaters bow
the knee before what they have themselves formed, they still imagine
that there are celestial gods; but when before a figure of wood or stone
they call upon God, it is the same thing as though they expected help
from the wood and stone; for the question is not here what idolaters
imagine, but the thing itself is to be regarded; and this is what the
Prophet most fully and plainly condemns. Since, then, the superstitious
are wont to address their prayers to wood and stone, he says, that they
make to themselves gods, to whom they sacrifice. And the Prophet rightly
refers in express terms to this kind of service; for the chief sacrifice
which God bids to be offered to him, and demands from us, is to call on
him; for we thus testify that life and all things belonging to salvation
are found alone in him. Since, then, the majesty of God appears
especially from having this testimony borne to him, that he is the
fountain of life and of all blessings, every one who prostrates himself
before a stone or wood, and implores the aid of a visible god,
transfers, no doubt, the glory of the eternal God to a dead piece of
wood or to a stone. If, then, we wish to be free from every
superstition, let us remember this truth, that then only we have the
only true God, when we direct our prayers and supplications to him
alone, or, in a word, when we call on him alone. When we have recourse
to dead idols, God is deprived of his own right. We may call him God a
hundred times, but we give him an empty title, and one of no value,
except we pray to him alone.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p5"></span>The Prophet, in the last place,
derides the madness of men, by saying that the very idols teach: for, as
it was said yesterday, the clause is not to be read as a question, as
some do; but in order more sharply to reprove the stupidity of men, the
Prophet says, "Doubtless the very figures themselves, except ye are
wholly senseless, will teach you.” He had before said, it is true, that
they were the teachers of falsehood and vanity; but he speaks now of
another kind of teaching, that if men wisely attended to the thing
itself, they might soon learn from a mere view of their gods, that they
were most palpably the deceits of Satan; for if any one looked on the
idols with a clear eye, he would see that they were a dead material, and
would see that great wrong is done to God by transforming him into a
likeness of what is dead.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p6"></span>We now understand the Prophet’s
meaning, when he says, That idols themselves are sufficient, and more
than sufficient teachers, when men are teachable, and lend an attentive
ear. He means not, as it was said yesterday, that idols teach
fallaciously to the destruction of men, while something divine is
ascribed to them; but he says that they teach, if any one of a sane
mind, and free from error, comes to view the idol, and forms a judgement
of the thing itself. But superstition occupies the minds of men; and
hence it is that all become the scholars of Satan, and no one applies
his mind to understand the doctrine he mentions here. In short, idols
teach naturally, and they teach through the artifice and delusion of
Satan. They teach naturally; for by their silence they show that they
are not gods, inasmuch as there is no strength in them. They teach,
also, by the artifice of the devil; for they are made to claim a kind of
divinity, and thus dazzle the minds of men, who are already corrupted by
their own delusions. To the first teaching, of which the Prophet now
speaks, none apply their minds; for almost all renounce nature wholly:
this only lays hold on them — that idols are gods; for they make an
image of the heavenly and eternal God, from whom we are at a great
distance, and who does not otherwise descend to us, except through
visible representations!

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p7"></span>The same truth the Prophet confirms
when he says, that though these gods are covered over with gold and
silver, *there is no breath in them*, or in the midst of them. In short,
he means that they are mere masks; for no divinity can be without life.
As then idols are dead things, it follows that they are the most
palpable impostures of Satan, by which he fascinates the minds of men,
when they thus devote themselves to dead things.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p8"></span>Moreover, whatever is here said
against idols, most certainly applies to the superstitions of popery.
They deny that they give divine honors to their idols; but let us
consider what the Prophet says. They indeed sacrifice to gold and
silver, and then bend their knees before their images, and do not think
that God is near them, except in these figures. Let them show, then,
that the Prophet reasons here foolishly, or let them be held guilty
according to the declaration, as it were, of the Holy Spirit, when they
thus present their prayers before idols. It now follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>**20.** But the Lord *is* in his holy
temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p3"></span>**20.** Jehova autem in templo
sanctitatis suae (*id est*, in templo sancto suo:) sileat a facie ejus
omnis terra.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p6"></span>After having taught us that the
Babylonians were deceived in expecting any help from their idols, and
were deluded by Satan, Habakkuk now recalls the attention of the
faithful to the only true God; for it would not have been enough to take
away from the Babylonians the false confidence which they had in their
idols, except the Israelites, on the other hand, trusting in the grace
of the true God, were fully persuaded that God was on their side, as he
had taken them under his protection.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p7"></span>And we ought carefully to observe
this order; for we see that many boldly deride all the superstitions
which prevail in the world, and at the same time daringly and with
cyclopic fury despise the true God. How many are at this day either
Epicureans or Lucianians, who prate jestingly and scoffingly against the
superstitions of the papacy, but in the meantime they are not influenced
by any fear of God? If, however, we are to choose one of two evils,
superstition is more tolerable than that gross impiety which obliterates
every thought of a God. It is indeed true, that the more the
superstitious toil in their delusions, the more they provoke God’s wrath
against them; for they transfer his glory to dead things; but yet they
retain this principle — that honor and worship are due to God: but the
profane, in whom there is no religion whatever, not only change God from
what he is, but also strive as far as they can to reduce him to nothing.
Hence I have said, that the order which the Prophet observes here ought
to be maintained. For, after having overturned the false illusions of
the devil, by which he deludes the superstitious, by setting before them
a mere shadow in the place of the true God, he now sets up the true
worship of the only true God. Then the Prophet has hitherto been
endeavoring to subvert superstitions, but he now builds up: for except
God, when idols are pulled down, ascends his own tribunal, and shines
there as supreme according to his right, it would be better, at least it
would be more tolerable, as I have said, that superstitions should be
left entire.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p8"></span>He now says that God is *in his own
temple* or palace: this word is often taken for heaven, but is applied
to the sanctuary. Many consider that the reference is made to heaven; as
though the Prophet had said, that the true God, who is the artificer and
creator of heaven and earth, is not to be seen in a visible form, nor
covered over with gold and silver, nor represented by wood or stone; but
that he rules in heaven, and fills heaven with his infinite glory and
this view is by no means unsuitable. But as he here specially addresses
the Jews, it seems to me more probable that he speaks of the temple,
where God then designed to be worshipped, and sacrifices to be offered
to him for it would not have been sufficient to set God, the creator of
heaven and earth, in opposition to the superstitions of all the nations;
but it was also necessary to introduce the contrast between the God of
Israel and all those gods who then had obtained a name and reputation in
the world, as they had been formed by the will of men. The God of Israel
was indeed the creator of heaven and earth; but he had made himself
known by his law, he had revealed himself to men, so that his majesty
was not hidden; for when we speak of God, we are lost except he comes to
us, and in a manner exhibits himself to us; for the capacity of our
understanding is not so great that it can penetrate above all heavens.
Hence the majesty of God is in itself incomprehensible to us; but he
makes himself known by his works and by his word. Now as the Israelites
worshipped, and surely knew that they worshipped the only true God, the
Prophet here rightly confirms them in the hope they derived from the
teaching of the law — that God was their Father, inasmuch as he had
adopted them. If any prefer to take the word for heaven, I do not
object; and that meaning, as I have said, is not unsuitable. But as the
Prophet seems to me to have a special vies to his own people, to whom he
was appointed a teacher; it is more probable that the word, temple or
palace, is here to be understood of the sanctuary.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p9"></span>If any raises the objection that
there is then no difference between the God of Israel and the gods of
the Gentiles, for he also dwells in an earthly habitation, the answer is
obviously this — that though God is said to dwell between the cherubim,
he has not been represented by an image, as though he had anything like
to wood or stone, or possessed any likeness to human bodies. All these
delusions were banished from the Temple; for he commanded his worshipers
to look up to heaven. There was an intervening veil, that the people
might understand that they could not otherwise come to God than through
that celestial model, the and types of which they saw in the altar of
incense, in the altar on which they sacrificed, in the table of the
shewbread, in short, in all other services of the Temple. And there is
another difference to be noticed; for though there was there the golden
altar, though there was there the ark of the covenant, and the altar on
which the victims were immolated, yet inscribed on all these typical
representations was the word of God, by which alone true religion was to
be distinguished from all false inventions. For whatever specious
appearance of reason may therefore be in fictitious modes of worship,
men have no authority to render them lawful; but so much reverence is
due to the only true word of God, that it ought to overrule all other
reasons. And besides, this word, as I have hinted already, did not
retain the Jews in these delusions, but elevated their minds to heaven.
We now then see that there was a wide difference between the Temple
which was at Jerusalem, and the temples which the superstitious had then
built for themselves throughout the world; for God ruled over the Jews,
so that they could not have been deluded. And at this day, where the
word of God shines among us, we can follow it with safety. And, further,
God did spiritually draw to himself his own servants, though he
employed, on account of their ignorance, certain outward elements. Hence
the Prophet justly says, that God was in his palace or his Temple; for
the Israelites knew of a certainty that they did not worship a
fictitious God, since in his law he had revealed himself to them, and
had chosen the sanctuary, where he intended to be worshipped in a
typical, and yet in a spiritual manner.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p10"></span>He then adds, *Let all the earth be
silent before him*. Habakkuk, no doubt, commends the power of God, that
the Israelites might proceed with alacrity in their religious course,
knowing it to be a sufficient security to be under the protection of the
only true God, and that they might not seek after the superstitions of
the nations, nor be carried here and there, as it often happens, by vain
desires. *Keep silence*, then, he says, *let all the earth*. He shows
that though the Israelites might be far inferior to the Babylonians and
other nations, and be far unequal to them in strength, military art,
forces, and, in short, in all things of this kind, yet they would be
always safe under the guardianship of God; for the Lord was able to
control whatever power there might be in the world.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p11"></span>We now see what the Prophet had in
view: for he does not here simply exhort all people to worship God, but
shows, that thought men may grow mad against him, he yet can easily by
his hand subjugate them; for after all the tumults made by kings and
their people, the Lord can, by one breath of his mouth, dissipate all
their attempts, however furious they may be. This, then, is the silence
of which the Prophet now speaks. But there is another kind of silence,
and that is, when we willingly submit to God; for silence in this
respect is nothing else but submission: and we submit to God, when we
bring not our own inventions and imaginations, but suffer ourselves to
be taught by his word. We also submit to him, when we murmur not against
his power or his judgements, when we humble ourselves under his powerful
hand, and do not fiercely resist him, as those do who indulge their own
lusts. This is indeed, as I have said, a voluntary submission: but the
Prophet here shows that there is power in God to lay prostrate the whole
world, and to tread it under his feet, whenever it may please him; so
that the faithful have nothing to fear, for they know that their
salvation is secured; for though the whole world were leagued against
them, it yet cannot resist God. Now follows a prayer: —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc29005.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p8"></span> On my watch-tower, \[<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>משמרתי\]; the word means commonly the
office, or the act of watching, but here it means evidently the place;
the verb "stand” and the corresponding word \[<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p8.2"></span>מצור\] fortress, or citadel, in the next
line, prove clearly that this is its meaning here. The metaphor is taken
from the practice of ascending a high tower, when any messenger was
expected with news. That any locality is meant here is supported by
nothing in the passage. The Prophet puts himself in an attitude of
waiting for an answer from God to the complaints which he had made: and
the metaphor of “tower and citadel” is most beautifully applied by
*Calvin*, and in a very instructive and striking manner. I give this
version —

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p9"></span>On my watch-tower will I stand,  
And I will set myself on a citadel;  
That I may look out to see what he will say to me,  
And what I shall answer to the reproof given to me;  
Literally, to my reproof.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p10"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc29005.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p12"></span> That is, to the chiding, rebuke, or
reproof, given to me. Both *Newcome* and *Henderson* give a version of
this line, which is nearly the same, but seems incongruous, though
*Grotius* agrees with them. The version of the former is as follows: —

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p13"></span>*And what I should reply to my arguing*
with him. *  
The latter renders the line thus:* — *  
And what I shall reply in regard to my argument.*

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p14"></span>The phrase is, \[<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>על-תוכחתי\] upon, (to, says *Drusius*) my
reproof, or rebuke, or chiding. This is the current meaning of the word,
see <span id="iii.iii.ii-p14.2"></span>[2Ki
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p14.2"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.ii-p14.3"></span>[Prov.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#017), [Prov.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p14.3"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.ii-p14.4"></span>[Isa
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p14.4"></span>. He calls it “my,” because given him,
either by his enemies, as *Calvin* thinks, or by God, as some others
suppose. The view of *Piscator* and *Junius* is, that it is the reproof
or correction he administered to the people in chapter 1:2-12. He was
waiting to know what he might have to give as a reply in defense of that
reproof. “And what I may reply as to my reproof,” *i.e.,* the reproof
given by him. In this case, the preceding clause, “What he may or will
say to me,” refers to his complaint respecting the Chaldeans. This is
altogether consistent with the mode in which the Prophets usually write:
reversing the order, they take up first the last subject, and then refer
to the first. He then waited to know two things, how to solve his
difficulties respecting the conduct of the Chaldeans, and how to reply
to his own people for the severe rebuke he gave them. There is much in
this view to recommend it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc29005.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p11"></span> The word means, to open, or make
open. It was to be written in open and plain letters, and on tables or
tablets. These were either of wood or stone, made smooth. The Septuagint
render the word πυξιον, a smooth plank of boxwood, and give the whole
sentence thus: “Write the vision and openly (or plainly — σαφῶς,) on
boxwood.” See <span id="iii.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>[De
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>. So *Junius* takes the word as an adverb,
<span id="iii.iii.iii-p11.2"></span>*perspicue*, perspicuously. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc29005.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p14"></span> It is not a common word that is used:
\[<span id="iii.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>יפח\], “it will breathe.” When
transitively, it signifies, to breathe out or forth, and is rendered
often in our version, to speak; see <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p14.2"></span>[Prov.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#019), [Prov.
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p14.2"></span>. The idea here seems to be the
restoration, as it were, of a suspended life. The vision was to be for a
time like a body without any symptom of life: but “it will breathe,” he
says, “at last,” or at the end; that is, it will live, and manifest life
and vigor. This breathing, or this life, would be its accomplishment.
Corresponding with this idea is ἀνατελι, “it will rise,” by the
Septuagint. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc29005.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p15"></span> \[<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>כזב\], its primary meaning, is to fail,
<span id="iii.iii.iii-p15.2"></span>[Isa
63:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p15.2"></span>; and to fail, in a moral sense, is to
lie, and also to deceive; and the latter meaning is attached to it here
by *Drusius*, *Piscator,* and *Grotius*, <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p15.3"></span>*non fallet*, it will not deceive, *i.e.,*
disappoint. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc29005.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p18"></span> What is here said is very true; but
the words are not the same in Hebrew. The first signifies delay, \[<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>יתמהמה\] rendered “linger” in <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p18.2"></span>[Gen.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#016), [Gen.
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p18.2"></span>. The other verb, \[<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p18.3"></span>יאחר\], means, to put off, to postpone:
and the sense is, that the vision will not be *after* the appointed
time. So the two lines may be thus rendered:

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p19"></span>If it will delay, wait for it,  
For coming it will come, it will not be postponed;

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p20"></span>or, be after, *i.e.,* the appointed
time.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p21"></span>*Dr. Wheeler*, quoted by *Newcome*,
give the right idea, by the following paraphrase:

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p22"></span>It shall not be later than its season.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p23"></span>Both *Jerome* and *Marckius* have
found a grammatical difficulty in this verse from a mistake as to the
gender of \[<span id="iii.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>חזון\], vision; and they
had been evidently led astray by the Septuagint; in which the gender is
changed, and the phrase, “wait for it,” is rendered, “wait for him,”
ὑπομεινον αὐτον; and so as to what follows, “for he that cometh
(ἐρχομενος) shall come.” But \[<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>חזון\] is the masculine gender; it is
elsewhere connected with verbs in that gender. See <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p23.3"></span>[1Sa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p23.3"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.iii-p23.4"></span>[Eze
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p23.4"></span>. Indeed the whole tenor of the passage
admits not of any other construction. It is probable that this mistake
made *Eusebius* and *Augustine* to apply this verse to Christ, and some
to Nebuchadnezzar, in a typical sense. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc29005.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p10"></span> Most authors agree in the main with
*Calvin* in his exposition of this clause. The whole verse is quoted by
Paul in <span id="iii.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>[Heb
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>, nearly *verbatim* from the Scriptures;
only he inverts the clauses, and leaves out the pronoun, “my,” connected
with “faith.” But this clause, as quoted by him, is materially different
from the Hebrew text, as it now exists, though the chief difference
relates to the word \[<span id="iii.iii.vi-p10.2"></span>עפלה\],
rendered elation, or pride, by *Calvin* and many others. Two MSS. give
another reading; one has \[<span id="iii.iii.vi-p10.3"></span>עולפה\],
and the other, \[<span id="iii.iii.vi-p10.4"></span>עלפה\], which means
to swoon, or to faint, or to fail.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p11"></span>This reading would essentially
harmonize the passage, and the context evidently favors it, as well as
the antithesis in the verse itself. As to the rest of the clause the
*meaning* is same with the Septuagint version, as cited by Paul, though
the words are different; and there are other examples in which the
apostle did not alter that version, though varying in words, when the
sense was preserved. To say that man’s soul is not right in him amounts
to the same thing as to say that God is not pleased with him. There is
indeed one MS. which has \[<span id="iii.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>נפשי\],
“my soul,” and not “his soul;” and then \[<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p11.2"></span>ישרה\] is often rendered ἀρεσκειν, to
please, by the Septuagint. See <span id="iii.iii.vi-p11.3"></span>[Nu
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p11.3"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.vi-p11.4"></span>[2Ch
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p11.4"></span>. There would in this case be a complete
identity of words as well as of meaning.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p12"></span>What especially countenances these
readings is, that the alteration would agree better with the preceding
verse. There is an exhortation to wait for the vision, *i.e.,* its
fulfillment. To refer to pride in this connection seems not suitable;
but to mention fainting or failing through unbelief is quite
appropriate; and then as a contrast to this state of mind, the latter
clause is added. Adopting the main alteration, \[<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>עלפה\] instead of \[<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p12.2"></span>עפלה\], (only a transposition of two
letters,) I would render the verse thus —

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p13"></span>Behold the fainting! not right is his
soul within him;  
But the righteous, by his faith shall he live.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p14"></span>The word for “fainting” is in the
feminine gender, either on account of the word “soul” in what follows,
or \[<span id="iii.iii.vi-p14.1"></span>איש\] is understood, the “man of
fainting,” instances of which are adduced by *Henderson* on this verse,
though he retains the word of the present text; as \[<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p14.2"></span>אני תפלה\], “I am prayer,” instead of “I am
a man of prayer.” — <span id="iii.iii.vi-p14.3"></span>[Ps.
109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004), [Jer.
50:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#032), [Dan.
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p15"></span>Now not only the antithesis is here
complete, but the *order* also in which it occurs corresponds with what
is often the style of the Prophets; the first part of the first clause
corresponds with the last part of the second, and the last of the former
with the first of the latter; and not according to Dr. *Henderson*, who
represents the clauses as regularly antithetic. See a similar instance
in <span id="iii.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>[Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>, and also in the first verse of this
chapter. The man who faints, and he who lives by faith, form the
contrast; and the addition “by faith” in the latter clause implies the
fainting to be through want of faith, or through unbelief. Then the soul
that is not right stands in contrast with the righteous, or the just in
the second line. Thus every thing in the verse itself, and in its
connection with what precedes it, is in favor of what has been proposed.
And *Grotius* and *Newcome* seemed disposed to adopt this reading. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc29005.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p9"></span> Though the general meaning of the
beginning of this verse is what most critics agree in, yet the
construction is difficult. The only difference as to the meaning is,
whether the proud man is said to be given to wine, or is compared to
such an one, or to wine itself. *Newcome* takes the first, and gives
this version —

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p10"></span>Moreover, as a mighty man transgresseth
through wine,  
He is proud, and remaineth not at rest.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p11"></span>*Henderson*, agreeing with *Grotius*
and *Mede*, takes the latter sense, and renders the line as follows: —

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p12"></span>Moreoever wine is treacherous;  
The haughty man stayeth not at home.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p13"></span>This is rather a paraphrase than a
version; but this is the meaning of which the words are most capable.
The two first participles need not be connected according to what
*Calvin* proposes. Then the distich may be thus rendered —

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p14"></span>*And truly, as wine is treacherous,  
*So *is the proud man, and he will not rest.*

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p15"></span>Then follows a delineation of his
character —

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p16"></span>Because he enlarges as the grave his
desire,  
And he is like death and cannot be satisfied;  
For he gathers to himself all the nations,  
And collects to himself all the people.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p17"></span>As to wine being treacherous, see <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p17.1"></span>[Pr
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.ix-p17.1"></span>. Wine is pleasant to the taste and
inviting in its color, but degrading, when taken immoderately, in its
effects; so a proud and arrogant man is at first glittering and
plausible, and splendid in his appearance, but afterwards cruel and
oppressive. This seems to be the most obvious similitude, as contained
in the passage.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p18"></span>*Parkhurst* renders the two first lines
as follows —

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p19"></span>*Yea,* as *when wine deceiveth a man,  
*So *he is proud, and is not at rest.*

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p20"></span>He interprets “proud,” as meaning
“intoxicated with power and dominion,” and refers to <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p20.1"></span>[Da
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iii.ix-p20.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc29005.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p7.7"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p8"></span> This can hardly be allowed; for in this
case the final letter of the previous word must have been \[<span
id="iii.iii.x-p8.1"></span>ת\] and not \[<span
id="iii.iii.x-p8.2"></span>ה\]. It is a word evidently in appostion,
designing the character of the proverb and the taunt, they being
enigmas, conveyed in a highly figurative language. The whole verse may
be thus rendered —

<span id="iii.iii.x-p9"></span>*Shall not these, all of them,  
Raise against him a proverb and a taunt* —*  
Enigmas for him;  
Yea, say will* every one —*  
“Woe to him who multiplies* what *is not his own! how long!  
“And to him who accumulates on himself thick clay!”*

<span id="iii.iii.x-p10"></span>To render the last word \[<span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.1"></span>עבטיט\], (or \[<span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.2"></span>עב טיט\], apart, as given by ten MSS.,)
“pledges,” as it is done by *Newcome* and *Henderson*, does not comport
at all with the rest of the passage. The Septuagint favor the common
explanation, and also the *Vulgate*, and most commentators. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc29005.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p12"></span> It is rendered impersonally by *Jerome*
“<span id="iii.iii.x-p12.1"></span>et dicetur — and it shall be said.”
*Junius* introduces a question, and supposed the just, who lives by
faith to be referred to — “And shall not he, *i.e.,* the just, say?” But
*Marckius* considers that God is the speaker — “And he, *i.e.,* God,
shall say.” But the most obvious construction is, that each one of the
nations previously mentioned is introduced as speaking — “<span
id="iii.iii.x-p12.2"></span>Unusquisque illorum — every one of them,” is
understood, says *Piscator*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc29005.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p7"></span> This is rendered by *Henderson*,
"that have lent thee on usury;” but incorrectly, as the corresponding
clause is found in the following, and not, as he ays, in the preceding
line. The literal version is as follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p8"></span>Shall not suddenly arise thy biters,  
And awake thy tormentors,  
And thou become for spoils to them?

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p9"></span>Now, the two corresponding words are
“biters” and “tormentors;” and the idea of lending on usury cannot be
admitted; and the common meaning of the word \[<span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p9.1"></span>נשך\], is to bite, and means lending on
usury only in Hiphil. What the Septuagint gives is δακνοντες — biters.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p10"></span>Here is an instance of the peculiar
manner of the Prophets, and also of the writers of the New Testament;
the most obvious act is mentioned first “arise,” and then what is
previous to it, “awake.” There is also a similar difference in “biters”
and “tormentors,” or those who vex and harass: to torment or vex is not
so great an evil as to bite, as it were, like a serpent; for such is the
biting meant here. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc29005.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p10"></span> So *Grotius*, *Drusius*, and
*Henderson* regard the passage: the land, and the city, are supposed to
have been used poetically for lands and cities. The word rendered
“violence,” \[<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>חמס\], means an unjust
or wrong act done by force, an outrage, a violent injustice: hence
*Grotius* rightly renders it here, “<span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p10.2"></span>direptionem — robbing, pillaging, or
plundering.” While *Newcome* and others apply the passage to Judea and
Jerusalem, the Septuagint version would lead us to suppose that Babylon
was intended. The view taken here would be the most probable, were it
not that the words are repeated at the end of verse 17; and there
clearly they refer to the land of Judea and Jerusalem. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc29005.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p10"></span> Literally, “sinning thy soul.” We
have in <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.1"></span>[Pr
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.1"></span>, \[<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.2"></span>הטאי\], “my sinner,” rendered no doubt
correctly, “he that sinneth against me.” So here “sinning thy soul,”
means “sinning against thy soul.” See the same words in <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.3"></span>[Pr
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.3"></span>. In <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.4"></span>[Nu
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.4"></span>, the preposition \[<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.5"></span>ב\] is before “souls.” “Thy soul hath
sinned,” as given by the Septuagint, and adopted by *Newcome*, does not
convey the meaning; for to sin against our souls, is to injure ourselves
so as to bring down judgment, as in the case mentioned in <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.6"></span>[Nu
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.6"></span>, while the other phrase conveys only the
idea of doing what is wrong. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc29005.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p11"></span> The word rendered here “Wood,” <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p11.1"></span>*lignum*, is \[<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p11.2"></span>כפיס\], and only found here. The
Septuagint has κανθαρος, a beetle, — *Sym.* συνδεσμος, bond, tie, or
joint, — *Theod.* ἔνδεσμος, bandage or jointing. The context shows that
it must be something connected with wood-building. *Parkhurst* says,
that it is a verb in Syriac, and means to connect, to fasten together,
and he renders it a beam or a rafter, which would exactly suit this
place. The word, \[<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p11.3"></span>מעף\], “from the
wood,” evidently means the wood-building or wood-work. So that <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p11.4"></span>*tabulatum*, a story or a chamber in a
building, as rendered by *Calvin*, is not amiss. Perhaps the best
version would be, —

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p12"></span>And the beam from the wood-work
answers it.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p13"></span>*Bochart* says, that \[<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p13.1"></span>כפיס\], in Rabbinical writings, means a
brick, and that it was usual formerly, as it was in this country not
long ago, to build with bricks and wood or timber together; and
*Henderson* has adopted this meaning, but the other is more
satisfactory. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc29005.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p19"></span> The construction of the first line
of this verse, as given by *Calvin*, is stiff and unnatural. There is no
doubt but that \[<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p19.1"></span>הנה\] is a pronoun
in the plural number, and so it has been taken by the Septuagint, ταυτα,
these things, and such is the rendering of the Syriac and Arabic
versions. No improvement, perhaps, can be made on *Newcome’s* rendering
of this verse, —

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p20"></span>*Are not these things from Jehovah*
God *of hosts,  
That people should labor for the fire,  
And nations should weary themselves for a vain thing?*

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p21"></span>The intimation is, that all the
buildings erected by blood and prepared by iniquity, were destined for
the fire. “For the fire,” \[<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p21.1"></span>בדי
אש\], literally is, for the supply of fire, as *Parkhurst* renders the
phrase: then it is, for the supply of emptiness or vacuity, \[<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p21.2"></span>ברי ריק\].

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p22"></span>The last two lines, with some
variety, are found in <span id="iii.iii.xvii-p22.1"></span>[Jer
51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058)<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p22.1"></span>, and applied to Babylon. In Jeremiah,
“for a vain thing,” is in the first line, and “for the fire” is in the
second. Jeremiah puts the less evil first, and the greatest last; but
Habakkuk’s usual manner is the reverse, which has been before noticed,
and we find an instance in the preceding verse, where he mentions
“blood” first, and in the next line, “iniquity.”

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p23"></span>That the destination of Babylon for
the fire is here meant, seems evident from the following verse. See
<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p23.1"></span>[Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p23.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc29005.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p8"></span> The idea is nearly the same, though
not the words. The verse in Isaiah is literally this —

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p9"></span>For fill the earth shall the
knowledge of Jehovah,  
Like the waters spreading over the sea.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p10"></span>The verb rendered “cover” here and
in Isaiah is, \[<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p10.1"></span>כסה\], which means
first to spread, and in the second place to cover, as the effect of
spreading. It is followed here by \[<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p10.2"></span>על\], over, and by \[<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p10.3"></span>ל\], over, in Isaiah; and so spreading
must be the idea included in the verb. The comparison in Isaiah is
between knowledge and waters, and the earth and the sea. Hence the
common version does not properly present the comparison. The verb
\[<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p10.4"></span>מלא\], is used in a passive and
active sense. See <span id="iii.iii.xviii-p10.5"></span>[Ge
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p10.5"></span>, and <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p10.6"></span>[Gen.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#022), [Gen.
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p10.6"></span>. This verse may be rendered in *Welsh*
word for word, without changing the order in one instance: —

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p11"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p11.1"></span>Canys henwa y ddaear wybodaeth o
Jehova,  
Vel y dyvroedd dros y more yn ymdaenu.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p12"></span>“The knowledge of Jeohovah,” \[<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p12.1"></span>דעה את-יהוה\], is not an instance of a
genitive case by juxtaposition, which is common both in Hebrew and in
Welsh; for \[<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p12.2"></span>את\] here must be a
preposition, “from,” for it is sometimes used for \[<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p12.3"></span>מאת\]. It is a knowledge that was to
come from Jehovah, and not a knowledge of Jehovah. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc29005.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p13"></span> There is no reason to doubt but
that this is the meaning of the sentence here: and it is a striking
instance of the variety of meaning which belongs to similar expressions,
when differently connected. The glory of God is manifested by judgments
as well as by mercies. In Isaiah it is “the knowledge of or from
Jehovah;” here the expression is, “the knowledge of the glory of
Jehovah.” By “the knowledge of Jehovah” is to be understood the
revelation made by the gospel. But by “the knowledge of his glory” is
meant evidently the display of his power in destroying Babylon, as power
is often signified by glory. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc29005.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.7"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p10"></span> The rendering of this verse has been
various, though most agree as to its import. *Grotius*, *Marckius*, and
*Henderson*, take nearly the same view of its meaning as *Calvin*,
regarding it as metaphorical. But *Marckius* thinks that the drunkenness
which the king of Babylon produced, means the evils which he inflicted
on other nations. To make a nation drunk was to subdue and oppress it.
See <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Isa.
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>; <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p10.2"></span>[Jer.
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#016),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#028), [Jer.
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039),
[57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p10.2"></span>. This view is confirmed by the following
verse, where the king of Babylon is threatened with a similar judgment;
he was also to drink of the cup of Jehovah’s right hand. As he made
other nations drunk, so the Lord threatens him with a like visitation.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p11"></span>The verse will admit of a much simpler
rendering than what has been commonly offered, such as the following: —

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p12"></span>Woe to him who makes his neighbor to
drink,  
Who adds his bottle, and also strong drink,  
In order that he may look on their nakedness.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p13"></span>To render \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p13.1"></span>חמה\], wrath, or heat, or gall, or poison,
as some have done, is to introduce an idea foreign to the context, and
the word is often found to signify the bottle of skin in which wine was
kept. *Newcome* renders it “flagon.” By mentioning bottle, abundance of
wine was probably intended, and to this abundance was added the strong
drink, \[<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p13.2"></span>שכר\], intoxicating liquor.
It is commonly rendered as though it were a verb in Hiphil; but it is
not so. It means here no doubt, as in other places, strong drink. This
line is only an application, as we find often in the Prophets, of the
preceding line.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p14"></span>Though there is no MS. which has “his”
instead of “thy” connected with “bottle,” yet the preceding and the
following lines seem to require it; and this is the reading of
*Symmachus* and of the *Vulgate*. The change of persons, it is true, is
very common in the Prophets, but not in such a way as we find here, the
third person being adopted both in the preceding and in the following
line.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p15"></span>The idea of drinking as a judgment may
have arisen from the cup of malediction given to criminals before their
execution. See also <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p15.1"></span>[Ps
75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p15.1"></span>. Babylon is in <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p15.2"></span>[Jer
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p15.2"></span>, represented as “a golden cup” in God’s
hand to make the nations drunken. It was “golden” to signify an outward
appearance that was plausible, and alluring. So the mystic Babylon is
said to have a golden cup, which was full of all abominations, <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p15.3"></span>[Re
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p15.3"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc29005.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p23"></span> The view presented here of the first
clause of the verse is striking, and such as the words may admit. But
most commentators attach to them another meaning. *Newcome’s* version is
—

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p24"></span>Thou art filled with shame instead of
glory.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p25"></span>*Henderson’s* rendering is —

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p26"></span>Thou art filled with shame, not with
glory.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p27"></span>The verb being in the past tense seems
to favor *Calvin’s* view — “Thou hast been satiated with shame from
glory,” that is, thou hast been filled to satiety with the shame
occasioned to others, arising from the pursuit of thine own glory. And
then, as *Calvin* justly observes, his punishment is denounced. — “Drink
thou also.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc29005.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p31"></span> The verb \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p31.1"></span>תסוב\], loosely expressed here, is very
correctly rendered by *Henderson* “shall come round;” and this is the
idea which *Calvin* suggests in the following explanation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc29005.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p33"></span> It is commonly derived from \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p33.1"></span>קי\], a contraction of \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p33.2"></span>קיא\], a vomit or spewing, and \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p33.3"></span>קלוז\], shame. Compounds are no common
things in Hebrew; and these are found separate in nine MSS. The
*Septuagint* have ἀτιμια, reproach only; and the *Vulgate*, “<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p33.4"></span>vomitus ignominiae — the spewing of
shame.” *Newcome* renders it “foul shame,” and *Henderson* “great
ignominy,” regarding it as a reduplicate noun for \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p33.5"></span>קלקלוז\]. But as drunkenness is the
metaphor used, “shameful spewing,” or the spewing of shame or of
reproach is most suitable to the passage. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc29005.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p8.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p9"></span> It is commonly agreed, that Libanus
here means either the temple or the land of Judah; most probably the
last, according to the opinion of *Jerome*, *Drusius*, and others. The
“violence,” or outrage, of Libanus, means the violence *done* to it, as
*Newcome* and others render the clause. The next line is more difficult:
if the verb be retained as it is, we must either adopt what *Calvin* has
proposed, and after him *Drusius*, or take the \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p9.1"></span>ו\] at the beginning as a particle of
comparison, according to what is done by *Henderson*, “As the
destruction of beasts terrifieth them.” But to preserve the parallelism
of the two lines, it would be better to adopt the correction of all the
early versions, *Sept. Arab. Syr.* and also of the *Chald.* *par.;*
which substitute \[<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p9.2"></span>ד\] for \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p9.3"></span>ז\] and make the verb to be \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p9.4"></span>יחיתד\]: and there are two MSS. which have
\[<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p9.5"></span>יחת\]. In this case the rendering
would be the following —

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p10"></span>Because the violence done to Libanus
shall overwhelm thee;  
And the depredation done to the beasts shall rend thee;  
On account of the blood of men, and of violence to the land,  
To the city, and to all who dwelt in it.

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p11"></span>The reason men are called “beasts” is
because Libanus is mentioned which was inhabited by beasts; and in the
two following lines the statement is more clear, and according to the
order usually observed, “the depredation done to beasts” is “the blood
of men;” and “the violence to Libanus” is “violence to the land.” And
then, as it is often the case in the Prophets, there is an addition made
to the two last lines, “To the city,” etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc29005.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8"></span> Rightly to understand this verse, it
is necessary to remember that the graven and the molten image was the
same; it was first graven and then covered with some metal, either of
gold or of silver. See Note on <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>[Micah
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>, vol. 3, p. 167.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9"></span>This verse, as given in our version
and in that of *Newcome*, presents hardly a meaning; and *Henderson* is
not justified in the peculiar sense he gives to the particle \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>כי\], taking it as a relative pronoun.
The rendering of *Calvin* gives an evident and a striking sense. The
verse may be thus literally rendered —

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p10"></span>18. **What avails the graven image?
—  
For its graver has formed it, —  
The molten image and the teacher of falsehood?  
For trust in it does the former of its form,  
After having made dumb idols.**

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p11"></span>The last line show that the singular
number before used is to be taken in a collective sense: and the
preposition \[<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>ל\] before an
infinitive has sometimes the meaning of “after.” See <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p11.2"></span>[Ex
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p11.2"></span>, “When he has made,” etc., is the
rendering of *Grotius*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc29005.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8"></span> With the exception of the clause, “It
will teach,” there is a general agreement in the mode of rendering this
verse. “Shall it teach,” is *Newcome’s* version. *Henderson* considers
it to be ironical, “It teach!” *Grotius* agrees with *Calvin*, “It will
itself teach thee,” that is, that it is deaf, and no god. I regard the
verse as capable of a simpler and more literal rendering, as follows:

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p9"></span>19. *Woe to him who saith to the wood,
“Awake, Arise;”  
To the dumb stone, “It will teach:”  
Behold, it is covered with gold and silver!  
Yet there is no breath within it.*

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p10"></span>The two verbs, “Awake, Arise,” stand
connected with “wood,” and they are so given in the Septuagint; and
there is a striking contrast between the dumb stone and teaching. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc29006)
