[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29010)  [Next](cc29012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-fourth

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Woe to her that is filthy and
polluted, to the oppressing city!

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Vae pollutae et inquinatae, urbi
direptrici (*vel*, fraudatrici.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span>**2.** She obeyed not the voice; she
received not correction; she trusted not in the LORD; she drew not near
to her God.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Non audivit ad vocem; non suscepit
disciplinam (*vel*, correctionem;) in Iehova non est confisa; ad Deum
suum non appropinquarit.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span>The Prophet speaks here again against
Jerusalem; for first, the Jews ought ever to have been severely
reproved, as they were given to many sins; and secondly, because there
was always there some seed which needed consolation: and this has been
the way pursued, as we have hitherto seen, by all the Prophets. But we
must also bear in mind, that the books now extant were made up of
prophetic addresses, that we might understand what was the sum of the
doctrine delivered.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span>The Prophet here makes this charge against
the Jews, that they were *polluted and become filthy*. And he addresses
Jerusalem, where the sanctuary was; and it might therefore seem to have
been superior to other cities; for God had not in vain chosen that as
the place for his worship. But the Prophet shows how empty and
fallacious was any boasting of this kind; for the city which God had
consecrated for himself had polluted itself with many sins. The Prophet
seems to allude to the ancient rites of the law, which, though many, had
been prescribed, we know, by God, that the people might observe a holy
course of life: for the ceremonies could not of themselves wash away
their filth; but the people were instructed by these external things to
worship God in a holy and pure manner. As then they often washed
themselves with water, and as they carefully observed other rites of
outward sanctity, the Prophet derides their hypocrisy, for they did not
regard the real design of the ceremonies. Hence he says, that they were
polluted, though in appearance they might be deemed the most pure; for
they were defiled as to their whole life.  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p15"></span>He adds that the city was <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p15.1"></span>היונה, *eiune*; some render it the city of
dove, or, a dove; for the word has this meaning: and they take it
metaphorically for a foolish and thoughtless city, as we find it to be
so understood in <span id="iv.iv.ii-p15.2"></span>[Ho
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p15.2"></span>;
where Ephraim was said to be a dove, because the people were void of
reason and knowledge, and of their own accord exposed themselves to
traps and snares. Some then consider this place to have this meaning, —
that Jerusalem, which ought to have been wise, was yet wholly fatuitous
and foolish. But it may be easily gathered from the context, that the
Prophet means another thing, even this, — that Jerusalem was given to
plunder and fraud; for the verb <span id="iv.iv.ii-p15.3"></span>ינה,
*ine*, signifies to defraud and to take by force what belongs to
another; and it means also to circumvent as well as to plunder. He
therefore means no doubt, that Jerusalem was a city full of every kind
of iniquity, as he had before called it a polluted city; and then he
adds an explanation.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p16"></span>The Prophet in the first verse seems to
have in view the two tables of the law. God, we know, requires in the
law that his people should be holy; and then he teaches the way of
living justly and innocently. Hence when the Prophet called Jerusalem a
polluted city, he meant briefly to show that the whole worship of God
was there corrupted, and that no regard for true religion flourished
there; for the Jews thought that they had performed all their duty to
God, when they washed away their filth by water. Such was the extremely
foolish notion which they entertained: but we know and they ought to
have known that the worship of God is spiritual. He afterwards adds,
that the *city was rapacious*, under which term he includes every kind
of injustice.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p17"></span>It follows, *She heard not the voice, she
received not correction*. The Prophet now explains and defines what the
pollution was of which he had spoken: for true religion begins with
teachableness; when we submit to God and to his word, it is really to
enter on the work of worshipping him aright. But when heavenly truth is
despised, though men may toil much in outward rites, yet their impiety
discovers itself by their contumacy, inasmuch as they suffer not
themselves to be ruled by God’s authority. Hence the Prophet shows, that
whatever the Jews thought of their purity at Jerusalem, it was nothing
but filth and pollution. He says, that they were unteachable, because
they did not hear the Prophets sent to them by God.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p18"></span>This ought to be carefully noticed; for
without this beginning many torment themselves in the work of serving
God, and do nothing, because obedience is better than sacrifice. If,
then, we wish our efforts to be approved by God, we must begin with
faith; for except the word of God obtains credit with us, whatever we
may offer to him are mere human inventions. It is, in the second place,
added, that they did not receive correction; and this was no superfluous
addition. For when God sees that we are not submissive, and that we do
not willingly come to him when he calls us, he strengthens his
instruction by chastisements. He allures us at first to himself, he
employs kind and gentle invitations; but when he sees us delaying, or
even going back, he begins to treat us more roughly and more severely:
for teaching without the goads of reproof would have no effect. But when
God teaches and reproves in vain, it then appears that our disposition
is wicked and perverse. So the Prophet intended here to show the
wickedness of his people as extreme, by saying, that they *heard not the
voice nor received correction*; as though he had said, that the
wickedness of his people was unhealable, for they not only rejected the
doctrine of salvation, when offered, but also obstinately rejected all
warnings, and would not bear any correction.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p19"></span>But we must bear in mind, that the
Prophet had to do with that holy people whom God had chosen as his
peculiar treasure. There is therefore no reason why those who profess
the name of Christians at this day should exempt themselves from this
condemnation; for our condition is not better than the condition of that
people. Jerusalem was in an especial manner, as we have already said,
the sanctuary, as it were, of God: and yet we see how severely the
Prophet reproves Jerusalem and all its inhabitants. We have no cause to
flatter ourselves, except we willingly submit to God, and suffer
ourselves to be ruled by his word, and except we also patiently bear
correction, when his teaching takes no suitable effect, and when there
is need of sharp goads to stimulate us.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p20"></span>He afterwards adds, that it *did not
trust in the Lord, nor draw nigh to its God*. The Prophet discovers here
more clearly the spring of impiety — that Jerusalem placed not the hope
of salvation in God alone; for from hence flowed all the mass of evils
which prevailed; because if we inquire how it is that men burn with
avarice, why they are insatiable, and why they wantonly defraud and
plunder one another, we shall find the cause to be this — that they
trust not in God. Rightly then does the Prophet mention this here, among
other pollutions at Jerusalem, as the chief — that it did not put its
trust in God. The same also is the cause and origin of all
superstitions; for if men felt assured that God alone is enough for
them, they would not follow here and there their own inventions. We
hence see that unbelief is not only the mother of all the evil deeds by
which men willfully wrong and injure one another, but that it is also
the cause of all superstitions.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p21"></span>He says, in the last place, that it *did
not draw nigh to God*. The Prophet no doubt charges the Jews that they
willfully departed from God when he was nigh them; yea, that they wholly
alienated themselves from him, while he was ready to cherish them, as it
were, in his own bosom. This is indeed a sin common to all who seek not
God; but Jerusalem sinned far more grievously, because she would not
draw nigh to God, by whom she saw that she was sought. For why was the
law given, why was adoption vouchsafed, and in short, why had they the
various ordinances of religion, except that they might join themselves
to God? ‘And now Israel,’ said Moses, ‘what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, except to cleave to him?’ God thus intended his law to
be, as it were, a sacred bond of union between him and the Jews. Now
when they wandered here and there, that they might not be united to him,
it was a diabolical madness. Hence the Prophet here does not only accuse
the Jews of not seeking God, but of withdrawing themselves from him; and
thus they were ungovernable. The Lord sought to tame them; but they were
like wild beasts. It now follows —

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Her princes within her *are*
roaring lions; her judges *are* evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones
till the morrow.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Principes ejus in medio ejus,
leones rugientes; judices ejus lupi vespertini, non lacerant ad mane
(*alii* non differunt, *nempe ossa comminuer*e; *sed* \[םרג\], *proprie*
*significat*, conterere *vel*, frangere *ergo de ossibus loquitur
Propheta*, *quod scilicet non expectarent usque ad mane*, *ut ipsa
contererent dentibus*; *sed prae fame*, *vel potius rabie praedam statim
lacerarent*; *imo etiam contererent ossa dentibus*.)

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet now explains what we have
stated respecting plunder and fraud. He confirms that he had not without
reason called Jerusalem <span id="iv.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>היונה, *eiune*,
a rapacious city, or one given to plunder; for the princes were like
lions and the judges like wolves. And when he speaks of judges, he does
not spare the common people; but he shows that all orders were then
corrupt: for though no justice or equity is regarded by the people,
there will yet remain some shame among the judges, so as to retain the
people at least within some limits, that an extreme licentiousness may
not prevail: but when robbery is practiced in the court of justice, what
can be said of such a city? We hence see that the Prophet in these words
describes an extreme confusion: The princes of Jerusalem, he says, are
lions. And we have elsewhere similar declarations; for the Prophets,
when it was their object to condemn all from the least to the greatest,
did yet direct their discourse especially to the judges.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7"></span>And this is worthy of being noticed, for
there was then no Church of God, except at Jerusalem. Yet the Prophet
says, that the judges, and prophets, and priests, were all apostates.
What comfort could the faithful have had? But we hence see that the fear
of God had not wholly failed in his elect, and that they firmly and with
an invincible heart contended against all offenses and trials of this
kind. Let us also learn to fortify ourselves at this day with the same
courage, so that we may not faint, however much impiety may everywhere
prevail, and all religion may seem extinct among men.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p8"></span>But we may also hence learn, how
foolishly the Papists pride themselves in their vain titles, as though
they thought that God was bound as it were to them, because they have
bishops and pastors. But the Prophet shows, that even those who
performed the ordinary office of executing the laws could yet be the
wicked and perfidious despisers of God. He also shows, that neither
prophets nor priests ought to be spared; for when God sets them over his
Church, he gives them no power to tyrannize, so that they might dare to
do anything with impunity, and not be reproved. For though the
priesthood under the law was sacred, we yet see that it was subject to
correction. So let no one at this day claim for himself a privilege, as
though he was exempt from all instruction and reproof, while occupying a
high station among the people of God.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p9"></span>He distinguishes between princes and
judges; and the reason is, because the kingdom was as yet standing. So
the courtiers, who were in favor and authority with the king, drew a
part of the spoil to themselves, and the judges devoured another part.
Though Scripture often makes no difference between these two names, yet
I doubt not but he means by <span id="iv.iv.iii-p9.1"></span>שרים,
*sherim*, princes, the chiefs who were courtiers; and he calls them
<span id="iv.iv.iii-p9.2"></span>שפטים, *shepthim*, judges, who
administered justice. And he says that the judges were evening wolves,
that is, hungry, for wolves become furious in the evening when they have
been roaming about all day and have found nothing. As their want
sharpens the savageness of wolves, so the Prophet says that the judges
were hungry like evening wolves, whose hunger renders them furious. And
for the same purpose he adds, that they *broke not the bones in the
morning*; that is, they waited not till the dawn to break the bones;
 <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) for when they devoured the
flesh they also employed their teeth in breaking the bones, because
their voracity was so great. We now apprehend the Prophet’s meaning. It
afterwards follows —

<span id="iv.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p2"></span>**4.** Her prophets *are* light *and*
treacherous persons: her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have
done violence to the law.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Prophetae ejus leves (*vel*,
futiles,) viri transgressionum; sacerdotes ejus polluerunt sanctum
(*vel*, sanctuarium,) sustulerunt legem.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet again reverts to the pollution
and filth of which he has spoken in the first verse. He shows that he
had not without reason cried against the polluted city; for though the
Jews used their washings, they could not yet make themselves clean in
this manner before God, as the whole of religion was corrupted by them.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p7"></span>He says that *the Prophets were light*. He
alone speaks here, and he condemns the many. We hence see that there is
no reason why the ungodly should allege their great number, when God by
his word accuses them, as the Papists do at this day, who deny it to be
right in one or two, or few men, to speak against their impiety, however
bad the state of things may be; there must be the consent of the whole
world, as though the Prophet was not alone, and had not to contend with
a great many. It is indeed true that he taught at the same time with the
Prophet Jeremiah, as we have elsewhere seen; but yet hardly two or three
did then discharge faithfully their office of teaching; and from this
and other places we learn that the false Prophets, relying on their
number, were on that account bolder. But Zephaniah did not for this
reason cease to cry against them. However much then the false Prophets
raged against him, and terrified him by the show of their number, he
still exercised his liberty in condemning them. So at this day, though
the whole world should unite in promoting impiety, there is yet no
reason why the few should be disheartened when observing the worship of
God perverted; but they ought on the contrary to encourage themselves by
this example, and strenuously to resist thousands of men if necessary;
for no union formed by men can possibly lessen the authority of God.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p8"></span>It now follows that they were *men of
transgressions*. What we render light, others render empty; (*vacuous*;)
but the word <span id="iv.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>פוחזים, *puchezim*, means
strictly men of nought, and also the rash, and those who are void of
judgment as well as of all moderation. In short, it is the same as
though the Prophet had said that they were stupid and blind; and he says
afterwards that they were fraudulent, than which there is nothing more
inconsistent with the Prophetic office. But Zephaniah shows that the
whole order was then so degenerated among the people, that the thickest
darkness prevailed among those very leaders whose office it was to bring
forth the light of celestial truth. And he makes a concession by calling
them Prophets. The same we do at this day when we speak of Popish
bishops. It is indeed certain that they are unworthy of so honorable a
title; for they are blinder than moles, so that they are far from being
overseers. We also know, that they are like brute beasts; for they are
immersed in their lusts: in short, they are unworthy to be called men.
But we concede to them this title, in order that their turpitude may be
more apparent. The Prophet did the same, when he said, that the Jews did
not draw nigh to their God; he conceded to them what they boasted; for
they ever wished to be regarded as the holy and peculiar people of God:
but their ingratitude did hence become more evident, because they went
back and turned to another object, when God was ready to embrace them,
as though they designedly meant to show that they had nothing to do with
him. It is then the same manner of speaking, that Zephaniah adopts here,
when he says, that the Prophets were light and men of transgressions.
 <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p13"></span>He then adds, The priests have polluted
the holy place. The tribe of Levi, we know, had been chosen by God; and
those who descended from him, were to be ministers and teachers to
others: and for this reason the Lord in the law ordered the Levites to
be dispersed through the whole country. He might indeed have given them
as to the rest, a fixed habitation; but his will was, that they should
be dispersed among the whole population, that no part of the land should
be without good and faithful ministers. The Prophet now charges them,
that they had polluted the holy place. By the word <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>קדש, *kodash* the Prophet means whatsoever is
holy; at the same time he speaks of the sanctuary. Moreover, since the
sanctuary was as it were the dwelling-place of God, when the Prophets
speak of divine worship and religion, they include the whole under the
word, Temple, as in this place. He says then that the sanctuary was
polluted by the priests, and then that they took away or subverted the
law.  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p16"></span>We here see how boldly the Prophet
charges the priests. There is then no reason why they who are divinely
appointed over the Church should claim for themselves the liberty of
doing what they please; for the priests might have boasted of this
privilege, that without dispute everything was lawful for them. But we
see that God not only calls them to order by his Prophets, but even
blames them more than others, because they were less excusable. Now the
Papists boast, that the clergy, even the very dregs collected from the
filthiest filth, cannot err; which is extremely absurd; for they are not
better than the successors of Aaron. But we see what the Prophet objects
now to them, — that they *subverted the law*: he not only condemns their
life, but says also, that they were perfidious towards God; for they
strangely corrupted the whole truth of religion. The Papists confess,
that they indeed can sin, but that the sin dwells only in their moral
conduct. They yet seek to exempt themselves from all the danger of going
astray. Though the Levitical priests were indeed chosen by the very
voice of God, we yet see that they were apostates. But God confirms the
godly, that they might not abandon themselves to impiety, though they
saw their very leaders going astray, and rushing headlong into ruin. For
it behaved the faithful to fortify themselves with constancy, when the
priests not only by their bad conduct withdrew the people from every
fear of God, but also perverted every sound doctrine; it behaved, I say,
the faithful to remain then invincible. Though then at this day those
who hold the highest dignity in the Church neglect God and even despise
every celestial truth, and thus rush headlong into ruin, and though they
attempt to turn God’s truth into falsehood, yet let our faith continue
firm; for John has not without reason declared, that it ought to be
victorious against the whole world. <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>[1Jo
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>.
It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span>**5.** The just Lord *is* in the midst
thereof; he will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his
judgment to light, he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no shame.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span>**5.** Iehova justus in medio ejus, non
faciet iniquitatem: mane, mane judicium suum proferet in lucem, non
deficiet: neque tamen congnoscet iniquus pudorem.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p6"></span>Here the Prophet throws back against
hypocrites what they were wont to pretend, when they sought wickedly to
reject every instruction and all warnings; for they said, that God dwelt
in the midst of them, like the Papists at the present day, who raise up
this as their shield against us, — that the Church is the pillar of the
truth. Hence they think that all their wicked deeds are defended by this
covering. So the Jews at that time had this boast ever on their lips, —
We are notwithstanding the holy people of God, and he dwells in the
midst of us, for he is worshipped in the Temple, which has been built,
not according to men’s will, but by his command; for that voice
proceeded not from earth, but came from heaven, ‘This is my rest for
ever, here will I dwell.’ <span id="iv.iv.v-p6.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.v-p6.1"></span>.
Since then the Jews were inflated with this presumption, the Prophet
concedes what they claimed, that God dwelt among them; but it was for a
far different purpose, which was, that they might understand, that his
hand was nigh to punish their sins. This is one thing.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p7"></span>Jehovah is in the midst of them; Granted,
he says; I allow that he dwells in this city; for he has commanded a
temple to be built for him on Mount Sion, he has ordered a holy altar
for himself; but why does God dwell among you, and has preferred this
habitation to all others? Surely, he says, *he will not do iniquity*.
Consider now what the nature of God is; for when he purposed to dwell
among you, he certainly did not deny himself, nor did he cease to be
what he is. There is therefore no reason for you to imagine, as though
God intended, for the sake of those to whom he bound himself, to throw
aside his own justice, or intended to pollute himself by the defilements
of men. He warns the Jews, that they absurdly blended these things
together. *God* then *who dwells in the midst of you, will not do
iniquity*; that is, He will not approve of your evil deeds; and though
he may for a time connive at them, he will not yet bear with them
continually. Do not therefore foolishly flatter yourselves, as though
God were the approver of your wickedness.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p8"></span>Some apply this to the people, — that they
ought not to have done iniquity; but this is a strained exposition, and
altogether foreign to the context. Most other interpreters give this
meaning, that God is just and will do no iniquity, for he had sufficient
reasons for executing his vengeance on a people so wicked. They hence
think, that the Prophet anticipates the Jews, lest they murmured, as
though the Lord was cruel or too rigid. He will not do iniquity, that
is, Though the Lord may inflict on you a most grievous punishment, yet
he cannot be arraigned by you as unjust; and ye in vain contend with
him, for he will ever be found to be a righteous judge. But this also is
a very frigid explanation. Let us bear in mind what I have already said,
— that the Prophet here, by way of irony, concedes to the Jews, that God
dwelt among them, but afterwards brings against them what they thought
was a protection to them, — God dwells in the midst of you; I allow it,
he says; but is not he a just God? Do not then dream that he is one like
yourselves, that he approves of your evil deeds. God will not do
iniquity; ye cannot prevail with him to renounce himself, or to change
his own nature. Why then does God dwell in the midst of you? *In the
morning, in the morning, he says, his judgment will he bring forth to
light*; the Lord will daily bring forth his judgment. How this is to be
understood, we shall explain tomorrow.

<span id="iv.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that inasmuch as thou
hast deigned to favor us with an honor so invaluable, as to adopt us for
a holy people to thee, and to separate us from the world, — O grant,
that we may not close our eyes against the light of thy truth, by which
thou showest to us the way of salvation; but may we with true docility
follow where thou callest us, and never cast away the fear of thy
majesty, nor mock thee with frivolous ceremonies, but strive sincerely
to devote ourselves wholly to thee, and to cleanse ourselves from all
defilements, not only of the flesh, but also of the spirit, that by thus
seeking true holiness, we may aspire after and diligently labor for that
heavenly perfection, from which we are as yet far distant; and may we in
the meantime, relying on the favor of thy only-begotten Son, lean on thy
mercy; and while depending on it, may we ever grow up more and more into
that true and perfect union, reserved for us in heaven, when we shall be
made partakers of thy glory, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-fifth

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the
passage, where the Prophet says, that God dwelt at Jerusalem, but that
he was notwithstanding just, and could not possibly associate with the
ungodly and the wicked, because he changes not his nature to suit the
humor of men.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p3"></span>It now follows, *In the morning, in the
morning, his judgment will he bring forth to light*: by which words he
means, either that God would be the avenger of wickedness, which seems
to escape, as it were, his eyes, while he delays his punishment, or that
he is ready to restore his people, whenever they are attentive to
instruction. If the former view be approved, the sense will be this, —
that hypocrites foolishly flatter themselves, when God spares them; for
he will suddenly ascend his tribunal that he may visit them with
punishment. Some however choose to apply this to the judgments executed
on the Gentiles, of which the Jews had not once nor twice been reminded,
but often, that they might in time repent. But there is no doubt but
that the Prophet refers here to a judgment belonging to the Jews.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p4"></span>Let us now see whether this judgment is
pronounced or inflicted. It would not ill suit the passage to understand
it of the vengeance which God was hastening to execute, for the Jews
were worthy of what had been severely threatened, because they falsely
professed his name; and while they absurdly boasted that he dwelt among
them, they withdrew themselves very far from him. It is however no less
suitable to refer this to teaching, so that the Prophet thus enhanced
the sin of the people, because they had hardened themselves after so
many and so constant warnings, which continually sounded in their ears,
as God elsewhere complains, that though he rose early, and indeed daily,
this solicitude had been without its fruit. The verb in the future tense
will thus signify a continued act, for God ceased not to exhort to
repentance those wretched beings who had ears which were deaf. And this
view strikingly corresponds with what immediately follows, that he fails
not; for such a perseverance was a proof of unwearied mercy, when God
continued to send Prophets one after the other.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p5"></span>He now adds, *The wicked knows no shame*.
He means what he has just referred to — that the people had become so
hardened in their wickedness that they could not be reformed, either by
instruction or by threats, or by the scourges of God.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p6"></span>If we refer judgment to teaching, which I
approve, the meaning will be — that though God, by making known daily
his law, kindled as it were a lamp, which discovered all evils, yet the
ungodly were not ashamed. But if we understand it, as they say, of
actual judgment, the meaning will be in substance the same — that the
ungodly repented not, though the hand of God openly appeared; and though
he rose to judgment, yet he says, they knew not what it was to feel
ashamed. As to the main subject there is no ambiguity; for the Prophet
means only that the people were past recovery; for though God proved
himself a judge by manifest evidences, and even by his own law, they yet
felt no shame, but went on in their wicked courses. The word judgment,
in the singular number, seems to have been put here in the sense of a
rule, by which men live religiously and justly, and a rule which ought
to make men ashamed.  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) It now
follows —

<span id="iv.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p2"></span>**6.** I have cut off the nations: their
towers are desolate; I made their streets waste, that none passeth by:
their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none
inhabitant.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Excidi gentes; vastate sunt arces
earum; perdidi vicos earum, ut nemo transeat; vastatae sunt urbes earum,
ut non sit vir, no sit qui habitet.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p4"></span>**7.** I said, Surely thou wilt fear me,
thou wilt receive instruction; so their dwelling should not be cut off,
howsoever I punished them: but they rose early, *and* corrupted all
their doings.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p5"></span>**7.** Dixi, certe timebis me, suscipies
disciplinam; et non excidetur habitatio ejus, quicquid visitavi super
eam: certe properarunt, corruperunt omnia studia sua.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p8"></span>Here the Prophet shows in another way
that there was no hope for a people, who could not have been instructed
by the calamities of others, to seek to return to God’s favor. For God
here complains that he had in vain punished neighboring nations, and
made them examples, in order to recall the Jews to himself. Had they
been of a sane mind they might have been led, by their quiet state,
while God spared them, to consider what they had deserved — If this is
done in the green tree, what at length will be done in the dry? They
might then have thought within themselves, that a most grievous calamity
was at hand, except they anticipated God’s wrath, which had grown ripe
against them; and God also testified that he intended by such examples
to stay the judgment which he might have already justly executed on
them. As they then even hastened it, it is evident that their wickedness
was past remedy. This is the sum of the whole.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p9"></span>He says first, I *have cut off nations*;
by which words he shows that he warned the Jews to repent, not only by
one example, but by many examples; for not one instance only of God’s
wrath had appeared, but God had on all sides manifested himself to be a
judge, in inflicting punishment on one nation after another. Since then
they had been so often warned, we may hence learn that they were wholly
blinded by their wickedness.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p10"></span>He now enhances the atrocity of the
punishment inflicted, and says, that *citadels had been demolished and
streets cut off, that no one passed through*; and then, that *cities had
been reduced to solitude, so that there was no inhabitant*. For when
punishment is of an ordinary kind, it is wont, for the most part, to be
disregarded; but when God showed, by so remarkable proofs, that he was
displeased with the nations, that is, with the ignorant, who in
comparison with the Jews were innocent, how could such an instance as
this be disregarded by the Jews, whom God thus recalled to himself,
except that they were of a disposition wholly desperate and
irreclaimable? We now then see why the Prophet enlarges on the
punishments which, having been inflicted on the nations, ought to have
been considered by the Jews.  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110)

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p14"></span>He now subjoins the object which God
had in view, *I said, Surely thou wilt fear me*. Here God assumes the
character of man, as he does often elsewhere: for he does not wait for
what is future, as though he was doubtful; but all things, as we know,
are before his eyes. Hence God was not deceived, as though something had
happened beyond his expectation; but as I have already said, he
undertakes here the character of man; for he could not otherwise have
sufficiently expressed how inexcusable the Jews were who had despised
all his warnings. For what was God’s design when he punished the
heathens, one nation after another, except that the Jews might be
awakened by the evils of others, and not provoke his wrath against
themselves? Paul makes use of the same argument.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p15"></span>‘On account of these things,’ he
says,  
‘the wrath of God comes upon all the unbelieving.’  
<span id="iv.iv.viii-p15.3"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p15.3"></span>.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p16"></span>Inasmuch as men for the most part
deceive themselves by self-flatteries and cherish with extreme
indulgence their own wickedness, Paul says, that the wrath of God comes
on the unbelieving: and it is a singular proof of God’s love, that he
does not immediately assail us, but sets before us the examples of
others. As when any one lays hold of his servant in the presence of his
son, and punishes him severely, the son must be moved by the sight,
except he be wholly an abandoned character: however, in such a case the
father’s love manifests itself; for he withholds his hand from his son
and inflicts punishment on the servant, and this for the benefit of his
son, that he may learn wisdom by what another suffers. God declares in
this place that he had done the same; but he complains that it had been
without benefit, for the Jews had frustrated his purpose.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p17"></span>It may be here asked, whether men so
frustrate God that he looks for something different from what happens. I
have already said, that God speaks after the manner of men, and in a
language not strictly correct: and hence we ought not here to enter or
penetrate into the secret purpose of God, but to be satisfied with this
reason, — that if we profit nothing when God warns us either by his word
or by his scourges, we are then equally guilty, as though he was
deceived by us: and hence also the madness of those is reproved, who are
unwilling to ascribe anything to God but what is conveyed in these
common forms of speech: God says, that he wills the salvation of all,
<span id="iv.iv.viii-p17.1"></span>[1Ti
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p17.1"></span>;) hence there is no election, which makes
a distinction between one man and another; but the Lord leaves the whole
human race to their free-will, so that every one may provide for himself
as he pleases; otherwise the will of God must be twofold. So unlearned
men vainly talk; and such not only show their ignorance in religion, but
are also wholly destitute of common sense. For what is more absurd than
to conclude, that there is a twofold will in God, because he speaks
otherwise with us than is consistent with his incomprehensible majesty?
God’s will then is one and simple, but manifold as to the perceptions of
men; for we cannot comprehend his hidden purpose, which angels adore
with reverence and humility. Hence the Lord accommodates himself to the
measure of our capacities, as this passage teaches us with sufficient
clearness. For if we receive what the fanatics imagine, then God is like
man, who hopes well, and finds afterwards that he has been deceived: but
what can be more alien to his glory? We hence see how these insane men
not only obscure the glory of God, but also labor, as far as they can,
to reduce his whole essence to nothing. But this mode of speaking ought
to be sufficiently familiar to us, — that God justly complains that he
has been deceived by us, when we do not repent, inasmuch as he invites
us to himself, and even stimulates us, *I said, Surely thou wilt fear
me*

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p18"></span>This word *said*, ought not then to be
referred to the hidden counsel of God, but to the subject itself, and
that is, that it was time to repent. Who would not have hoped but that
you would have returned to the right way? When the next house was on
fire, how was it possible for you to sleep, except ye were extremely
stupid? And when so many examples were presented before your eyes
without any advantage, it is evident that there is no more any hope of
repentance. Thou, then, wilt fear me; that is, God might have hoped for
some amendment, though he had not yet touched you even with his smallest
finger; for ye beheld, while in a tranquil state, how severely he
punished the contempt of his justice as to the heathens. He uses a
similar language in <span id="iv.iv.viii-p18.1"></span>[Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p18.1"></span>,

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p19"></span>‘My vine, what have I done to thee? or
what could I have done to thee more than what I have done? I expected
thee to bring forth fruit; but, behold, thou hast brought forth wild
grapes.’

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p20"></span>God in that passage expostulates with
the Jews as though they had by their perfidiousness deceived him. But we
know, that whatever happens was known to him before the creation of the
world: but, as I have already said, the fact itself is to be regarded by
us, and not the hidden judgment of God.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p21"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou wilt receive
correction*; that is, thou wilt be hereafter more tractable: for
monstrous is our stupidity, when we fear not God’s vengeance; when yet
it evidently appears that we are warned, as I have already said, to
repent, by all the examples of judgments which are daily presented to
us. But if we proceed in our wickedness, what else is it but to kick
against the goad, as the old proverb is? In short, we here see described
an extreme wickedness and obstinacy, which admitted of no remedy.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p22"></span>Hence the Prophet adds again, *And cut
off should not be her habitation, howsoever I might have visited her*;
that is, though the Jews had already provoked me, so that the punishment
they have deserved was nigh; yet I was ready to withdraw my hand and to
forgive them, if they repented: not that God ever turns aside from his
purpose, for there is no shadow of turning in him; but he sets before
them the fact as it was; for the subject here, as I have said, is not
respecting the secret purpose of God, but we ought to confine ourselves
to the means which he employs in promoting our salvation. God had
already threatened the Jews for many years; he had as yet deferred to
execute what he had threatened. In the meantime his wrath had been
manifested through the whole neighborhood; the heathen nations had
suffered the severest judgments. God here declares, that he had been so
lenient to his people as to give time to repent; and he complains that
he had delayed in vain, for they had gone on in their wickedness, and
had mocked, as it were, his patience. When, therefore, he says, *Cut off
should not* be her habitation, *howsoever I might have visited her*, or
have visited her, he pursues still the same mode of speaking, that is,
that he was prepared to forgive the Jews, though he had before destined
them to destruction; not that he, as to himself, would retract that
sentence; but that he was still reconcilable, if the Jews had been
touched by any feeling of repentance.  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111)

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p30"></span>He at last adds, *Surely*, (some render
it, *but*,) *surely they have hastened*. The verb <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p30.1"></span>שכם, *shecam*, means properly to rise
early, but is to be taken metaphorically in the sense of hastening; as
though he had said, They run headlong to corrupt their ways. God had
said that he had been indulgent to them for this end — that he might
lead them by degrees to repentance: now he complains, that they on the
contrary had run another way, when they saw that he suspended his
judgments, as though it was their designed object to accelerate his
wrath. Thus they hastened to corrupt their ways. The meaning, then, is
that this people were not only irreclaimable in their obstinacy, but
that they were also sottish and presumptuous, as though they wished to
hasten the judgment, which the Lord was ready for a time to defer. It
now follows —

<span id="iv.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p2"></span>**8.** Therefore wait ye upon me, saith
the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination
*is* to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour
upon them mine indignation, *even* all my fierce anger: for all the
earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p3"></span>**8.** Propterea expectate me, dicit
Jehova, usque ad diem quo surgam ad praedam; quia judicium meum (*hoc*
*est*, decretum est mihi,) ut colligam gentes, ut congregem regna; ut
effundam super ipsa (regna, *vel*, super ipsas gentes) indignationem
meam, totum furorem irae meae; quia igne zeli (*vel*, indignationis
meae) vorabitur tota terra.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p6"></span>God here declares that the last end was
near, since he had found by experience that he effected nothing by long
forbearance, and since he had even found the Jews becoming worse,
because he had so mercifully treated them. Some think that the address
is made to the faithful, that they might prepare themselves to bear the
cross; but this view is foreign to the subject of the Prophet: and
though this view has gained the consent of almost all, I yet doubt not
but that the Prophet, as I have now stated, breaks out into a complaint,
and says, that God would not now deal in words with a people so
irreclaimable.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p7"></span>*Look for me*, he says; that is, I am now
present fully prepared: I have hitherto endeavored to turn you, but your
hearts have become hardened in depravity. But inasmuch as I have lost
all my labor in teaching, warning, and exhorting you, even when I
presented to you examples on every side among heathen nations, which
ought to have stimulated you to repentance, and inasmuch as I have
effected nothing, it is now all over with you — *Look for me*: I shall
no more contend with you, nor is there any ground for you to hope that I
shall any more send Prophets to you.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p8"></span>*Look* then *for me, until I shall rise* —
for what purpose? *to the prey*. Some render the word <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p8.1"></span>לעד, *laod*, forever; but the Prophet means,
that God was so offended with the contumacy oú the people, that he would
now plunder, spoil and devour, and forget his kindness, which had been
hitherto a sport to them — I shall come as a wild beast; as lions rage,
lacerate, tear, and devour, so also will I now do with you; for I have
hitherto too kindly and paternally spared you. We hence see that these
things are not to be referred to the hope and patience of the godly; but
that God on the contrary does here denounce final destruction on the
wicked, as though he had said — I bid you adieu; begone, and mind your
own concerns; for I will no longer contend with you; but I shall shortly
come, and ye shall find me very differentfrom what I have been to you
hitherto. We now see that God, as it were, repudiates the Jews, and
threatens that he would come to them with a drawn sword; and at the same
time he compares himself to a savage and cruel wild beast.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p9"></span>He afterwards adds — *For my judgment is*;
that is, I have decreed to *gather all nations*. We have elsewhere
spoken of this verb <span id="iv.iv.ix-p9.1"></span>אסף, *asaph*; it is
the same in Hebrew as the French *trousser*. It is then my purpose to
gather, that is, to heap together into one mass *all nations*, to
*assemble the kingdoms*, so that no corner of the earth may escape my
hand. But he speaks of all nations and kingdoms, that the Jews might
understand that his judgment could no longer be deferred; for if a
comparison be made between them and the heathen nations, judgment, as it
is written, is wont to begin with the house of God, <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p9.2"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p9.2"></span>;
and further, they were less excusable than the unbelieving, who went
astray, which is nothing strange, in darkness, for they were without the
light of truth. God then threatens nations and kingdoms, that the Jews
might know that a most dreadful punishment was impending over their
heads, for they had surpassed all others in wickedness and evil deeds.
 <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) He afterwards adds —

<span id="iv.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.x-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p2"></span>**9.** For then will I turn to the people a
pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the LORD, to
serve him with one consent.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p3"></span>**9.** Certe tunc convertam ad populos
labium purum, ut invocent omnes nomen Jehovae, ut serviant ei humero
uno.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p6"></span>The Prophet now mitigates the asperity of
his doctrine, which might have greatly terrified the godly; nay, it
might have wholly disheartened them, had no consolation been applied.
God then moderates here what he had previously threatened; for if the
Prophet had only said this — My purpose is to gather all the nations,
and thus the whole earth shall be devoured by the fire of indignation,
what could the faithful have concluded but that they were to perish with
the rest of the world? It was therefore necessary to add something to
inspire hope, such as we find here.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p7"></span>We must at the same time bear in mind what
I have reminded you of elsewhere — that the Prophet directs his
discourse one while to the faithful only, who were then few in number,
and that at another time he addresses the multitude indiscriminately;
and so when our Prophet threatens, he regards the whole body of the
people; but when he proclaims the favor of God, it is the same as though
he turned his eyes towards the faithful only, and gathered them into a
place by themselves. As for instance, when a few among a people are
really wise, and the whole multitude unite in hastening their own ruin,
he who has an address to make will make a distinction between the vast
multitude and the few; he will severely reprove those who are thus
foolish, and live for their own misery; and he will afterwards shape his
discourse so as to suit those with whom he has not so much fault to
find. Thus also the Lord changes his discourse; for at one time he
addresses the ungodly, and at another he turns to the elect, who were
but a remnant. So the Prophet has hitherto spoken by reproofs and
threatening, for he addressed the whole body of the people; but now he
collects, as I have said, the remnant as it were by themselves, and sets
before them the hope of pardon and of salvation.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p8"></span>Hence he says, *But then*  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) (for I take <span
id="iv.iv.x-p15.1"></span>כי, *ki*, as an adversative) *will I turn to
the people a pure lip*. God intimates that he would propagate his grace
wider, after having cleansed the earth; for he will be worshipped not
only in Judea, but by foreign nations, and even by the remotest. For it
might have been objected, Will God then extinguish his name in the
world? For what will be the state of things when Judea is overthrown and
other nations destroyed, except that God’s name will be exposed to
reproach! It will nowhere be invoked, and all will outvie one another in
blasphemies against him. The Prophet meets this objection, and says,
that God has in his own hand the means by which he will vindicate his
own glory; for he will not only defend his Church in Judea, but will
also gather into it nations far and wide, so that his name shall be
everywhere celebrated.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p16"></span>But he speaks first of a pure lip, *I will
turn*, he says, *to the nations a pure lip*. By this word he means, that
the invocation of God’s name is his peculiar work; for men do not pray
through the suggestion of the flesh, but when God draws them. It is
indeed true, that God has ever been invoked by all nations; but it was
not the right way of praying, when they heedlessly cast their petitions
into the air: and we also know, that the true God was not invoked by the
nations; for there was no nation then in the world which had not formed
for itself some idol. As then the earth was full of innumerable idols,
God was not invoked except in Judea only. Besides, though the
unbelieving had an intention to pray to God, yet they could not have
prayed rightly, for prayer flows from faith. God then does not without
reason promise, that he would turn pure lips to the nations; that is,
that he would cause the nations to call on his name with pure lips. We
hence then learn what I have stated — that God cannot be rightly invoked
by us, until he draws us to himself; for we have profane and impure
lips. In short, the beginning of prayer is from that hidden cleansing of
the Spirit of which the Prophet now speaks.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p17"></span>But if it be God’s singular gift, to turn
a pure lip to the nations, it follows that faith is conferred on us by
him, for both are connected together. As God then purifies the hearts of
men by faith, so also he purifies their lips that his name may be
rightly invoked, which would otherwise be profaned by the unbelieving.
Whenever they pretend to call on God’s name, it is certain that it is
not done without profanation.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p18"></span>As to the word *all*, it is to be referred
to nations, not to each individual; for it has not been that every one
has called on God; but there have been some of all nations, as Paul also
says in the first chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians <span
id="iv.iv.x-p18.1"></span>[1Co
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.x-p18.1"></span>:
for in addressing the faithful, he adds, ‘With all who call on the name
of the Lord in every place’ — that is, not only in Judea; and elsewhere
he says,

<span id="iv.iv.x-p19"></span>‘I would that men would stretch forth
hands to heaven in every place.’  
(<span id="iv.iv.x-p19.2"></span>[1Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.x-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.x-p20"></span>He afterwards adds, *That they may serve
him with one shoulder*; that is, that they may unitedly submit to God in
order to do him service; for to serve him with the shoulder is to unite
together, so as to help one another. The metaphor seems to have been
derived from those who carry a burden; for except each assists, one will
be overpowered, and then the burden will fall to the ground. We are said
then to serve God with one shoulder when we strive by mutual consent to
assist one another. And this ought to be carefully noticed, that we may
know that our striving cannot be approved by God, except we have thus
the same end in view, and seek also to add courage to others, and
mutually to help one another. Unless then the faithful thus render
mutual assistance, the Lord cannot approve of their service.  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114)

<span id="iv.iv.x-p22"></span>We now see how foolishly they talk who so
much extol free-will and whatever is connected with it: for the Lord
demands faith as well as other duties of religion; and he requires also
from all, love and the keeping of the whole law. But he testifies here
that his name cannot be invoked, as the lips of all are polluted, until
he has consecrated them, cleansing by his Spirit what was before
polluted: and he shows also that men will not undertake the yoke, unless
he joins them together, so as to render them willing. I must not proceed
farther.

<span id="iv.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since it is the
principal part of our happiness, that in our pilgrimage through this
world there is open to us a familiar access to thee by faith, — O grant,
that we may be able to come with a pure heart to thy presence: and when
our lips are polluted, O purify us by thy Spirit, so that we may not
only pray to thee with the mouth, but also prove that we do this
sincerely, without any dissimulation, and that we earnestly seek to
spend our whole life in glorifying thy name, until being at length
gathered into thy celestial kingdom, we may be truly and really united
to thee, and be made partakers of that glory, which has been procured
for us by the blood of thy only-begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p1"></span>Lecture One hundred and Twenty-sixth

<span id="iv.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p2"></span>**10.** From beyond the rivers of
Ethiopia my suppliants, *even* the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring
mine offering.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p3"></span>**10.** Trans fluvios Ethiopiae
supplicantes mihi (*vel*, supplices mei;) filia dispersorum meorum
offerent munus meum (*hoc* *est*, mihi; *nam* \[י\] *affixum accipitur
loco pronominis* \[ילא\].)

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p6"></span>Interpreters agree not as to the meaning
of this verse; for some of the Hebrews connect this with the former, as
though the Prophet was still speaking of the calling of the Gentiles.
But others, with whom I agree, apply this to the dispersed Jews, so that
the Prophet here gives hope of that restoration, of which he had before
spoken. They who understand this of the Gentiles, think that Atharai and
Phorisai are proper names. But in the first place, we cannot find that
any nations were so called; and then, if we receive what they say, these
were not separate nations, but portions of the Ethiopians; for the
Prophet does not state the fact by itself, that Atharai and Phorisai
would be the worshipers of God; but after having spoken of Ethiopia, he
adds these words: hence we conclude, that the Prophet means this, — that
they would return into Judea from the farthest region of the Ethiopians
to offer sacrifices to God. And as he mentions the daughter of the
dispersion, we must understand this of the Jews, for it cannot be
applied to the Ethiopians. And this promise fits in well with the former
verse: for the Prophet spoke, according to what we observed yesterday,
of the future calling of the Gentiles; and now he adds, the Jews would
come with the Gentiles, that they might unite together, agreeing in the
same faith, in the true and pure worship of the only true God. He had
said, that the kingdom would be enlarged, for the Church was to be
gathered from all nations: he now adds, that the elect people would be
restored, after having been driven away into exile.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p7"></span>Hence he says, *Beyond the rivers of
Ethiopia shall be my suppliants*: for <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p7.1"></span>עתר, *otar*, means to supplicate; but it
means also sometimes to be pacified, or to be propitious; and therefore
some take <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p7.2"></span>עתרים, *otarim*, in a
passive sense, they who shall be reconciled to God; as though he had
said, God will at length be propitious to the miserable exiles, though
they have been cast away beyond the rivers of Ethiopia: they shall yet
again be God’s people, for he will be reconciled to them. As David calls
Him the God of his mercy, because he had found him merciful and
gracious, (<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p7.3"></span>[Ps
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p7.3"></span>,) so also in this place they think that the
Jews are said to be the <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p7.4"></span>עתרי, the
reconciled of Jehovah, because he would be reconciled to them. But this
exposition is too forced: I therefore retain that which I have stated, —
that some suppliants would come to God from the utmost parts of
Ethiopia, not the Ethiopians themselves, but the Jews who had been
driven there.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p8"></span>To the same purpose is what is added,
*The daughter of my dispersed*; for <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p8.1"></span>פוף, *puts*, means to scatter or to
disperse.  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) Hence by the daughter
of the dispersed he means the gathered assembly of the miserable exiles,
who for a time were considered as having lost their name, so as not to
be counted as the people of Israel. These then *shall again offer to me
a gift*, that is, they are to be restored to their country, that they
may there worship me after their usual manner. Now though this prophecy
extends to the time of the Gospel, it is yet no wonder, that the Prophet
describes the worship of God such as it had been, accompanied with the
ceremonies of the Law. We now then perceive what Zephaniah means in this
verse, — that not only the Gentiles would come into the Church of God,
but that the Jews also would return to their country, that they might
together make one body. It follows, —

<span id="iv.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p2"></span>**11.** In that day shalt thou not be
ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed against me:
for then I will take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in
thy pride, and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy
mountain.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p3"></span>**11.** In die illo non erubesces ob
omnia facta tua, quibus praevaricata es contra me; quia tunc auferam e
medio tui qui exultant superbia tua; et non adijicies ad superbiendum
posthac (*hoc est*, non adjicies superbire) in monte sanctitatis meae.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet teaches us, that the
Church would be different, when God removed the dross and gathered to
himself a pure and chosen people: and the Prophet stated this, that the
faithful might not think it hard that God so diminished his Church that
hardly the tenth part remained; for it was a sad and a bitter thing,
that of a vast multitude a very few only remained. It could not then be,
but that the ruin of their brethren greatly affected the Jews, though
they knew them to be reprobate. We indeed see how Paul felt a sympathy,
when he saw that his own nation were alienated from God. <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>[Ro
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>.
So it was necessary that some consolation should be given to the
faithful, that they might patiently bear the diminution of the Church,
which had been previously predicted. Hence the Prophet, that he might
moderate their grief, says, that this would be for their good; for in
this manner the reproaches were to be removed, by which the Jewish name
had been polluted, and rendered abominable.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p7"></span>*Thou shalt not be ashamed*, he says,
*for the sins by which I have been offended*. Why? For thou shalt be
cleansed; for it is God’s purpose to reserve a few, by whom he will be
purely worshipped. Some think that he does not speak here of the
remission of sins, but on the contrary, of a pure and holy life, which
follows regeneration; as though he had said, "There will be no reason
any more for thee to be ashamed of thy life; for when I shall chasten
you, ye will then fear me, and your correction will be conducive to a
newness of life: since then your life will not be the same as formerly,
and since my glory shall shine forth among you, there will be no cause
why ye should be ashamed.” But this is a strained view, and cannot be
accommodated to the words of the Prophet; for he says, *Thou shalt no
more be ashamed of the sins by which thou hast transgressed against me*.
We hence see that this cannot be otherwise applied than to the remission
of sins. But the last clause has led interpreters astray, for the
Prophet adds, *For I will take away from the midst of thee those who
exult*: but the Prophet’s design, as I have stated, was different from
what they have supposed; for he shows that there was no reason for the
Jews to lament and deplore the diminution of the Church because the best
compensation was offered to them, which was, that by this small number
God would be purely served. For when the body of the people was
complete, it was, we know, a mass of iniquity. How then could Israel
glory in its vast number, since they were all like the giants carrying
on war against God? When now God collects a few only, these few would at
length acknowledge that they had been preserved in a wonderful manner,
in order that religion and the true worship of God should not be
extinguished in the earth.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p8"></span>We now perceive the Prophet’s design; but
I will endeavor to render this clearer by a comparison: Suppose that in
a city licentiousness of life so prevails that the people may seem to be
irreclaimable; when it happens that the city itself falls away from its
power and pristine state, or is in some other way reformed, not without
loss, and is thus led to improve its morals, this would be a
compensation to the good, and would give courage to the godly and ease
their grief, so that they would patiently submit, though the city had
not the same abundance, nor the same wealth and enjoyments. How so?
because they who remained would form a body of people free from reproach
and disgrace. When disease is removed from the human body, the body
itself is necessarily weakened; and it is sometimes necessary to
amputate a member, that the whole body may be preserved. In this case
there is a grievous diminution, but as there is no other way of
preserving the body, the remedy ought to be patiently sustained. In a
similar manner does the Prophet now speak of the city Jerusalem: *Thou
shalt not be ashamed of the sins by which thou hast transgressed against
me*. How so? Because they were to be separated from the profane and
gross despisers of God; for as long as the good and the evil were mixed
together, it was a reproach common to all. Jerusalem was then a den of
robbers; it was, as it were, a hell on earth; and all were alike exposed
to the same infamy, for the pure part could not be distinguished, as a
mass of evil prevailed everywhere. The Prophet now says, Thou shalt not
be ashamed of thy former infamy. Why? “Because God will separate the
chaff from the wheat, and will gather the wheat; ye shall be, as it
were, in the storehouse of God; the chosen seed shall alone remain;
there will be such purity, that the glory of the Lord shall shine forth
among you: ye shall not therefore be ashamed of the disgraceful deeds by
which ye are now contaminated.”

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p9"></span>We now apprehend the meaning of the
words. But it may seem strange that the Prophet should say, that sins
should be covered by oblivion, which the Jews ought indeed to have
thought of often and almost at all times, according to what Ezekiel
says,

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p10"></span>‘Thou wilt then remember thy ways, and
be ashamed,’  
(<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p10.2"></span>[Eze
16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p10.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p11"></span>that is, when God shall be pacified.
Ezekiel says, that the fruit of repentance would be, that the faithful,
covered with shame, would condemn themselves. Why so? Because the
reprobate proceed in their wicked courses, as it were, with closed eyes,
and as it has been previously said, they know no shame: though God
charges them with their sins, they yet despise and reject every warning
with a shameless front; yea, they kick against the goads. Since it is
so, justly does Ezekiel say, that shame would be the fruit of true
repentance, according to what Paul also says in the sixth chapter to the
Romans <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>[Ro
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>,
“Of which ye are now ashamed.” He intimates, that when they were sunk in
their unbelief, they were so given to shameful deeds, that they
perceived not their abomination. They began therefore to be ashamed,
when they became illuminated. The Prophet seems now to cut off this
fruit from repentance: but what he says ought to be otherwise
understood, that is, that the Church would be then free from reproach;
for the reprobate would be separated, all the filth would be taken away,
when God gathered only the remnant for himself; for in this manner, as
it has been said, the wheat would be separated from the chaff. *Thou
shalt not then be ashamed in that day of evil deeds; for I will take
away from the midst of thee those who exult*. He shows how necessary the
diminution would be; for all must have perished, had not God cut off the
putrid members. How severe soever then and full of pain the remedy would
be, it ought yet to be deemed tolerable; for the Church, that is the
body, could not otherwise be preserved.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p12"></span>But it may be again objected — That the
Church is cleansed from all spots, inasmuch as the reprobate are taken
away; for he says, *Thou shalt not be ashamed of the evil deeds by which
thou hast sinned*, literally, *against me*, that is, by which thou hast
transgressed against me. God here addresses, it may be said, the
faithful themselves: He then does not speak of the evil deeds of those
whom the Lord had rejected. But the answer is easy: When he says, that
the Church had sinned, he refers to that mixture, by which no
distinction is made between the wheat and the chaff. We may say that a
city is impious and wicked, when the majority so much exceeds in number
the good, that they do not appear. When therefore among ten thousand men
there are only thirty or even a smaller number who are anxious for a
better state of things, the whole number will be generally counted
wicked on account of the larger portion, for the others are hid, and, as
it were, covered over and buried. Justly then and correctly does
Zephaniah declare, that the Jews had transgressed against God; for in
that mixed multitude the elect could not have been distinguished from
the reprobate. But he now promises that there would be a distinction,
when God took away the proud, who exulted in vain boasting. For he says,
*I will take away from the midst of thee those who exult in thy pride*

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p13"></span>Some render the word in the abstract,
the exultations of thy pride: but the term <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p13.1"></span>עליזים, found here, is never in construction
rendered exultations. It is therefore no doubt to be understood of men.
He then names the pride of the people; and yet he addresses the elect,
who were afterwards to be gathered. What does this mean? even what we
have already stated, that before the Church was cleansed from her
pollution and filth, there was a common exultation and insolence against
God; for these words were everywhere heard —

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p14"></span>“We are God’s holy people,  
we are a chosen race,  
we are a royal priesthood,  
we are a holy inheritance.”  
<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p14.5"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p14.5"></span>.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p15"></span>Since, then, these boastings were in the
mouth of them all, the Prophet says, that it was the pride of the whole
people. *I will* then *take away*, he says, *from the midst of thee
those who exult in thy pride*  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116)

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p19"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou shalt no more
add to take pride in my holy mountain*. Here the Prophet points out the
main spring of the evil, because the Jews had hardened themselves in a
perverse self-confidence, as they thought that all things were lawful
for them, inasmuch as they were God’s chosen people. Jeremiah also in a
similar manner represents their boasting as false, when they pretended
to be the temple of God. <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p19.1"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p19.1"></span>.
So our Prophet condemns this pride, because they concealed their sins
under the shadow of the temple, and thought it a sufficient defense,
that God dwelt on Mount Sion. To show, then, that the people were
unhealable, without being cleansed from this pride, the Prophet says, *I
will take away those who exult* — How did they exult? *in thy pride*:
and what was this pride? that they inhabited the holy mount of God,
besides which there was no other sanctuary of God on earth. As then they
imagined that God was thus bound to them, they insolently despised all
admonitions, as though they were exempt from every law and restraint.
*Thou shalt not* then *add to take pride in my holy mountain*

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p20"></span>We now then see how careful we ought to
be, lest the favors of God, which ought by their brightness to guide us
to heaven, should darken our minds. But as we are extremely prone to
arrogance and pride, we ought carefully to seek to conduct ourselves in
a meek and humble manner, when favored with God’s singular benefits; for
when we begin falsely to glory in God’s name, and to put on an empty
mask to cover our sins, it is all over with us; inasmuch as to our
wickedness, to our contempt of God, and to other evil lusts and
passions, there is added perverseness, for we persevere in our course,
as it were, with an iron and inflexible neck. Thus, indeed, it happens
to all hypocrites, who elate themselves through false pretenses as to
their connection with God. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p2"></span>**12.** I will also leave in the midst of
thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of
the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p3"></span>**12.** Et residuum faciam in medio tui
populum afflictum et pauperem; et sperabunt in nomine Iehovae.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p4"></span>**13.** The remnant of Israel shall not do
iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in
their mouth: for they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make
*them* afraid.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p5"></span>**13.** Residuum Israel non perpetrabunt
iniquitatem (*hoc est*, reliquae; *ad verbum est*, residuum; *sed quia
nomen est collectivum*, *ideo mutatur numerus*,) et non loquentur
mendacium, et non invenietur in ore ipsorum lingua dolosa (*vel*, lingua
fraudis;) quoniam ipsi pascentur et accubabunt; et nemo erit exterrens.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p8"></span>Here the Prophet pursues the same subject
— that God would provide for the safety of his Church, by cutting off
the majority of the people, and by reserving a few; for his purpose was
to gather for himself a pure and holy Church, as the city had previously
been full of all uncleanness. It ought, then, to have been a
compensation to ease their grief, when the godly saw that God would be
propitious to them, though he had treated them with great severity. And
we must bear in mind what I have before stated — that the Church could
not have been preserved without correcting and subduing that arrogance,
which arose from a false profession as to God. Zephaniah takes it now as
granted, that pride could not be torn away from their hearts, except
they were wholly cast down, and thus made contrite. He then teaches us,
that as long as they remained whole, they were ever proud, and that
hence it was necessary to apply a violent remedy, that they might learn
meekness and humility; which he intimates when he says, *that the
residue of the people would be humble and afflicted*; for if they had
become willingly teachable, there would have been no need of so severe a
correction. In short, though the faithful lament that God should thus
almost annihilate his Church, yet in order that they might not murmur,
he shows that this was a necessary remedy. How so? because they would
have always conducted themselves arrogantly against God, had they not
been afflicted. It was, therefore, needful for them to be in a manner
broken, because they could not be bent. *I will*, then, he says, *make
the residue an afflicted and a poor people*

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p9"></span>The word, <span
id="iv.iv.xv-p9.1"></span>עני, *oni*, means humble; but as he adds the
word <span id="iv.iv.xv-p9.2"></span>דל, *dal*, he no doubt shows that
the Jews could not be corrected without being stripped of all the
materials of their glorying.  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117)
They were, indeed, extremely wedded to their boastings; yea, they were
become hardened in their contempt of God. He therefore says, that this
fruit would at last follow, that they would *trust in the Lord*, that
is, when he had laid them prostrate.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p12"></span>This verse contains a most useful
instruction: for first we are taught that the Church is subdued by the
cross, that she may know her pride, which is so innate and so fixed in
the hearts of men, that it cannot be removed, except the Lord, so to
speak, roots it out by force. There is then no wonder that the faithful
are so much humbled be the Lord, and that the lot of the Church is so
contemptible; for if they had more vigor, they would soon, as is often
the case, break out into an insolent spirit. That the Lord, then, may
keep his elect under restraint, he subdues and tames them by poverty. In
short, he exercises them under the cross. This is one thing.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p13"></span>We must also notice the latter clause,
when he says, *They shall trust in the Lord*, that is, those who have
been reduced to poverty and want. We hence see for what purpose God
deprives us of all earthly trust, and takes away from us every ground of
glorying; it is, that we may rely only on his favor. This dependence
ought not, indeed, to be extorted from us, for what can be more
desirable than to trust in God? But while men arrogate to themselves
more than what is right, and thus put themselves in the place of God,
they cannot really and sincerely trust in him. They indeed imagine that
they trust in God, when they ascribe to him a part of their salvation;
but except this be done wholly, no trust can be placed in God. It is
hence necessary that they who ascribe to themselves even the smallest
thing, should be reduced to nothing: and this is what the Prophet means.
Let us further know, that men do not profit under God’s scourges, except
they wholly deny themselves, and forget their own power, which they
falsely imagine, and recomb on him alone.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p14"></span>But the Prophet speaks of the elect
alone; for we see that many are severely afflicted, and are not
softened, nor do they put off their former hardihood. But the Lord so
chastises his people, that by the spirit of meekness he corrects in them
all pride and haughtiness. But by saying, *They shall trust in the name
of Jehovah*, he sets this trust in contrast with the pride which he had
previously condemned. They indeed wished to appear to trust in the name
of God, when they boasted of Mount Sion, and haughtily brought forward
the adoption by which they had been separated from heathen nations; but
it was a false boasting, which had no trust in it. To trust, then, in
the name of Jehovah is nothing else than sincerely to embrace the favor
which he offers in his word, and not to make vain pretenses, but to call
on him with a pure heart and with a deep feeling of penitence.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p15"></span>For the same purpose he adds, *The
residue of Israel shall no more work iniquity nor speak falsehood; nor
shall there be found a deceitful tongue in their mouth*. The Prophet
continues the same subject — that the Church is not to be less esteemed
when it consists only of a few men; for in the vast number there was
great filth, which not only polluted the earth by its ill savor, but
infected heaven itself. Since then Jerusalem was full of iniquities, as
long as the people remained entire, the Prophet adduces this comfort,
that there was no reason for sorrow, if from a vast number as the sand
of the sea, and from a great multitude like the stars, God would only
collect a small band; for by this means the Church would be cleansed.
And it was of great importance that the filth should be cleansed from
God’s sanctuary; for what could have been more disgraceful than that the
holy place should be made the lodging of swine, and that the place which
God designed to be consecrated to himself, should be profaned? As then
Jerusalem was the sanctuary of God, ought not true religion to have
flourished there? But when it became polluted with every kind of filth,
the Prophet shows that it ought not to have seemed grievous that the
Lord should take away that vast multitude which falsely boasted that
they professed his name. *They shall not* then *work iniquity*

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p16"></span>Under one kind of expression he includes
the whole of a righteous life, when he says, *They shall not speak
falsely, nor will there be found a deceitful tongue*. It is indeed
sufficient for the practice of piety or integrity of life to keep the
tongue free from frauds and falsehood; but as it cannot be that any one
will abstain from all frauds and falsehood, except he purely and from
the heart fears God, the Prophet, by including the whole under one
thing, expresses under the word tongue what embraces complete holiness
of life.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p17"></span>It may be now asked, whether this has
ever been fulfilled. It is indeed certain, that though few returned to
their own country, there were yet many hypocrites among that small
number; for as soon as the people reached their own land, every one, as
we find, was so bent on his own advantages, that they polluted
themselves with heathen connections, that they neglected the building of
the temple, and deprived the priests of their tenths, that they became
cold in the worship of God. With these things they were charged by
Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. Since these things were so, what means
this promise, that there would be no iniquity when God had cleansed his
Church? The Prophet speaks comparatively; for the Lord would so cleanse
away the spots from his people that their holiness would then appear
more pure. Though then many hypocrites were still mixed with the good
and real children of God, it was yet true that iniquity was not so
prevalent, that frauds and falsehood were not so rampant among the
people as they were before.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p18"></span>He afterwards adds, *For they shall feed
and lie down, and there will be none to terrify them*. He mentions
another benefit from God — that he will protect his people from all
wrongs when they had repented. We must ever bear in mind what I have
stated — that the Prophet intended here to heal the sorrow of the godly,
which night have otherwise wholly dejected their minds. That he might
then in some measure alleviate the grief of God’s children, he brings
forward this argument — “Though few shall remain, it is yet well that
the Lord will cleanse away the filth of the holy city, that it may be
justly deemed to be God’s habitation, which was before the den of
thieves. It is not then a loss to you, that few will dwell in the holy
land, for God will be a faithful guardian of your safety. What need then
is there of a large multitude, except to render you safe from enemies
and from wild beasts? What does it signify, if God receives you under
his protection, under the condition that ye shall be secure, though not
able to resist your enemies? Though one cannot defend another, yet if
God be your protector, and ye be made to live in peace under the defense
which he promises, there is no reason why ye should say, that you have
suffered a great loss, when your great number was made small. It is then
enough for you to live under God’s guardianship; for though the whole
world were united against you, and ye had no strength nor defense
yourselves, yet the Lord can preserve you; *there will be no one to
terrify you*

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p19"></span>And this argument is taken from the law;
for it is mentioned among other blessings, that God would render safe
the life of his people; which is an invaluable blessing, and without
which the life of men, we know, must be miserable; for nothing is more
distressing than constant fear, and nothing is more conducive to
happiness than a quiet life: and hence to live in quietness and free
from all fear, is what the Lord promises as a chief blessing to his
people.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since the
depravity of our nature is so great, that we cannot bear prosperity
without some wantonness of the flesh immediately raging in us, and
without becoming even arrogant against thee, — O grant, that we may
profit under the trials of the cross; and when thou have blest us, may
we with lowly hearts, renouncing our perverseness, submit ourselves to
thee, and not only bear thy yoke submissively, but proceed in this
obedience all our life, and so contend against all temptations as never
to glory in ourselves, and feel also convinced, that all true and real
glory is laid up for us in thee, until we shall enjoy it in thy
celestial kingdom, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-seventh

<span id="iv.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** Sing, O daughter of Zion;
shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of
Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Exulta filia Sion (*vel*,
jubila; exulta Israel; gaude et exulta toto corde filia Ierjusalem.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p4"></span>**15.** The Lord hath taken away thy
judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy: the king of Israel, *even* the
Lord, *is* in the midst of thee: thou shalt not see evil any more.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p5"></span>**15.** Abstulit Iehova judicia tua,
purgando avertit inimicos tuos; rex Israel Iehova in medio tui; non
videbis malum amplius.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p8"></span>The Prophet confirms what he has been
teaching, and encourages the faithful to rejoice, as though he saw with
his eyes what he had previously promised. For thus the Prophets, while
encouraging the faithful to entertain hope, stimulate them to testify
their gratitude, as though God’s favor was already enjoyed. It is
certain, that this instruction was set before the Jews for this purpose,
— that in their exile and extreme distress they might yet prepare
themselves to give thanks to God, as though they were already, as they
say, in possession of what they had prayed for. But we must remember the
design of our Prophet, and the common mode of proceeding which all the
Prophets followed; for the faithful are exhorted to praise God the same
as if they had already enjoyed his blessings, which yet were remote, and
seemed concealed from their view.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p9"></span>We now then perceive what the Prophet
meant in encouraging the Jews to praise God: he indeed congratulates
them as though they were already enjoying that happiness, which was yet
far distant: but as it is a congratulation only, we must also bear in
mind, that God deals so bountifully with his Church as to stimulate the
faithful to gratitude; for we pollute all his benefits, except we return
for them, as it has been stated elsewhere, the sacrifice of praise: and
as a confirmation of this is the repetition found here, which would have
otherwise appeared superfluous. "Exult, daughter of Sion, shout, be
glad; rejoice with all thine heart, daughter of Jerusalem.”  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118)

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p13"></span>But the Prophet was not thus earnest
without reason; for he saw how difficult it was to console the
afflicted, especially when God manifested no evidence of hope according
to the perception of the flesh; but his purpose was by this heap of
words to fortify them, that they might with more alacrity struggle with
so many hard and severe trials.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p14"></span>He then adds, that God had *taken away
the judgments* of Zion. By judgments, he means those punishments which
would have been inflicted if it had been the Lord’s purpose to deal
according to strict justice with the Jews, as when any one says in our
language, *J’ai brule tous tes proces*. He intimates then that God would
no more make an enquiry as to the sins of his people. The word <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p14.1"></span>משפט, *meshiphath*, we know, has various
meanings in Hebrew; but in this place, as I have said, it means what we
call in French, *Toutes procedures*. In short, God declares that the
sins of his people are buried, so that he in a manner cuts off his
character as a judge, and remits his own right, so that he will no more
contend with the Jews, or summon them, as they say, to trial. *Jehovah*
then *will take away thy judgments*  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119)

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p16"></span>Then follows an explanation, *By
clearing he has turned aside all enemies*;  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) for we know that war is one of God’s
judgments. As then God had punished the Jews by the Assyrians, by the
Egyptians, by the Chaldeans, and by other heathen nations, he says now,
that all enemies would be turned away. It hence follows, that neither
the Assyrians nor the Chaldeans had assailed them merely through their
own inclination, but that they were, according to what has been
elsewhere stated, the swords, as it were, of God.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p18"></span>It afterwards follows, *The king of
Israel is Jehovah in the midst of thee*. Here the Prophet briefly shows,
that the sum of real and true happiness is then possessed, when God
declares, that he undertakes the care of his people. God is said to be
in the midst of us, when he testifies that we live under his
guardianship and protection. Properly speaking, he never forsakes his
own; but these forms of speech, we know, are to be referred to the
perception of the flesh. When the Lord is said to be afar off, or to
dwell in the midst of us, it is to be understood with reference to our
ideas: for we think God to be then absent when he gives liberty to our
enemies, and we seem to be exposed as a prey to them; but God is said to
dwell in the midst of us when he protects us by his power, and turns
aside all assaults. Thus, then, our Prophet now says, that God will be
in the midst of his Church; for he would really and effectually prove
that he is the guardian of his elect people. He had been indeed for a
time absent, when his people were deprived of all help, according to
what Moses expresses when he says, that the people had denuded
themselves, because they had renounced God, by whose hand they had been
safely protected, and were also to be protected to the end. <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p18.1"></span>[Ex
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p19"></span>He lastly adds, *Thou shalt not see
evil*. Some read, “Thou shalt not fear evil,” by inserting <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p19.1"></span>י, *iod*; but the meaning is the same: for
the verb, to see, in Hebrew is, we know, often to be taken in the sense
of finding or experiencing. *Thou shalt* then *see no evil*; that is,
God will cause thee to live in quietness, free from every disturbance.
If the other reading, Thou shalt not fear evil, be preferred, then the
reference is to the blessing promised in the law; for nothing is more
desirable than peace and tranquillity. Since then this is the chief of
temporal blessings, the Prophet does not without reason say, that the
Church would be exempt from all fear and anxiety, when God should dwell
in the midst of it, according to what he says in <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p19.2"></span>[Ps
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p19.2"></span>. It now follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p2"></span>**16.** In that day it shall be said to
Jerusalem, Fear thou not: *and to* Zion, Let not thine hands be slack.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p3"></span>**16.** In die illa dicitur Jerosolymae,
Ne timeas; Sion, ne pigrescant (*vel*, solvantur, *name* \[הפר\]
*significat* lentum esse, *vel*, remissum, *vel*, dissolutum; ne *ergo*
pigrescant) manus tuae.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p4"></span>**17.** The LORD thy God in the midst of
thee *is* mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he
will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p5"></span>**17.** Iehova Deus tuus in medio tui
fortis servabit; exultabit (*vel*, gaudebit) super te in laetitia;
quiescet (silebit *ad verbum*, *vel*, quietus erit) in amore suo;
exultabit super te cum jubilatione.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p8"></span>The Prophet proceeds still to confirm the
same truth, but employs a different mode of speaking. It shall, he says,
be then said everywhere to Zion, *Fear not, let not thine hands be let
down*, etc. For these words may no less suitably be applied to the
common report or applause of all men, then to the prophetic declaration;
so that the expression, It shall be said, may be the common
congratulation, which all would vie to offer. The import of the whole
is, that Jerusalem would be so tranquil that either the Prophets, or all
with common consent would say, “Thou enjoyest thy rest: for God really
shows that he cares for thee; there is therefore no cause for thee
hereafter to fear.” For there is expressed here a real change: since the
Jews had been before in daily fear, the Prophet intimates, that they
would be so safe from every danger, as to be partakers of the
long-wished-for rest, with the approbation even of the whole world.
Hence, it shall be said — by whom? either by the Prophets, or by common
report: it makes no great difference, whether there would be teachers to
announce their state joyful and prosperous, or whether all men would, by
common consent, applaud God’s favor, when he had removed from his people
all wars, troubles, and fears, so as to make them live in quietness.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p9"></span>*It shall* then *be said to Jerusalem,
fear not; Sion! let not thine hands be relaxed*. By saying Fear not, and
let not thine hands be relaxed, he intimates, that all vigor is so
relaxed by fear, that no member can perform its function. But by taking
a part for the whole, he understands by the word hands, every other part
of the body; for by the hands men perform their works. Hence in
Scripture the hands often signify the works of men. The meaning then is
— that God’s Church would then be in such a state of quietness as to be
able to discharge all its duties and transact its concerns peaceably and
orderly. And it is what we also know by experience, that when fear
prevails in our hearts we are as it were lifeless, so that we cannot
raise even a finger to do anything: but when hope animates us, there is
a vigor in the whole body, so that alacrity appears everywhere. The
Prophet, no doubt, means here, that God thus succors his elect, not that
they may indulge in pleasures, as is too often the case, but that they
may, on the contrary, strenuously devote themselves to the performance
of their duties. We ought therefore to notice the connection between a
tranquil state and diligent hands; for, as I have said, God does not
free us from all trouble and fear, that we may grow torpid in our
pleasures, but that we may, on the contrary, be more attentive to our
duty. *Sion*, then! *let thine hands be no more torpid* — Why?

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p10"></span>*Jehovah*, he says, *in the midst of
thee strong, will save*. He repeats what he had said, but more fully
expresses what might have appeared obscure on account of its brevity. He
therefore shows here more at large the benefit of God’s presence — that
God will not dwell idly in his Church, but will be accompanied with his
power. For what end? To save. We hence see that the word <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p10.1"></span>גבור, *gebur*, ascribed to God, is very
emphatical; as though he had said, that God would not be idle while
residing in the midst of his Church, but would become its evident
strength. And it is worthy of notice, that God exhibits not himself as
strong that he may terrify his elect, but only that he may become their
preserver.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *He will rejoice
over thee with gladness*. This must be referred to the gratuitous love
of God, by which he embraces and cherishes his Church, as a husband his
wife whom he most tenderly loves. Such feelings, we know, belong not to
God; but this mode of speaking, which often occurs in Scripture, is thus
to be understood by us; for as God cannot otherwise show his favor
towards us and the greatness of his love, he compares himself to a
husband, and us to a wife. He means in short — that God is most highly
pleased when he can show himself kind to his Church.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p12"></span>He confirms and shows again the same
thing more clearly, *He will be at rest* (or silent) *in his love*. The
proper meaning of <span id="iv.iv.xix-p12.1"></span>חרש, *charesh*, is
to be silent, but it means here to be at rest. The import is, that God
will be satisfied, as we say in French, *Il prendra tout son
contentement*; as though he had said that God wished nothing more than
sweetly and quietly to cherish his Church. As I have already said, this
feeling is indeed ascribed to God with no strict correctness; for we
know that he can instantly accomplish whatever it pleases him: but he
assumes the character of men; for except he thus speaks familiarly with
us, he cannot fully show how much he loves us. God then shall be at rest
in his love; that is, “It will be his great delight, it will be the
chief pleasure of thy God when he cherishes thee: as when one cherishes
a wife most dear to him, so God will then rest in his love.” *He then
says, He will exult over thee with joy*  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121)

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p17"></span>These hyperbolic terms seem indeed to
set forth something inconsistent, for what can be more alien to God’s
glory than to exult like man when influenced by joy arising from love?
It seems then that the very nature of God repudiates these modes of
speaking, and the Prophet appears as though he had removed God from his
celestial throne to the earth. A heathen poet says, —

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p18"></span>Not well do agree, nor dwell on the same
throne,  
Majesty and love. (Ovid. Met. Lib. 2: 816-7.)

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p19"></span>God indeed represents himself here as a
husband, who burns with the greatest love towards his wife; and this
does not seem, as we have said, to be suitable to his glory; but
whatever tends to this end — to convince us of God’s ineffable love
towards us, so that we may rest in it, and being weaned as it were from
the world, may seek this one thing only, that he may confer on us his
favor — whatever tends to this, doubtless illustrates the glory of God,
and derogates nothing from his nature. We at the same time see that God,
as it were, humbles himself; for if it be asked whether these things are
suitable to the nature of God, we must say, that nothing is more alien
to it. It may then appear by no means congruous, that God should be
described by us as a husband who burns with love to his wife: but we
hence more fully learn, as I have already said, how great is God’s favor
towards us, who thus humbles himself for our sake, and in a manner
transforms himself, while he puts on the character of another. Let every
one of us come home also to himself, and acknowledge how deep is the
root of unbelief; for God cannot provide for our good and correct this
evil, to which we are all subject, without departing as it were from
himself, that he might come nigher to us.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p20"></span>And whenever we meet with this mode of
speaking, we ought especially to remember, that it is not without reason
that God labors so much to persuade us of his love, because we are not
only prone by nature to unbelief, but exposed to the deceits of Satan,
and are also inconstant and easily drawn away from his word: hence it is
that he assumes the character of man. We must, at the same time, observe
what I have before stated — that whatever is calculated to set forth the
love of God, does not derogate from his glory; for his chief glory is
that vast and ineffable goodness by which he has once embraced us, and
which he will show us to the end.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p21"></span>What the Prophet says of *that day* is
to be extended to the whole kingdom of Christ. He indeed speaks of the
deliverance of the people; but we must ever bear in mind what I have
already stated — that it is not one year, or a few years, which are
intended, when the Prophets speak of future redemption; for the time
which is now mentioned began when the people were restored from the
Babylonian captivity, and continues its course to the final advent of
Christ. And hence also we learn that these hyperbolic expressions are
not extravagant, when the Prophets say, Thou shalt not afterwards fear,
nor see evil: for if we regard the dispersion of that people, doubtless
no trial, however heavy, can happen to us, which is not moderate, when
we compare our lot with the state of the ancient people; for the land of
Canaan was then the only pledge of God’s favor and love. When,
therefore, the Jews were ejected from their inheritance, it was, as we
have said elsewhere, a sort of repudiation; it was the same as if a
father were to eject from his house a son, and to repudiate him. Christ
was not as yet manifested to the world. The miserable Jews had an
evidence, in figures and shadows, of that future favor which was
afterwards manifested by the gospel. Since, then, God gave them so small
an evidence of his love, how could it be otherwise but that they must
have fainted, when driven far away from their land? Though the Church is
now scattered and torn, and seems little short of being ruined, yet God
is ever present with us in his only-begotten Son: we have also the gate
of the celestial kingdom fully opened. There is, therefore, administered
to us at all times more abundant reasons for joy than formerly to the
ancient people, especially when they seemed to have been rejected by
God. This is the reason why the Prophet says, that the Church would be
lessened by calamities, when God again gathered it. But that redemption
of the people of Israel ought at this day to be borne in mind by us; for
it was a memorable work of God, by which he intended to afford a
perpetual testimony that he is the deliverer of all those who hope in
him. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p2"></span>**18.** I will gather *them that are*
sorrowful for the solemn assembly, *who* are of thee, *to whom* the
reproach of it *was* a burden.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p3"></span>**18.** Afflictos a tempore (*vel*, pro
tempore, *vel*, ad tempus, *ut alii vertunt*) congregabo qui ex te
erunt: onus (*vertunt quidam*, *sed active* *accipere Propheta potius*,
qui sistinuerunt *ergo*) super eam opprobrium.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p6"></span>He proceeds here with the same subject,
but in different words; for except some consolation had been introduced,
what the Prophet has hitherto said would have been frigid; for he had
promised them joy, he had exhorted the chosen of God to offer praise and
thanksgiving; but they were at the same time in a most miserable state.
It was hence necessary to add this declaration respecting the exiles
being gathered.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p7"></span>But he says *at the time*. Some read, in
respect to time; but this is obscure and strained. Others render it, at
the time; but it means strictly from the time; though <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p7.1"></span>מ, *mem*, may sometimes be rendered as a
particle of comparison. Interpreters do not seem to me rightly to
understand the Prophet’s meaning: for I do not doubt but that he points
out here the fixed time of deliverance, as though he had said, I will
again gather thine afflicted, and those who have endured thy reproach.
When? at the time, <span id="iv.iv.xx-p7.2"></span>ממועד, *memuod*; that
is, at the determined or fixed time: for <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p7.3"></span>מועד, *muod*, is not taken in Hebrew for time
simply, but for a predetermined time, as we say in French, *Un terme
prefix* *I will* then *gather thine afflicted*, but not soon. Our
Prophet then holds the faithful here somewhat in suspense, that they
might continue in their watch tower, and patiently wait for God’s help;
for we know how great is our haste, and how we run headlong when we hope
for anything; but this celerity, according to the old proverb, is often
delay to us. Since, then, men are always carried away by a certain heat,
or by too much impetuosity, to lay hold on what may happen, the Prophet
here lays a restraint, and intimates that God has his own seasons to
fulfill what he has promised, that he will not do so soon, nor according
to the will of men, but when the suitable time shall come. And this time
is that which he has appointed, not what we desire.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p8"></span>He then adds, *Who have sustained reproach
for her*. In this second clause the Prophet no doubt repeats the same
thing; but at the same time he points out, not without reason, their
condition — that the Jews suffered reproach and contumely at the time of
their exile, and that on account of being the Church; that is, because
they professed to worship their own God; for on account of his name the
Jews were hated by all nations, inasmuch as their religion was different
from the superstitions of all heathens. It could not hence be, but that
the unbelieving should vex them with many reproaches, when they were
carried away into exile, and scattered in all directions.  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122)

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p18"></span>He had said before, I will gather the
afflicted; but he now adds, I will gather those who have sustained
reproach. I have stated that some read, A burden upon her is reproach;
but no sense can be elicited from such words. The Prophet does here no
doubt obviate a temptation which awaited God’s children, who would have
to experience in exile what was most grievous to be borne; for they were
to be exposed to the taunts and ridicule of all nations. Hence he
seasonably heals their grief by saying, that though for a time they
would be laughed at by the ungodly, they would yet return to their own
country; for the Lord had resolved to gather them. But we must ever
remember what I have said — that God would do this in his own time, when
he thought it seasonable. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p2"></span>**19.** Behold, at that time I will undo
all that afflict thee: and I will save her that halteth, and gather her
that was driven out; and I will get them praise and fame in every land
where they have been put to shame.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p3"></span>**19.** Ecce ego conficiens omnes
oppressores tuos (qui te humiliant, ad verbum) in tempore illo; et
servabo claudicantem, et reducam expulsam ad faciendum eos in laudem et
nomen in terra opprobrii ipsorum.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p6"></span>He confirms here what I have referred to
in the last verse that God would overcome all obstacles, when his
purpose was to restore his people. On this the Prophet, as we have said,
dwells, that the Jews might in their exile sustain themselves with the
hope of deliverance. As, then, they could not instantly conceive what
was so incredible according to the perceptions of the flesh, he
testifies that there is sufficient power in God to subdue all enemies.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p7"></span>*At that time*, he says, he repeats what
had been stated before — that his people must wait as long as God
pleases to exercise them under the cross; for if their option had been
given to the Jews, they would have willingly continued at their ease;
and we know how men are wont to exempt themselves from every trouble,
fear, and sorrow. As therefore men naturally desire rest and immunity
from all evil, the Prophet here exhorts the faithful to patience, and
shows, that it cannot be that God will become their deliverer, except
they submit to his chastisement; at that time then. It is ever to be
observed, that the Prophet condemns that extreme haste which usually
takes hold of men when God chastises them. However slowly then and
gradually God proceeds in the work of delivering his own, the Prophet
shows here, that there was no reason for them to despair, or to be
broken down in their spirits.  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123)

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p9"></span>He then subjoins, that he would *save the
halting, and restore the driven away*. By these words he means, that
though the Church would be maimed and torn, there would yet be nothing
that could hinder God to restore her: for by the halting and the driven
away he understands none other than one so stripped of power as wholly
to fail in himself. He therefore compares the Church of God to a person,
who, with relaxed limbs, is nearly dead. Hence, when we are useless as
to any work, what else is our life but a languor like to death? But the
Prophet declares here, that the seasonable time would come when God
would relieve his own people: though they were to become prostrate and
fallen, though they were to be scattered here and there, like a torn
body of man, an arm here and a leg there, every limb separated; yet he
declares that nothing could possibly prevent God to gather his Church
and restore it to its full vigor and strength. In short, he means that
the restoration of the Church would be a kind of resurrection; for the
Lord would humble his people until they became almost lifeless, so as
not to be able to breathe: but he would at length gather them, and so
gather them that they would not only breathe but be replenished with
such new vigor as though they had received no loss. I cannot finish the
whole today.

<span id="iv.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iv.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are at
this day so scattered on account of our sins, and even they who seem to
be collected in thy name and under thy authority, are yet so torn by
mutual discords, that the safety of thy Church hangs as it were on a
thread, while in the meantime thine enemies seem with savage cruelty to
destroy all those who are thine, and to obliterate thy gospel, — O
grant, that we may live in quietness and resignation, hoping in thy
promises, so that we may not doubt, but that thou in due time will
become our deliverer: and may we so patiently bear to be afflicted and
cast down by thee, that we may ever raise up our groans to heaven so as
to be heard through the name of thy Son, until being at length freed
from every contest, we shall enjoy that blessed rest which is laid up
for us in heaven, and which thine only begotten Son has procured for us.
Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-eighth

<span id="iv.iv.xxiii-p2"></span>We stopped yesterday at the latter
clause of the last verse but one of the Prophet Zephaniah, where God
promises that the Jews, who had been before not only obscure, but also
exposed to all kinds of reproaches, would again become illustrious; for
to give them for a name and for a praise, is no other thing than to
render them celebrated, that they might be, as they say, in the mouth of
every one.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>And he says, *in the land of their
shame*, or reproach; for they had been a mockery everywhere; as the
unbelieving thought that they deluded themselves with a vain hope,
because they boasted that God, under whose protection they lived, would
be their perpetual guardian, though they were driven away into exile.
Hence an occasion for taunt and ridicule was given. But a change for the
better is here promised; for all in Assyria and Chaldea would have to
see that this was a people chosen by God; so that there would be a
remarkable testimony among all nations, that all who trust in God are by
no means disappointed, for they find that he is faithful in his
promises. The last verse follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p2"></span>**20.** At that time will I bring you
*again*, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a name
and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your
captivity before your eyes, saith the LORD.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>**20.** In tempore illo reducam vos, in
tempore illo colligam vos; quia ponam vos in nomen et laudem per cunctos
populos terrae, (*vel*, inter cunctos populos terrae,) quam reducam
captivitates vestras in oculis vestris, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p6"></span>He repeats the same things, with some
change in the words; and not without reason, because no one of then
thought that the Jews, who were cast as it were into the grave, would
ever come forth again, and especially, that they would be raised unto
such dignity and unto so elevated an honor. As then this was not
probable, that Prophet confirms his prediction — *I will restore you,
says God, I will gather you, even because I have given you a name*; that
is, it is my resolved and fixed purpose to render you celebrated: but
here again are laid down the words we have already noticed.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p7"></span>He afterwards adds — *When I shall
restore your captivities*. The plural number is to be noticed; and not
rightly nor prudently is what has been done by many interpreters, who
have rendered the word in the singular number; for the Prophet mentions
captivities designedly, as the Jews had not only been driven into exile,
but had also been scattered through various countries, so that they were
not one captive people, but many troops of captives. Hence his purpose
was to obviate a doubt; for it would not have been enough that one
captivity should be restored, except all who had been dispersed were
collected into one body by the wonderful power of God. And hence he adds
before your eyes, that the Jews might be convinced that they should be
eye-witnesses of this miracle, which yet they could hardly conceive,
without raising up their thoughts above the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc29011.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span> The first word, \[<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>מוראה\], is rendered "rebellions” by
*Newcome* and *Henderson.* The *Vulgate* is nearly the same, “<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p10.2"></span>provocatrix — provoking.” The verb is \[<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p10.3"></span>מרא\], once in *Hiphil* in <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p10.4"></span>[Job
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10.4"></span>;
and to take it to be the same with \[<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p10.5"></span>מרה\], to rebel, is gratuitous. The context
in Job shows its idea to be that of raising up or swelling; and
*Parkhurst* very properly renders the participle here, swelling,
arrogant, insolent; and this notion entirely corresonds with the
character given of the city in the next verse; being arrogant, it did
“not hear the voice” of God. The verse may be rendered thus —

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span>Woe to the arrogant and polluted,  
The city, which is an oppressor!

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12"></span>Then follows a specification as to her
conduct, —

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p13"></span>She has not hearkened to the voice,  
She has not received instruction;  
In Jehovah has she not trusted,  
To her God has she not drawn nigh.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14"></span>To “obey the voice,” as given in our
version and by *Newcome*, is not quite correct; she was too arrogant
even to hear or attend to the voice. “Correction,” as in our version,
and by *Calvin*, is rendered “instruction” by *Newcome* and *Henderson*;
for \[<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>מוסר\] has often this meaning.
The *Septuagint* have παιδαιαν — discipline. But the same phrase occurs
in verse 7, where the word necessarily means instruction, by way of
warning, communicated by the example of others. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc29011.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p10"></span> This is the explanation of *Grotius*,
*Mede*, and *Henderson*. The latter’s version is — “They gnaw no bones
in the morning;” *i.e.*, all is devoured in the night. *Newcome*,
adopting the conjecture of *Houbigant,* supposes the true reading to be
\[<span id="iv.iv.iii-p10.1"></span>ידמו\], and gives this rendering —
“They wait not until the morning,” which seems to have no meaning in
this connection. What *Cocceius* proposes is more probable — “Who have
not gnawed in the morning;” and on this account they were exceedingly
voracious in the evening. But the idea of our common version is very
appropriate; it implies that they were like wild beasts prowling all
night, and carrying as it were their prey to their dens, that they might
devour it there in the morning. This is the view taken by *Henry.* “They
devour the flesh,” says Adam *Clarke*, “in the night, and gnaw the
bones, and extract the marrow afterwards.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc29011.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p9"></span> Her prophets are light, *they are*
treacherous men. — *Newcome.*

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p10"></span>Her prophets are vainglorious,
hypocritical men. — *Henderson.*

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11"></span>The word rendered “light,” as a river,
and not “unstable,” as in our version. It is applied as a participle in
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>[Jud
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>,
to designate persons overflowing in wickedness, dissolute, licentious,
dissipated; and as a noun in <span id="iv.iv.iv-p11.2"></span>[Jer
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p11.2"></span>, to set forth the licentious conduct of the
false prophets, who like the priests under the Papacy, were given to
lasciviousness, and “committed adultery with their neighbors’ wives,”
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11.3"></span>[Jer
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p11.3"></span>. See also <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p11.4"></span>[Jer
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p11.4"></span>. As Zephaniah was cotemporary with Jeremiah,
his description of the Prophets is thus seen to be the same, “Her
Prophets are licentious,” or lascivious.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p12"></span>Men of dissimulations or deceits, \[<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>אנשי בגדות\], signify, that under the
pretense of telling the truth, they delivered what was false; or in the
words of Jeremiah, they “caused the people to err by their lies,” while
they pretended to deliver true messages from God: so that <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p12.2"></span>[Jer
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p12.2"></span>, contains an explanation of this clause.
“Deceiving men” would perhaps be the best rendering. Though they were
licentious, yet they deceived men, and made them to believe that they
were true Prophets. They were impostors, and notwithstanding their
immoral character, they persuaded deluded men that they were true and
faithful. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc29011.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14"></span> The word, \[<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>קדש\], as *Calvin* intimates, does not
specifically mean the sanctuary, but holiness, or, as *Henderson*
renders it, “what is sacred,” or holy. Both our version and *Newcome*
improperly render it “the sanctuary.” The explanation of what is meant
may be found in <span id="iv.iv.iv-p14.2"></span>[Eze
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.2"></span>. The word for sanctuary is \[<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.3"></span>מקדש\]. See <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.4"></span>[Ezek.
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p15"></span>The words, \[<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>חמסו תורה\], have been taken to mean, —
either, “They violated the law,” as the words are rendered in <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p15.2"></span>[Eze
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p15.2"></span>, that is, transgressed it by acting contrary
to it; or, “They perverted the law,” forcing it, as it were, out of its
plain meaning by subtle glosses. The *Septuagint* render the verb
ηθετησαν — set aside or abolished, in Ezekiel, and here ἀσεβουσι — act
impiously. “Trangressed,” says *Grotius*; “Do violence to,” say
*Piscator* and *Drusius*, that is, by wresting its words. It occurs much
oftener as a noun than as a verb, and it commonly means a wrong or
injustice done in an outrageous and violent manner. According to this
general idea, we may render the phrase here, “they have outraged the
law,” either by their conduct, or by their comments. It was in either
case a wrong done to the law, that was enormous, passing all reason and
decency. So that to transgress or to violate, or to do violence to, or
to pervert the law, does not convey the full meaning. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc29011.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p7"></span> The verbs here are in the future tense,
but evidently express, as *Calvin* observes, a continued act. The same
is exactly the case in *Welsh*; the verbs are in the future tense, but
are understood as expressing a present act or a continued act, or what
is continually or habitually done. In English the present must be
adopted —

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p8"></span>*The righteous Jehovah* is *in the midst
of her,  
He doeth no injustice:  
Every morning his judgment  
He bringeth to light* — *it fails not;  
Yet the unjust knoweth no shame.*

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p9"></span>"Injustice” in the second, and “unjust”
in the fifth line, come from the same root. “Judgment” here is what God
judges and determines to be right and just; and it is set forth here as
the sun rising every day from morning to morning, and as never failing
to appear. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc29011.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p11"></span> This verse, literally rendered, is as
follows, —

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p12"></span>I have cut off nations;  
Desolate are become their towers;  
I have made solitary their streets, without a passenger;  
Deserted are become their cities,  
Without a man, without an inhabitant.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p13"></span>It is not the *destruction*. The
nations being cut off, then the towers became desolate, the streets
empty, and the cities forsaken. The last line but one is literally —
“Hunted have been their cities,” so that no man was left behind. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc29011.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p23"></span> The last clause has been variously
rendered. There is no assistance from the Septuagint, as the whole text
is very different. *Marckius*, after *Drusius*, connects it, not with
the preceding, but with the following line, in this sense, that how much
soever God had punished the city, yet its inhabitants were the more best
to corrupt their ways. But the words can hardly admit of this meaning.
*Henderson* supposes \[<span id="iv.iv.viii-p23.1"></span>כ\] to be
understood before \[<span id="iv.iv.viii-p23.2"></span>כל\], and gives
this rendering of the two lines —

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p24"></span>*That her habitation might not be cut
off,  
*According *to all that I had appointed concerning her.*

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p25"></span>*Newcome* differs as to the last line —

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p26"></span>*After all* the punishment with *which
I had visited her.*

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p27"></span>None of these are satisfactory.
*Grotius*, taking the sense of the *Targum,* means to have given the
best meaning. He says that \[<span id="iv.iv.viii-p27.1"></span>פקד\],
followed by \[<span id="iv.iv.viii-p27.2"></span>על\], means sometimes
to appoint or constitute, and refers to <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p27.3"></span>[2Ch
36:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p27.3"></span>, “All the *good* which I have appointed to
her,” or promised; but he unnecessarily supposes “shall come” to be
understood; for the word, “all which,” may be considered to be in
apposition with “habitation.” I give the following version of this whole
verse —

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p28"></span>*I said, “Surely thou wilt fear me,  
Thou wilt receive instruction;”  
Then cut off should not be her habitation* —*  
All that I have committed to her:  
Yet they rose up early, they corrupted all their doings.*

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p29"></span>To rise up early is a Hebrew phrase,
which means a resolved and diligent attention to a thing. The import of
the line is, that they with full-bent purpose and activity corrupted all
their doings. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc29011.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p10"></span> This verse is considered by *Newcome*
and *Henderson* to be addressed to the godly, to encourage them at the
approaching calamities, while *Piscator*, *Grotius*, *Marckius*, and
*Dathius*, agree with *Calvin* that it is an awful warning to the wicked
Jews, spoken of in the preceding verse. Differing somewhat from
*Calvin*, they regard the “nations” and “kingdoms” to be the
Babylonians, who were composed of various nations and kingdoms, and
“upon them” to be the Jews, and “the whole land” to be that of Judea.
This view, no doubt, is the most consistent with the context. The
objection made by *Henderson*, that the words *expect*, or *wait for
me*, are ever used in a good sense, seems to have no force, for these
words by themselves can mean neither what is good nor what is bad, the
whole depends on the context. The verb \[<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p10.1"></span>חכה\] simply means to tarry, to wait —
μενειν. The word “therefore” seems to connect this with the preceding
verse, and there is nothing in the foregoing part of the chapter that
alludes to the godly. Besides, the words which follow “wait for me”
explain them, as will be seen by the following literal rendering of the
whole verse —

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p11"></span>8. *Therefore wait for me, saith
Jehovah,  
For the day of my rising to the prey!  
For my purpose is to gather nations,  
To assemble kingdoms,  
In order to pour on them my indignation,  
All the heat of my anger;  
For by the fire of my jealousy  
Shall be consumed the whole land.*

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p12"></span>The “fire of God’s jealousy” sufficiently
proves that what is meant is the land of Judea. (See chapter 1:18.) —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc29011.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p9"></span> \[<span id="iv.iv.x-p9.1"></span>כי אן\],
“For then,” *Henderson*; “Surely then,” *Newcome*; “<span
id="iv.iv.x-p9.2"></span>Postea vero — but afterwards,” *Dathius* and
*Grotius*. And *Newcome* says, that \[<span
id="iv.iv.x-p9.3"></span>אן\] is used here largely, for “afterwards.” It
refers to the time after the execution of the judgments previously
mentioned.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p10"></span>“The pure lip” is evidently not the
language which God would adopt in addressing the nations, but the
language they would adopt in addressing him. What is meant is a pure
heart; what gives utterance to the heart is mentioned for the heart
itself; as the “shoulder” is afterwards used for the service that is
rendered to God.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p11"></span>The verb \[<span
id="iv.iv.x-p11.1"></span>הפך\], to turn, means to change the form,
condition, or course of a thing, conveying perhaps here the idea, that
the pure lip is substituted for that which is impure: “I will give them
as a change, instead of what they have, a pure lip.” Μεταστρεψω — “I
will change,” Sept. and Sym.; στρεψω — “I will turn,” Aq. and Theod. It
is rendered “<span id="iv.iv.x-p11.2"></span>reddam“ and “<span
id="iv.iv.x-p11.3"></span>restituam“ by *Drusius* and *Grotius*

<span id="iv.iv.x-p12"></span>*Newcome*, following the conjecture of
*Houbigant*, reads \[<span id="iv.iv.x-p12.1"></span>אשפך\], “I will
pour out,” contrary to all the ancient versions, and without the
countenance of a single MS.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p13"></span>Though the word, \[<span
id="iv.iv.x-p13.1"></span>עמים\], peoples, most frequently means the
nations, yet there are instances in which it means the people of Israel,
inasmuch as they were composed of various tribes. See <span
id="iv.iv.x-p13.2"></span>[1Ki
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.x-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.x-p13.3"></span>[Joe
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.x-p13.3"></span>.
And if we render the verb, “restore,” with *Drusius* and *Grotius*, then
we must adopt this meaning. Eleven MSS. have “and,” \[<span
id="iv.iv.x-p13.4"></span>ו\], before the verb to “serve:” and as there
is no preposition before “shoulder,” we may render the verse —

<span id="iv.iv.x-p14"></span>*But I will then restore to the people a
pure lip,  
That they may, all of them, call on the name of Jehovah,* —*  
And one shoulder, that they may serve him.*

<span id="iv.iv.x-p15"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc29011.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p21"></span> The expression “with one shoulder” is
rendered by the Septuagint, “under one yoke” — ὑπὸ ζυγὸν ἕνα. The idea
is that of oxen drawing together. To serve God under one yoke, is to do
the same service unitedly. “A metaphor,” says *Newcome*, “from the joint
efforts of yoked beasts.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc29011.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p9"></span> It is more consonant with the style of
the Prophets to render the clauses apart, as *Calvin* does, than as it
is done in our version, and by *Newcome* and *Henderson*. The auxiliary
verb, as is often the case, is to be understood in the first clause, —

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p10"></span>*From beyond the rivers of Cush* shall
be *my suppliants;  
The daughter of my dispersed shall bring my offering.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc29011.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p16"></span> This may be rendered, “Those who exult
in thy exaltation:” the Targum has it, “in thy glory.” This “glory” or
“exaltation,” as explained in the next verse, was Mount Sion. There was
a preeminence, but it was made an object of unholy boasting. The
paraphrase of *Henderson*, “thy proud exulters,” completely leaves out
the character of their exultation. The whole verse may be thus rendered,
—

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p17"></span>In that day thou shalt not be ashamed of
thy doings,  
By which thou hast transgressed against me;  
For then will I remove from the midst of thee  
Those who exult in thy exaltation;  
And thou shalt no more be elevated  
On account of the mount of my holiness.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p18"></span>The word \[<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p18.1"></span>גאות\] means exaltation or glory in a good
as well as in a bad sense. See <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p18.2"></span>[Ps
93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p18.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p18.3"></span>[Isa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p18.3"></span>. What they exulted in was in itself good,
but they exulted only in an outward privilege, without connecting it
with God, as many have done in all ages. This is the essence of
Pharisaism. *Vatables* and *Drusius* regard the word as having this
sense here. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc29011.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iv.iv.xv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p10"></span> The first word, \[<span
id="iv.iv.xv-p10.1"></span>עכי\], means one made humble by distress or
affliction, the humbled, rather than the humble. The second word,
\[<span id="iv.iv.xv-p10.2"></span>דל\], is one exhausted, or reduced in
number, or reduced to poverty. *Newcome* renders it “lowly,” but
improperly. *Jerome* has “<span id="iv.iv.xv-p10.3"></span>pauperem et
egenum — poor and needy;” the Septuagint, “πραυν και ταπεινον — meek and
humble;” *Marckius*, “<span id="iv.iv.xv-p10.4"></span>afflictum et
attenuatum — afflicted and diminished.” Perhaps the best rendering would
be, “a people humbled and reduced.” The idea of being “afflicted” or
distressed, is excluded by what is expressed at the end of the next
verse, and also that of being “poor” in a worldly respect. The reference
seems to be to a humbled state of mind, occasioned by calamities, and to
a reduced number — a remnant.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p11"></span>“I will leave” for \[<span
id="iv.iv.xv-p11.1"></span>השארתי\], as in our version, is not its full
meaning. It means to reserve as a remnant. “I will cause to remain,” or,
“I will reserve,” would be the proper rendering. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc29011.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p10"></span> To give the words their specific
meaning, they may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p11"></span>Cry aloud thou daughter of Zion,  
Shout ye Israel;  
Rejoice and exult with all thine heart,  
Thou daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p12"></span>The first two lines encourage the
fullest expression of feelings, loud crying, and shouting like a
trumpet; and then is set forth the character of these feelings; they
were to be those of job and exultation. Our version, *Newcome* and
*Henderson*, render the second line correctly, but not the first; and
“Be glad and rejoice” are too feeble to express what the third line
contains: for the exhortation is to “rejoice” and to “exult.” It was to
be the loud cry of joy, and the shouting of exultation or triumph. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc29011.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p15"></span> Turned aside hath Jehovah thy
judgments. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc29011.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p17"></span> The words are, \[<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p17.1"></span>פנה איבך\], “he hath turned away thine
enemy.” Many copies have \[<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p17.2"></span>איביך\],
“thine enemies;” but it may be regarded as the poetical singular. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc29011.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p13"></span> This is a very remarkable passage.
Perhaps the more literal version would be the following, —

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p14"></span>16. *In that day he will say to
Jerusalem, “Fear thou not;  
Sion! relaxed let not thy hands be:*

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p15"></span>**17.** <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p15.1"></span>He will rejoice over thee with joy;  
He will renew thee in his love,  
He will exult over thee with acclamation.”

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p16"></span>The verb \[<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p16.1"></span>יאמר\] is rendered as above by the
Septuagint, ερει, meaning the Lord. The last line but one is according
to the Septuagint and the Syriac; and this sense has been adopted by
*Houbigant*, *Dathius*, and *Newcome*. There is the difference only of
one letter, \[<span id="iv.iv.xix-p16.2"></span>ד\] for \[<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p16.3"></span>ר\], which are very like. The law of
parallelism is in favor of this meaning. The verse contains four lines:
there is an evident correspondence of meaning in the second and the last
line; and so there is between the first and the third according to the
preceding version, but not otherwise. The word rendered “acclamation” is
a noun from the verb \[<span id="iv.iv.xix-p16.4"></span>רכה\], to cry
aloud, used at the beginning of verse 14. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc29011.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p9"></span> This verse presents considerable
difficulties, and has been variously rendered. The Septuagint and the
Targum differ as much from one another, as they do from the Hebrew. None
regard the former as at all suitable; but some, as *Grotius* and
*Dathius*, take the meaning of the latter, though to reconcile it with
the Hebrew is difficult. *Marckius* seems to have given the most
probable meaning —

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p10"></span><span id="iv.iv.xx-p10.1"></span>Remotos
a festivitate collegi,  
Ex to sunt, onus super eam opprobrium.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p11"></span>*Those driven away from festivity have I
gathered,  
From thee they are* — *a burden on her* is *reproach.*

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p12"></span>The word \[<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p12.1"></span>נוגי\], he derives from \[<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p12.2"></span>הגה\]. In this case it is literally, “my
driven away,” or, “my removed” ones. \[<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p12.3"></span>מועד\] is assembling or meeting, as well as a
fixed time or season; and the assembling was that on festal days: it may
therefore be rendered, “festivals.” “From thee” is “Sion” in verse 16.
Instead of “on her,” more than ten copies, as well as the Targum, have
“on thee,” \[<span id="iv.iv.xx-p12.4"></span>עליך\]; but an abrupt
change of person is of frequent occurrence in the Prophets.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p13"></span>Following the sense of the Targum, we
may, perhaps, give the following version —

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p14"></span>The grieved for the festivals have I
gathered from thee;  
They were a burden on thee, a reproach.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p15"></span>The paraphrase of the Targum, as given by
*Dathius*, is the following —

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p16"></span>Those who among thee have impeded the
seasons of thy festivity,  
I will expel from thee; wo to them who have carried arms against thee,
and loaded thee with reproaches.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p17"></span>The “grieved for the festivals” were
those who disliked them, who grudged the offerings that were to be made.
The words are in the past tense, but future as to what is said; for the
Prophets declare things as exhibited to them in a vision. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc29011.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p8"></span> The first clause in this verse is
amended by *Newcome* and some other in conformity with the Septuagint:
but this is a very unsafe process. *Henderson’s* version is —Behold, I
will deal with all thine oppressors at that time. “Deal,” \[<span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p8.1"></span>עשה\]; “<span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p8.2"></span>interficiam — I will slay,” *Vulg.*; “<span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p8.3"></span>conficiam — I will make an end,” *Drusius*;
but to “deal with,” or “act against,” is the literal rendering. More is
implied than what is expressed, which is often the case with words used
in every language. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Haggai](cc29012)
