[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29005)  [Next](cc29007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet
upon Shigionoth.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Precatio Chabakuk Prophetae super
ignorantiis (*vel*, super canticis, *aut* instrumentis musicis.)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.i-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p6"></span>There is no doubt but that the Prophet
dictated this form of prayer for his people, before they were led into
exile, that they might always exercise themselves in the study of
religion. We indeed know that God cannot be rightly and from the heart
worshipped but in faith. Hence, in order to confine the dispersed
Israelites within due limits, so that they might not fall away from true
religion, the Prophet here sets before them the materials of faith, and
stimulates them to prayer: and we know, that our faith cannot be
supported in a better way than by the exercise of prayer.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p7"></span>Let us then bear in mind, that the way of
fostering true religion, prescribed here to the miserable Israelites
while dispersed in their exile, was to look up to God daily, that they
might strengthen their faith; for they could not have otherwise
continued in their obedience to God. They would, indeed, have wholly
fallen away into the superstitions of the Gentiles, had not the memory
of the covenant, which the Lord had made with them, remained firm in
their hearts: and we shall presently see that the Prophet lays much
stress upon this circumstance.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p8"></span>He calls it his own prayer,  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) not because he used it himself privately,
or composed it for himself, but that the prayer might have some
authority among the people; for they knew that a form of prayer dictated
for them by the mouth of a Prophet, was the same as though the Spirit
itself was to show them how they were to pray to God. The name, then, of
Habakkuk is added to it, not because he used it himself, but that the
people might be more encouraged to pray, when they knew that the Holy
Spirit, through the Prophet, had become their guide and teacher.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p10"></span>There is some difficulty connected with
the word <span id="iii.iv.i-p10.1"></span>שגינות, *sheginut*. The verb
<span id="iii.iv.i-p10.2"></span>שגג, *shegag*, or <span
id="iii.iv.i-p10.3"></span>שגה, *shege*, means, to act inconsiderately;
and from <span id="iii.iv.i-p10.4"></span>שגה, *shege*, is derived <span
id="iii.iv.i-p10.5"></span>שגיון, *shegiun*. Many render it, ignorance;
some, delight. Some think it to be the beginning of a song; others
suppose it to be a common melody; and others, a musical instrument. Thus
interpreters differ. In the seventh Psalm David, no doubt, calls either
a song or some musical instrument by the word <span
id="iii.iv.i-p10.6"></span>שגיון, *shegiun*. Yet some think that David
bears testimony there to his own innocency; and that, as he was not
conscious of having done wrong, his own innocency is alone signified by
the title: but this is a strained view. The word is taken in this place,
almost by common consent, for ignorances: and we know that the Hebrews
denominate by ignorances all errors or falls which are not grievous, and
such things as happen through inadvertence; and by this word they do not
extenuate their faults, but acknowledge themselves to be inconsiderate
when they offend. Then <span id="iii.iv.i-p10.7"></span>שגיון,
*shegiun*, is no excusable ignorance, which men lay hold on as a
pretext; but an error of folly and presumptions, when men are not
sufficiently attentive to the word of God. But perhaps the word <span
id="iii.iv.i-p10.8"></span>שגינות, *sheginut*, being here in the plural
number, ought to be taken for musical instruments. Yet as I would not
willingly depart from a received opinion, and as there is no necessity
in this case to constrain us to depart from it, let us follows what had
been already said, — that the Prophet dictates here for his people a
form of prayer for ignorances, that is, that they could not otherwise
hope for God’s forgiveness than by seeking his favor.  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) And how can we be reconciled to God,
except by his not imputing to us our sins?

<span id="iii.iv.i-p12"></span>But the Prophet, by asking for the
pardons of ignorances, does not omit more grievous sins; but intimates
that though their conscience does not reprove men, they are yet not on
that account innocent and without guilt; for they often inconsiderately
fall, and their faults are not to be excused for inadvertence. It is,
then, the same thing as though the Prophet reminded his own people, that
there was no remedy for them in adversity but by fleeing to God, and
fleeing as suppliants, in order to solicit his forgiveness; and that
they were not only to acknowledge their more grievous sins, but also to
confess that they were in many respects guilty; for they might have
fallen through error a thousand times, as we are inconsiderate almost
through the whole course of our life. We now, then, perceive what this
word means, and why the Prophet spoke rather of ignorances than of other
sins. But I shall not proceed farther now, as there is some other
business.

<span id="iii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
deigned to make thyself known to us by thy word, and as thou elevates us
to thyself in a way suitable to the ignorance of our minds, — O grant,
that we may not continue fixed in our stupidity, but that we may put off
all superstitions, and also renounce all the thoughts of our flesh, and
seek thee in the right way; and may we suffer ourselves to be so ruled
by thy word, that we may purely and from the heart call upon thee, and
so rely on thine infinite power, that we may not fear to despise the
whole world, and every adversity on the earth, until, having finished
our warfare, we shall at length be gathered into that blessed rest,
which thine only-begotten Son has procured for us by his own blood —
Amen.

<span id="iii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifteenth

<span id="iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>**2.** O Lord, I have heard thy speech,
*and* was afraid: O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years, in
the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p3"></span>**2.** Jehova, audivi vocem tuam (auditum
tuum, *ad verbum*, \[דעמש\];  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) )
Jehova, opus tuum in medio annorum vivifica illud (*sed relativum
pronomen abundat*;) in medio annorum notum fac; in ira misericordiae
recorderis.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p6"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7"></span>The Prophet says here, in the name of the
whole people, that he was terrified by the voice of God, for so I
understand the word, though in many places it means report, as some also
explain it in this place. But as the preaching of the Gospel is called
in <span id="iii.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>[Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>,
<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7.2"></span>שמעה, *shemoe*, report, it seems to me
more suitable to the present passage to render it the voice of God; for
the general sentiment, that the faithful were terrified at the report of
God, would be frigid. It ought rather to be applied to the Prophecies
which have been already explained: and doubtless Habakkuk did not intend
here to speak only in general of God’s power; but, as we have seen in
the last lecture, he humbly confesses the sins of the people, and then
prays for forgiveness. It is then not to be doubted but that he says
here, that he was terrified by the voice of God, that is, when he heard
him threatening punishment so grievous. He then adds, *Revive thy work
in the middle of the years, and make it known*. At last, by way of
anticipation, he subjoins, that *God would remember his mercy*, though
justly offended by the sins of the people.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p8"></span>But by saying, that he feared the voice
of God, he makes a confession, or gives an evidence of repentance; for
we cannot from the heart seek pardon, unless we be first made humble.
When a sinner is not displeased with himself, and confesses not his
guilt, he is not deserving of mercy. We then see why the Prophet speaks
here of fear; and that is, that he might thus obtain for himself and for
others the favor of God; for as soon as a sinner willingly condemns
himself, and does not do this formally, but seriously from the heart, he
is already reconciled to God; for God bids us in this way to anticipate
his judgement. This is one thing. But if it be asked, for what purpose
the Prophet heard God’s voice; the obvious answer is, — that as it is
not the private prayer of one person, but of the whole Church, he
prescribes here to the faithful the way by which they were to obtain
favor from God, and turn him to mercy; and that is, by dreading his
threatening and by acknowledging that whatever God threatened by his
Prophets was near at hand.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p9"></span>Then follows the second clause, *Jehovah!
in the middle of the years revive thy work*. By the work of God he means
the condition of his people or of the Church. For though God is the
creator of heaven and earth, he would yet have his own Church to be
acknowledged to be, as it were, his peculiar workmanship, and a special
monument of his power, wisdom, justice, and goodness. Hence, by way of
eminence, he calls here the condition of the elect people the work of
God; for the seed of Abraham was not only a part of the human race, but
was the holy and peculiar possession of God. Since, then, the Israelites
were set apart by the Lord, they are rightly called his work; as we read
in another place,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p10"></span>“The work of thine hands thou wilt not
despise,”  
<span id="iii.iv.iv-p10.2"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p11"></span>And God often says, “This is my
planting,” “This is the work of my hands,” when he speaks of his Church.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p12"></span>By *the middle of the years*, he means
the middle course, as it were, of the people’s life. For from the time
when God chose the race of Abraham to the coming of Christ, was the
whole course, as it were, of their life, when we compare the people to a
man; for the fullness of their age was at the coming of Christ. If,
then, that people had been destroyed, it would have been the same as
though death were to snatch away a person in the flower of his age.
Hence the Prophet prays God not to take away the life of his people in
the middle of their course; for Christ having not come, the people had
not attained maturity, nor arrived at manhood. *In the middle*, then,
*of the years thy work revive*; that is, “Though we seem destined to
death, yet restore us.” *Make it known*, he says, in the middle of the
years; that is, “Show it to be in reality thy work.”  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p17"></span>We now apprehend the real meaning of the
Prophet. After having confessed that the Israelites justly trembled at
Cod’s voice, as they saw themselves deservedly given up to perdition, he
then appeals to the mercy of God, and prays God to revive his own work.
He brings forward here nothing but the favor of adoption: thus he
confesses that there was no reason why God should forgive his people,
except that he had been pleased freely to adopt them, and to choose them
as his peculiar people; for on this account it is that God is wont to
show his favor towards us even to the last. as, then, this people had
been once chosen by God, the Prophet records this adoptions, and prays
God to continue and fulfill to the end what he had begun. With regard to
the half course of life, the comparison ought to be observed; for we see
that the race of Abraham was not chosen for a short time, but until
Christ the Redeemer was manifested. Now we have this in common with the
ancient people, that God adopts us, that he may at length bring us into
the inheritance of eternal life. Until, then, the work of our salvation
is completed, we are, as it were, running our course. We may therefore
adopt this form of prayer, which is prescribed for us by the Holy
Spirit, — that God would not forsake his ohm work; in the middle of our
course.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p18"></span>What he now subjoins — *in wrath
remember mercy*, is intended to anticipate an objection; for this
thought might have occurred to the faithful — “there is no ground for us
to hope pardon from God, whom we have so grievously provoked, nor is
there any reason for us to rely any more on the covenant which we have
so perfidiously violated.” The Prophet meets this objection, and he
flees to the gracious favor of God, however much he perceived that the
people would have to suffer the just punishment of their sins, such as
they deserved. He then confesses that God was justly angry with his
people, and yet that the hope of salvation was not on that account
closed up, for the Lord had promised to be propitious. Since God then is
not inexorable towards his people — nay, while he chastises them he
ceases not to be a father; hence the Prophet connects here the mercy of
God with his wrath.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p19"></span>We have elsewhere said that the word
wrath is not to be taken according to its strict sense, when the
faithful or the elect are spoken of; for God does not chastise them
because he hates them; nay, on the contrary, he thereby manifests the
care he has for their salvations. Hence the scourges by which God
chastises his children are testimonies of his love. But the Scripture
represents the judgement with which God visits his people as wrath, not
towards their persons but towards their sins. Though then God shows love
to his chosen, yet he testifies when he punishes their sins that
iniquity is hated by him. When God then comes forth as it were as a
judge, and shows that sins displease him, he is said to be angry with
the faithful; and there is also in this a reference to the perceptions
of men; for we cannot, when God chastises us, do otherwise than feel the
accusations of our own conscience. Hence then is this hatred; for when
our conscience condemns us we must necessarily acknowledge God to be
angry with us, that is with respect to us. When therefore we provoke
God’s wrath by our sins we feel him to be angry with us; but yet the
Prophet collects together things which seem wholly contrary — even that
God *would remember mercy in wrath*; that is, that he would show himself
displeased with them in such a way as to afford to the faithful at the
same time some taste of his favor and mercy by finding him to be
propitious to them.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p20"></span>We now then perceive how the Prophet had
joined the last clause to the foregoing. Whenever, then, the judgement
of the flesh would lead us to despair, let us ever set up against it
this truth — that God is in such a way angry that he never forgets his
mercy — that is, in his dealings with his elect. It follows —

<span id="iii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p2"></span>**3.** God came from Teman, and the Holy
One from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the
earth was full of his praise.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p3"></span>**3.** Deus de Theman veniet, et Sanctus e
monte Paran. Selach.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) Operuit
coelos decor (*vel*, gloria) ejus; laude ejus plena est terra.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.v-p11"></span><span id="iii.iv.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p12"></span>This verse interpreters explain in two
ways. Some construe the verb in the future tense in the past time — “God
went forth from Teman, and the holy one from mount Paran”; for a verb in
the past tense follows. But others consider it to be in the optative
mood — “May God come, or go forth, from Teman, and the holy one from
mount Paran;” as though the Prophet prayed God to come as the defender
of his people from mount Sinai, where the law was promulgated and the
covenant ratified, which God had formerly made with Abraham and his
posterity. I rather subscribe to their opinion who think that the
manifestation of God, by which he had testified that he was the guardian
of that people, is repeated by the Prophet. As, then, God had so made
known his glory on mount Sinai, that it was evident that that nation was
under his protection, so the Prophet, with the view of strengthening
himself and others, records what was well known among the whole people —
that is, that the law was given on mount Sinai, which was a testimony of
singular favor; for God then by a new pledge testified, that the
covenant formerly made with Abraham was firm and inviolable. The reason
why Habakkuk does not mention mount Sinai, but Teman and Paran, seems to
some to be this — because these mountains were nearer the Holy Land,
though this view, I fear, will appear too refined; I therefore take this
simple view — that instead of mentioning mount Sinai, he
paraphrastically designates it by mount Paran and the desert of Teman.
Some suppose these to be two mountains; but I know not whether Teman
ought to be understood only as a mountain; it seems on the contrary to
have been some large tract of country. It was a common thing among the
Jews to add this name when they spoke of the south, as many nations were
wont to give to winds the names of some neighboring places; so when the
Jews wished to designate a wind from Africa, they called it Teman. “It
is a Teman wind;” and so when they spoke of the south, they said Teman.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p13"></span>However this may be, it is certain that
the desert of Teman was nigh to Sinai, and also that mount Paran was
connected with that desert. As then they were places towards the south,
and nigh to mount Sinai, where the law had been proclaimed, the Prophet
records here, in order to strengthen the faith of the whole people, that
God had not in vain gone forth once from Teman, and there appeared in
his celestial power; for God then openly showed, that he took under his
guardianship the children of Abraham, and that the covenant which he had
formerly made with him was not vain or of no effect. Since, then, God
had testified this in so remarkable and wonderful a manner, the Prophet
brings forward here that history which tended especially to confirm the
faith of the godly — God went forth once from Teman, and the holy one
from mount Paran.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p14"></span>For it was not God’s will that the memory
of that manifestation should be obliterated; but he had once appeared
with glory so magnificent, that the people might feel assured that they
would ever be safe, for they were protected by God’s hand, and that full
of power, as the fathers had once known by manifest and visible
evidences; and hence the Prophet represents God’s going forth from mount
Paran as a continued act, as though he rendered himself visible chiefly
from that place. Nor is this representation new; for we see, in many
other places, a living picture, as it were, set before the eyes of the
faithful, in order to strengthen them in their adversity, and to make
them assured that they shall be safe through God’s presence. The Lord,
indeed, did not daily fulminate from heaven, nor were there such visible
indications of his presence as on mount Sinai; but it behaved the people
to feel assured that he was the same God who had given to their fathers
such clear evidence of his power, and that he is also at this time, and
to the end of the world, endued with the same power, though it be not
rendered visible.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p15"></span>We now then apprehend the design of the
Prophet: God then *came from Teman, and the holy one from mount Paran*.
We must also observe, that the minds of the godly were recalled to the
spectacle on mount Sinai, when they were drawn away into exile, or when
they were in the power of their enemies. They might indeed have then
supposed, that they were wholly forsaken. Obliterated then must have
been the memory of that history, had not this remedy been introduced. It
is, therefore, the same as though the Prophet had said — “Though God now
hides his power, and gives no evidence of his favor, yet think not that
he formerly appeared in vain to your fathers as one clothed with so
great a power, when the law was proclaimed on mount Sinai. It follows —

<span id="iii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p2"></span>**4.** And *his* brightness was as the
light; he had horns *coming* out of his hand: and there *was* the hiding
of his power.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Et splendor quasi lux fuit; cornua
e manu ejus ei, et ibi absconsio fortitudinis ejus.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p6"></span>He confirms the declaration which I have
explained that God, when he intended his presence to be made known to
his people, gave evidences of his wonderful power, capable of awakening
the minds of all. He then says, that the brightness was like light. By
the word <span id="iii.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>אור, *aur*, is doubtless meant
the light, which diffuses itself through the whole world, and proceeds
from the sun. Then he says, that the brightness which appeared on mount
Sinai was equal to the light of the sun, capable of filling the whole
world. He adds, that *horns were to him from the hand*. Some render it,
splendor; but <span id="iii.iv.vi-p6.2"></span>קרן, *coren*, properly
means a horn, and <span id="iii.iv.vi-p6.3"></span>קרנים, *corenium*, is
here in the dual number: it is therefore more probable, that the Prophet
ascribes horns to God, carried in both hands; and it more corresponds
with what immediately follows, that “there was the hiding of his
strength,” or that “there was his power hidden.” They who render the
word, splendours, think that what had been said is repeated, that is,
that the brightness was like light; but they are mistaken, for we may
collect from the verse that two different things are expressed by the
Prophet: he first speaks of the visible form of God; and then he adds
his power, designating it metaphorically by horns, which is common in
Scripture. Indeed this mode of speaking occurs often. He then says, that
God came armed with power, when he gave the law to his people; for he
bore horns in his hands, where his strength was hid.  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52)

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p13"></span>As to the word *hiding*, some indeed
give this refined view, that God then put forth his strength, which was
before hidden. But this is a very strained explanation. To me it seems
evident, that the Prophet in the first place says, that God’s glory was
conspicuous, capable of irradiating the whole world like the light of
the sun; and he then adds, that this splendor was connected with power,
for God carried horns in both his hands, where his strength was laid:
and he says, that it was hid, because God did not intend to make known
his power indiscriminately throughout the world, but peculiarly to his
own people; as it is also said in <span id="iii.iv.vi-p13.1"></span>[Ps
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.vi-p13.1"></span>, that

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p14"></span>“the greatness of his goodness is laid
up for the faithful alone,  
who fear and reverence him.”

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p15"></span>As then it is said, that the goodness of
God is laid up for the faithful, for they enjoy it as children and
members of the household; so also the power of God is said to be laid
up, because he testifies that he is armed with power to defend his
Church, that he may render safe the children of Abraham, whom he has
taken under his protection. It afterwards follows —

<span id="iii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p2"></span>**5.** Before him went the pestilence,
and burning coals went forth at his feet.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Coram facie ejus ambulavit
pestis, et egredietur carbo ignitus (*vel*, ustio) ad pedes ejus.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet repeats here, that God came
armed to defend his people, when he went forth from Teman; for he
connects with it here the deliverance of the people. He does not indeed
speak only of the promulgation of the law, but encourages all the godly
to confidence; for God, who had once redeemed their fathers from Egypt,
remained ever like himself, and was endued with the same power.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p7"></span>And he says, that *before God’s face
walked the pestilence*; this is to be referred to the Egyptians; and
that *ignited coal proceeded from his feet*. Some render <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>רשף, *reshoph*, exile; but its etymology
requires it to be rendered burning or ignited coal, and there is no
necessity to give it another meaning.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53)

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p11"></span>The import of the whole is — that Cod
had put to flight all the enemies of his people; for we know that the
Egyptians were smitten with various plagues, and that the army of
Pharaoh was drowned in the Red Sea. Hence, the Prophet says, that God
had so appeared from Teman, that the pestilence went before him, and
then the ignited coal; in short, that the pestilence and ignited coal
were God’s officers, which were ready to perform his commands: as when a
king or a judge, having attendants, commands them to put this man in
prison, and to punish another in a different way; so the Prophet, giving
us a representation of God, says, that all kinds of evils were ready to
obey his orders, and to destroy his and their enemies. He does not then
intend here to terrify the faithful in mentioning the pestilence and the
ignited coal; but, on the contrary, to set before their eyes evidences
of God’s power, by which he could deliver them from the hand of their
enemies, as he had formerly delivered their fathers from Egypt. By God’s
feet, he then means his going forth or his presence; for I do not
approve of what some have said, that ignited coals followed, when
pestilence had preceded; for both clauses are given in the same way. It
follows —

<span id="iii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p2"></span>**6.** He stood, and measured the
earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations; and the everlasting
mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways *are*
everlasting.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Stetit et mensus est terram;
aspexit et dissolvit gentes; et afflicti sunt montes aeterni; incurvati
sunt colles seculi; itinera seculi ei.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p6"></span>He says that God possessed every power
to subdue the earth to himself, and that he could at his will destroy
it, yea, dissolve mountains as veil as nations. Some of the Jews
understood this of the ark, which stood at that time in Gilead. They
then suppose that the Prophet meant this in short — that when God chose
a place for the ark of the covenant in Gilgal, that he determined then
what he would do, and that he then in his secret counsel divided the
land, so that each should have his portion by lot. This, it is true, was
accomplished shortly after, for Joshua, as we know, divided it by lot
between the tribes. But what the Jews affirm of the ark seems to me
strained and frigid. Habakkuk, on the contrary, means by the word
*stand*, that God was openly conspicuous, like him who assumes an erect
posture, so that he is seen at a distance. In this sense we are to take
the expression that God stood.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p7"></span>The measuring, of the earth is not to
be confined to Judea, but is to be extended to the whole world. God, he
says, has *measured the earth*. To measure the earth is what properly
belongs to a sovereign king; and it is done that he may assign to each
his portion. Except God, then, had a sovereign right over the earth and
the whole world, Habakkuk would not have ascribed to him this office;
and this we learn from the verse itself, for he immediately subjoins,
that the *nations, as it were, melted away, that the mountains were
destroyed, that the hills were bowed down*

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p8"></span>We hence see that by earth we are not
to understand Judea only, but the whole world; as though he had said,
that when God appeared on mount Sinai, he made it fully evident that the
earth was under his power and authority, so that he could determine
whatever he pleased, and prescribe limits to all nations. For he does
not speak of God here as having, like a surveyor, a measuring line; but
he says, that he measured the earth as one capable even then of changing
the boundaries of the whole world; nay, he intimates that it was he
himself who had at first created the earth and assigned it to men. It is
indeed true that the nations did not then melt away, nor were the
mountains demolished, nor the hills bowed down; but the Prophet simply
means, that God’s power then appeared, which was capable of shaking the
whole world.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p9"></span>But he calls these *the mountains of
eternity and the hills ages*, which had been from the beginning fixed on
their own foundations. For if an earthquake happens on a plain, it seems
less wonderful; and then if any of those mountains cleave, which are not
so firmly fixed, it may be on account of some hollow places; for when
the winds fill the caverns, they are forced to burst, and they cleave
the mountains and the earth. But the Prophet relates an unusual thing,
and wholly different from the ordinary course of nature — that the
mountains of eternity, which had been from the beginning, and had
remained without any change, were thus demolished and bowed down. In
short, the Prophet intended by all means to raise up to confidence the
minds of the godly, so that they should become fully persuaded that
God’s power to deliver them would be the same as that which their
fathers had formerly experienced; for there is no other support under
adverse, and especially under despairing circumstances, than that the
faithful should know that they are still under the protection of that
God who has adopted them. This is the reason why the Prophet amplifies,
in so striking a manner, on the subject of God’s power.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p10"></span>And hence also he subjoins, that the
ways of ages are those of God. Some render the clause, “the ways of the
world.” The word <span id="iii.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>עולם, *oulam*,
however, means properly an age, or perpetual time. The Prophet, I have
no doubt, means by ways of ages, the wonderful means which God is wont
to adopt for the defense of his Church; for we are ever wont to reduce
God’s wonder to our own understanding, while it is his purpose to
perfect, in a manner that is wonderful, the work of our salvation. Hence
the Prophet bids the faithful here to raise upwards their thoughts, and
to conceive something greater of God’s power than what they can
naturally comprehend. If we take the *ways of eternity*, in this sense,
then they are to be understood as in opposition to those means which are
known and usual. They are his daily ways, when the sun rises and sets,
when the spring succeeds the winter, when the earth produces fruit;
though even these are so many miracles, yet they are his common ways.
But God has ways of eternity that is he has means unknown to us by which
he can deliver us from death, whenever it may please him.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p11"></span>But yet, if any prefer taking the
*ways of eternity* as signifying the continued power of God, which has
ever appeared from the beginning, the sense would be appropriate and not
less useful: for it especially avails to confirm our faith, when we
consider that God’s power has ever been the same from the creation of
heaven and earth, that it has never been lessened or undergone any
change. Since, then, God has successively manifested his power through
all ages, we ought hence to learn that we have no reason to despair,
though he may for a time conceal his hand; for he is not on that account
deprived of his right. He ever retains the sovereignty of the world. We
ought, then, to be attentive to the ways of ages, that is, to the
demonstration of that power, which was manifested in the creation of the
world, and still continues to be manifested.  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) It follows —

<span id="iii.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p2"></span>**7.** I saw the tents of Cushan in
affliction: *and* the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Pro iniquitate (*vel*, pro nihilo,
*alii vertunt*) vidi tentoria Chusan (*vel*, Aethiopiae;) contremiscent
cortinae (*vel*, pelles) terrae Madian.

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet relates here, no doubt,
whatever might bring comfort to the miserable Jews, as they thought
themselves rejected and in a manner alienated from God. Hence the
Prophet mentions here other deliverances, which were clear evidences of
God’s constant favor towards his chosen people. He had hitherto spoken
of their redemption, and he will presently return to the same subject:
but he introduces here other histories; as though he had said, that it
was not only at one time that God had testified how much he loved the
race of Abraham, and how inviolable was the covenant he had made; but
that he had given the same testimonies at various times: for as he had
also defended his people against other enemies, the conclusion was
obvious, that God’s hand was thus made manifest, that the children of
Abraham might know that they were not deceived, when they were adopted
by him.

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p7"></span>Hence Habakkuk mentions the *tents of
Chushan* as another evidence of God’s power in preserving his people,
and the *curtains of Midian*; for we know how wonderful was the work,
when the Jews were delivered by the hand of Gideon; and the same was the
case with respect to the king of Chosen.

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p8"></span>We now, then, understand the design of
the Prophet: for as he knew that the time was near when the Jews might
succumb to despair in their great adversities, he reminds them of the
evidences of God’s favor and power, which had been given to their
fathers, that they might entertain firm hope in time to come, and be
fully persuaded that God would be their deliverer, as he had been
formerly to their fathers.

<span id="iii.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iv.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we have a
continual contest with powerful enemies, we may know that we are
defended by thine hand, and that even thou art fighting for us when we
are at rest; so that we may boldly contend under thy protection, and
never be wearied, nor yield to Satan and the wicked, or to any
temptations; but firmly proceed in the course of our warfare: and
however much thou mayest often humble us, so as to make us to tremble
under thine awful judgement, may we yet never cease to entertain firm
hope, since thou hast once promised to be to us an eternal Father in
thine eternal and only-begotten Son, but being confirmed by the
invincible constancy of faith, may we so submit ourselves to thee, as to
bear all our afflictions patiently, till thou gatherest us at length
into that blessed rest, which has been procured for us by the blood of
thine own Son. Amen.

<span id="iii.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixteenth

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p2"></span>We said yesterday that the Prophet spoke
of the king of Chusan and of the Midianites, in order to strengthen the
minds of the godly, and to set before their eyes the continued aid of
God, so that they might venture to feel assured that he would not act
otherwise towards the Church to the end of the world, then what he had
done from the beginning. The meaning, then, is sufficiently evident. We
must now consider the words.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p3"></span>Some understand by the word, <span
id="iii.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>און, *aun*, nothing, or vanity; as though the
Prophet had said, that the tells of Cushan had been reduced to nothing:
but another sense is more probable; *I have seen the tents of Cushan on
account of his iniquity*;  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) that is,
the reward which God had repaid, for the iniquity of the king of Cushan
had been made manifest. The Prophet says that he had seen it, because it
was evident and known to all. We now perceive what is meant that God had
been a just judge against the army of Cushan; for as they had unjustly
assailed the Israelites, so a just reward was rendered to them. The
account of this we have in <span id="iii.iv.xi-p6.3"></span>[Judges
3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#000)<span id="iii.iv.xi-p6.3"></span>.
Chusan, the king of Mesopotamia, had well-nigh destroyed the Israelites,
when the Lord put him to flight with all his forces. Some render the
words, “The tents of Ethiopia,” as though it was written thus; but this
is strained, and contrary to the rules of grammar; and besides, the
following clause confirms what I have said; for the Prophet mentions the
slaughter with which God destroyed the Midianites, who had also nearly
overwhelmed the miserable people. He says that their curtains trembled,
or their dwellings: for God, without the hand or sword of men, drove
them into such madness, that they slew one another, as the sacred
history testifies. See <span id="iii.iv.xi-p6.4"></span>[Judg.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001), [Judg.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.xi-p6.4"></span>.
It now follows —

<span id="iii.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p2"></span>**8.** Was the Lord displeased against
the rivers? *was* thine anger against the rivers? *was* thy wrath
against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thine horses *and* thy
chariots of salvation?

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p3"></span>**8.** An contra fluvios iratus es,
Jehova? an contra fluvios indignatio tua? an contra mare furor tuus
(*vel*, ira tua)? quia equitasti super equos tuos; quadridge tuae salus.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet here applies the histories
to which he has already referred, for the purpose of strengthening the
hope of the faithful; so that they might know these to be so many proofs
and pledges of God’s favor towards them, and that they might thus
cheerfully look for his aid, and not succumb to temptation in their
adversities. When he asks, was God angry with the rivers and the sea, he
no doubt intended in this way to awaken the thoughts of the faithful,
that they might consider the design of God in the works which he had
already mentioned; for it would have been unreasonable that God should
show his wrath against rivers and the sea; why should he be angry with
lifeless elements? The Prophet then shows that God had another end in
view when he dried the sea, when he stopped the course of Jordan, and
when he gave other evidences of his power. Doubtless God did not regard
the sea and the rivers; for that would have been unreasonable. It then
follows that these changes were testimonies of God’s favor towards his
Church: and hence the Prophet subjoins, that God *rode on his horses*,
and that his *chariots were for salvation* to his people.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) We now perceive the Prophet’s meaning,
which interpreters have not understood, or at least have not explained.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p16"></span>We now, then, see why the Prophet puts
these questions: and a question has much more force when it refers to
what is in no way doubtful. What! can God be angry with rivers? Who can
imagine God to be so unreasonable as to disturb the sea and to change
the nature of things, when a certain order has been established by his
own command? Why should he dry the sea, except he had something in view,
even the deliverance of his Church? except he intended to save his
people from extreme danger, by stretching forth his hand to the
Israelites, when they thought themselves utterly lost? He therefore
denies, that when God dried the Red Sea, and when he stopped the flowing
of Jordan, he had put forth his power against the sea or against the
river, as though he was angry with them. The design of God, says the
Prophet, was quite another; for God *rode on his horses*, that is, he
intended to show that all the elements were under his command, and that
for the salvation of his people. That God, then, might be the redeemer
of his Church, he constrained Jordan to turn back its course, he
constrained the Red Sea to make a passage for his miserable captives,
who would have otherwise been exposed to the slaughter of their enemies.
There was indeed no hope of saving Israel, without a passage being
suddenly opened to them through the Red Sea.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p17"></span>Hence all these miracles were designed
to show that God had become the redeemer of his Church, and had put
forth his power for the salvation of those whom he had taken under his
protection: and it is easy from this fact to conclude, that the same
help ought to be expected from God by posterity; for God was not induced
by some sudden impulse to change the nature of things, but exhibited a
proof of his favor: and his grace is perpetual, and flows in an even
course, though not according to the apprehension of men; for it suffers
some interruptions, because God exercises the faithful under the cross;
yet his goodness never ceases. It hence follows that the faithful are to
entertain hope; for God, when he pleases, and when he sees it expedient,
will really show the same power which was formerly exhibited to the
fathers. It now follows —

<span id="iii.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p2"></span>**9.** Thy bow was made quite naked,
*according* to the oaths of the tribes, *even thy* word. Selah. Thou
didst cleave the earth with rivers.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p3"></span>**9.** Nudando nudatus fuit (*vel*,
manifestatione manifestus fuit) arcus tuus; juramenta Tribuum, sermo:
Selach: fluviis scindes terram.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet explains the same thing
more clearly in this verse — that the power of God was formerly
manifested for no other reason but that the children of Abraham might be
taught to expect from him a continued deliverance: for he says that *the
bow* of God *was made bare*. By the bow, he means also the sword and
other weapons; as though he had said, that God was then armed, as we
have found declared before. God therefore was then furnished with
weapons, and marched to the battle, having undertaken the cause of his
chosen people, that he might defend them against the wicked. Since it
was so, we hence see that these miracles were not to avail only for one
period, but were intended perpetually to encourage the faithful to look
ever for the aid of God, even in the midst of death; for he can find
escapes, though they may not appear to us.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p7"></span>We now see the import of the text; but
he emphatically adds, *The oaths of the tribes*; for hereby he more
fully confirms that God had not then assisted the children of Abraham,
so as to discard them afterwards; but that he had really proved how true
he was in his promises; for by the oaths of (or to) the tribes he means
the covenant that God had made not only with Abraham, but also with his
posterity for ever. He puts oaths in the plural number, because God had
not only once promised to be a God to Abraham and to his seed, but had
often repeated the same promise, in order that faith might be rendered
more certain, inasmuch as we have need of more than one thing to confirm
us. For we see how our infirmity always vacillates, unless God supplies
us with many props. As, then, God had often confirmed his servant
Abraham, the Prophet speaks here of his oaths: but then as to the
substance, the oath of God is the same; which was, that he had taken the
race of Abraham under his protection, and promised that they should be
to him a peculiar people, and, especially, that he had united the people
under one head; for except Christ had been introduced, that covenant of
God would not have been ratified nor valid. As, then, God had once
included every thing when he said to Abraham, “I am God Almighty, and I
shall be a God to you and to your children;” it is certain that nothing
was added when God afterwards confirmed the faith of Abraham: but yet
the Prophet does not without reason use the plural number; it was done,
that the faithful might recomb with less fear on God’s promise, seeing,
that it had been so often and by so many words confirmed.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p8"></span>He calls them too *the oaths to the
tribes*: for though God had spoken to Abraham and afterwards to Moses,
yet the promise was deposited in the hands of Abraham, and of the
patriarchs, and afterwards in those of Moses, that the people might
understated that it belonged equally to them; for it would have been no
great matter to promise what we read of to a few men only. But Abraham
was as it were the depository; and it was a certain solemn stipulation
made with his whole race. We hence see why the Prophet here mentions the
tribes rather than Abraham, or the patriarchs or Moses. He had indeed a
special regard to those of his own time, in order to confirm them, that
they might not doubt but that God would extend to them also the same
power. How so? Because God had formerly wrought in a wonderful manner
for the deliverance of his people. Why? That he might prove himself to
be true and faithful. In what respect? Because he had said, that he
would be the protector of his people; and he did not adopt a few men
only, but the whole race of Abraham. Since it was so, why should not his
posterity hope for that which they knew was promised to their fathers?
for the truth of God can never fail. Though many ages had passed away,
the faith of his people ought to have remained certain, for God intended
to show himself to be the same as he had been formerly known by their
fathers.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p9"></span>He afterwards adds <span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p9.1"></span>אמר, *amer*, which means a word or speech;
but it is to be taken here for a fixed and an irrevocable word. The
word, <span id="iii.iv.xiii-p9.2"></span>אמר, *amer*, he says; that is,
as they say, the word and the deed: for when we say, that words are
given, we often understand that those who liberally promise are false
men, and that we are only trifled with and disappointed when we place
confidence in them. But the term, word, is sometimes taken in a good
sense. “This is the word,” we often say, when we intend to remove every
doubt. We now then perceive what the Prophet meant by adding <span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p9.3"></span>אמר, *amer*, the word. “O Lord, thou hast
not given mere words to and people; but what has proceeded from thy
mouth has been found to be true and valid. Such, therefore, is and
faithfulness in thy promises, that we ought not to entertains the least
doubt as to the event. As soon as thou givest to us any hope, we ought
to feel assured of its accomplishment, as though it were not a word but
the exhibition of the thing itself.” In short, by this term the Prophet
commends the faithfulness of God, lest we should harbour doubts as to
his promises.  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p21"></span>He then says, that *by rivers had been
cleft the earth*. He refers, I doubt not, to the history we read in
<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p21.1"></span>[Nu
14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p21.1"></span>; for the Lord, when the people were
nearly dead through thirst, drew forth water from the rock, and caused a
river to flow wherever the people journeyed. As then he had cleft the
earth to make a perpetual course for the stream, and thus supplied the
people in dry places with abundance of water, the Prophet says here,
that the *earth had been cleft by rivers* or streams. It was indeed but
one river; but he amplifies, and justly so, that remarkable work of God.
He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p2"></span>**10.** The mountains saw thee, *and*
they trembled: the overflowing of the water passed by: the deep uttered
his voice, *and* lifted up his hands on high.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p3"></span>**10.** Viderunt me, timuerunt montes;
inundatio (*vel*, gurges) aquarum transivit; dedit abyssus vocen suam;
in altum manus suas sustulit (*vel*, altitudo, \[םור\]; *potest tam in
casu nominandi legi quam in accusative*.)

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p6"></span>Habakkuk proceeds with the history of
the people’s redemption. We have said what his object was, even this
that the people, though in an extreme state of calamity, might yet
entertain hope of God’s favor; for he became not a Redeemer to the race
of Abraham for one time, but that he might continue the same favor to
them to the end.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p7"></span>He says that *mountains had seen and
grieved*. Some explain this allegorically of kings, and say, that they
grieved when envy preyed on them: but this view is too strained. The
Prophet, I have no doubt, means simply, that the mountains obeyed God,
so as to open a way for his people. At the same time, the verb <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p7.1"></span>חול, *chul*, signifies not only to grieve,
but also to bring forth, and then to fall and to abide in the same
place. We might then with no less propriety read thus — *see thee did
the mountains, and were still*, or fell down; that is, they were
subservient to thy command, and did not intercept the way of thy people.
I think the real meaning of the Prophet to be, that God had formerly
imprinted on all the elements evident marks of his paternal favor, so
that the posterity of Abraham might ever confide in him as their
deliverer in all their distresses: and even the context requires this
meaning; for he subjoins -

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p8"></span>*The stream* or *the inundation of
waters*, *etc*.: and this second part cannot be explained allegorically.
We then see, that the import of the words is — That God removed all
obstacles, so that neither mountains, nor waters, nor sea, nor rivers,
intercepted the passage of the people. He says now, that the inundation
of waters had passed away. This applies both to Jordan and to the Red
Sea; for God separated the Red Sea, so that the waters stood apart,
contrary to the laws of nature, and the same thing happened to Jordan;
for the flowing of the water was stayed, and a way was opened, so that
the people passed over dryshod into the land of Canaan. Thus took place
what is said by the Prophet, *the stream of waters passed away*. We
indeed know that such is the abundance of waters in the sea and in the
rivers, that they cannot be dried up: when therefore waters disappear,
it is what is beyond the course of nature. The Prophet, therefore,
records this miracle, that the faithful might know, that though the
whole world were resisting, their salvation would still be certain; for
the Lord can surmount whatever impediments there may be.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p9"></span>He then ascribes life to waters; for he
says, that *the abyss gave its voice*, and also, that *the deep lifted
up its hands*; or that the abyss with uplifted hands was ready to obey
God. It is a striking personification; for though the abyss is void of
intelligence, and it cannot speak, yet the Prophet says, that the abyss
with its voice and uplifted hands testified its obedience, when God
would have his people to pass through to the promised land. When anxious
to testify our obedience, we do this both with our voice and in our
gesture. When any one is willing to do what is commanded, he says, “Here
I am,” or “I promise to do this.” As, then, servants respond to others,
so the Prophet says, that a voice was uttered by the abyss. The abyss
indeed uttered no voice; but the event itself surpassed all voices. Now
when a whole people meet together, they raise their hands; for their
consent cannot be understood except by the outstretching of the hands,
and hence came the word hand-extending, χειροτονια. This similitude the
Prophet now takes, and says, that the abyss raised up its hands; that
is, shows its consent by this gesture. As when men declare by this sign
that they will do what they are bidden; so also the abyss lifted up its
hands. If we read, The deep raised up its hands, the sense will be the
same.  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) Let us proceed -

<span id="iii.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p2"></span>**11.** The sun *and* moon stood still in
their habitation: at the light of thine arrows they went, *and* at the
shining of thy glittering spear.

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p3"></span>**11.** Sol, luna stetit in habitaculo,
ad lucem sagittarum tuarum ambulabunt, ad splendorum fulguris hastae
tuae.

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet refers to another
history; for we know that when Joshua fought, and when the day was not
long enough to slay the enemies, the day was prolonged according to his
prayer, (<span id="iii.iv.xv-p6.1"></span>[Jos
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.xv-p6.1"></span>.) He seems indeed to have authoritatively
commanded the sun to stay its course: but there is no doubt, but that
having been answered as to his prayer, when he expressed this, he
commanded the sun, as he did, through the secret impulse of the Holy
Spirit: and we know that the sun would not have stopped in its course,
except the moon also was stayed. There must indeed have been the same
action as to these two luminaries.

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p7"></span>Hence Habakkuk says, that the *sun and
moon stood still in their habitation*; that is, that the sun then rested
as it were in its dwelling. When it was hastening in its course, it then
stood still for the benefit of God’s people. *The sun then and the moon
stood*, — How? *At the light of thy arrows shall they walk*. Some refer
this to the pillar of fire, as though the Prophet had said, that the
Israelites walked by that light, by which God guided them: but I doubt
not but that this is said of the sun. The whole sentence is thus
connected — that the sun and moon walked, not as from the beginning, but
at the light of God’s arrows; that is, when instead of God’s command,
which the sun had received from the beginning as its direction, the sun
had God’s arrows, which guided it, retarded its course, or restrained
the velocity which it had before. There is then an implied contrast
between the progress of the sun which it had by nature to that day, and
that new direction, when the sun was retained, that it might give place
to the arrows of God, and to the sword and the spear; for by the arrows
and the spear he means nothing else but the weapons of the elect people;
for we know, that when that people fought under the protection of God,
they were armed as it were from above. As then it is said of Gideon,
“The sword of God and of Gideon;” so also in this place the Prophet
calls whatever armor the people of Israel had, the arrows of God and his
spear; for that people could not move — no, not a finger’s breadth —
without the command of God. The sun then was wont before to regard the
ordinary command, of which we read in Genesis; but it was then directed
for another purpose: for it had regard to the arrows of God flying on
the earth as lightning; and it had regard to the arrows, as though it
stood astonished and dared not to advance. Why? because it behoved it to
submit to God while he was carrying on war.  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) We now then perceive how much kindness is
included in these words.

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p16"></span>What, therefore, we have already
referred to, ought to be borne in mind — that in this place there is no
frigid narrative, but such things are brought before the faithful as
avail to confirm their hope, that they may feel assured, that the power
of God is sufficient for the purpose of delivering them; for it was for
this end that he formerly wrought so many miracles. It follows —

<span id="iii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p2"></span>**12.** Thou didst march through the
land in indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p3"></span>**12.** In ira calcasti terram (*vel*,
ambulasti super terram; \[דעצ\] *enim significat ambulare;*) in ira
(*est tamen aliud nomen*, *ergo vertamus uno loco*, indignationem,
*vel*, furorem, — in furore) triturasti gentes (*vel*, triturabis.)

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet relates here the entrance of
the people into the land of Canaan, that the faithful might know that
their fathers would not have obtained so many victories had not God put
forth the power and strength of his hand. Hence he says, that God
himself *had trampled on the land in anger*. For how could the
Israelites have dared to attack so many nations, who had lately come
forth from so miserable a bondage? They had indeed been in the desert
for forty years; but they were always trembling and fearful, and we also
know that they were weak and feeble. How then was it, that they overcame
most powerful kings? that they made war with nations accustomed to war?
Doubtless God himself *trod down the land in his wrath*, and also
*threshed the nations*: as it is said in <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p6.1"></span>[Ps
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p6.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p7"></span>“It was not by their own sword that they
got the land of Canaan; neither their own power, nor their own hand
saved them; but the Lord showed favor to them, and became their
Deliverer.”

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p8"></span>Justly then does the Prophet ascribe
this to God, that he himself walked over the land; for otherwise the
Israelites would never have dared to move a foot. Doubtless, they could
never have been settled in that land, had not God gone before them.
Hence when God did tread on the land in his anger, then it became a
quiet habitation to the children of Abraham; warlike nations were then
easily and without much trouble conquered by the Israelites, though they
were previously very weak.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p9"></span>We now see, that the Prophet sets forth
here before the eyes of the people their entrance into the land, that
they might know that God did not in vain put to flight so many nations
at one time; but that the land of Canaan might be the perpetual
inheritance of his chosen people.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p10"></span>The Prophet changes often the tenses of
the verbs, inconsistently with the common usage of the Hebrew language;
but it must be observed, that he so refers to those histories, as though
God were continually carrying on his operations; and as though his
presence was to be looked for in adversities, the same as what he had
granted formerly to the fathers. Hence the change of tenses does not
obscure the sense, but, on the contrary, shows to us the design of the
Prophet, and helps us to understand the meaning. It follows at length -

<span id="iii.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** Thou wentest forth for the
salvation of thy people, *even* for salvation with thine anointed; thou
woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the
foundation unto the neck. Selah.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Egressus es in salutem populi
tui, in salutem cum Christo tuo; transfodisti caput e domo impii,
nudando fundamentum usque ad collum. Selah.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p6"></span>The Prophet applies again to the
present state of the people what he had before recorded — that God went
forth with his Christ for the salvation of his people. Some consider
that there is understood a particle of comparison, and repeat the verb
twice, “As thou didst then go forth for the deliverance of thy people,
so now wilt thou go forth for the deliverance of thy people with thy
Christ.” But this repetition is strained. I therefore take the words of
the Prophet simply as they are — that God went forth for the deliverance
of his people. But when God’s people are spoken of, their gratuitous
adoption must ever be remembered. How was it that the children of
Abraham became the peculiar people of God? Did this proceed from any
worthiness? Did it come to them naturally? None of these things can be
alleged. Though then they differed in nothing from other nations, yet
God was pleased to choose them to be a people to himself. By the title,
the people of God, is therefore intimated their adoption. Now this
adoption was not temporary or momentary, but was to continue to the end.
Hence it was easy for the faithful to draw this conclusion — that they
were to hope from God the same help as what he had formerly granted to
the fathers.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p7"></span>*Thou wentest forth*, he says, *for the
salvation, for the salvation of thy people*. He repeats the word
salvation, and not without reason; for he wished to call attention to
this point, as when he had said before — that God had not in vain
manifested, by so many miracles, his power, as though he were angry with
the sea and with rivers, but had respect to the preservation of his
people. Since then the salvation of the Church has ever been the design
of God in working miracles, why should the faithful be now cast down,
when for a time they were oppressed by adversities? for God ever remains
the same: and why should they despond, especially since that ancient
deliverance, and also those many deliverances, of which he had hitherto
spoken, are so many evidences of his everlasting covenant. These indeed
ought to be connected with the word of God; that is, with that promise,
according to which he had received the children of Abraham into favor
for the purpose of protecting them to the end. “For salvation, for
salvation,” says the Prophet, and that of his elect people.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p8"></span>He adds, *with thy Christ*. This clause
still more confirms what Habakkuk had in view — that God had been from
the beginning the deliverer of his people in the person of the Mediator.
When God, therefore, delivered his people from the hand of Pharaoh, when
he made a way for them to pass through the Red Sea, when he redeemed
them by doing wonders, when he subdued before them the most powerful
nations, when he changed the laws of nature in their behalf — all these
things he did through the Mediator. For God could never have been
propitious either to Abraham himself or to his posterity, had it not
been for the intervention of a Mediator. Since then it has ever been the
office of the Mediator to preserve in safety the Church of God, the
Prophet takes it now for granted, that Christ was now manifested in much
clearer light than formerly; for David was his lively image, as well as
his successors. God then gave a living representation of his Christ when
he erected a kingdom in the person of David; and he promised that this
kingdom should endure as long as the sun and moon should shine in the
heavens. Since, then, there were in the time of Habakkuk clearer
prophecies than in past times respecting the eternity of this kingdom,
ought not the people to have taken courage, and to have known of a
certainty that God would be their Deliverer, when Christ should come? We
now then apprehend the meaning of the Prophet.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) But I cannot now go farther; I shall
defer the subject until tomorrow.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
so often and in such various ways testified formerly how much care and
solicitude thou hast for the salvation of those who rely and call on
thee, — O grant, that we at this day may experience the same: and though
thy face is justly hid from us, may we yet never hesitate to flee to
thee, since thou hast made a covenant through thy Son, which is founded
in thine infinite mercy. Grant then, that we, being humbled in true
penitence, may so surrender ourselves to thy Son, that we may be led to
thee, and find thee to be no less a Father to us than to the faithful of
old, as thou everywhere testifies to us in thy word, until at length
being freed from all troubles and dangers, we come to that blessed rest
which thy Son has purchased for us by his own blood. Amen.

<span id="iii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventeenth

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p2"></span>We explained yesterday why the Prophet
says that God went forth for the salvation of the elect people with his
Christ. His purpose was to confirm still more the faithful in the hope
of their deliverance; for God is not only the same, and never changes
his purpose, but the same Mediator also performs his office, through
whom the people were formerly preserved. We must also notice this
difference, to which I referred yesterday; for as God had then more
clearly manifested Christ, with more cheerfulness it behaved the
faithful to go on, as they had so remarkable a pledge of God’s favor,
inasmuch as God had promised that the kingdom of God would be for ever.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p3"></span>He adds, that *wounded was the head from
the house of the wicked*; that is, that there was no power which had not
been laid prostrate by God for the sake of his people; and we know that
all the great kings were formerly destroyed, in order that favor might
be shown to God’s people. The other comparison seems different, and yet
its object is the same — that God *had made bare the foundation to the
neck*; that is, that he had destroyed from the roots his enemies; for by
foundation he means, in a metaphorical sense, whatever stability there
was in these enemies, and that this was torn up and overthrown to the
very neck, that is, to the very summit; for the body of men, we know, is
covered from the neck to the feet. And he says that their houses, that
is their families, were made bare to the neck, for the Lord had
destroyed them all from the bottom to the top. We now understand what
the Prophet meant.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p4"></span>As to the word <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p4.1"></span>סלה, *selah*, I have hitherto said nothing;
but I shall now briefly refer to what the Hebrew interpreters think.
Some explain it by <span id="iii.iv.xix-p4.2"></span>לעולם, *laoulam*,
"for ever;” and by <span id="iii.iv.xix-p4.3"></span>עד ועד, *od uod*,
“yet and yet;” as though, when this word is inserted, the Holy Spirit
pronounced what is to be for ever. Others render it by <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p4.4"></span>אמן, *amen*, as though God testified that
what is said is true and indubitable. But as it never occurs except in
this song and in the Psalms, and does not always comport with what they
say, that is, that it denotes certainty or perpetuity, I prefer
embracing the opinion of those who think that it refers to singing, and
not to things. And what they add is also probable, if we regard its
etymology, for the word means to raise or to elevate; and it was
therefore put down to remind the singers to raise their voice. But as it
is a thing of no great importance, it is enough shortly to state what
others think. Let us now go on —

<span id="iii.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p2"></span>**14.** Thou didst strike through with
his staves the head of his villages: they came out as a whirlwind to
scatter me: their rejoicing *was* as to devour the poor secretly.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p3"></span>**14.** Perforasti baculis ejus caput
villarum ejus; prosilierunt instar turbinis ad dispellendum me;
exultatio eorum sicut ad vorandum pauperem in abscondito.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p6"></span>At the beginning of this verse the
Prophet pursues the same subject — that God had wounded all the enemies
of his people; and he says that the head of villages or towns had been
wounded, though some think that <span id="iii.iv.xx-p6.1"></span>פרזים,
*perezim*, mean rather the inhabitants of towns; for the Hebrews call
fortified towns or villages <span id="iii.iv.xx-p6.2"></span>פרזות,
*perezut*, and the word is commonly found in the feminine gender; but as
it is here a masculine noun, it is thought that it means the
inhabitants. At the same time this does not much affect the subject; for
the Prophet simply means, that not only things had been overthrown by
God’s hand, but also all the provinces under their authority; as though
he had said that God’s vengeance, when his purpose was to defend his
people, advanced through all the villages and through every region, so
that not a corner was safe.  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) But we
must also notice what follows — *with his rods*. The Prophet means that
the wicked had been smitten by their own sword. Though the word *rods*
is put here, it is yet to be taken for all kinds of instruments or
weapons; it is the same as though it was said that they had been wounded
by their own hands.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p9"></span>We now perceive the import of this clause
— that God not only put forth his strength when he purposed to crush the
enemies of his people, but that he had also smitten them with
infatuation and madness, so that they destroyed themselves by their own
hands. And this was done, as in the case of the Midianites, who, either
by turning their swords against one another, fell by mutual wounds, or
by slaying themselves, perished by their own hands. (<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p9.1"></span>[Jud
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p9.1"></span>.)
We indeed often read of the wicked that they ensnared themselves, fell
into the pit which they had made, and, in short, perished through their
own artifices; and the Prophet says here that the enemies of the Church
had fallen, through God’s singular kindness, though no one rose up
against them; for they had transfixed or wounded themselves by their own
staff. Some read — “Thou hast cursed his sceptres and the head of his
villages;” but the interpretation which I have given is much more
appropriate.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p10"></span>He adds, that they *came like a
whirlwind*. It is indeed a verb in the future tense; but the sentence
must be thus rendered — “When they rushed as a whirlwind to cast me
down, when their exultation was to devour the poor in their
hiding-places.” It is indeed only a single verb, but it comes from <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p10.1"></span>סער, *sor*, which means a whirlwind, and we
cannot render it otherwise than by a paraphrase. They rushed, he says,
like a whirlwind. The Prophet here enlarges on the subject of God’s
power, for he had checked the enemies of his people when they rushed on
with so much impetuosity. Had their advance been slow God might have
frustrated their attempts without a miracle, but as their own madness
rendered them precipitate, and made them to be like a whirlwind, God’s
power was more clearly known in restraining such violence. We now
understand the import of what is here said; for the Prophet’s special
object is not to complain of the violent and impetuous rage of enemies,
but to exalt the power of God in checking the violent assaults of those
enemies whom he saw raging against his people.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p11"></span>He subjoins, *their exultation was to
devour the poor*. He intimates that there was nothing in the world
capable of resisting the wicked, had not God brought miraculous help
from heaven; for when they came to devour the poor, they came not to
wage war, but to devour the prey like wild beasts. Then he says, *to
devour the poor in secret*. He means, that the people of God had no
strength to resist, except help beyond all hope came from heaven.  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p15"></span>The import of the whole is — that when
the miserable Israelites were without any protection, and exposed to the
rage and cruelty of their enemies, they had been miraculously helped;
for the Lord destroyed their enemies by their own swords; and that when
they came, as it were to enjoy a victory, to take the prey, they were
laid prostrate by the hand of God: hence his power shone forth more
brightly. It follows —

<span id="iii.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p2"></span>**15.** Thou didst walk through the sea
with thine horses, *through* the heap of great waters.

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p3"></span>**15.** Viam fecisti in mari equis tuis
per acervum aquarum magnarum.

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p6"></span>Some read, “Thou hast trodden thy horses
in the sea;” but it is a solecism, that is quite evident. Others, “Thou
hast trodden in the sea by thy horses.” But what need is there of
seeking such strained explanations, since the verb <span
id="iii.iv.xxi-p6.1"></span>דרך, *darek*, means to go or to march? The
Prophet’s meaning is by no means doubtful — that God would make a way
for himself in the sea, and on his own horses. How? even when *great
waters were gathered into a mass*. The Prophet again refers to the
history of the passage through the Red Sea; for it was a work of God, as
it has been said, worthy of being remembered above all other works: it
is therefore no wonder that the Prophet dwells so much in setting forth
this great miracle. *Thou* then *didst make a way for thy horses* —
where? *in the sea*; which was contrary to nature. And then he adds,
*The heap of waters*: for the waters had been gathered together, and a
firm and thick mass appeared, which was not according to nature; for we
know that water is a fluid, and that hardly a drop of water can stand
without flowing.  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) How then was it
that he stopped the course of Jordan, and that the Red Sea was divided?
These were evidences of God’s incomprehensible power, and rightly ought
these to have added courage to the faithful, knowing, as they ought to
have done, that nothing could have opposed their salvation, which God
was not able easily to remove, whenever it pleased him. It follows —

<span id="iii.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p2"></span>**16.** When I heard, my belly
trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my
bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of
trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he will invade them with his
troops.

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p3"></span>**16.** Audivit, et contremuit (*vel*,
tumultuatus est) venter meus; ad vocem trepidarunt labia mea; ingressa
est putredo in ossa mea; et apud me tumultuatus sum (*ad verbum*,
tumultuabitur; *sed diximus heri de temporibus verborum*,) ad ascendedum
ad populum, excidet eum (*vel*, colliget se.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p6"></span>Those interpreters are mistaken in my
view, who connect the verb, “I have heard,” with the last verse, as
though the Prophet had said, that he had conceived dread from those
evidences of God’s power: for the Prophet had no occasion to fear in
regarding God as armed with unexpected power for the salvation of his
people; there was no reason for such a thing. Hence these things do not
agree together. But he returns again to that dread which he had
entertained on account of God’s voice in those terrific threatening
which we before referred to. We must always bear in mind the Prophet’s
design — that his object was to humble the faithful, that they might
suppliantly acknowledge to God their sins and solicit his forgiveness.
His purpose also was to animate them with strong hope, that they might
nevertheless look for deliverance. He had already said at the beginning,
“Lord, I have heard thy voice; I feared.” He now repeats the same thing:
for if he had spoken only of that terrific voice, the faithful might
have been overwhelmed with despair; he therefore wished opportunely to
prevent this evil, by interposing what might have comforted them. For
this reason he recited these histories, by which God had proved that he
was armed with invincible power to save his Church. Having done this, he
applies his general doctrine to present circumstances, and says, “I have
heard.” What had he heard? even those judgements with which God had
determined to visit the contumacy of his people. Since, then, God had
threatened his people with a horrible destruction, the Prophet says now,
that he had heard and trembled, so that he had been confounded. He
speaks in the singular number; but this was done, as we have said,
because he represented the whole people, as was the case before (which
escaped my notice) when he said, his enemies came like whirlwind to cast
him down; for certainly he did not then speak of himself but of the
ancient people. As, then, the Prophet here undertakes the cause of the
whole Church, he speaks as though he were the collective body of the
people: and so he says that he had heard; but the faithful speak here as
with one mouth, that they had *heard*, and that their *inside trembled*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p7"></span>Some read, “I was dismayed, or I
feared, and my inside trembled at his voice.” He takes <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p7.1"></span>קול, *kul*, voice, not for report, but, as
it has been said, for threatening. The faithful, then, declare here,
that they dreaded the voice of God, before he had executed his
judgements, or before he inflicted the punishment which he had
threatened. He says, *quiver did my lips*. The verb <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p7.2"></span>צלל, *tsalel*, means sometimes to tingle,
and so some render it here, “Tingle did my lips;” but this is not
suitable, and more tolerable is the rendering of others, “Palpitate did
my lips.” The Hebrews say that what is meant is that motion in the lips
which fear or trembling produces. I therefore render the words, “quiver
did my lips;” as when one says in our language, *Mes levres ont
barbate*; that is, when the whole body shakes with trembling, not only a
noise is made by the clashing of the teeth, but an agitation is also
observed in the lips.

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p8"></span>*Enter*, he says, *did rottenness into
my bones and within myself I made a noise*, (it is the verb <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>רגז, *regaz*, again,) or I trembled. No
doubt the Prophet describes here the dread, which could not have been
otherwise than produced by the dreadful vengeance of God. It hence
follows that he does not treat here of those miracles which were, on the
contrary, calculated to afford an occasion of rejoicing both to the
Prophet and to the whole of the chosen people; but that the vengeance of
God, such as had been predicted, is described here.

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p9"></span>He now adds, *That I may rest in the
day of affliction*  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) There seems to
be here an inconsistency — that the Prophet was affected with grief even
to rottenness, that he trembled throughout his members with dread, and
now that all this availed to produce rest. But we must inquire how rest
is to be obtained through these trepidations, and dreads, and
tremblings. We indeed know that the more hardened the wicked become
against God, the more grievous ruin they ever procure for themselves.
But there is no way of obtaining rest, except for a time we tremble
within ourselves, that is, except God’s judgement awakens us, yea, and
reduces us almost to nothing. Whosoever therefore securely slumbers,
will be confounded in the day of affliction; but he who in time
anticipates the wrath of God, and is touched with fear, as soon as he
hears that God the judge is at hand, provides for himself the most
secure rest in the day of affliction. We now then see, that the right
way of seeking rest is set forth here by the Prophet, when he says, that
he had been confounded, and that rottenness had entered into his bones
that he could have no comfort, except he pined away as one half-dead:
and the design of the Prophet, as I have already said, was to exhort the
faithful to repentance. But we cannot truly and from the heart repent,
until our sins become displeasing to us: and the hatred of sin proceeds
from the fear of God, and that sorrow which Paul regards as the mother
of repentance. (<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.10"></span>[2Co
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.10"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p15"></span>This exhortation is also very
necessary for us in the present day. We see how inclined we are by
nature to indifference; and when God brings before us our sins, and then
sets before us his wrath, we are not moved; and when we entertain any
fear, it soon vanishes. Let us, then, know that no rest can be to us in
the day of distress, except we tremble within ourselves, except dread
lays hold on all our faculties, and except all our soul becomes almost
rotten. And hence it is said in <span id="iii.iv.xxii-p15.1"></span>[Ps
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p15.1"></span>, “Tremble, and ye shall not sin.” And
Paul also shows that the true and profitable way of being angry is, when
one is angry with his sins (<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p15.2"></span>[Eph
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p15.2"></span>,) and when we tremble within ourselves.
In the same manner does the Prophet describe the beginnings of
repentance, when he says, that the faithful trembled in their bowels,
and were so shaken within, that even their lips quivered, and, in short,
(and this is the sum of the whole,) that all their senses felt
consternation and fear.

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p16"></span>He says, *When he shall ascend*: he
speaks, no doubt, of the Chaldeans; *When* therefore the enemy *shall
ascend against the people, that he may cut them off*: for <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p16.1"></span>גדה or <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p16.2"></span>גוד, *gade* or *gud*, means to cut off,
and it means also to gather, and so some render it, “that he may gather
them:” but the other meaning is better, “when the enemy shall ascend,
that he may cut them off.” If one would have the word God to be
understood, I do not object: for the Prophet does not otherwise speak of
the Chaldeans than as the ministers and executioners of God’s wrath.

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p17"></span>In short, he intimates, that they who
had been moved and really terrified by God’s vengeance, would be in a
quiet state when God executed his judgements. How so? because they would
calmly submit to the rod, and look for a happy deliverance from their
evils; for their minds would be seasonably prepared for patience, and
then the Lord would also console them, as it is said in <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p17.1"></span>[Ps
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p17.1"></span>, that he despises not contrite hearts.
When, therefore, the faithful are in a suitable time humbled, and when
they thus anticipate the judgement of God, they then find a rest
prepared for them in his bosom. It follows —

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Hab.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p2"></span>**17.** Although the fig tree shall
not blossom, neither *shall* fruit *be* in the vines; the labour of the
olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and *there shall be* no herd in the stalls:

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>**17.** Quia ficus non florebit, et
nullus erit fructus in veneis; fraudabit opus olivae, et agri non
producent cibum (ad verbum, non faciet cibum; est mutatio numeri, sed
esset asperior illa translatio; Agri igitur non producent cibum: porro
hac voce comprehendi triticum, legumina, et quae ad victum pertinent,
satis liquet;) excissum est ab ovili pecus, et nullus bos in stabulis:

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p4"></span>**18.** Yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p5"></span>**18.** Ego autem in Jehova exultabo,
laetabor in Deo salutis meae.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p7"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p8"></span>The Prophet declares now at large what
that rest would be of which he had spoken; it would be even this — that
he would not cease to rejoice in God, even in the greatest afflictions.
He indeed foresees how grievous the impending punishment would be, and
he warns also and arouses the faithful, that they might perceive the
approaching judgement of God. He says, *Flourish shall not the fig, and
no fruit shall be on the vines; fail shall the olive*. First, the fig
shall not flourish; then, the fields shall produce nothing; and lastly,
the cattle and the sheep shall fail. Though the figs produce fruit
without flowering, it is not yet an improper use of <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>פרח, *perech*, which means strictly to
bud.  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) He means that the desolation
of the land was nigh at hand, and that the people would be reduced to
extreme poverty. But it was an instance of rare virtue, to be able to
rejoice in the Lord, when occasions of sorrow met him on every side.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p10"></span>The Prophet then teaches us what
advantage it is to the faithful seasonably to submit to God, and to
entertain serious fear when he threatens them, and when he summons them
to judgement; and he shows that though they might perish a hundred
times, they would yet not perish, for the Lord would ever supply them
with occasions of joy, and would also cherish this joy within, so as to
enable them to rise above all their adversities. Though, then, the land
was threatened with famine, and though no food would be supplied to
them, they would yet be able always to rejoice in the God of their
salvation; for they would know him to be their Father, though for a time
he severely chastised them. This is a delineation of that rest of which
he made mention before.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p11"></span>The import of the whole is — “Though
neither the figs, nor the vines, nor the olives, produce any fruit, and
though the field be barren, though no food be given, yet I *will
rejoice* in my God;” that is, our joy shall not depend on outward
prosperity; for though the Lord may afflict us in an extreme degree,
there will yet be always some consolation to sustain our minds, that
they may not succumb under evils so grievous; for we are fully
persuaded, that our salvation is in God’s hand, and that he is its
faithful guardian. We shall, therefore, rest quietly, though heaven and
earth were rolled together, and all places were full of confusion; yea,
though God fulminated from heaven, we shall yet be in a tranquil state
of mind, looking for his gratuitous salvation.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p12"></span>We now perceive more clearly, that
the sorrow produced by the sense of our guilt is recommended to us on
account of its advantage; for nothing is worse than to provoke God’s
wrath to destroy us; and nothing is better than to anticipate it, so
that the Lord himself may comfort us. We shall not always escape, for he
may apparently treat us with severity; but though we may not be exempt
from punishment, yet while he intends to humble us, he will give us
reasons to rejoice: and then in his own time he will mitigate his
severity, and by the effects will show himself propitious to us.
Nevertheless, during the time when want or famine, or any other
affliction, is to be borne, he will render us joyful with this one
consolation, for, relying on his promises, we shall look for him as the
God of our salvation. Hence, on one side Habakkuk sets the desolation of
the land; and on the other, the inward joy which the faithful never fail
to possess, for they are upheld by the perpetual favor of God. And thus
he warns, as I have said, the children of God, that they might be
prepared to bear want and famine, and calmly to submit to God’s
chastisements; for had he not exhorted them as he did, they might have
failed a hundred times.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p13"></span>We may hence gather a most useful
doctrine, — That whenever signs of God’s wrath meet us in outward
things, this remedy remains to us — to consider what God is to us
inwardly; for the inward joy, which faith brings to us, can overcome all
fears, terrors, sorrows and anxieties.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p14"></span>But we must notice what follows, *In
the God of my salvation*: for sorrow would soon absorb all our thoughts,
except God were present as our preserver. But how does he appear as such
to the faithful? even when they estimate not his love by external
things, but strengthen themselves by embracing the promise of his mercy,
and never doubt but that he will be propitious to them; for it is
impossible but that he will remember mercy even while he is angry. It
follows —

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p2"></span>**19.** The Lord God *is* my strength,
and he will make my feet like hinds’ *feet*, and he will make me to walk
upon mine high places. To the chief singer on my stringed instruments.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>**19.** Jehova Dominus fotitudo mea, et
ponet pedes meos quasi cervarum, et super excelsa mea ambulare me
faciet. Prefecto in Neginothai (*vel*, in pulsationibus meis, *vel*,
musicis instrumentis.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6"></span>He confirms the same truth, — that he
sought no strength but in God alone. But there is an implied contrast
between God and those supports on which men usually lean. There is
indeed no one, who is not of a cheerful mind, when he possesses all
necessary things, when no danger, no fear is impending: we are then
courageous when all things smile on us. But the Prophet, by calling God
his strength, sets him in opposition to all other supports; for he
wishes to encourage the faithful to persevere in their hope, however
grievously God might afflict them. His meaning then is, — that even when
evils impetuously rage against us, when we vacillate and are ready to
fall every moment, God ought then to be our strength; for the aid which
he has promised for our support is all-sufficient. We hence see that the
Prophet entertained firm hope, and by his example animated the faithful,
provided they had God propitious, however might all other things fail
them.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p7"></span>*He will make*, he says, *my feet like
those of hinds*. I am inclined to refer this to their return to their
own country, though some give this explanation, — “God will give the
swiftest feet to his servants, so that they may pass over all obstacles
to destroy their enemies;” but as they might think in their exile that
their return was closed up against them, the Prophet introduces this
most apt similitude, that God would give his people *feet like those of
hinds*, so that they could climb the precipices of mountains, and dread
no difficulties: *He will* then, he says, *give me the feet of hinds,
and make me to tread on my high places*. Some think that this was said
with regard to Judea, which is, as it is well known, mountainous; but I
take the expression more simply in this way, — that God would make his
faithful people to advance boldly and without fear along high places:
for they who fear hide themselves and dare not to raise up the head, nor
proceed openly along public roads; but the Prophet says, *God will make
me to tread on any high places*

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p8"></span>He at last adds, *To the leader on my
beatings*. The first word some are wont to render conqueror. This
inscription, To the leader, <span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p8.1"></span>למנצח,
*lamenatsech*, frequently occurs in the Psalms. To the conqueror, is the
version of some; but it means, I have no doubt, the leader of the
singers. Interpreters think that God is signified here by this title,
for he presides over all the songs of the godly: and it may not inaptly
be applied to him as the leader of the singers, as though the Prophet
had said, — “God will be a strength to me; though I am weak in myself, I
shall yet be strong in him; and he will enable me to surmount all
obstacles, and I shall proceed boldly, who am now like one half-dead;
and he will thus become the occasion of my song, and be the leader of
the singers engaged in celebrating his praises, when he shall deliver
from death his people in so wonderful a manner.” We hence see that the
connection is not unsuitable, when he says, that there would be strength
for him in God; and particularly as giving of thanks belonged to the
leader or the chief singer, in order that God’s aid might be celebrated,
not only privately but at the accustomed sacrifices, as was usually the
case under the law. Those who explain it as denoting the beginning of a
song, are extremely frigid and jejune in what they advance; I shall
therefore pass it by.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p9"></span>He adds, *on my beatings*. This word,
<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p9.1"></span>נגינות, *neginoth*, I have already
explained in my work on the Psalms. Some think that it signifies a
melody, others render it beatings (*pulsationes*) or notes (*modos*;)
and others consider that musical instruments are meant.  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) I affirm nothing in a doubtful matter:
and it is enough to bear in mind what we have said, — that the Prophet
promises here to God a continual thanksgiving, when the faithful were
redeemed, for not only each one would acknowledge that they had been
saved by God’s hand, but all would assemble together in the Temple, and
there testify their gratitude, and not only with their voices confess
God as their Deliverer, but also with instruments of music, as we know
it to have been the usual custom under the Law.

<span id="iii.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease
not daily to provoke thy wrath against us, and as the hardness and
obstinacy of our flesh is so great, that it is necessary for us to be in
various ways afflicted, — O grant, that we may patiently bear thy
chastisements, and under a deep feeling of sorrow flee to thy mercy; and
may we in the meantime persevere in the hope of that mercy, which thou
hast promised, and which has been once exhibited towards us in Christ,
so that we may not depend on the earthly blessings of this perishable
life, but relying on thy word may proceed in the course of our calling,
until we shall at length be gathered into that blessed rest, which is
laid up for us in heaven, through Christ one Lord. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc29006.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p9"></span> The more correct rendering here would be,
“A Prayer (or rather, An Intercession) by Habakkuk the Prophet;” that
is, It was a prayer composed by him. The preposition \[<span
id="iii.iv.i-p9.1"></span>ל\] before Habakkuk, as often before David in
the Psalms, would be better rendered in this way, than by “of;” for the
meaning is, not that it was his prayer, that is, one offered up by him,
but that it was composed by him. “A Psalm of David,” ought to be, “A
Psalm by David.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc29006.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p10.9"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p11"></span> This explanation, adopted by *Calvin*,
is derived originally from *Aquila* and *Symmachus*, who rendered the
phrase, ἐπι ἀγοηματων, — respecting oversights or errors: and they have
been followed by *Jerome*, *Vulgate*, etc. The prior version of the
*Septuagint* is, μετ ᾿ ὠδδης, — with an ode that this prayer is composed
in metre, is evident from the word, “Selah,” and from the conclusion of
the chapter. The most probable meaning of the word is what *Drusius* has
suggested, and adopted by *Grotius*, *Marckius*, and *Henderson,* and
that is, that it refers to a peculiar metre, a kind of composition,
which from its irregularity is called <span
id="iii.iv.i-p11.1"></span>*erratica cantio*, an erratic verse. “The
prayer of Habakkuk,” says *Drusius*, “was to be sung according to the
odes which they called *Sigionoth*.” To the same purpose is what
*Grotius* says, that is, it is “a song according to the notes of an
ancient ode which began with this word.” It is derived from \[<span
id="iii.iv.i-p11.2"></span>שגה\], to go astray, to wander, that is, in
this instance, from the regular metre of an ode. It is an erratic ode,
that is, one containing varieties. It may be thus paraphrastically
expressed, “According to the notes of the irregular ode;” or, as it is
in the margin of our Bibles, “According to variable songs or tunes.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc29006.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p4"></span> The verb, "<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>territus sum, — I feared,” has been omitted.
It is even omitted in the French version. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc29006.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p13"></span> The view given of “the middle of the
years,” is ingenious and striking; but the common interpretation is,
that “the years” of calamity, allotted to the Jews, are meant. The
Septuagint version of this verse is so extremely wide of the original,
that none can account for the differences. There are no various readings
of any moment; and the literal rendering of this verse, and of the
former part of the following, I consider to be this, —

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p14"></span>2. *O Jehovah! I have heard thy
report;  
I feared, O Jehovah!  
Thy work! in the midst of the years revive it;  
In the midst of the years make it known;  
In anger remember mercy:*

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p15"></span>3. *May God from Teman come  
And the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah.*

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p16"></span>It is called “thy report,” as it was a
report which came from God; the allusion is to the threatenings in
chapter 1. “The report from thee,” would convey the sense. The third
line is a prayer; and so are the following lines, though all the verbs
are in the future tense, while that for “revive” is in the imperative
mood. The third verse ought to end with the word “Selah.” What follows
in the other part and in the subsequent verses, is a relation of what
took place when God had formerly interfered in behalf of Israel; while
here, and in the latter part of the preceding verse, the Prophet
expresses a prayer to God in reference to his people, and borrows his
language from the past interpositions of God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc29006.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p4"></span> The word \[<span
id="iii.iv.v-p4.1"></span>סלה\] is found 70 times, as *Parkhurst* says,
in the Psalms, and thrice in this chapter. “It was most probably,” he
adds, “a *note of music,* or a direction to the singers in the temple
service to *raise* their voices or instruments where it is inserted.”
The opinion of *Gesenius* is the same, it being a direction, as he says,
“to repeat the preceding verse in a *louder* strain.” It is always
rendered by the Septuagint Διαψαλμα, which means a variation in singing.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p5"></span>Some have rendered the word pause, but it
cannot be so considered, for it occurs at the *end* of at least three of
the Psalms. There seems to be no regularity in its adoption in some of
the Psalms it occurs once, in some twice, in others thrice, and in one
psalm four times.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p6"></span>*Calvin* has not referred, in his comment,
to the latter part of this verse, which, according to his Latin, may be
thus translated, —

<span id="iii.iv.v-p7"></span>Cover the heavens did his glory;  
With his praise full was the earth.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p8"></span>Both glory and praise here are to be taken
as signifying their manifestations. The reference is made to the
displays of divine majesty on mount Sinai. The original may be thus
rendered —

<span id="iii.iv.v-p9"></span>*Cover the heavens did his shining,  
And his lustre filled the earth.* — Ed.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc29006.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iii.iv.vi-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p7"></span> That \[<span
id="iii.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>קרז\] means to irradiate or to shine, is
clear from <span id="iii.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>[Exod.
34:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#030),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#035)<span id="iii.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>;
“for shine did the skin of his face,” \[<span
id="iii.iv.vi-p7.3"></span>כי קרז עור פניי\]. Most critics consider that
the noun here, though in this sense in no other instance, means rays, or
beams of light; and this corresponds with the description given
elsewhere of God’s appearance on mount Sinai. *Drusius, Marckius,
Newcome,* and *Henderson*, render it “rays.” The line then would
literally be —

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p8"></span>*Rays from his hand* were *to him.*

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p9"></span>*or*, to retain the English idiom.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p10"></span>He had rays from his hand.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p11"></span>To render the line, “Rays streamed from
his hand,” is to give a paraphrase.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p12"></span>The objection of *Calvin* as to the next
line, seems not valid; for the hiding of strength may refer to the hand,
or to the place, Sinai, whether we render the previous word, rays or
horns; — to the place, if we retain our present reading, \[<span
id="iii.iv.vi-p12.1"></span>עזה\], “of its strength;” but to the hand,
if we adopt the reading of *many* copies, \[<span
id="iii.iv.vi-p12.2"></span>עזו\] “of his strength,” which is perhaps
the most accordant with the passage. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc29006.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p8"></span> Most agree in the view given of this
verse, only there is some shade of difference as to the word \[<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>רשף\]; but though *Calvin* renders it <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p8.2"></span>*carbo ignitus* — ignited coals, yet in his
exposition he seems to regard it with many others as a burning disease.
In the six other instances in which the word occurs, it certainly has
not this sense, except it be in <span id="iii.iv.vii-p8.3"></span>[De
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p8.3"></span>, which is doubtful. It signifies not a
burning coal, but a glowing fire, burning or lightening. Compare <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p8.4"></span>[Exod.
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#025)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p8.4"></span>,
with <span id="iii.iv.vii-p8.5"></span>[Ps
78:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#048)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p8.5"></span>; where it designates the fires or
lightnings produced by thunder, which accompanied the hail. Lightning
would be its mot proper rendering here; for instead of referring this
verse to the plagues in Egypt, it may be considered as a continuation of
what is contained in the foregoing verse; and the *Septuagint* and
*Theodotion* have rendered \[<span id="iii.iv.vii-p8.6"></span>דבר\] in
the preceding clause, not pestilence, but word — λογος, its most usual
meaning. This makes the whole to comport to what we read of God’s
appearance on mount Sinai. See <span id="iii.iv.vii-p8.7"></span>[Ex
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p8.7"></span>; <span id="iii.iv.vii-p8.8"></span>[De
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p8.8"></span>. The version then would be this —

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p9"></span>*From before him proceeded the word
(*i.e. *the law;)  
And forth came lightning at his feet.*

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p10"></span>Most of the ideas in this, and in the
two preceding verses, seem to be similar to those we find in <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>[Deut.
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc29006.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p12"></span> This verse is explained in a very
striking manner, but the version is not so strictly correct It may be
thus rendered: —

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p13"></span>6. *He stood, and measure the earth;  
He looked, and agitated the earth;  
And burst themselves open did the perpetual mountains,  
Bend down did the hills of ages;  
The going of ages were his.*

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p14"></span>“The perpetual mountains” are
literally “the mountains of perpetuity,” which had remained the same
from the beginning. “The hills of ages” might be rendered the hills of
antiquity or of old time, \[<span id="iii.iv.viii-p14.1"></span>עולם\],
an indefinite past time. “The goings of ages,” are God’s proceedings,
that is, in his works, and may therefore be rendered “deeds;” and they
are said to be deeds “of ages,” *i.e.,* of old time, with reference
probably to the creation of the world: for he who makes perennial
mountains to burst, and perpetual hills to bend downwards, must be their
first creator. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc29006.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iii.iv.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p4"></span> The word \[<span
id="iii.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>אוז\] not only means iniquity, but also what
iniquity produces, labor, trouble, affliction; and this latter meaning,
as allowed by *Newcome* and *Henderson*, is most suitable to it here.
The word is so taken in <span id="iii.iv.xi-p4.2"></span>[Ge
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.xi-p4.2"></span>; <span id="iii.iv.xi-p4.3"></span>[De
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.xi-p4.3"></span>; <span id="iii.iv.xi-p4.4"></span>[Ho
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.xi-p4.4"></span>.
Besides, this meaning makes a correspondence between this and the
following line, as will be seen by the following version —

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p5"></span>Under trouble have I seen the tents of
Cushan,  
Tremble did the curtains of the land of Madian.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p6"></span>The "curtains” were those used in forming
tents, and are used here to designate them. The most obvious reference
here is to Cushan, mentioned in <span id="iii.iv.xi-p6.1"></span>[Judg.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv.xi-p6.1"></span>,
as *Calvin* states; yet some consider that it stands for *Cush*, as
*Lotan*, in <span id="iii.iv.xi-p6.2"></span>[Ge
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xi-p6.2"></span>, is put for *Lot*: and some, as *Gesenius*,
say, that the African *Cush* is meant, and others, as *Henderson*,
think, that it is the Arabian *Cush,* especially as *Madian* is also
mentioned. Still the events recorded in Judges, nearly connected
together, favor the opinion adopted by *Calvin*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc29006.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p7"></span> The two first lines present a
difficulty in their construction. The most literal is this rendering of
*Junius* —

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p8"></span>*Did against rivers kindle, O Jehovah*
—*  
Against rivers, thy wrath;*

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p9"></span>Our language will admit of a similar
construction in another form, by inverting the order —

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p10"></span>Did thy wrath against rivers, O
Jehovah,  
Did it kindle against rivers?

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p11"></span>Some connect the two last lines of the
verse with the previous one, thus —

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p12"></span>*Was thine indignation against the
sea,  
When thou didst ride on thy horses,  
*On *thy chariots of salvation?*

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p13"></span>But *Calvin* considers them rather as
an answer to the previous questions, or as explanatory; and they may be
thus rendered —

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p14"></span>*When thou didst ride on thy horses,  
Thy chariots were* those *of salvation.*

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p15"></span>It is observed by *Henderson*, that
“there is no necessity for our understanding either the angels or
thunder and lightning by ‘horses’ and ‘chariots.’ They are,” he adds,
“merely figurative expressions, designed to carry out the metaphor
adopted from military operations.” Or it may be, that the horses and
chariots of the Israelites are here meant, as in the 11th verse, the
arrows and spears of the people are spoken of as those of God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc29006.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p10"></span> This clause has been variously
explained: the interpretation here given has been mostly adopted. In the
Barberinean manuscript the whole of this prayer is given in many
respects different from the present received text of the Septuagint, and
this clause is thus found in it — ἐχορτασας βολιδας της φαρετρας ἀυτου.
It is evident that this idea falls in more with the preceding clause
than any other; and the Hebrew will admit of a sense bordering on this
with less alteration than any other that has been offered. No version
has been given without supposing somethin to be understood. *Newcome*
says, that sixteen MSS. read \[<span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p10.1"></span>שבועת\]; by leaving out the \[<span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p10.2"></span>ו\], it may be a verb in Kal in the past
tense, as rendered above, and writers might have easily put down \[<span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p10.3"></span>אמר\] for \[<span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p10.4"></span>אזור\]. Then the line in Hebrew would be,

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p11"></span>\[<span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p11.1"></span>שבעת מטות אזור\]

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p12"></span>“Thou hast filled with arrows the
girdle.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p13"></span>It is a description of one equipped
for battle; his bow was made ready, and he had filled his girdle, that
is, his military guide, with arrows; for this girdle the preceding Greek
version introduced the quiver, in which arrows were commonly carried.
The word \[<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p13.1"></span>מטות\], means rods or
staves, that is, of arrows, as we may take it here. This is the most
satisfactory solution of the difficulties connected with this line, of
which there have been, as *Henderson* says, more than a hundred
interpretation.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p14"></span>The last clause of the verse is thus
rendered by *Newcome*, —

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p15"></span>Thou didst cleave the streams of the
land;

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p16"></span>and by *Henderson*, —

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p17"></span>Thou didst cleave the earth into
rivers.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p18"></span>The words will not admit the first
version; the genitive case in Hebrew is always by juxtaposition; here
“streams” and “earth” are separated by the verb. The other version
contains hardly a meaning. The most literal rendering is that given by
*Calvin*, and it affords the best sense. The words will admit of the
following, which is materially the same, —

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p19"></span>By streams didst thou cleavest the
earth.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p20"></span>The allusion evidently to the streams
of that water which miraculously issued from the smitten rock, and
followed the Israelites in the wilderness. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc29006.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p10"></span> Most critics have overlooked the
peculiar construction of this verse; but it presents a striking instant
of the order in which the Prophets often arrange their ideas. There are
two things referred to — the mountains and the waters — and the first
verb regards both; the nominative case being anticipated, and the first
of the two last lines refers to the waters, and the last to the
mountains. This is the literal version, —

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p11"></span>*They saw thee,* — *in pain were the
mountains,  
The flood of waters passed away,  
Utter did the deep its voice,  
The height its hands lifted up.*

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p12"></span>To construe \[<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p12.1"></span>רום\] adverbially, “on high,” does not so
well comport with the characters of the Hebrew language; and it
evidently here refers to the “mountains,” as the “deep” refers to the
water. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc29006.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iii.iv.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p8"></span> There is much beauty and force in this
explanation: and accordant with it is the version of *Henderson*. But
that of *Newcome* is somewhat different —

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p9"></span>*The sun* and *the moon stood still* in
their *habitation:  
By* their *light thine arrows went abroad;  
By* their *brightness, the lightning of thy spear.*

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p10"></span>To avoid the insertion of so many words
in italics which are not in the original, I would render the verse thus
—

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p11"></span>*The sun! the moon!* — *it stood* — *she
remained stationary,  
For light to thine arrows* which *went forth,  
For brightness to the flashing of thy spear.*

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p12"></span>The genitive case is often to be
rendered as a dative, as in <span id="iii.iv.xv-p12.1"></span>[Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.xv-p12.1"></span>, \[<span id="iii.iv.xv-p12.2"></span>לאור
לילה\], “for the light of the night;” that is, “for light to the night.”

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p13"></span>There are twelve MSS. which have “and,”
\[<span id="iii.iv.xv-p13.1"></span>ו\], before “moon:” but it is not
wanted, the verb “stood” being singular; and it is followed, as I
conceive, by another verb in the singular number, and in the feminine
gender, while “stood” is in the masculine, and refers to the moon, and
the last refers to the sun; which is sometimes feminine, while moon is
ever the masculine. The verb \[<span id="iii.iv.xv-p13.2"></span>זבל\]
is not properly to dwell, but to continue fixed, or to remain
stationary. The order in our language would be this —

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p14"></span>The sun remained stationary, the moon
stood.

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p15"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc29006.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p9"></span> However true is what is said here, it
seems not to be the doctrine of this text. The version of *Aquila* and
the *Vulgate* have been followed as to the second clause of the verse.
The *Septuagint* read, του σωσαι τον χριστον σου — to save thy Christ;”
or, according to Alex. cod., “thy Christs — τους χριστους σου;” or,
according to Barb. MS., “thine elect — τους εκλεκτους σου.” Five Hebrew
MSS. have \[<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p9.1"></span>משיחיד\], “thine anointed
ones.” But if “people” in the preceding line; or it may refer to Joshua
and his successors, the singular being used, as it is often done by the
Prophets, in the collective sense. The particle \[<span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p9.2"></span>את\] before it is not often used as a
preposition; and the word \[<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p9.3"></span>ישע\] may
better be taken here as a verb, according to the *Septuagint*, than as a
noun, though as a verb it most commonly occurs in *Hiphil*: but see
<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p9.4"></span>[1Sa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p9.4"></span>; <span id="iii.iv.xvii-p9.5"></span>[2Sa
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p9.5"></span>. The following would then be the version —

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p10"></span>Go forth didst thou to save thy
people,  
To save thine anointed:  
Thou didst smite the head from the house of the wicked,  
Emptying out the foundation even to the neck.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p11"></span>The reference in the two lines is
evidently to the rooting out of the Canaanites, and not, as *Newcome*
thinks, to the destruction of the firstborn in Egypt. The singular is
poetically used for the plural: “head,” instead of heads, or chiefs,
etc. The last line seems to be a proverbial saying, signifying an entire
demolition, the very foundation being dug up, though so deep as to reach
up to man’s neck. There is no MSS. nor version to countenance \[<span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p11.1"></span>צור\], “rock,” which *Houbigant* and
*Newcome* adopt. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc29006.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p7"></span> The Keri and many MSS. read \[<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p7.1"></span>פרזיו\], “his villages;” but there is no need
of this change, for the singular is used throughout instead of the
plural, until we come to the two following lines; and this proves that
the singular is to be taken in a collective sense. *Henderson* renders
it “captains,” contrary to the meaning of the word in other parts. It
means an open unfortified village, as it were scattered, and without any
boundaries. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc29006.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p8"></span> *Newcome* and some others, without any
authority, read “thy rod;” but conjecture, without some solid reason,
cannot be allowed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc29006.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p12"></span> “To devour the poor in secret,” seems
to have an allusion to the practice of wild beasts, who take there prey
to their dens to devour it there. The poor her, as in many other places,
mean the helpless, such as are destitute of aid or power to resist their
enemies. The line may be thus rendered —

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p13"></span>Their joy *was,* as it were, to devour
the helpless in secret.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p14"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc29006.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iii.iv.xxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p7"></span> The word is \[<span
id="iii.iv.xxi-p7.1"></span>חמר\], which many have rendered *acervus* —
heap; but there is no clear instance in which it has such a meaning. It
is without a preposition, and the *Septuagint* render it by a
participle, ταρασσοντας, which agrees with “horses.” It is singular in
Hebrew, and, if a particple, it agrees with the nominative case to the
preceding verb, \[<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p7.2"></span>דרכת\], “thou didst
guide” or direct. The two lines might then be rendered thus, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p8"></span>Thou didst guide through the sea thy
horses,  
Disturbing mighty waters.

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p9"></span>Both *Marckius* and *Henderson* think
that the passage through the Red Sea is not what is meant; but the
subjugation of the Canaanites, conveyed in a language derived from that
event. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc29006.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p10"></span> The word \[<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p10.1"></span>אשר\], which *Calvin* renders <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p10.2"></span>*ut*, “that,” has occasioned great trouble
to critics. *Marckius* reads <span id="iii.iv.xxii-p10.3"></span>*qui* —
“who,” “Who shall rest,” etc.; *Henderson*, “yet,” “Yet I shall have
rest,” etc. But it is never found as an adversative. The construction of
this line and the following is very difficult; and many have been the
forms in which they have been rendered. The verb \[<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p10.4"></span>נוח\] means not only to *rest* from action
or labor, but also to *rest* in the sense of remaining or continuing.
See <span id="iii.iv.xxii-p10.5"></span>[2Ki
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p10.5"></span>, and <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p10.6"></span>[Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p10.6"></span>. And were it taken in this latter sense
here, there would be a consistency in the whole passage. The Prophet
describes first the dread which seized him on hearing the report of
God’s vengeance; and then in the two last lines he accounts for his
consternation, because he should remain to witness this vengeance; and
he proceeds in verse 17 to set forth the effects of it, and in verse 18
he states that he would still rejoice in the God of his salvation. The
three verses may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p11"></span>16. *I heard,* — *and tremble did my
bowels;  
At the voice my lips quivered;  
Enter does rottenness into my bones,  
And on my own account I tremble;  
Because I shall remain to the day of distress,  
To his coming up to the people, who shall invade me.*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p12"></span>17. *For the fig-tree shall not shoot
forth,  
And no produce shall be on the vines;  
Fail shall the fruit of the olive,  
And the fields, none shall yield food;  
Cut off from the fold shall be the sheep,  
And no ox shall be in the stalls:*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p13"></span>18. *But as for me, in Jehovah will I
rejoice,  
I will exult in the God of my salvation.*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14"></span>“On my own account,” or for myself,
\[<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.1"></span>תחתי\]: the preposition, \[<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.2"></span>תחת\], is often taken in this sense; See
<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.3"></span>[2Sa
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.3"></span>, <span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.4"></span>[Pr
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.4"></span>. “Invade us” or assault us, or them, the
people, \[<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.5"></span>יגודנו\]; for \[<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.6"></span>נו\] is either us or him, but in our
language them, for so we speak of people. “And the fields, none,” etc.
There are instances of \[<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.7"></span>לא\], as
here, in which it may be rendered “none” and “nothing.” See <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.8"></span>[Eze
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.8"></span>, <span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.9"></span>[Job
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#021), [Job
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p14.9"></span>. “In the God,” etc.; it may be rendered,
“In my God, my Savior,” as it is in the *Septuagint* and the *Vulgate.*
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc29006.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p9"></span> The verb means to *break forth*
either in buds, or germs, or shoots, and so to germinate, or to blossom.
It is rendered by the Septuagint καρποφορησει, shall bear fruit. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc29006.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p10"></span> No satisfactory conjectures have been
made by any as to the *my* added to this word. Hezekiah says at the end
of his prayer, <span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p10.1"></span>[Isa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p10.1"></span>, \[<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p10.2"></span>ננגז ונגינותי\], “and my neginoth will we
sing,” or play, etc. Our version makes this *my* to refer to the ode or
song he made to be played on the neginoth, supposed to have been a
stringed instrument. In this case, “my neginoth” means the song he made
for the neginoth. Then we might render the words, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p11"></span>For the leader; my song on the
stringed instruments.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p12"></span>— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Zephaniah](cc29007)
