[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc38005)  [Next](cc38007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** What advantage  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) then hath the Jew? or what profit *is
there* of circumcision?

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**1.** Quae igitur praerogativa Iudaei, aut
quae utilitas circumcisionis?

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Much every way: chiefly, because that
unto them were committed the oracles of God.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>**2.** Multa per omnem modem; ac primum
quidem, quod illis credits sunt oracula Dei.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span><span id="vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**1.** Though Paul has clearly proved that
bare circumcision brought nothing to the Jews, yet since he could not
deny but that there was some difference between the Gentiles and the
Jews, which by that symbol was sealed to them by the Lord, and since it
was inconsistent to make a distinction, of which God was the author,
void and of no moment, it remained for him to remove also this
objection. It was indeed evident, that it was a foolish glorying in
which the Jews on this account indulged; yet still a doubt remained as
to the design of circumcision; for the Lord would not have appointed it
had not some benefit been intended. He therefore, by way of an
objection, asks, what it was that made the Jew superior to the Gentile;
and he subjoins a reason for this by another question, *What is the
benefit of circumcision?* For this separated the Jews from the common
class of men; it was a partition-wall, as Paul calls ceremonies, which
kept parties asunder.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span><span id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>**2.** *Much in every way,* *etc.*; that is,
very much. He begins here to give the sacrament its own praise; but he
concedes not, that on this account the Jews ought to have been proud;
for when he teaches that they were sealed by the symbol of circumcision,
by which they were counted the children of God, he does not allow that
they became superior to others through any merit or worthiness of their
own, but through the free mercy of God. If then regard be had to them as
men, he shows that they were on a level with others; but if the favors
of God be taken to the account, he admits that they possessed what made
them more eminent than other men.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>*First indeed, because, intrusted to them,*
*etc.* Some think there is here an unfinished period, for he sets down
what he does not afterwards complete. But the word *first* seems not to
me to be a note of number, but means chiefly” or especially,  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) and is to be taken in this sense —
“Though it were but this one thing, that they have the oracles  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) of God committed to them, it might be
deemed sufficient to prove their superiority.” And it is worthy of being
noticed, that the advantage of circumcision is not made to consist in
the naked sign, but its value is derived from the word; for Paul asks
here what benefit the sacrament conferred on the Jews, and he answers,
that God had deposited with them the treasure of celestial wisdom. It
hence follows, that, apart from the word, no excellency remained. By
*oracles* he means the covenant which God revealed first to Abraham and
to his posterity, and afterwards sealed and unfolded by the law and the
Prophets.

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>Now the oracles were committed to them, for
the purpose of preserving them as long as it pleased the Lord to
continue his glory among them, and then of publishing them during the
time of their stewardship through the whole world: they were first
depositories, and secondly dispensers. But if this benefit was to be so
highly esteemed when the Lord favored one nation only with the
revelation of his word, we can never sufficiently reprobate our
ingratitude, who receive his word with so much negligence or with so
much carelessness, not to say disdain.

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** For what if some did not believe?
shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect?

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Quid enigma si quidem fuerunt
increduli? Num incredulitas eorum fidem Dei faciet irritam?

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span>**4.** God forbid: yea, let God be true, but
every man a liar; as it is written, That thou mightest be justified in
thy sayings, and mightest overcome when thou art judged.

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Ne ita sit; quin sit Deus verax,
omnis autem homo mendax; quemadmodum scriptum est, ut justificeris in
sermonibus tuis, et vincas quum judicaris.  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md)

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span><span id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span>**3.** *What indeed if some,* *etc.* As
before, while regarding the Jews as exulting in the naked sign, he
allowed them no not even a spark of glory; so now, while considering the
nature of the sign, he testifies that its virtue (<span
id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>*virtutem, efficacy*) is not destroyed, no, not
even by their inconstancy. As then he seemed before to have intimated
that whatever grace there might have been in the sign of circumcision,
it had wholly vanished through the ingratitude of the Jews, he now,
anticipating an objection, again asks what opinion was to be formed of
it. There is here indeed a sort of reticence, as he expresses less than
what he intended to be understood; for he might have truly said that a
great part of the nation had renounced the covenant of God; but as this
would have been very grating to the ears of the Jews, he mitigated its
severity, and mentioned only some.

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>*Shall their unbelief,* *etc.* <span
id="vii.ii-p9.1"></span>Καταργεῖν is properly to render void and
ineffectual; a meaning most suitable to this passage. For Paul’s inquiry
is not so much whether the unbelief of men neutralizes the truth of God,
so that it should not in itself remain firm and constant, but whether it
hinders its effect and fulfillment as to men. The meaning then is,
“Since most of the Jews are covenant-breakers, is God’s covenant so
abrogated by their perfidiousness that it brings forth no fruit among
them? To this he answers, that it cannot be that the truth of God should
lose its stability through man’s wickedness. Though then the greater
part had nullified and trodden under foot God’s covenant, it yet
retained its efficacy and manifested its power, not indeed as to all,
but with regard to a few of that nation: and it is then efficacious when
the grace or the blessing of the Lord avails to eternal salvation. But
this cannot be, except when the promise is received by faith; for it is
in this way that a mutual covenant is on both sides confirmed. He then
means that some ever remained in that nation, who by continuing to
believe in the promise, had not fallen away from the privileges of the
covenant.

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span><span id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span>**4.** *But let God be true, etc.* Whatever
may be the opinion of others, I regard this as an argument taken from
the necessary consequence of what is opposed to it, by which Paul
invalidates the preceding objection. For since these two things stand
together, yea, necessarily accord, that God is true and that man is
false, it follows that the truth of God is not nullified by the
falsehood of men; for except he did now set those two things in
opposition, the one to the other, he would afterwards have in vain
labored to refute what was absurd, and show how God is just, though he
manifests his justice by our unjustice. Hence the meaning is by no means
ambiguous, — that the faithfulness of God is so far from being nullified
by the perfidy and apostasy of men that it thereby becomes more evident.
“*God*,” he says, “*is true,* not only because he is prepared to stand
faithfully to his promises, but because he also really fulfills whatever
he declares; for he so speaks, that his command becomes a reality. On
the other hand, *man is false,* not only because he often violates his
pledged faith, but because he naturally seeks falsehood and shuns the
truth.”

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span>The first clause contains the primary axiom
of all Christian philosophy; the latter is taken from <span
id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
116:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>,
where David confesses that there is nothing certain from man or in man.

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span>Now this is a remarkable passage, and
contains a consolation that is much needed; for such is the perversity
of men in rejecting and despising God’s word, that its truth would be
often doubted were not this to come to our minds, that God’s verity
depends not on man’s verity. But how does this agree with what has been
said previously — that in order to make the divine promise effectual,
faith, which receives it, is on the part of men necessary? for faith
stands opposed to falsehood. This seems, indeed, to be a difficult
question; but it may with no great difficulty be answered, and in this
way — the Lord, notwithstanding the lies of men, and though these are
hinderances to his truth, does yet find a way for it through a pathless
track, that he may come forth a conqueror, and that is, by correcting in
his elect the inbred unbelief of our nature, and by subjecting to his
service those who seem to be unconquerable. It must be added, that the
discourse here is concerning the corruption of nature, and not the grace
of God, which is the remedy for that corruption.

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span>*That thou mightest be justified,* *etc.*
The sense is, So far is it that the truth of God is destroyed by our
falsehood and unfaithfulness, that it thereby shines forth and appears
more evident, according to the testimony of David, who says, that as he
was sinner, God was a just and righteous Judge in whatever he determined
respecting him, and that he would overcome all the calumnies of the
ungodly who murmured against his righteousness. By the *words* of God,
David means the judgments which he pronounces upon us; for the common
application of these to promises is too strained: and so the particle
*that,* is not so much final, nor refers to a far-fetched consequence,
but implies an inference according to this purport, “Against thee have I
sinned; justly then dost thou punish me.” And that Paul has quoted this
passage according to the proper and real meaning of David, is clear from
the objection that is immediately added, “How shall the righteousness of
God remain perfect if our iniquity illustrates it?” For in vain, as I
have already observed, and unseasonable has Paul arrested the attention
of his readers with this difficulty, except David meant, that God, in
his wonderful providence, elicited from the sins of men a praise to his
own righteousness. The second clause in Hebrew is this, “And that thou
mightest be pure in thy judgment;” which expression imports nothing else
but that God in all his judgments is worthy of praise, how much soever
the ungodly may clamor and strive by their complaints disgracefully to
efface his glory. But Paul has followed the Greek version, which
answered his purpose here even better. We indeed know that the Apostles
in quoting Scripture often used a freer language than the original; for
they counted it enough to quote what was suitable to their subject:
hence they made no great account of words.

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>The application then of this passage is the
following: Since all the sins of mortals must serve to illustrate the
glory of the Lord, and since he is especially glorified by his truth, it
follows, that even the falsehood of men serves to confirm rather than to
subvert his truth. Though the word <span
id="vii.ii-p15.1"></span>κρίνεσθαι, may be taken actively as well as
passively, yet the Greek translators, I have no doubt, rendered it
passively, contrary to the meaning of the Prophet.  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md)

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>**5.** But if our unrighteousness commend
the righteousness of God, what shall we say? *Is* God unrighteous who
taketh vengeance? (I speak as a man)

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span>**5.** Quod si injustitia nostra Dei
justitiam commendat, quid dicemus? Num injustus est Deus qui infert
iram? Secundum hominem dico.

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span>**6.** God forbid: for then how shall God
judge the world?

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>**6.** Ne ita sit: nam quomodo judicabit
Deus mundum?

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span>**7.** For if the truth of God hath more
abounded through my lie unto his glory; why yet am I also judged as a
sinner?

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span>**7.** Si enim veritas Dei per meum
mendacium excelluit in ejus gloriam; quid etiammum et ego velut peccator
judicor;

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span>**8.** And not *rather*, (as we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say,) Let us do evil,
that good may come? whose damnation is just.

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span>**8.** Et non (quemadmodum exprobratur
nobis, et quemadmodum aiunt quidam nos dicere) Faciamus mala, ut veniant
bona? quorum judicium justum est.

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span><span id="vii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span>**5** *But if our unrighteousness,* *etc.*
Though this is a digression from the main subject, it was yet necessary
for the Apostle to introduce it, lest he should seem to give to the
ill-disposed an occasion to speak evil, which he knew would be readily
laid hold on by them. For since they were watching for every opportunity
to defame the gospel, they had, in the testimony of David, what they
might have taken for the purpose of founding a calumny, — “If God seeks
nothing else, but to be glorified by men, why does he punish them, when
they offend, since by offending they glorify him? Without cause then
surely is he offended, if he derives the reason of his displeasure from
that by which he is glorified.” There is, indeed, no doubt, but that
this was an ordinary, and everywhere a common calumny, as it will
presently appear. Hence Paul could not have covertly passed it by; but
that no one should think that he expressed the sentiments of his own
mind, he premises that he assumes the person of the ungodly; and at the
same time, he sharply, touches, by a single expression, on human reason;
whose work, as he intimates, is ever to bark against the wisdom of God;
for he says not, “according to the ungodly,” but “according to man,” or
as man. And thus indeed it is, for all the mysteries of God are
paradoxes to the flesh: and at the same tine it possesses so much
audacity, that it fears not to oppose them and insolently to assail what
it cannot comprehend. We are hence reminded, that if we desire to become
capable of understanding them, we must especially labor to become freed
from our own reason, (<span id="vii.iii-p11.1"></span>*proprio sensu*)
and to give up ourselves, and unreservedly to submit to his word. — The
word *wrath,* taken here for judgment, refers to punishment; as though
he said, “Is God unjust, who punishes those sins which set forth his
righteousness?”

<span id="vii.iii-p12"></span><span id="vii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p13"></span>**6.** *By no means,* *etc.* In checking
this blasphemy he gives not a direct reply to the objection, but begins
with expressing his abhorrence of it, lest the Christian religion should
even appear to include absurdities so great. And this is more weighty
than if he adopted a simple denial; for he implies, that this impious
expression deserved to be regarded with horror, and not to be heard. He
presently subjoins what may be called an indirect refutation; for he
does not distinctly refute the calumny, but gives only this reply, —
that the objection was absurd. Moreover, he takes an argument from an
office which belongs to God, by which he proves it to be impossible, —
*God shall judge the world;* he cannot then be unjust.

<span id="vii.iii-p14"></span>This argument is not derived, so to speak,
from the mere power of God, but from his exercised power, which shines
forth in the whole arrangement and order of his works; as though he
said, — “It is God’s work to judge the world, that is, to rectify it by
his own righteousness, and to reduce to the best order whatever there is
in it out of order: he cannot then determine any thing unjustly.” And he
seems to allude to a passage recorded by Moses, in <span
id="vii.iii-p14.1"></span>[Ge
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.iii-p14.1"></span>,
where it is said, that when Abraham prayed God not to deliver Sodom
wholly to destruction, he spoke to this purpose, —

<span id="vii.iii-p15"></span>“It is not meet, that thou who art to
judge the earth, shouldest destroy the just with the ungodly: for this
is not thy work nor can it be done by thee.”

<span id="vii.iii-p16"></span>A similar declaration is found in <span
id="vii.iii-p16.1"></span>[Job
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.iii-p16.1"></span>,
—

<span id="vii.iii-p17"></span>“Should he who hates judgment exercise
power?”

<span id="vii.iii-p18"></span>For though there are found among men
unjust judges, yet this happens, because they usurp authority contrary
to law and right, or because they are inconsiderately raised to that
eminence, or because they degenerate from themselves. But there is
nothing of this kind with regard to God. Since, then, he is by nature
judge, it must be that he is just, for he cannot deny himself. Paul then
proves from what is impossible, that God is absurdly accused of
unrighteousness; for to him peculiarly and naturally belongs the work of
justly governing the world. And though what Paul teaches extends to the
constant government of God, yet I allow that it has a special reference
to the last judgment; for then only a real restoration of just order
will take place. But if you wish for a direct refutation, by which
profane things of this kind may be checked, take this, and say, “That it
comes not through what unrighteousness is, that God’s righteousness
becomes more illustrious, but that our wickedness is so surpassed by
God’s goodness, that it is turned to serve an end different from that to
which it tends.”

<span id="vii.iii-p19"></span><span id="vii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p20"></span>**7.** *If indeed*  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) *the truth of God,* *etc.* This
objection, I have no doubt, is adduced in the person of the ungodly; for
it is a sort of an explanation of the former verse, and would have been
connected with it, had not the Apostle, moved with indignation, broken
off the sentence in the middle. The meaning of the objection is — “If by
our unfaithfulness the truth of God becomes more conspicuous, and in a
manner confirmed, and hence more glory redounds to him, it is by no
means just, that he, who serves to display God’s glory, should be
punished as a sinner.”  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md)

<span id="vii.iii-p23"></span><span id="vii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p24"></span>**8.** *And not,* *etc.* This is an
elliptical sentence, in which a word is to be understood. It will be
complete, if you read it thus, — “and why is it not rather said, (as we
are reproached, etc.) that we are to do evils, that good things may
come?” But the Apostle deigns not to answer the slander; which yet we
may check by the most solid reason. The pretense, indeed, is this, — “If
God is by our iniquity glorified, and if nothing can be done by man in
this life more befitting than to promote the glory of God, then let us
sin to advance his glory!” Now the answer to this is evident, — “That
evil cannot of itself produce anything but evil; and that God’s glory is
through our sin illustrated, is not the work of man, but the work of
God; who, as a wonderful worker, knows how to overcome our wickedness,
and to convert it to another end, so as to turn it contrary to what we
intend, to the promotion of his own glory.” God has prescribed to us the
way, by which he would have himself to be glorified by us, even by true
piety, which consists in obedience to his word. He who leaps over this
boundary, strives not to honor God, but to dishonor him. That it turns
out otherwise, is to be ascribed to the Providence of God, and not to
the wickedness of man; through which it comes not, that the majesty of
God is not injured, nay, wholly overthrown  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md)

<span id="vii.iii-p26"></span>*(As we are reproached,)* *etc.* Since
Paul speaks so reverently of the secret judgments of God, it is a wonder
that his enemies should have fallen into such wantonness as to
calumniate him: but there has never been so much reverence and
seriousness displayed by God’s servants as to be sufficient to check
impure and virulent tongues. It is not then a new thing, that
adversaries at this day load with so many false accusations, and render
odious our doctrine, which we ourselves know to be the pure gospel of
Christ, and all the angels, as well as the faithful, are our witnesses.
Nothing can be imagined more monstrous than what we read here was laid
to the charge of Paul, to the end, that his preaching might be rendered
hateful to the inexperienced. Let us then bear this evil, when the
ungodly abuse the truth which we preach by their calumnies: nor let us
cease, on this account, constantly to defend the genuine confession of
it, inasmuch as it has sufficient power to crush and to dissipate their
falsehoods. Let us, at the same time, according to the Apostle’s
example, oppose, as much as we can, all malicious subtilties, (<span
id="vii.iii-p26.1"></span>*technis* — crafts, wiles,) that the base and
the abandoned may not, without some check, speak evil of our Creator.

<span id="vii.iii-p27"></span>*Whose judgment is just.* Some take this
in an active sense, as signifying that Paul so far assents to them, that
what they objected was absurd, in order that the doctrine of the gospel
might not be thought to be connected with such paradoxes: but I approve
more of the passive meaning; for it would not have been suitable simply
to express an approval of such a wickedness, which, on the contrary,
deserved to be severely condemned; and this is what Paul seems to me to
have done. And their perverseness was, on two accounts, to be condemned,
— first, because this impiety had gained the assent of their minds; and
secondly, because, in traducing the gospel, they dared to draw from it
their calumny.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**9.** What then? are we better *than they?*
No, in no wise: for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that
they are all under sin.

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span>**9.** Quid ergo? præcellimus?  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) Nequaquam: ante enim constituimus tam
Judæos quam Græcos, omnes sub peccato esse.

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span><span id="vii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span>**9.** *What then?* He returns from his
digression to his subject. For lest the Jews should object that they
were deprived of their right, as he had mentioned those distinctions of
honor, for which they thought themselves superior to the Gentiles, he
now at length replies to the question — in what respect they excelled
the Gentiles. And though his answer seems in appearance to militate
against what he had said before, (for he now strips those of all dignity
to whom he had attributed so much,) there is yet no discord; for those
privileges in which he allowed them to be eminent, were separate from
themselves, and dependent on God’s goodness, and not on their own merit:
but here he makes inquiry as to their own worthiness, whether they could
glory in any respect in themselves. Hence the two answers he gives so
agree together, that the one follows from the other; for while he extols
their privileges, by including them among the free benefits of God, he
shows that they had nothing of their own. Hence, what he now answers
might have been easily inferred; for since it was their chief
superiority, that God’s oracles were deposited with them, and they had
it not through their own merit, there was nothing left for them, on
account of which they could glory before God. Now mark the holy
contrivance (<span id="vii.iv-p6.1"></span>*sanctum artificium*) which
he adopts; for when he ascribes pre-eminency to them, he speaks in the
third person; but when he strips them of all things, he puts himself
among them, that he might avoid giving offense.

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span>*For we have before brought a charge,*
*etc.* The Greek verb which Paul adopts, <span
id="vii.iv-p7.1"></span>αἰτιάσθαι is properly a forensic term; and I
have therefore preferred to render it, “We have brought a charge;”
 <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) for an accuser in an action is
said to charge a crime, which he is prepared to substantiate by
testimonies and other proofs. Now the Apostle had summoned all mankind
universally before the tribunal of God, that he might include all under
the same condemnation: and it is to no purpose for any one to object,
and say that the Apostle here not only brings a charge, but more
especially proves it; for a charge is not true except it depends on
solid and strong evidences, according to what *Cicero* says, who, in a
certain place, distinguishes between a charge and a slander. We must
add, that to be under sin means that we are justly condemned as sinners
before God, or that we are held under the curse which is due to sin; for
as righteousness brings with it absolution, so sin is followed by
condemnation.

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>**10.** As it is written, There is none
righteous, no, not one:

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span>**10.** Sicut scriptum, Quod non est justus
quisquam, ne unus quidem;

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span>**11.** There is none that understandeth,
there is none that seeketh after God.

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span>**11.** Non est intelligens, non est qui
requirat Deum;

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span>**12.** They are all gone out of the way,
they are together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth good,
no, not one.

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span>**12.** Omnes declinarunt, simul facti sunt
inutiles; non est qui exerceat benignitatem, ne ad unum quidem:

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span>**13.** Their throat *is* an open sepulchre:
with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps *is* under
their lips:

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span>**13.** Sepulchrum apertum guttur eorum;
linguis dolose egerunt: venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum:

<span id="vii.v-p10"></span>**14.** Whose mouth *is* full of cursing and
bitterness:

<span id="vii.v-p11"></span>**14.** Quorum os execratione et amarulentia
plenum:

<span id="vii.v-p12"></span>**15.** Their feet *are* swift to shed
blood:

<span id="vii.v-p13"></span>**15.** Veloces pedes eorum ad effundendum
sanguinem;

<span id="vii.v-p14"></span>**16.** Destruction and misery *are* in
their ways:

<span id="vii.v-p15"></span>**16.** Contritio et calamitas in viis
eorum;

<span id="vii.v-p16"></span>**17.** And the way of peace have they not
known:

<span id="vii.v-p17"></span>**17.** Et viam pacis non noverunt:

<span id="vii.v-p18"></span>**18.** There is no fear of God before their
eyes.

<span id="vii.v-p19"></span>**18.** Non est timor Dei præ oculis eorum.
 <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md)

<span id="vii.v-p21"></span><span id="vii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p22"></span>**10.** *As it is written,* *etc.* He has
hitherto used proofs or arguments to convince men of their iniquity; he
now begins to reason from authority; and it is to Christians the
strongest kind of proof, when authority is derived from the only true
God. And hence let ecclesiastical teachers learn what their office is;
for since Paul asserts here no truth but what he confirms by the sure
testimony of Scripture, much less ought such a thing to be attempted by
those, who have no other commission but to preach the gospel, which they
have received through Paul and others.

<span id="vii.v-p23"></span>*There is none righteous,* *etc.* The
Apostle, who gives the meaning rather than the entire words, seems, in
the first place, before he comes to particulars, to state generally the
substance of what the Prophet declares to be in man, and that is — *that
none is righteous;*  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) he afterwards
particularly enumerates the effects or fruits of this unrighteousness.

<span id="vii.v-p26"></span><span id="vii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p27"></span>**11.** The first effect is, that *there is
none that understands:* and then this ignorance is immediately proved,
for *they* *seek not God;* for empty is the man in whom there is not the
knowledge of God, whatever other learning he may possess; yea, the
sciences and the arts, which in themselves are good, are empty things,
when they are without this groundwork.

<span id="vii.v-p28"></span><span id="vii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p29"></span>**12.** It is added,  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) *There is no one who doeth kindness* By
this we are to understand, that they had put off every feeling of
humanity. For as the best bond of mutual concord among us is the
knowledge of God, (as he is the common Father of all, he wonderfully
unites us, and without him there is nothing but disunion,) so inhumanity
commonly follows where there is ignorance of God, as every one, when he
despises others, loves and seeks his own good.

<span id="vii.v-p31"></span><span id="vii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p32"></span>**13.** It is further added, *Their throat
is an open grave;*  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) that is, a
gulf to swallow up men. It is more than if he had said, that they were
devourers (<span id="vii.v-p33.5"></span>ἀνθρωποφάγους — men-eaters;)
for it is an intimation of extreme barbarity, when the throat is said to
be so great a gulf, that it is sufficient to swallow down and devour men
whole and entire. Their *tongues are deceitful,* and, *the poison of
asps is under their lips,* import the same thing,

<span id="vii.v-p34"></span><span id="vii.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p35"></span>**14.** Then he says, that *their mouth is
full of cursing and bitterness*  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md)
— a vice of an opposite character to the former; but the meaning is,
that they are in every way full of wickedness; for if they speak fair,
they deceive and blend poison with their flatteries; but if they draw
forth what they have in their hearts, bitterness and cursing stream out.

<span id="vii.v-p37"></span><span id="vii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p38"></span>**16.** Very striking is the sentence that
is added from Isaiah, *Ruin and misery are in all their ways;*  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) for it is a representation of
ferociousness above measure barbarous, which produces solitude and waste
by destroying every thing wherever it prevails: it is the same as the
description which *Pliny* gives of *Domitian.*

<span id="vii.v-p40"></span><span id="vii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p41"></span>**17.** It follows, *The way of peace they
have not known:* they are so habituated to plunders, acts of violence
and wrong, to savageness and cruelty, that they know not how to act
kindly and courteously.

<span id="vii.v-p42"></span><span id="vii.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p43"></span>**18.** In the last clause  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) he repeats again, in other words, what
we have noticed at the beginning — that every wickedness flows from a
disregard of God: for as the principal part of wisdom is the fear of
God, when we depart from that, there remains in us nothing right or
pure. In short, as it is a bridle to restrain our wickedness, so when it
is wanting, we feel at liberty to indulge every kind of licentiousness.

<span id="vii.v-p47"></span>And that these testimonies may not seem to
any one to have been unfitly produced, let us consider each of them in
connection with the passages from which they have been taken. David says
in <span id="vii.v-p47.1"></span>[Ps
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.v-p47.1"></span>,
that there was such perverseness in men, that God, when looking on them
all in their different conditions, could not find a righteous man, no,
not one. It then follows, that this evil pervaded mankind universally;
for nothing is hid from the sight of God. He speaks indeed at the end of
the Psalm of the redemption of Israel: but we shall presently show how
men become holy, and how far they are exempt from this condition. In the
other Psalms he speaks of the treachery of his enemies, while he was
exhibiting in himself and in his descendants a type of the kingdom of
Christ: hence we have in his adversaries the representatives of all
those, who being alienated from Christ, are not led by his Spirit.
Isaiah expressly mentions Israel; and therefore his charge applies with
still greater force against the Gentiles. What, then? There is no doubt
but that the character of men is described in those words, in order that
we may see what man is when left to himself; for Scripture testifies
that all men are in this state, who are not regenerated by the grace of
God. The condition of the saints would be nothing better, were not this
depravity corrected in them: and that they may still remember that they
differ nothing from others by nature, they do find in the relics of
their flesh (by which they are always encompassed) the seeds of those
evils, which would constantly produce fruits, were they not prevented by
being mortified; and for this mortification they are indebted to God’s
mercy and not to their own nature. We may add, that though all the vices
here enumerated are not found conspicuously in every individual, yet
they may be justly and truly ascribed to human nature, as we have
already observed on <span id="vii.v-p47.3"></span>[Romans
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.v-p47.3"></span>.

<span id="vii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span>**19.** Now we know that what things soever
the law saith, it saith to them who are under the law: that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.

<span id="vii.vi-p3"></span>**19.** Scimus autem quod quæcunque Lex
dicit, iis qui in Lege sunt loquitur; ut omne os obstruatur, et obnoxius
fiat omnis mundus Deo.  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md)

<span id="vii.vi-p5"></span>**20.** Therefore by the deeds of the law
there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law *is* the
knowledge of sin.

<span id="vii.vi-p6"></span>**20.** Quoniam ex operibus Legis non
justificabitur omnis caro coram ipso; per Legem enim agnitio peccati.

<span id="vii.vi-p7"></span><span id="vii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p8"></span>**19.** *Now we know,* *etc.* Leaving the
Gentiles, he distinctly addresses his words to the Jews; for he had a
much more difficult work in subduing them, because they, though no less
destitute of true righteousness than the Gentiles, yet covered
themselves with the cloak of God’s covenant, as though it was a
sufficient holiness to them to have been separated from the rest of the
world by the election of God. And he indeed mentions those evasions
which he well understood the Jews were ready to bring forward; for
whatever was said in the law unfavorably of mankind, they usually
applied to the Gentiles, as though they were exempt from the common
condition of men, and no doubt they would have been so, had they not
fallen from their own dignity. Hence, that no false conceit as to their
own worthiness should be a hinderance to them, and that they might not
confine to the Gentiles alone what applied to them in common with
others, Paul here anticipates them, and shows, from what Scripture
declares, that they were not only blended with the multitude, but that
condemnation was peculiarly denounced on them. And we indeed see the
discretion of the Apostle in undertaking to refute these objections; for
to whom but to the Jews had the law been given, and to whose instruction
but theirs ought it to have served? What then it states respecting
others is as it were accidental; or as they say, <span
id="vii.vi-p8.1"></span>παρεργον, an appendage; but it applies its
teaching mainly to its own disciples.

<span id="vii.vi-p9"></span>*Under the law* He says that the Jews were
those to whom the law was destined, it hence follows, that it especially
regards them; and under the word law he includes also the Prophets, and
so the whole of the Old Testament — *That every mouth may be stopped,*
*etc.*; that is, that every evasion may be cut off, and every occasion
for excuse. It is a metaphor taken from courts of law, where the
accused, if he has anything to plead as a lawful defense, demands leave
to speak, that he might clear himself from the things laid to his
charge; but if he is convicted by his own conscience, he is silent, and
without saying a word waits for his condemnation, being even already by
his own silence condemned. Of the same meaning is this saying in <span
id="vii.vi-p9.1"></span>[Job 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.vi-p9.1"></span>, “I will lay my hand on my mouth.” He indeed
says, that though he was not altogether without some kind of excuse, he
would yet cease to justify himself, and submit to the sentence of God.
The next clause contains the explanation; for his mouth is stopped, who
is so fast held by the sentence of condemnation, that he can by no means
escape. According to another sense, to be silent before the Lord is to
tremble at his majesty, and to stand mute, being astonished at his
brightness.  <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md)

<span id="vii.vi-p11"></span><span id="vii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p12"></span>**20.** *Therefore by the works of the
law,* *etc.* It is a matter of doubt, even among the learned, what the
works of the law mean. Some extend them to the observance of the whole
law, while others confine them to the ceremonies alone. The addition of
the word *law* induced <span id="vii.vi-p12.1"></span>Chrysostom*,*
<span id="vii.vi-p12.2"></span>Origen, and <span
id="vii.vi-p12.3"></span>Jerome to assent to the latter opinion;  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) for they thought that there is a
peculiar intimation in this appendage, that the expression should not be
understood as including all works. But this difficulty may be very
easily removed: for seeing works are so far just before God as we seek
by them to render to him worship and obedience, in order expressly to
take away the power of justifying from all works, he has mentioned
those, if there be any, which can possibly justify; for the law hath
promises, without which there would be no value in our works before God.
You hence see the reason why Paul expressly mentioned the works of the
law; for it is by the law that a reward is apportioned to works. Nor was
this unknown to the schoolmen, who held it as an approved and common
maxim, that works have no intrinsic worthiness, but become meritorious
by covenant. And though they were mistaken, inasmuch as they saw not
that works are ever polluted with vices, which deprive them of any
merit, yet this principle is still true, that the reward for works
depends on the free promise of the law. Wisely then and rightly does
Paul speak here; for he speaks not of mere works, but distinctly and
expressly refers to the keeping of the law, the subject which he is
discussing.  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md)

<span id="vii.vi-p17"></span>As to those things which have been adduced
by learned men in defense of this opinion, they are weaker than they
might have been. They think that by mentioning circumcision, an example
is propounded, which belonged to ceremonies only: but why Paul mentioned
circumcision, we have already explained; for none swell more with
confidence in works than hypocrites, and we know that they glory only in
external masks; and then circumcision, according to their view, was a
sort of initiation into the righteousness of the law; and hence it
seemed to them a work of primary excellence, and indeed the basis as it
were of the righteousness of works. — They also allege what is said in
the Epistle to the Galatians, where Paul handles the same subject, and
refers to ceremonies only; but that also is not sufficiently strong to
support what they wish to defend. It is certain that Paul had a
controversy with those who inspired the people with a false confidence
in ceremonies; that he might cut of this confidence, he did not confine
himself to ceremonies, nor did he speak specifically of what value they
were; but he included the whole law, as it is evident from those
passages which are derived from that source. Such also was the character
of the disputation held at Jerusalem by the disciples.

<span id="vii.vi-p18"></span>But we contend, not without reason, that
Paul speaks here of the whole law; for we are abundantly supported by
the thread of reasoning which he has hitherto followed and continues to
follow, and there are many other passages which will not allow us to
think otherwise. It is therefore a truth, which deserves to be
remembered as the first in importance, — that by keeping the law no one
can attain righteousness. He had before assigned the reason, and he will
repeat it presently again, and that is, that all, being to a man guilty
of transgression, are condemned for unrighteousness by the law. And
these two things — to be justified by works — and to be guilty of
transgressions, (as we shall show more at large as we proceed,) are
wholly inconsistent the one with the other. — The word *flesh,* without
some particular specification, signifies men;  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) though it seems to convey a meaning
somewhat more general, as it is more expressive to say, “All mortals,”
than to say, “All men,” as you may see in *Gallius.*

<span id="vii.vi-p20"></span>*For by the law,* *etc.* He reasons from
what is of an opposite character, — that righteousness is not brought to
us by the law, because it convinces us of sin and condemns us; for life
and death proceed not from the same fountain. And as he reasons from the
contrary effect of the law, that it cannot confer righteousness on us,
let us know, that the argument does not otherwise hold good, except we
hold this as an inseparable and unvarying circumstance, — that by
showing to man his sin, it cuts off the hope of salvation. It is indeed
by itself, as it teaches us what righteousness is, the way to salvation:
but our depravity and corruption prevent it from being in this respect
of any advantage to us. It is also necessary in the second place to add
this, — that whosoever is found to be a sinner, is deprived of
righteousness; for to devise with the sophisters a half kind of
righteousness, so that works in part justify, is frivolous: but nothing
is in this respect gained, on account of man’s corruption.

<span id="vii.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p1"></span><span id="vii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p2"></span>**21.** But now the righteousness of God
without the law  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) is manifested,
being witnessed by the law and the prophets;

<span id="vii.vii-p4"></span>**21.** Nunc autem sine Lege justitia Dei
manifesto est, testimonio comprobata Legis et prophetarum;

<span id="vii.vii-p5"></span>**22.** Even the righteousness of God
*which is* by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that
believe: for there is no difference:

<span id="vii.vii-p6"></span>**22.** Justitia, inquam, Dei per fidem
Iesu Christi, in omnes et super omnes credentes; non est sanè
distinctio:

<span id="vii.vii-p7"></span><span id="vii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p8"></span>**21.** *But now without the law,* *etc.*
It is not certain for what distinct reason he calls that the
righteousness of God, which we obtain by faith; whether it be, because
it can alone stand before God, or because the Lord in his mercy confers
it on us. As both interpretations are suitable, we contend for neither.
This righteousness then, which God communicates to man, and accepts
alone, and owns as righteousness, has been revealed, he says, *without
the law,* that is without the aid of the law; and the law is to be
understood as meaning works; for it is not proper to refer this to its
teaching, which he immediately adduces as bearing witness to the
gratuitous righteousness of faith. Some confine it to ceremonies; but
this view I shall presently show to be unsound and frigid. We ought then
to know, that the merits of works are excluded. We also see that he
blends not works with the mercy of God; but having taken away and wholly
removed all confidence in works, he sets up mercy alone.

<span id="vii.vii-p9"></span>It is not unknown to me, that <span
id="vii.vii-p9.1"></span>Augustine gives a different explanation; for he
thinks that the righteousness of God is the grace of regeneration; and
this grace he allows to be free, because God renews us, when unworthy,
by his Spirit; and from this he excludes the works of the law, that is,
those works, by which men of themselves endeavor, without renovation, to
render God indebted to them. (<span id="vii.vii-p9.2"></span>*Deum
promereri* — to oblige God.) I also well know, that some new speculators
proudly adduce this sentiment, as though it were at this day revealed to
them. But that the Apostle includes all works without exception, even
those which the Lord produces in his own people, is evident from the
context.

<span id="vii.vii-p10"></span>For no doubt Abraham was regenerated and
led by the Spirit of God at the time when he denied that he was
justified by works. Hence he excluded from man’s justification not only
works morally good, as they commonly call them, and such as are done by
the impulse of nature, but also all those which even the faithful can
perform.  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md) Again, since this is a
definition of the righteousness of faith, “Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven,” there is no question to be made about this or
that kind of work; but the merit of works being abolished, the remission
of sins alone is set down as the cause of righteousness.

<span id="vii.vii-p12"></span>They think that these two things well
agree, — that man is justified by faith through the grace of Christ, —
and that he is yet justified by the works, which proceed from spiritual
regeneration; for God gratuitously renews us, and we also receive his
gift by faith. But Paul takes up a very different principle, — that the
consciences of men will never be tranquillized until they recumb on the
mercy of God alone.  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) Hence, in
another place, after having taught us that God is in Christ justifying
men, he expresses the manner, — “by not imputing to them their sins.” In
like manner, in his Epistle to the Galatians, he puts the law in
opposition to faith with regard to justification; for the law promises
life to those who do what it commands, (<span
id="vii.vii-p13.2"></span>[Ga
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012)<span id="vii.vii-p13.2"></span>;.md)
and it requires not only the outward performance of works, but also
sincere love to God. It hence follows, that in the righteousness of
faith, no merit of works is allowed. It then appears evident, that it is
but a frivolous sophistry to say, that we are justified in Christ,
because we are renewed by the Spirit, inasmuch as we are the members of
Christ, — that we are justified by faith, because we are united by faith
to the body of Christ, — that we are justified freely, because God finds
nothing in us but sin.

<span id="vii.vii-p14"></span>But we are *in Christ* because we are out
of ourselves; and justified by *faith,* because we must recumb on the
mercy of God alone, and on his gratuitous promises; and *freely,*
because God reconciles us to himself by burying our sins. Nor can this
indeed be confined to the commencement of justification, as they dream;
for this definition — “Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven” —
was applicable to David, after he had long exercised himself in the
service of God; and Abraham, thirty years after his call, though a
remarkable example of holiness, had yet no works for which he could
glory before God, and hence his faith in the promise was imputed to him
for righteousness; and when Paul teaches us that God justifies men by
not imputing their sins, he quotes a passage, which is daily repeated in
the Church. Still more, the conscience, by which we are disturbed on the
score of works, performs its office, not for one day only, but continues
to do so through life. It hence follows that we cannot remain, even to
death, in a justified state, except we look to Christ only, in whom God
has adopted us, and regards us now as accepted. Hence also is their
sophistry confuted, who falsely accuse us of asserting, that according
to Scripture we are justified by faith only, while the exclusive word
*only,* is nowhere to be found in Scripture. But if justification
depends not either on the law, or on ourselves, why should it not be
ascribed to mercy alone? and if it be from mercy only, it is then by
faith only.

<span id="vii.vii-p15"></span>The particle *now* may be taken
adversatively, and not with reference to time; as we often use *now* for
*but.*  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) But if you prefer to
regard it as an adverb of time, I willingly admit it, so that there may
be no room to suspect an evasion; yet the abrogation of ceremonies alone
is not to be understood; for it was only the design of the Apostle to
illustrate by a comparison the grace by which we excel the fathers. Then
the meaning is, that by the preaching of the gospel, after the
appearance of Christ in the flesh, the righteousness of faith was
revealed. It does not, however, hence follow, that it was hid before the
coming of Christ; for a twofold manifestation is to be here noticed: the
first in the Old Testament, which was by the word and sacraments; the
other in the New, which contains the completion of ceremonies and
promises, as exhibited in Christ himself: and we may add, that by the
gospel it has received a fuller brightness.

<span id="vii.vii-p17"></span>*Being proved* \[*or approved*\] *by the
testimony*,  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) *etc.* He adds
this, lest in the conferring of free righteousness the gospel should
seem to militate against the law. As then he has denied that the
righteousness of faith needs the aid of the law, so now he asserts that
it is confirmed by its testimony. If then the law affords its testimony
to gratuitous righteousness, it is evident that the law was not given
for this end, to teach men how to obtain righteousness by works. Hence
they pervert it, who turn it to answer any purpose of this kind. And
further, if you desire a proof of this truth, examine in order the chief
things taught by Moses, and you will find that man, being cast from the
kingdom of God, had no other restoration from the beginning than that
contained in the evangelical promises through the blessed seed, by whom,
as it had been foretold, the serpent’s head was to be bruised, and
through whom a blessing to the nations had been promised: you will find
in the commandments a demonstration of your iniquity, and from the
sacrifices and oblations you may learn that satisfaction and cleansing
are to be obtained in Christ alone.  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) When you come to the *Prophets* you
will find the clearest promises of gratuitous mercy. On this subject see
my Institutes.

<span id="vii.vii-p20"></span><span id="vii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p21"></span>**22.** *Even the righteousness of God,*
*etc.*  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) He shows in few words
what this justification is, even that which is found in Christ and is
apprehended by faith. At the same time, by introducing again the name of
God, he seems to make God the founder, (<span
id="vii.vii-p22.3"></span>*autorem,* the author,) and not only the
approver of the righteousness of which he speaks; as though he had said,
that it flows from him alone, or that its origin is from heaven, but
that it is made manifest to us in Christ.

<span id="vii.vii-p23"></span>When therefore we discuss this subject, we
ought to proceed in this way: *First,* the question respecting our
justification is to be referred, not to the judgment of men, but to the
judgment of God, before whom nothing is counted righteousness, but
perfect and absolute obedience to the law; which appears clear from its
promises and threatenings: if no one is found who has attained to such a
perfect measure of holiness, it follows that all are in themselves
destitute of righteousness. *Secondly,* it is necessary that Christ
should come to our aid; who, being alone just, can render us just by
transferring to us his own righteousness. You now see how the
righteousness of faith is the righteousness of Christ. When therefore we
are justified, the efficient cause is the mercy of God, the meritorious
is Christ, the instrumental is the word in connection with faith.  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) Hence faith is said to justify,
because it is the instrument by which we receive Christ, in whom
righteousness is conveyed to us. Having been made partakers of Christ,
we ourselves are not only just, but our works also are counted just
before God, and for this reason, because whatever imperfections there
may be in them, are obliterated by the blood of Christ; the promises,
which are conditional, are also by the same grace fulfilled to us; for
God rewards our works as perfect, inasmuch as their defects are covered
by free pardon.

<span id="vii.vii-p25"></span>*Unto all and upon all,*  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) *etc.* For the sake of amplifying, he
repeats the same thing in different forms; it was, that he might more
fully express what we have already heard, that faith alone is required,
that the faithful are not distinguished by external marks, and that
hence it matters not whether they be Gentiles or Jews.

<span id="vii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p1"></span><span id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p2"></span>**23.** For all have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God;

<span id="vii.viii-p3"></span>**23.** Omnes enim peccaverunt, et
destituuntur gloria Dei;

<span id="vii.viii-p4"></span>**24.** Being justified freely by his
grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus:

<span id="vii.viii-p5"></span>**24.** Justificati gratis ipsius gratia
per redemptionem quæ est in Christo lesu:

<span id="vii.viii-p6"></span>**25.** Whom God hath set forth *to be* a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God;

<span id="vii.viii-p7"></span>**25.** Quem proposuit Deus propitiatorium
per fidem in sanguine ipsius, in demonstrationem justitiae suæ, propter
remissionem delictorum,

<span id="vii.viii-p8"></span>**26.** To declare, *I say*, at this time
his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which
believeth in Jesus.

<span id="vii.viii-p9"></span>**26.** Quæ prius extiterunt in tolerantia
Dei; ad demonstrationem justitiae suae, in hoc tempore; ut sit ipse
justus et Justificans enum qui est ex fide Iesu.

<span id="vii.viii-p10"></span><span id="vii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p11"></span>**23.** *There is indeed no difference,*
*etc.* He urges on all, without exception, the necessity of seeking
righteousness in Christ; as though he had said, “There is no other way
of attaining righteousness; for some cannot be justified in this and
others in that way; but all must alike be justified by faith, because
all are sinners, and therefore have nothing for which they can glory
before God.” But he takes as granted that every one, conscious of his
sin, when he comes before the tribunal of God, is confounded and lost
under a sense of his own shame; so that no *sinner* can bear the
presence of God, as we see an example in the case of Adam. He again
brings forward a reason taken from the opposite side; and hence we must
notice what follows. Since we are all sinners, Paul concludes, that we
are deficient in, or *destitute* of, the praise due to righteousness.
There is then, according to what he teaches, no righteousness but what
is perfect and absolute. Were there indeed such a thing as half
righteousness, it would yet be necessary to deprive the sinner entirely
of all glory: and hereby the figment of partial righteousness, as they
call it, is sufficiently confuted; for if it were true that we are
justified in part by works, and in part by grace, this argument of Paul
would be of no force — that all are deprived of the glory of God because
they are sinners. It is then certain, there is no righteousness where
there is sin, until Christ removes the curse; and this very thing is
what is said in <span id="vii.viii-p11.1"></span>[Ga
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.viii-p11.1"></span>,
that all who are under the law are exposed to the curse, and that we are
delivered from it through the kindness of Christ. *The glory of God* I
take to mean the approbation of God, as in <span
id="vii.viii-p11.2"></span>[Joh
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043.md)<span
id="vii.viii-p11.2"></span>, where it is said, that “they loved the
glory of men more than the glory of God.” And thus he summons us from
the applause of a human court to the tribunal of heaven.  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md)

<span id="vii.viii-p13"></span><span id="vii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p14"></span>**24.** *Being justified freely,* *etc.*
A participle is here put for a verb according to the usage of the Greek
language. The meaning is, — that since there remains nothing for men, as
to themselves, but to perish, being smitten by the just judgment of God,
they are to be justified freely through his mercy; for Christ comes to
the aid of this misery, and communicates himself to believers, so that
they find in him alone all those things in which they are wanting. There
is, perhaps, no passage in the whole Scripture which illustrates in a
more striking manner the efficacy of his righteousness; for it shows
that God’s mercy is the efficient cause, that Christ with his blood is
the meritorious cause, that the formal or the instumental cause is faith
in the word, and that moreover, the final cause is the glory of the
divine justice and goodness.

<span id="vii.viii-p15"></span>With regard to the efficient cause, he
says, that we are *justified freely,* and further, by his grace; and he
thus repeats the word to show that the whole is from God, and nothing
from us. It might have been enough to oppose grace to merits; but lest
we should imagine a half kind of grace, he affirms more strongly what he
means by a repetition, and claims for God’s mercy alone the whole glory
of our righteousness, which the sophists divide into parts and mutilate,
that they may not be constrained to confess their own poverty. —
*Through the redemption,* *etc.* This is the material, — Christ by his
obedience satisfied the Father’s justice, (<span
id="vii.viii-p15.1"></span>*judicium* — judgment,) and by undertaking
our cause he liberated us from the tyranny of death, by which we were
held captive; as on account of the sacrifice which he offered is our
guilt removed. Here again is fully confuted the gloss of those who make
righteousness a quality; for if we are counted righteous before God,
because we are redeemed by a price, we certainly derive from another
what is not in us. And Paul immediately explains more clearly what this
redemption is, and what is its object, which is to reconcile us to God;
for he calls Christ a propitiation, (or, if we prefer an allusion to an
ancient type,) a propitiatory. But what he means is, that we are not
otherwise just than through Christ propitiating the Father for us. But
it is necessary for us to examine the words.  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md)

<span id="vii.viii-p19"></span><span id="vii.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p20"></span>**25.** *Whom God hath set forth,* *etc.*
The Greek verb, <span id="vii.viii-p20.1"></span>προτίθεναι, means
sometimes to determine beforehand, and sometimes to set forth. If the
first meaning be taken, Paul refers to the gratuitous mercy of God, in
having appointed Christ as our Mediator, that he might appease the
Father by the sacrifice of his death: nor is it a small commendation of
God’s grace that he, of his own good will, sought out a way by which he
might remove our curse. According to this view, the passage fully
harmonizes with that in <span id="vii.viii-p20.2"></span>[Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.viii-p20.2"></span>,

<span id="vii.viii-p21"></span>“God so loved the world, that he gave his
only-begotten Son.”

<span id="vii.viii-p22"></span>Yet if we embrace this meaning, it will
remain still true, that God hath set him forth in due time, whom he had
appointed as a Mediator. There seems to be an allusion in the word,
ἱλαστήριον, as I have said, to the ancient propitiatory; for he teaches
us that the same thing was really exhibited in Christ, which had been
previously typified. As, however, the other view cannot be disproved,
should any prefer it, I shall not undertake to decide the question. What
Paul especially meant here is no doubt evident from his words; and it
was this, — that God, without having regard to Christ, is always angry
with us, — and that we are reconciled to him when we are accepted
through his righteousness. God does not indeed hate in us his own
workmanship, that is, as we are formed men; but he hates our
uncleanness, which has extinguished the light of his image. When the
washing of Christ cleanses this away, he then loves and embraces us as
his own pure workmanship.

<span id="vii.viii-p23"></span>*A propitiatory through faith in his
blood,* *etc.* I prefer thus literally to retain the language of Paul;
for it seems indeed to me that he intended, by one single sentence, to
declare that God is propitious to us as soon as we have our trust
resting on the blood of Christ; for by faith we come to the possession
of this benefit. But by mentioning *blood* only, he did not mean to
exclude other things connected with redemption, but, on the contrary, to
include the whole under one word: and he mentioned “blood,” because by
it we are cleansed. Thus, by taking a part for the whole, he points out
the whole work of expiation. For, as he had said before, that God is
reconciled in Christ, so he now adds, that this reconciliation is
obtained by faith, mentioning, at the same time, what it is that faith
ought mainly to regard in Christ — his blood.

<span id="vii.viii-p24"></span>*For* <span
id="vii.viii-p24.1"></span>(<span id="vii.viii-p24.2"></span><span
id="vii.viii-p24.3"></span>propter<span id="vii.viii-p24.4"></span>)
*the remission of sins,*  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) *etc.*
The causal preposition imports as much as though he had said, “for the
sake of remission,” or, “to this end, that he might blot out sins.” And
this definition or explanation again confirms what I have already often
reminded you, — that men are pronounced just, not because they are such
in reality, but by imputation: for he only uses various modes of
expression, that he might more clearly declare, that in this
righteousness there is no merit of ours; for if we obtain it by the
remission of sins, we conclude that it is not from ourselves; and
further, since remission itself is an act of God’s bounty alone, every
merit falls to the ground.

<span id="vii.viii-p31"></span>It may, however, be asked, why he
confines pardon to preceding sins? Though this passage is variously
explained, yet it seems to me probable that Paul had regard to the legal
expiations, which were indeed evidences of a future satisfaction, but
could by no means pacify God. There is a similar passage in <span
id="vii.viii-p31.1"></span>[Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.viii-p31.1"></span>,
where it is said, that by Christ a redemption was brought from sins,
which remained under the former Testament. You are not, however, to
understand that no sins but those of former times were expiated by the
death of Christ — a delirious notion, which some fanatics have drawn
from a distorted view of this passage. For Paul teaches us only this, —
that until the death of Christ there was no way of appeasing God, and
that this was not done or accomplished by the legal types: hence the
reality was suspended until the fullness of time came. We may further
say, that those things which involve us daily in guilt must be regarded
in the same light; for there is but one true expiation for all.

<span id="vii.viii-p32"></span>Some, in order to avoid what seems
inconsistent, have held that former sins are said to have been forgiven,
lest there should seem to he a liberty given to sin in future. It is
indeed true that no pardon is offered but for sins committed; not that
the benefit of redemption fails or is lost, when we afterwards fall, as
*Novatus* and his sect dreamed, but that it is the character of the
dispensation of the gospel, to set before him who will sin the judgment
and wrath of God, and before the sinner his mercy. But what I have
already stated is the real sense.

<span id="vii.viii-p33"></span>He adds, that this remission was *through
forbearance;* and this I take simply to mean gentleness, which has
stayed the judgment of God, and suffered it not to burst forth to our
ruin, until he had at length received us into favor. But there seems to
be here also an implied anticipation of what might be said; that no one
might object, and say that this favor had only of late appeared. Paul
teaches us, that it was an evidence of forbearance.

<span id="vii.viii-p34"></span><span id="vii.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p35"></span>**26.** *For a demonstration,*  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md) *etc.* The repetition of this clause
is emphatical; and Paul resignedly made it, as it was very needful; for
nothing is more difficult than to persuade man that he ought to disclaim
all things as his own, and to ascribe them all to God. At the same time
mention was intentionally made twice of this demonstration, that the
Jews might open their eyes to behold it. — *At this time,* *etc.* What
had been ever at all times, he applies to the time when Christ was
revealed, and not without reason; for what was formerly known in an
obscure manner under shadows, God openly manifested in his Son. So the
coming of Christ was the time of his good pleasure, and the day of
salvation. God had indeed in all ages given some evidence of his
righteousness; but it appeared far brighter when the sun of
righteousness shone. Noticed, then, ought to be the comparison between
the Old and the New Testament; for then only was revealed the
righteousness of God when Christ appeared.

<span id="vii.viii-p37"></span>*That he might be just,* *etc.* This is a
definition of that righteousness which he has declared was revealed when
Christ was given, and which, as he has taught us in the first chapter,
is made known in the gospel: and he affirms that it consists of two
parts — The first is, that God is just, not indeed as one among many,
but as one who contains within himself all fullness of righteousness;
for complete and full praise, such as is due, is not otherwise given to
him, but when he alone obtains the name and the honor of being just,
while the whole human race is condemned for injustice: and then the
other part refers to the communication of righteousness; for God by no
means keeps his riches laid up in himself, but pours them forth upon
men. Then the righteousness of God shines in us, whenever he justifies
us by faith in Christ; for in vain were Christ given us for
righteousness, unless there was the fruition of him by faith. It hence
follows, that all were unjust and lost in themselves, until a remedy
from heaven was offered to them.  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md)

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span><span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027.md)<span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span>**27.** Where *is* boasting then? It is
excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith.

<span id="vii.ix-p3"></span>**27.** Ubi ergo gloriatio?  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) exclusa est. Per quam legem? operum?
Nequaquam; Sed per legem fidei.

<span id="vii.ix-p5"></span>**28.** Therefore we conclude that a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the law.

<span id="vii.ix-p6"></span>**28.** Constituimus ergo, fide justificari
hominem sine operibus Legis.

<span id="vii.ix-p7"></span><span id="vii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p8"></span>**27.** *Where then is glorying?* The
Apostle, after having, with reasons abundantly strong, cast down men
from their confidence in works, now triumphs over their folly: and this
exulting conclusion was necessary; for on this subject, to teach us
would not have been enough; it was necessary that the Holy Spirit should
loudly thunder, in order to lay prostrate our loftiness. But he says
that glorying is beyond all doubt excluded, for we cannot adduce
anything of our own, which is worthy of being approved or commended by
God. If the material of glorying be merit, whether you name that of
congruity or of condignity, by which man would conciliate God, you see
that both are here annihilated; for he treats not of the lessening or
the modifying of merit, but Paul leaves not a particle behind. Besides,
since by faith glorying in works is so taken away, that faith cannot be
truly preached, without wholly depriving man of all praise by ascribing
all to God’s mercy — it follows, that we are assisted by no works in
obtaining righteousness.

<span id="vii.ix-p9"></span>*Of works?* In what sense does the Apostle
deny here, that our merits are excluded by the law, since he has before
proved that we are condemned by the law? For if the law delivers us over
to death, what glorying can we obtain from it? Does it not on the
contrary deprive us of all glorying and cover us with shame? He then
indeed showed, that our sin is laid open by what the law declares, for
the keeping of it is what we have all neglected: but he means here, that
were righteousness to be had by the law of works, our glorying would not
be excluded; but as it is by faith alone, there is nothing that we can
claim for ourselves; for faith receives all from God, and brings nothing
except an humble confession of want.

<span id="vii.ix-p10"></span>This contrast between faith and works ought
to be carefully noticed: works are here mentioned without any
limitation, even works universally. Then he neither speaks of ceremonies
only, nor specifically of any external work, but includes all the merits
of works which can possibly be imagined.

<span id="vii.ix-p11"></span>The name of *law* is here, with no strict
correctness, given to faith: but this by no means obscures the meaning
of the Apostle; for what he understands is, that when we come to the
rule of faith, the whole glorying in works is laid prostrate; as though
he said — “The righteousness of works is indeed commended by the law,
but that of faith has its own law, which leaves to works, whatever they
may be, no righteousness.”  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md)

<span id="vii.ix-p13"></span><span id="vii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p14"></span>**28.** *We then conclude, etc.* He now
draws the main proposition, as one that is incontrovertible, and adds an
explanation. Justification by faith is indeed made very clear, while
works are expressly excluded. Hence, in nothing do our adversaries labor
more in the present day than in attempts to blend faith with the merits
of works. They indeed allow that man is justified by faith; but not by
faith alone; yea, they place the efficacy of justification in love,
though in words they ascribe it to faith. But Paul affirms in this
passage that justification is so gratuitous, that he makes it quite
evident, that it can by no means be associated with the merit of works.
Why he names the works of the law, I have already explained; and I have
also proved that it is quite absurd to confine them to ceremonies.
Frigid also is the gloss, that works are to be taken for those which are
outward, and done without the Spirit of Christ. On the contrary, the
word *law* that is added, means the same as though he called them
meritorious; for what is referred to is the reward promised in the law.
 <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md)

<span id="vii.ix-p16"></span>What, James says, that man is not justified
by faith alone, but also by works, does not at all militate against the
preceding view. The reconciling of the two views depends chiefly on the
drift of the argument pursued by James. For the question with him is
not, how men attain righteousness before God, but how they prove to
others that they are justified, for his object was to confute
hypocrites, who vainly boasted that they had faith. Gross then is the
sophistry, not to admit that the word, to justify, is taken in a
different sense by James, from that in which it is used by Paul; for
they handle different subjects. The word, faith, is also no doubt
capable of various meanings. These two things must be taken to the
account, before a correct judgment can be formed on the point. We may
learn from the context, that James meant no more than that man is not
made or proved to be just by a feigned or dead faith, and that he must
prove his righteousness by his works. See on this subject my Institutes.

<span id="vii.x"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p1"></span><span id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p2"></span>**29.** *Is he* the God of the Jews only? *Is
he* not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also:

<span id="vii.x-p3"></span>**29.** Num Iudæorum Deus tantum? an non et
Gentium? certe et Gentium.

<span id="vii.x-p4"></span>**30.** Seeing *it is* one God  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) which shall justify the circumcision
by faith, and uncircumcision through faith.

<span id="vii.x-p6"></span>**30.** Quandoquidem unus Deus, qui
justificabit circumcisionem ex fide, et Præputium per fidem.

<span id="vii.x-p7"></span><span id="vii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p8"></span>**29.** *Is he the God of the Jews only?* The
second proposition is, that this righteousness belongs no more to the
Jews than to the Gentiles: and it was a great matter that this point
should be urged, in order that a free passage might be made for the
kingdom of Christ through the whole world. He does not then ask simply
or expressly, whether God was the Creator of the Gentiles, which was
admitted without any dispute; but whether he designed to manifest
himself as a Savior also to them. As he had put all mankind on a level,
and brought them to the same condition, if there be any difference
between them, it is from God, not from themselves, who have all things
alike: but if it be true that God designs to make all the nations of the
earth partakers of his mercy, then salvation, and righteousness, which
is necessary for salvation, must be extended to all. Hence under the
name, *God,* is conveyed an intimation of a mutual relationship, which
is often mentioned in Scripture, —

<span id="vii.x-p9"></span>“I shall be to you a God, and you shall be to
me a people.” (<span id="vii.x-p9.1"></span>[Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)<span id="vii.x-p9.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.x-p10"></span>For the circumstance, that God, for a time,
chose for himself a peculiar people, did not make void the origin of
mankind, who were all formed after the image of God, and were to be
brought up in the world in the hope of a blessed eternity.

<span id="vii.x-p11"></span><span id="vii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p12"></span>**30.** *Who shall justify,*  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) *etc.* In saying that some are
justified by faith, and some through faith, he seems to have indulged
himself in varying his language, while he expresses the same thing, and
for this end, — that he might, by the way, touch on the folly of the
Jews, who imagined a difference between themselves and the Gentiles,
though on the subject of justification there was no difference whatever;
for since men became partakers of this grace by faith only, and since
faith in all is the same, it is absurd to make a distinction in what is
so much alike. I am hence led to think that there is something ironical
in the words, as though be said, — “If any wishes to have a difference
made between the Gentile and the Jew, let him take this, — that the one
obtains righteousness *by* faith, and the other *through* faith.”

<span id="vii.x-p14"></span>But it may be, that some will prefer this
distinction, — that the Jews were justified by faith, because they were
born the heirs of grace, as the right of adoption was transmitted to
them from the Fathers, — and that the Gentiles were justified through
faith, because the covenant to them was adventitious.

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031.md)<span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>**31.** Do we then make void the law through
faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law.

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>**31.** Legem igitur irritam facimus per
fidem? Ne ita sit: sed Legem stabilimus.

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span><span id="vii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span>**31.** *Do we then make,* *etc.* When the
law is opposed to faith, the flesh immediately suspects that there is
some contrariety, as though the one were adverse to the other: and this
false notion prevails, especially among those who are imbued with wrong
ideas as to the law, and leaving the promises, seek nothing else through
it but the righteousness of works. And on this account, not only Paul,
but our Lord himself, was evil spoken of by the Jews, as though in all
his preaching he aimed at the abrogation of the law. Hence it was that
he made this protest, —

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span>“I came not to undo, but to fulfill the
law.” (<span id="vii.xi-p7.1"></span>[Mt
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="vii.xi-p7.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.xi-p8"></span>And this suspicion regards the moral as well
as the ceremonial law; for as the gospel has put an end to the Mosaic
ceremonies, it is supposed to have a tendency to destroy the whole
dispensation of Moses. And further, as it sweeps away all the
righteousness of works, it is believed to be opposed to all those
testimonies of the law, by which the Lord has declared, that he has
thereby prescribed the way of righteousness and salvation. I therefore
take this defense of Paul, not only as to ceremonies, nor as to the
commandments which are called moral, but with regard to the whole law
universally.  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md)

<span id="vii.xi-p10"></span>For the *moral* law is in reality confirmed
and established through faith in Christ, inasmuch as it was given for
this end — to lead man to Christ by showing him his iniquity; and
without this it cannot be fulfilled, and in vain will it require what
ought to be done; nor can it do anything but irritate lust more and
more, and thus finally increase man’s condemnation; but where there is a
coming to Christ, there is first found in him the perfect righteousness
of the law, which becomes ours by imputation, and then there is
sanctification, by which our hearts are prepared to keep the law; it is
indeed imperfectly done, but there is an aiming at the work. Similar is
the case with *ceremonies,* which indeed cease and vanish away when
Christ comes, but they are in reality confirmed by him; for when they
are viewed in themselves they are vain and shadowy images, and then only
do they attain anything real and solid, when their end is regarded. In
this then consists their chief confirmation, when they have obtained
their accomplishment in Christ. Let us then also bear in mind, so to
dispense the gospel that by our mode of teaching the law may be
confirmed; but let it be sustained by no other strength than that of
faith in Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc38006.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="vii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span> “Prærogativa — prerogative,” τὸ περισσὸν,
rendered “pre-eminence” by <span id="vii.i-p3.1"></span>Macknight*;*
“præstantia — superiority” by <span id="vii.i-p3.2"></span>Beza and
<span id="vii.i-p3.3"></span>Pareus*;* and “advantage” in our version,
and by <span id="vii.i-p3.4"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="vii.i-p3.5"></span>Stuart. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc38006.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="vii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span> The word πρῶτον is thus used in other
places. See <span id="vii.i-p12.1"></span>[Mt
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033.md)<span id="vii.i-p12.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.i-p12.2"></span>[Mr
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#027.md)<span id="vii.i-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="vii.i-p12.3"></span>[2Pe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.i-p12.3"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc38006.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="vii.i-p12.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span> Λόγια, *oracula,* mean, in Greek authors,
divine responses. <span id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>Hesychius explains it by
Θέσφατα — divine dictates. The word is used four times in New Testament.
In <span id="vii.i-p13.2"></span>[Ac
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038.md)<span id="vii.i-p13.2"></span>, it
means specifically the law of Moses; here it includes the whole of the
Old Testament; in <span id="vii.i-p13.3"></span>[Heb
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.i-p13.3"></span>,
and in <span id="vii.i-p13.4"></span>[1Pe
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.i-p13.4"></span>, it
embraces the truths of the Gospel. The divine character of the
Scriptures is by this word attested; they are the oracles of God, his
dictates, or communications from him. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc38006.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span> The references in the margin are the
following: — <span id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>[Rom.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006.md), [2 Tim.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013.md), [John
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033.md), [Ps.
116:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#011.md), [Ps.
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc38006.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span> Whenever there is a material agreement
between the Greek and the Hebrew, we ought not to make it otherwise. If
the verb κρίνεσθαι, as admitted by most critics, may be taken actively
and be thus made to agree with the Hebrew, what reason can there be to
take it in another sense? The only real difference is in one word,
between νικήσης, “overcomest,” and <span id="vii.ii-p16.1"></span>תזכה,
“art clear:” but the meaning is the same, though the words are
different. To overcome in judgment, and to be clear in judgment, amounts
to the same thing. The parallelism of the Hebrew requires κρίνεσθαι to
be a verb in the middle voice, and to have an active meaning. The two
lines in Hebrew, as it is often the case in Hebrew poetry, contain the
same sentiment in different words, the last line expressing it more
definitely; so that to be “justified,” and to be “cleared,” convey the
same idea; and also “in thy word,” or saying — <span
id="vii.ii-p16.2"></span>בדברך and “in thy judgment” <span
id="vii.ii-p16.3"></span>בשפטך. In *many* copies both these last words
are in the plural number, so that the first would be strictly what is
here expressed, “in thy words,” that is, the words which thou hast
declared; and “in thy judgments,” that is, those which thou hast
announced, would be fully rendered by “when thou Judgest.”

<span id="vii.ii-p17"></span>Commentators, both ancient and modern, have
differed on the meaning of the verb in question. <span
id="vii.ii-p17.1"></span>Pareus*,* <span
id="vii.ii-p17.2"></span>Beza*,* <span
id="vii.ii-p17.3"></span>Macknight*,* and <span
id="vii.ii-p17.4"></span>Stuart*,* take it in an active sense; while
<span id="vii.ii-p17.5"></span>Erasmus*,* <span
id="vii.ii-p17.6"></span>Grotius*,* <span
id="vii.ii-p17.7"></span>Venema*,* and others, contend for the passive
meaning. <span id="vii.ii-p17.8"></span>Drusius*,* <span
id="vii.ii-p17.9"></span>Hammond*,* and <span
id="vii.ii-p17.10"></span>Doddridge render it, “when thou contendest in
judgment,” or, “when thou art called to judgment:” and such a meaning no
doubt the verb has according to <span id="vii.ii-p17.11"></span>[Mt
5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040.md)<span id="vii.ii-p17.11"></span>,
and <span id="vii.ii-p17.12"></span>[1 Cor.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.ii-p17.12"></span>.
But in this case regard must be had, especially to the meaning which
corresponds the nearest with the original Hebrew. Some have maintained
that “in thy judgment” <span id="vii.ii-p17.13"></span>בשפטך may be
rendered “in judging thee;” but this would not only be unusual and make
the sentence hardly intelligible, but also destroy the evident
parallelism of the two lines. The whole verse may be thus literally
rendered from the Hebrew, —

<span id="vii.ii-p18"></span>Against thee, against thee only have I
sinned;  
And the evil before thine eyes have I done;  
So that thou art justified in thy words,  
*And* clear in thy judgments.

<span id="vii.ii-p19"></span>The conjunction <span
id="vii.ii-p19.1"></span>למען, admits of being rendered *so that;* see
<span id="vii.ii-p19.2"></span>[Ps
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.ii-p19.2"></span>;
<span id="vii.ii-p19.3"></span>[Isa
41:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.ii-p19.3"></span>;
<span id="vii.ii-p19.4"></span>[Am
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.ii-p19.4"></span>;
and ὅπως in many instances may be thus rendered; see <span
id="vii.ii-p19.5"></span>[Luke 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035.md),
[Phlm. 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#006.md), [1 Pet.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.ii-p19.5"></span>. It
is what <span id="vii.ii-p19.6"></span>Schleusner designates ἐκβατικῶς,
signifying the issue or the event.

<span id="vii.ii-p20"></span><span id="vii.ii-p20.1"></span>Pareus
connects the passage differently. He considers the former part of the
verse parenthetic, or as specifying what is generally stated in the
previous verse, the third; and with that verse he connects this passage:
so that the rendering of the two verses would be the following, —

<span id="vii.ii-p21"></span>**3.** For my transgression I acknowledge,
And my sin is before me continually, —

<span id="vii.ii-p22"></span>**4.** (Against thee, against thee only
have I sinned, and the evil before thine eyes have I done,) That thou
mightest be justified in thy saying, *And* clear in thy judgment.

<span id="vii.ii-p23"></span>This is certainty more probable than what
<span id="vii.ii-p23.1"></span>Vatablus and <span
id="vii.ii-p23.2"></span>Houbigant propose, who connect the passage with
the second verse, “Wash me thoroughly,” etc. But the sense given by
<span id="vii.ii-p23.3"></span>Calvin is the most satisfactory — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc38006.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p21"></span> Or, “For if” — *Si enim* — εἰ γὰρ. The
particle γὰρ here gives no reason, but is to be viewed as meaning
*then*, or *indeed, verily;* see <span id="vii.iii-p21.1"></span>[Lu
12:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#058.md)<span id="vii.iii-p21.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.iii-p21.2"></span>[Joh
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.iii-p21.2"></span>;
<span id="vii.iii-p21.3"></span>[Ac
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037.md)<span id="vii.iii-p21.3"></span>;
<span id="vii.iii-p21.4"></span>[Php
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#027.md)<span id="vii.iii-p21.4"></span>
<span id="vii.iii-p21.5"></span>Stuart renders it, *still,* and says,
that it “points to a connection with verse. 5, and denotes a
*continuance* of the same theme.” <span
id="vii.iii-p21.6"></span>Macknight often renders it by *further,
besides,* and no doubt rightly. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc38006.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p21.7"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p22"></span> It is remarkable how the Apostle changes
his words from the third verse to the end of this, while the same things
are essentially meant. His style is throughout Hebraistic. <span
id="vii.iii-p22.1"></span>Stuart makes these just remarks, “Αδικία is
here \[<span id="vii.iii-p22.2"></span>[Ro
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.iii-p22.2"></span>\]
the *generic* appellation of sin, for which a specific name, ἀπιστία,
was employed in <span id="vii.iii-p22.3"></span>[Ro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.iii-p22.3"></span>,
and ψεῦσμα, in <span id="vii.iii-p22.4"></span>[Ro
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.iii-p22.4"></span>.
In like manner the δικαιοσύνη, in <span id="vii.iii-p22.5"></span>[Ro
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.iii-p22.5"></span>,
which is a generic appellation, is expressed by a specific one, πίστιν,
in <span id="vii.iii-p22.6"></span>[Ro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.iii-p22.6"></span>,
and by ἀλήθεια, in <span id="vii.iii-p22.7"></span>[Ro
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.iii-p22.7"></span>.
The idea is substantially the same, which is designated by these
respectively corresponding appellations. *Fidelity, uprightness,
integrity,* are designated by πίστιν, δικαιοσύνην, and ἀλήθεια; while
ἀλήθεια, and ἀπιστία ἀδικία, designate *unfaithfulness,* *want of
uprightness* and *false dealing.* All of these terms have more or less
reference to the <span id="vii.iii-p22.8"></span>ברית, *covenant* or
*compact* (so to speak) which existed between God and his ancient
people.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc38006.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p25"></span> <span id="vii.iii-p25.1"></span>Grotius
thinks, that in the beginning of this verse there is a transposition,
and that ὅτι, after the parenthesis, ought to be construed before μὴ
which precedes it, and that ὅτι is for <span
id="vii.iii-p25.2"></span>*cur,* why, — as in <span
id="vii.iii-p25.3"></span>[Mark 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#011.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#028.md)<span id="vii.iii-p25.3"></span>.
The version would then be, “and why not, (as we are reproached, and as
some declare that we say,) Let us do evil that good may come?” This is
the rendering of <span id="vii.iii-p25.4"></span>Luther But <span
id="vii.iii-p25.5"></span>Limborch and <span
id="vii.iii-p25.6"></span>Stuart consider λεγωμεν to be understood after
μὴ; and the latter takes μὴ not as a negative but an interrogative, “and
shall we say,” etc.? Amidst these varieties, the main drift of the
passage remains the same. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc38006.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span> “<span
id="vii.iv-p4.1"></span>Præcellimus?” προεχόμεθα; “Have we the
advantage?” <span id="vii.iv-p4.2"></span>Doddridge*;* “Do we excel?”
<span id="vii.iv-p4.3"></span>Macknight*;* “Have we any preference?”
<span id="vii.iv-p4.4"></span>Stuart It is thus paraphrased by <span
id="vii.iv-p4.5"></span>Theodoret τί οὖν κατέχομεν περισσόν — “What
advantages then, have we?” “<span id="vii.iv-p4.6"></span>Præcellimus“
is the rendering of <span id="vii.iv-p4.7"></span>Erasmus*,* <span
id="vii.iv-p4.8"></span>Pareus*,* and <span id="vii.iv-p4.9"></span>Beza
<span id="vii.iv-p4.10"></span>Venema says, that this verb, in the
active voice only, has this meaning in Greek authors; but the context
can allow it no other sense here. <span
id="vii.iv-p4.11"></span>Wetstein indeed gives it a passive meaning,
“<span id="vii.iv-p4.12"></span>an antecellimur — are we surpassed?” but
it can hardly comport with the drift of the passage. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc38006.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span> So do <span
id="vii.iv-p8.1"></span>Grotius*,* <span id="vii.iv-p8.2"></span>Beza*,*
and <span id="vii.iv-p8.3"></span>Stuart render the verb. <span
id="vii.iv-p8.4"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="vii.iv-p8.5"></span>Macknight have preserved our common version. “We
have before charged,” <span id="vii.iv-p8.6"></span>Chalmers “<span
id="vii.iv-p8.7"></span>Antea idoneis argumentis demonstravimus — we
have before proved by sufficient arguments*.”* <span
id="vii.iv-p8.8"></span>Schleusner It is charge rather than conviction
that the verb imports, though the latter idea is also considered to be
included. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc38006.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="vii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p20"></span> The references given in the margin are
these, — <span id="vii.v-p20.1"></span>[Ps.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md), [Ps.
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#003.md), [Ps.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009.md), [Ps.
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003.md), [Ps.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007.md), [Isa.
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007.md), [Prov.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#016.md), [Ps.
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc38006.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="vii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p24"></span> <span id="vii.v-p24.1"></span>[Ps
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.v-p24.1"></span>.
The Hebrew is, “There is none that doeth good;” and the *Septuagint,*
“There is none doing kindness, (χρηστότητα), there is not even one, (ὀυκ
ἔστιν ἕως ἑνός.)” So that the Apostle quotes the meaning, not the words.

<span id="vii.v-p25"></span>The *eleventh* verse (<span
id="vii.v-p25.1"></span>[Ro 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.v-p25.1"></span>) is from the same Psalm; the Hebrew, with which
the *Septuagint* agree, except that there is the disjunctive ἢ between
the participles, is the following, — “Whether there is any one who
understands, who seeks after God.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc38006.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="vii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p30"></span> This verse is literally the *Septuagint,*
and as to meaning, a correct version of the Hebrew. “All have gone out
of the way — πάντες ἐξέκλιναν” “is in Hebrew <span
id="vii.v-p30.1"></span>הכל סר, “the whole (or every one) has turned
aside,” or revolted, or apostatized. Then, “they have become
unprofitable” or useless, is <span id="vii.v-p30.2"></span>נאלחו, “they
are become putrid,” or Corrupted, like putrified fruit or meat,
therefore useless, not fit for what they were designed — to serve God
and to promote their own and the good of others. Idolatry was evidently
this putrescence. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc38006.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="vii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p33"></span> This is from <span
id="vii.v-p33.1"></span>[Ps 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.v-p33.1"></span>, that is, the first part, and is literally the
*Septuagint,* which correctly represents the Hebrew. The last clause is
from <span id="vii.v-p33.2"></span>[Ps
140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.v-p33.2"></span>,
and is according to the *Septuagint,* and the Hebrew, too, except that
“asps,” or adders, is in the singular number. <span
id="vii.v-p33.3"></span>Stuart gives the import of this figurative
language different from <span id="vii.v-p33.4"></span>Calvin*:* “As from
the sepulchre,” he says, “issues forth an offensive and pestilential
vapor; so from the mouths of slanderous persons issue noisome and
pestilential words. Their words are like poison, they utter the
poisonous breath of slander.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc38006.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="vii.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p36"></span> <span id="vii.v-p36.1"></span>[Ps
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.v-p36.1"></span>.
Paul corrects the order of the words as found in the *Septuagint,* and
gives the Hebrew more exactly, but retains the word “bitterness,” by
which the *Septuagint* have rendered <span
id="vii.v-p36.2"></span>מרמות, which means *deceit,* or rather,
mischievous deceit. Some think that it ought to be <span
id="vii.v-p36.3"></span>מררות, “bitterness;” but there is no copy in its
favor. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc38006.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="vii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p39"></span> <span id="vii.v-p39.1"></span>[Rom.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.v-p39.1"></span> are
taken from <span id="vii.v-p39.2"></span>[Isa.
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.v-p39.2"></span>. Both
the Hebrew and the *Septuagint* are alike, but Paul has abbreviated
them, and changed two words in the Greek version, having put οξει᾿ for
ταχινοι, and ἔγνωσαν for ὀίδασι, and has followed that version in
leaving out “innocent” before “blood.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc38006.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="vii.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p44"></span> It is taken from <span
id="vii.v-p44.1"></span>[Ps 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.v-p44.1"></span>, and verbatim from the Greek version, and
strictly in accordance with the Hebrew. It is evident from several of
these quotations, that Paul’s object, as <span
id="vii.v-p44.2"></span>Calvin says, was to represent the general
meaning, and not to keep strictly to the expressions.

<span id="vii.v-p45"></span>There is a difference of opinion as to the
precise object of the Apostle; whether in these quotations he had regard
to the Jews only, or to both Jews and Gentiles. In the introduction,
<span id="vii.v-p45.1"></span>[Ro
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.v-p45.1"></span>, he
mentions both, and in the conclusion, <span id="vii.v-p45.2"></span>[Ro
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.v-p45.2"></span>, he
evidently refers to both, in these words, “that every, mouth may be
stopped, and *all the world* may become guilty before God.”

<span id="vii.v-p46"></span>The most consistent view seems to be, that
the passages quoted refer both to Jews and Gentiles; the last, more
especially, to the Jews, while some of the preceding have a special
reference to the Gentile world, particularly <span
id="vii.v-p46.1"></span>[Ps 14](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.v-p46.1"></span>, as it describes the character of the enemies
of God and his people, to whose liberation the Psalmist refers in the
last verse. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc38006.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="vii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p4"></span> <span id="vii.vi-p4.1"></span>*Obnoxius
Deo* — ὑπόδικος τῶ θεῶ: “<span id="vii.vi-p4.2"></span>Obnoxius
condemnationi Dei — subject to the condemnation of God” <span
id="vii.vi-p4.3"></span>Beza*;* “Liable to punishment before God,” <span
id="vii.vi-p4.4"></span>Macknight*;* “Stand convicted before God,” <span
id="vii.vi-p4.5"></span>Doddridge The word means to be “under sentence”
or under condemnation, and thus “to God,” i.e., before God. <span
id="vii.vi-p4.6"></span>Tillotson gives this paraphrase, “Liable to the
Divine justice.” It may be rendered “condemned before God.” The meaning
is that the world is under condemnation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc38006.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="vii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p10"></span> To see the force and meaning of this
verse, we must bear in mind that the former part was said to prevent the
Jews from evading the application of the preceding testimonies; and then
the words “that every mouth,” etc., and “that all the world,” etc., were
added, not so much to include the Gentiles, as to include the Jews, who
thought themselves exempted. No doubt the Gentiles are included, but the
special object of the Apostle evidently seems to prevent the Jews from
supposing that they were not included. In no other way can the
connection between the two parts of the verse be understood. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc38006.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="vii.vi-p12.4"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p13"></span> The original is “<span
id="vii.vi-p13.1"></span>ut in priorem opinionem concederent:” but the
context shows clearly that “<span id="vii.vi-p13.2"></span>priorem“ is a
misprint for “<span id="vii.vi-p13.3"></span>posteriorem. In addition to
the authors mentioned here may be added <span
id="vii.vi-p13.4"></span>Ambrose*,* <span
id="vii.vi-p13.5"></span>Theodoret*,* <span
id="vii.vi-p13.6"></span>Pelagius*,* <span
id="vii.vi-p13.7"></span>Erasmus*,* and <span
id="vii.vi-p13.8"></span>Grotius And yet, notwithstanding all those
authorities, the opinion referred to is wholly inconsistent with the
reasoning of the Apostle here and throughout the whole Epistle. It has
indeed been given up as untenable by modern authors of the same school,
such as <span id="vii.vi-p13.9"></span>Locke*,* <span
id="vii.vi-p13.10"></span>Whitby*,* and <span
id="vii.vi-p13.11"></span>Macknight

<span id="vii.vi-p14"></span>To disprove this notion it is sufficient to
notice the sins which the Apostle had referred to; they are not those
against the ceremonial but the moral law, and it is because the moral
law is transgressed that it cannot justify.

<span id="vii.vi-p15"></span>“If there be any law which man has
perfectly kept, he may doubtless be justified by it; and surely no man
can be justified by a law which condemns him for breaking it. But there
is no law of God which any man has kept; therefore no law by the deeds
of which a man can be justified. The Gentile broke the law of his reason
and conscience; the Jew broke the moral law; and even the attempt to
justify himself by observing the ceremonial law, contradicted the very
nature and intent of it.” — <span id="vii.vi-p15.1"></span>Scott

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc38006.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="vii.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p16"></span> The argument and the reasoning of the
Apostle seem to require that ἐξ ἔργων νόμου should be rendered here
literally, “by works of law,” without the article, as the word “law”
seems here, according to the drift of the argument, to mean law in
general, both natural and revealed; and διὰ νόμου in the next clause
must be regarded as having the same meaning; the law of nature as well
as the written law, though not to the same extent, makes sin known. This
is the view taken by <span id="vii.vi-p16.1"></span>Pareus*,* <span
id="vii.vi-p16.2"></span>Doddridge*,* <span
id="vii.vi-p16.3"></span>Macknight*,* <span
id="vii.vi-p16.4"></span>Stuart*,* and <span
id="vii.vi-p16.5"></span>Haldane. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc38006.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="vii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p19"></span> The expression is ὀυ πᾶσα σὰρξ — not all,
that is, not any flesh, etc.; the word πᾶσα, like <span
id="vii.vi-p19.1"></span>כל in Hebrew, is used here in the sense of
“any.” The sentence bears a resemblance to what is contained in <span
id="vii.vi-p19.2"></span>[Ps
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.vi-p19.2"></span>,
“for justified before thee shall not all living,” or, not any one
living, <span id="vii.vi-p19.3"></span>לא כל חי. The sentence here is
literally, “Hence by works of law shall not be justified any flesh
before Him.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc38006.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p3"></span> Here again it is better, and indeed
necessary for the Apostle’s argument, to render χωρὶς νόμου, ““without
law,” that is, without any law, either natural or revealed. The same
sentiment is found in <span id="vii.vii-p3.1"></span>[Ga
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.vii-p3.1"></span> —
“For if a law had been given, capable of giving life, truly righteous
would have been by law (ἐκ νόμου.)” The version of <span
id="vii.vii-p3.2"></span>Macknight seems just, “But now a righteousness
of God without law is discovered.” But we, may retain the tense
(πεφανέρωται) “has been discovered,” or manifested, or made known. “A
righteousness of God without law,” is a similar phrase to “the
righteousness of God by faith,” in <span id="vii.vii-p3.3"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.vii-p3.3"></span>. —
Then in the following clause the “law” means not specifically the law of
Moses, but the Old Testament, excepting the Prophets. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc38006.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p11"></span> Professor <span
id="vii.vii-p11.1"></span>Hodge very justly observes, “It never was the
doctrine of the Reformation, or of the Lutheran and Calvinistic divines,
that the imputation of righteousness affected the moral character of
those concerned. It is true,” he adds, “whom God justifies he also
sanctifies; but justification is not sanctification, and the imputation
of righteousness is not the infusion of righteousness.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc38006.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p13"></span> “The foundation of your trust before God,
must be either your own righteousness out and out, or the righteousness
of Christ out and out. ... If you are to lean upon your own merit, lean
upon it wholly — if you are to lean upon Christ, lean upon him wholly.
The two will not amalgamate together, and it is the attempt to do so,
which keeps many a weary and heavy-laden inquirer at a distance from
rest, and at a distance from the truth of the gospel. Maintain a clear
and consistent posture. Stand not before God with one foot upon a rock
and the other upon a treacherous quicksand...We call upon you not to
lean so much as the weight of one grain or scruple of your confidence
upon your own doings — to leave this ground entirely, and to come over
entirely to the ground of a Redeemer’s blood and a Redeemer’s
righteousness.” — *Dr.* <span id="vii.vii-p13.1"></span>Chalmers

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc38006.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p16"></span> “The words *but now* may be regarded
merely as marking the transition from one paragraph to another, or as a
designation of tense; *now, i.e.,* under the gospel dispensation. In
favor of this view is the phrase, “to declare *at this time* his
righteousness, <span id="vii.vii-p16.1"></span>[Ro
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.vii-p16.1"></span>.”
— <span id="vii.vii-p16.2"></span>Hodge

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc38006.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p18"></span> “<span
id="vii.vii-p18.1"></span>Testimonio comprobata,” etc., so <span
id="vii.vii-p18.2"></span>Beza and <span
id="vii.vii-p18.3"></span>Pareus render μαρτυρουμένη; “Being attested,”
<span id="vii.vii-p18.4"></span>Doddridge*;* “Being testified,” <span
id="vii.vii-p18.5"></span>Macknight <span
id="vii.vii-p18.6"></span>Schleusner gives a paraphrase, “Being
predicted and promised;” and this no doubt is the full meaning. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc38006.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p18.7"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p19"></span> Concurrent with what is said here is this
striking and condensed passage from <span
id="vii.vii-p19.1"></span>Scott*,* — “It has been witnessed by the law
and the Prophets; the ceremonies typified it; the very strictness of the
moral law and its awful curses, being compared with the promises of
mercy to sinners, implied it; the promises and predictions of the
Messiah bore witness to it; the faith and hope of ancient believers
recognized it; and the whole Old Testament, rightly understood, taught
men to expect and depend on it.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc38006.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p22"></span> The words which follow, διὰ πίστεως Ιησοῦ
Χριστοῦ “by or through the faith of Jesus Christ,” mean not the faith
which is his, but the faith of which he is the object. They ought to be
rendered “through faith in Jesus Christ.” The genitive case has often
this meaning: “Εχετε πίστιν Θεοῦ — Have faith in (of) God,” <span
id="vii.vii-p22.1"></span>[Mr
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.vii-p22.1"></span>;
“Εν πίστει ζῶ τὟ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ Θεοῦ — I live by the faith of the Son of
God;” \[<span id="vii.vii-p22.2"></span>[Ga
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.vii-p22.2"></span>;\] it should be in our language, “I live by
faith in the Son of God.” This genitive case of the object is an
Hebraism, and is of frequent occurrence. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc38006.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p24"></span> The original is this, “<span
id="vii.vii-p24.1"></span>Ut ergo justificemur, causa efficiens est
misericordia Dei, Christus materia, verbum cum fide instrumentum — When
therefore we are justified, the efficient cause is God’s mercy, Christ
is the material, the word with faith is the instrument.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc38006.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p26"></span> Εἰς πάντας και ἐπι πάντας. He makes a
similar difference in his expressions in <span
id="vii.vii-p26.1"></span>[Ro
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.vii-p26.1"></span>.
This righteousness, as some say, came *to* the Jews, as it had been
promised to them, and *upon* the Gentiles, as a gift with which they
were not acquainted, and it was conferred on them. But the possession
was equal and belonged to all who believed, and to none else, whether
Jews or Gentiles.

<span id="vii.vii-p27"></span><span id="vii.vii-p27.1"></span>Stuart
connects these words with “manifested,” or revealed, in <span
id="vii.vii-p27.2"></span>[Ro
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.vii-p27.2"></span>.
It is manifested *to* all, and manifested *for* all; that is, for the
real benefit of all who believe; in other words, it is offered to all,
but becomes of real advantage only to those who believe. But the simpler
mode is to consider the words, *which is,* as in our version, to be
understood. ‘Ερχομένη is the word which <span
id="vii.vii-p27.3"></span>Luther adopts. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc38006.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="vii.viii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p12"></span> <span id="vii.viii-p12.1"></span>Beza
gives another view, that the verb ὑστεροῦνται, refers to those who run a
race, and reach not the goal, and lose the prize. The “glory of God” is
the happiness which he bestows; (see <span
id="vii.viii-p12.2"></span>[Ro
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002)<span id="vii.viii-p12.2"></span>;.md)
of this all mankind come short, however much some seemed to labor for
it; and it can only be attained by faith. <span
id="vii.viii-p12.3"></span>Pareus*,* <span
id="vii.viii-p12.4"></span>Locke*,* and <span
id="vii.viii-p12.5"></span>Whitby give the same view. Others consider it
to be “the glory” due to God, — that all come short of rendering him the
service and honor which he justly demands and requires. So <span
id="vii.viii-p12.6"></span>Doddridge*,* <span
id="vii.viii-p12.7"></span>Scott*,* and <span
id="vii.viii-p12.8"></span>Chalmers But <span
id="vii.viii-p12.9"></span>Melancthon*,* <span
id="vii.viii-p12.10"></span>Grotius and <span
id="vii.viii-p12.11"></span>Macknight seemed to have agreed with <span
id="vii.viii-p12.12"></span>Calvin in regarding “glory” here as the
praise or approbation that comes from God. The second view seems the
most appropriate, according to what is said in <span
id="vii.viii-p12.13"></span>[Ro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.viii-p12.13"></span>, “they glorified him not as God.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc38006.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="vii.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p16"></span> On this word ἱλαστήριον, both <span
id="vii.viii-p16.1"></span>Venema*,* in his Notes on the Comment of
<span id="vii.viii-p16.2"></span>Stephanus de Brais on this Epistle, and
Professor <span id="vii.viii-p16.3"></span>Stuart*,* have long remarks.
They both agree as to the meaning of the word as found in the Septuagint
and in Greek authors, but they disagree as to its import here. It means
uniformly in the Septuagint, the mercy-seat, <span
id="vii.viii-p16.4"></span>כפרת, and, as it is in the form of an
adjective, it has at least once, (<span id="vii.viii-p16.5"></span>[Ex
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.viii-p16.5"></span>,) ἐπίθεμα, *cover,* added to it. But in the
classics it means a propitiatory sacrifice, the word θῦμα, a sacrifice,
being understood; but it is used by itself as other words of similar
termination are. It is found also in <span
id="vii.viii-p16.6"></span>Josephus and in *Maccabees* in this sense. It
appears that <span id="vii.viii-p16.7"></span>Origen*,* <span
id="vii.viii-p16.8"></span>Theodoret*,* and other Fathers, and also
<span id="vii.viii-p16.9"></span>Erasmus*,* <span
id="vii.viii-p16.10"></span>Luther and <span
id="vii.viii-p16.11"></span>Locke*,* take the first meaning —
*mercy-seat;* and that <span id="vii.viii-p16.12"></span>Grotius*,*
<span id="vii.viii-p16.13"></span>Elsner*,* <span
id="vii.viii-p16.14"></span>Turrettin*,* <span
id="vii.viii-p16.15"></span>Bos*,* and <span
id="vii.viii-p16.16"></span>Tholuck*,* take the second meaning — *a
propitiatory sacrifice.* Now as both meanings are legitimate, which of
them are we to take? <span id="vii.viii-p16.17"></span>Venema*,* and
<span id="vii.viii-p16.18"></span>Stuart allude to one thing which much
favors the latter view, that is, the phrase ἐν τω αἵματι αὐτου; and the
latter says, that it would be incongruous to represent Christ himself as
the mercy-seat, and to represent him also as sprinkled by his own blood;
but that it is appropriate to say that a propitiatory sacrifice was made
by his blood. The verb προέθετο, *set forth,* it is added, seems to
support the same view. To exhibit a *mercy-seat* is certainly not
suitable language in this connection.

<span id="vii.viii-p17"></span><span id="vii.viii-p17.1"></span>Pareus
renders it “<span id="vii.viii-p17.2"></span>placamentum — atonement,”
<span id="vii.viii-p17.3"></span>*hoc est,* “<span
id="vii.viii-p17.4"></span>placatorem,” that is, “atoner, or expiator.”
<span id="vii.viii-p17.5"></span>Beza*’s* version is the same — “<span
id="vii.viii-p17.6"></span>placamentum;” <span
id="vii.viii-p17.7"></span>Doddridge has “propitiation,” and <span
id="vii.viii-p17.8"></span>Macknight, “a propitiatory,” and <span
id="vii.viii-p17.9"></span>Schleusner*,* “<span
id="vii.viii-p17.10"></span>expiatorem — expiator.”

<span id="vii.viii-p18"></span>The word occurs in one other place with
the neuter article, τὸ ἱλαστήριον, <span id="vii.viii-p18.1"></span>[Heb
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.viii-p18.1"></span>,
where it clearly means the mercy-seat. It is ever accompanied with the
article in the Septuagint, when by itself, see <span
id="vii.viii-p18.2"></span>[Lev. 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.viii-p18.2"></span>;
but here it is without the article, and may be viewed as an adjective
dependent on on, “whom,” and rendered propitiator. Had the mercy-seat
been intended, it would have been τὸ ἱλαστήριον. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc38006.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="vii.viii-p24.5"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p25"></span> The words are, διὰ τὴν πάρεσιν. They
seem connected, not with the first clause, but with the one immediately
preceding; and διὰ may be rendered here *in;* see a note on <span
id="vii.viii-p25.1"></span>[Ro
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.viii-p25.1"></span>;
or more properly, perhaps, *on account of.* “For a proof of his own
righteousness in passing by the sins,” etc., <span
id="vii.viii-p25.2"></span>Macknight*;* “In order to declare his
justification *with respect to* the remission of sins,” <span
id="vii.viii-p25.3"></span>Stuart

<span id="vii.viii-p26"></span>What is God’s “righteousness” here has
been variously explained. Some regard it his righteousness in fulfilling
his promises, as <span id="vii.viii-p26.1"></span>Beza*;* others, his
righteousness in Christ to believers, mentioned in <span
id="vii.viii-p26.2"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.viii-p26.2"></span>,
as <span id="vii.viii-p26.3"></span>Augustine*;* and others, his
righteousness as the God of rectitude and justice, as <span
id="vii.viii-p26.4"></span>Chrysostom Some, too, as <span
id="vii.viii-p26.5"></span>Grotius*,* view it as meaning goodness or
mercy, regarding the word as having sometimes this sense.

<span id="vii.viii-p27"></span>It is the context that can help us to the
right meaning. God exhibited his Son as a propitiation, to set forth
this righteousness; and this righteousness is connected with the
remission of, or rather; as the word means, the preterition of or
connivance at sins committed under the old dispensation: and those sins
were connived at through the forbearance of God, he not executing the
punishment they deserved; and the purpose is stated to be, — that God
might be or appear *just,* while he is the justifier of those who
believe in Christ. Now, what can this righteousness be but his
administrative justice? As the law allowed no remission, and God did
remit sins, there appeared to be a stain on divine justice. The
exhibition of Christ as an atonement is what alone removes it. And there
is a word in the former verse, as <span
id="vii.viii-p27.1"></span>Venema justly observes, which tends to
confirm this view, and that word is redemption, ἀπολυτρώσις, which is a
deliverance obtained by a ransom, or by a price, such as justice
requires.

<span id="vii.viii-p28"></span>Both <span
id="vii.viii-p28.1"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="vii.viii-p28.2"></span>Scott regard the passage in this light; and
the latter gives the following version of it, —

<span id="vii.viii-p29"></span>“Whom God hath before appointed to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, for a demonstration of his
justice, on account of the passing by of sins, that had been committed
in former times, through the forbearance of God; *I say,* for a
demonstration of his justice, in this present time, in order that he
might be just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus.” —
Nothing can be clearer than this version.

<span id="vii.viii-p30"></span>The last words are rightly rendered,
though not literally; τὸν ἐκ πίστεως Ιησου — “him of the faith of
Jesus,” or, “him of faith in Jesus.” Him of faith is him who believes,
as τοῖς οὑκ ἐκ περιτομὢς — “them not of circumcision” means “them who
are not circumcised,” <span id="vii.viii-p30.1"></span>[Ro
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.viii-p30.1"></span>;
and τοῖς έξ ἐριθείας — “those of contention,” signifies, “those who
contend,” or, are contentious, <span id="vii.viii-p30.2"></span>[Ro
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.viii-p30.2"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc38006.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="vii.viii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p36"></span> There is a different preposition used
here, πρὸς, while εἰς is found in the preceding verse. The meaning seems
to be the same, for both prepositions are used to designate the design,
end, or object of any thing. This variety seems to have been usual with
the Apostle; similar instances are found in <span
id="vii.viii-p36.1"></span>[Ro
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.viii-p36.1"></span>,
as to εἰς and ἐπὶ, and in <span id="vii.viii-p36.2"></span>[Ro
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.viii-p36.2"></span>,
as to ἐκ and διὰ. “By both,” says <span
id="vii.viii-p36.3"></span>Wolfius*,* “the final cause (<span
id="vii.viii-p36.4"></span>*causa finalis*) is indicated.” <span
id="vii.viii-p36.5"></span>Beza renders them both by the same
preposition, <span id="vii.viii-p36.6"></span>*ad,* in Latin; and <span
id="vii.viii-p36.7"></span>Stuart regards the two as equivalent. There
is, perhaps, more refinement than truth in what <span
id="vii.viii-p36.8"></span>Pareus says, — that εἰς intimates the
proximate end — the forgiveness of sins; and πρὸς, the final end — the
glory of God in the exhibition of his justice as well as of his mercy.
There is, at the same time, something in the passage which seems
favorable to this view. Two objects are stated at the end of the
passage, — that God might appear just, and be also the justifier of such
as believe. The last may refer to ἐις, and the former to πρὸς; and this
is consistent with the usual style of the Apostle; for, in imitation of
the Prophets, where two things are mentioned in a former clause, the
order is reversed in the second. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc38006.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="vii.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p38"></span> A parallel passage to this, including
the two verses, <span id="vii.viii-p38.1"></span>[Rom.
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.viii-p38.1"></span>,
is found in <span id="vii.viii-p38.2"></span>[Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.viii-p38.2"></span>;
where a reference, as here, is made to the effect of Christ’s death as
to the saints under the Old testament. The same truth is implied in
other parts of Scripture, but not so expressly declared. <span
id="vii.viii-p38.3"></span>Stuart makes here an important remark — that
if the death of Christ be regarded only as that of a martyr or as an
example of constancy, how then could its efficacy be referred to “sins
that are past?” In no other way than as a vicarious death could it
possibly have any effect on past sins, not punished through God’s
forbearance. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc38006.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="vii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p4"></span> <span id="vii.ix-p4.1"></span>*Gloriatio* —
καύχησις — glorying — boasting or rejoicing. “The result of the gospel
plan of salvation is to prevent all self-approbation, self-gratulation
and exaltation on the part of the sinner.” — <span
id="vii.ix-p4.2"></span>Hodge

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc38006.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="vii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p12"></span> <span id="vii.ix-p12.1"></span>Grotius
explains “law” here by “<span id="vii.ix-p12.2"></span>vivendi regula“ —
rule of living;” <span id="vii.ix-p12.3"></span>Beza*,* by “<span
id="vii.ix-p12.4"></span>doctrina — doctrine or teaching,” according to
the import of the word <span id="vii.ix-p12.5"></span>תורה in Hebrew;
and <span id="vii.ix-p12.6"></span>Pareus takes “the law of works,”
metonymically, for works themselves, and “the law of faith,” for faith
itself; and he quotes these words of <span
id="vii.ix-p12.7"></span>Theophylact*,* “The Apostle calls faith a law
because the word, law, was in high veneration among the Jews.” He uses
the term, law, in a similar manner in <span id="vii.ix-p12.8"></span>[Ro
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.ix-p12.8"></span>,
“The law of the spirit of life,” etc. “He calls here the gospel; ‘the
law of faith,’ because faith is the condition of the gospel covenant, as
perfect obedience was the condition of the covenant of nature and of
that of Moses, (<span id="vii.ix-p12.9"></span>conditio fœderis
naturalis et fœderis Mosaici.)” — <span
id="vii.ix-p12.10"></span>Turrettin

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc38006.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="vii.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p15"></span> The phrase, χωρίς ἔργων νόμου, may be
rendered, “without the works of law,” that is, either natural or
revealed; for Gentiles as well as Jews are here contemplated. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc38006.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="vii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p5"></span> Εἷς ὁ Θεος — <span
id="vii.x-p5.1"></span>*unus Deus* Εἷς here means the *same,* see <span
id="vii.x-p5.2"></span>[1Co 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.x-p5.2"></span>; or if it be rendered *one,* it refers to God as
being one in his purpose, and as to the way of salvation. See <span
id="vii.x-p5.3"></span>[Zec 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.x-p5.3"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc38006.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="vii.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p13"></span> The future is used for the present — “who
justifies,” after the manner of the Hebrew language, though some
consider that the day of judgment is referred to; but he seems to speak
of a present act, or as <span id="vii.x-p13.1"></span>Grotius says, of a
continued act, which the Hebrews expressed by the future tense. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc38006.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="vii.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p9"></span> The law here, no doubt means, the law of
which mention is made in the preceding verses — the law by the works of
which we cannot be justified — the law that is in this respect opposed
to faith. To refer us for its meanng to <span
id="vii.xi-p9.1"></span>[Ro 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.xi-p9.1"></span> and 21, as is done by <span
id="vii.xi-p9.2"></span>Stuart*,* “is wholly unwarrantable,” and to say
that it means the Old Testament; for this is to separate it from it’s
immediate connection without any satisfactory reason. Besides, such an
interpretation obliterates an important doctrine, that faith does not
render void, or nullify the authority, the use and sanctions of the
moral law but on the contrary, sustains and confirms them. Though it
does what the law does not, and cannot do, inasmuch as it saves the
sinner whom the law condemns; it yet effects this without relaxing or
dishonoring the law, but in a way that renders it, if possible, more
binding, and more honorable, and more illustrious. It only renders the
passage more intricate to include the ceremonial law, (for that has more
of faith than of law in it,) to which no reference is made in the
context: but there seems to be no objection to include the law of
conscience, as well as the written law; for faith confirms both, and the
word “law,” is here without the article, though this indeed of itself is
not decisive. The moral law, then, as well as the law of conscience, is
what is here intended: for the authority of both is confirmed and
strengthened by faith. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc38007.md)
