[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38003)  [Next](cc38005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>COMMENTARIES ON THE

<span id="v-p2"></span>EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE ROMANS.

<span id="v-p3"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
1:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called
*to be* an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God,

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Paulus, servus Iesu Christi, vocatus
Apostolus, selectus in Evangelium Dei,

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>**2.** (Which he had promised afore by his
prophets in the holy scriptures,)

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quod ante promiserat per Prophetas suos
in Scripturis Sanctis,

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>**3.** Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh;

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>**3.** De Filio suo, qui factus est è semine
David secundum carnem,

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>**4.** And declared *to be* the Son of God with
power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the
dead:

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>**4.** Declaratus Filius Dei in potentia, per
Spiritum sanctificationis, ex resurrectione mortuorum, Iesu Christo
Domino nostro:

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>**5.** By whom we have received grace and
apostleship, for obedience to the faith among all nations, for his name:

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>**5.** Per quem accepimus gratiam et
Apostolatum, in obedientiam fidei inter omnes gentes, pro nomine ipsius;

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>**6.** Among whom are ye also the called of
Jesus Christ:

<span id="v.i-p13"></span>**6.** Inter quas estis etiam vos, vocati Iesu
Christi:

<span id="v.i-p14"></span>**7.** To all that be in Rome, beloved of God,
called *to be* saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="v.i-p15"></span>**7.** Omnibus qui Romæ estis, dilectis Deo,
vocatis sanctis: gratia vobis, et pax a Deo Patre nostro, et Domino Iesu
Christo.

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**1.** *Paul, etc.*  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) — With regard to the word Paul, as it is
a subject of no such moment as ought to detain us, and as nothing can be
said which has not been mentioned by other expounders, I should say
nothing, were it not proper to satisfy some at small expense without
being tedious to others; for the subject shall be despatched in a very
few words.

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>They who think that the Apostle attained this
name as a trophy for having brought Sergius, the proconsul, to the faith
of Christ, are confuted by the testimony of Luke, who shows that he was
so called before that time. (<span id="v.ii-p4.1"></span>[Acts
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009)<span id="v.ii-p4.1"></span>.) Nor
does it seem probable to me, that it was given him when he was converted
to Christ; though this idea so pleased <span
id="v.ii-p4.2"></span>Augustine, that he took occasion refinedly to
philosophize on the subject; for he says, that from a proud Saul he was
made a very little (<span id="v.ii-p4.3"></span>*parvulum*  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) ) disciple of Christ. More probable is
the opinion of <span id="v.ii-p5.3"></span>Origen, who thought that he
had two names; for it is not unlikely to be true, that his name, Saul,
derived from his kindred, was given him by his parents to indicate his
religion and his descent; and that his other name, Paul, was added, to
show his right to Roman citizenship;  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) they would not have this honor, then
highly valued, to be otherwise than made evident; but they did not so
much value it as to withhold a proof of his Israelitic descent. But he
has commonly taken the name Paul in his Epistles, and it may be for the
following reasons: because in the churches to which he wrote, it was
more known and more common, more acceptable in the Roman empire, and
less known among his own nation. It was indeed his duty to avoid the
foolish suspicion and hatred under which the name of a Jew then labored
among the Romans and in their provinces, and to abstain from inflaming
the rage of his own countrymen, and to take care of himself.

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>*A servant of Jesus Christ, etc.* — He
signalizes himself with these distinctions for the purpose of securing
more authority to his doctrine; and this he seeks to secure by two
things — first, by asserting his call to the Apostleship;  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) and secondly, by showing that his call
was not unconnected with the Church of Rome: for it was of great
importance that he should be deemed an Apostle through God’s call, and
that he should be known as one destined for the Roman Church. He
therefore says, that he was a *servant* of Christ, and called to the
office of an Apostle, thereby intimating that he had not presumptuously
intruded into that office. He then adds, that he was *chosen*, (<span
id="v.ii-p10.1"></span>selectum — selected,  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) ) by which he more fully confirms the
fact, that he was not one of the people, but a particular Apostle of the
Lord. Consistently with this, he had before proceeded from what was
general to what was particular, as the Apostleship was an especial
service; for all who sustain the office of teaching are to be deemed
Christ’s servants, but Apostles, in point of honor, far exceed all
others. But the *choosing* for the gospel, etc., which he afterwards
mentions, expresses the end as well as the use of the Apostleship; for
he intended briefly to show for what purpose he was called to that
function. By saying then that he was servant of Christ, he declared what
he had in common with other teachers; by claiming to himself the title
of an Apostle, he put himself before others; but as no authority is due
to him who willfully intrudes himself, he reminds us, that he was
appointed by God.

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span>Then the meaning is, — that Paul was a
servant of Christ, not any kind of servant, but an Apostle, and that by
the call of God, and not by presumptuous intrusion: then follows a
clearer explanation of the Apostolic office, — it was ordained for the
preaching of the Gospel. For I cannot agree with those who refer this
call of which he speaks to the eternal election of God; and who
understand the separation, either that from his mother’s womb, which he
mentions in <span id="v.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ga
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)<span id="v.ii-p12.1"></span>, or
that which Luke refers to, when Paul was appointed for the Gentiles: but
I consider that he simply glories in having God as the author of his
call, lest any one should think that he had through his own rashness
taken this honor to himself.  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span>We must here observe, that all are not fitted
for the ministry of the word; for a special call is necessary: and even
those who seem particularly fitted ought to take heed lest they thrust
themselves in without a call. But as to the character of the Apostolic
and of the Episcopal call, we shall consider it in another place. We
must further observe, that the office of an Apostle is the preaching of
the gospel. It hence appears what just objects of ridicule are those
dumb dogs, who render themselves conspicuous only by their mitre and
their crook, and boast themselves to be the successors of the Apostles!

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span>The word, *servant*, imports nothing else but
a minister, for it refers to what is official.  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) I mention this to remove the mistake of
those who too much refine on this expression and think that there is
here to be understood a contrast between the service of Moses and that
of Christ.

<span id="v.ii-p17"></span><span id="v.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p18"></span>**2.** *Which he had before promised*, *etc.*
— As the suspicion of being new subtracts much from the authority of a
doctrine, he confirms the faith of the gospel by antiquity; as though he
said, “Christ came not on the earth unexpectedly, nor did he introduce a
doctrine of a new kind and not heard of before, inasmuch as he, and his
gospel too, had been promised and expected from the beginning of the
world.” But as antiquity is often fabulous, he brings witnesses, and
those approved, even the Prophets of God, that he might remove every
suspicion. He in the third place adds, that their testimonies were duly
recorded, that is, in the Holy Scriptures.

<span id="v.ii-p19"></span>We may learn from this passage what the
gospel is: he teaches us, not that it was promulgated by the Prophets
but only promised. If then the Prophets promised the gospel, it follows,
that it was revealed, when our Lord was at length manifested in the
flesh. They are then mistaken who confound the promises with the gospel,
since the gospel is properly the appointed preaching of Christ as
manifested, in whom the promises themselves are exhibited.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

<span id="v.ii-p21"></span><span id="v.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p22"></span>**3.** *Concerning his own Son,* *etc.* —
This is a remarkable passage, by which we are taught that the whole
gospel is included in Christ, so that if any removes one step from
Christ, he withdraws himself from the gospel. For since he is the living
and express image of the Father, it is no wonder, that he alone is set
before us as one to whom our whole faith is to be directed and in whom
it is to center. It is then a definition of the gospel, by which Paul
expresses what is summarily comprehended in it. I have rendered the
words which follow, *Jesus Christ our Lord*, in the same case; which
seems to me to be most agreeable with the context. We hence learn, that
he who has made a due proficiency in the knowledge of Christ, has
acquired every thing which can be learned from the gospel; and, on the
other hand, that they who seek to be wise without Christ, are not only
foolish, but even completely insane.

<span id="v.ii-p23"></span>*Who was made,* *etc.* — Two things must be
found in Christ, in order that we may obtain salvation in him, even
divinity and humanity. His divinity possesses power, righteousness,
life, which by his humanity are conveyed to us. Hence the Apostle has
expressly mentioned both in the Summary he gives of the gospel, that
Christ was manifested in the flesh — and that in it he declared himself
to be the Son of God. So John says; after having declared that the Word
was made flesh, he adds, that in that flesh there was a glory as of the
only-begotten Son of God. (<span id="v.ii-p23.1"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="v.ii-p23.1"></span>.)
That he specially notices the descent and lineage of Christ from his
ancestor David, is not superfluous; for by this he calls back our
attention to the promise, that we may not doubt but that he is the very
person who had been formerly promised. So well known was the promise
made to David, that it appears to have been a common thing among the
Jews to call the Messiah the Son of David. This then — that Christ did
spring from David — was said for the purpose of confirming our faith.

<span id="v.ii-p24"></span>He adds, *according to the flesh*; and he
adds this, that we may understand that he had something more excellent
than flesh, which he brought from heaven, and did not take from David,
even that which he afterwards mentions, the glory of the divine nature.
Paul does further by these words not only declare that Christ had real
flesh, but he also clearly distinguishes his human from his divine
nature; and thus he refutes the impious raving of *Servetus*, who
assigned flesh to Christ, composed of three untreated elements.

<span id="v.ii-p25"></span><span id="v.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p26"></span>**4.** *Declared*  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) *the Son of God*, *etc.*: or, if you
prefer, determined (<span id="v.ii-p29.4"></span>definitus); as though
he had said, that the power, by which he was raised from the dead, was
something like a decree by which he was proclaimed the Son of God,
according to what is said in <span id="v.ii-p29.5"></span>[Ps
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="v.ii-p29.5"></span>, “I
have this day begotten thee:” for this begetting refers to what was made
known. Though some indeed find here three separate evidences of the
divinity of Christ — “power,” understanding thereby miracles — then the
testimony of the Spirit — and, lastly, the resurrection from the dead —
I yet prefer to connect them together, and to reduce these three things
to one, in this manner — that Christ was declared the Son of God by
openly exercising a real celestial power, that is, the power of the
Spirit, when he rose from the dead; but that this power is comprehended,
when a conviction of it is imprinted on our hearts by the same Spirit.
The language of the Apostle well agrees with this view; for he says that
he was declared by power, because power, peculiar to God, shone forth in
him, and uncontestably proved him to be God; and this was indeed made
evident by his resurrection. Paul says the same thing in another place;
having stated, that by death the weakness of the flesh appeared, he at
the same time extols the power of the Spirit in his resurrection; (<span
id="v.ii-p29.6"></span>[2CO 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="v.ii-p29.6"></span>) This glory, however, is not made known to us,
until the same Spirit imprints a conviction of it on our hearts. And
that Paul includes, together with the wonderful energy of the Spirit,
which Christ manifested by rising from the dead, the testimony which all
the faithful feel in their hearts, is even evident from this — that he
expressly calls it the Spirit of Holiness; as though he had said, that
the Spirit, as far as it sanctifies, confirms and ratifies that evidence
of its power which it once exhibited. For the Scripture is wont often to
ascribe such titles to the Spirit, as tend to illustrate our present
subject. Thus He is called by our Lord the Spirit of Truth, on account
of the effect which he mentions; (<span id="v.ii-p29.7"></span>[Joh
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span id="v.ii-p29.7"></span>)

<span id="v.ii-p30"></span>Besides, a divine power is said to have shone
forth in the resurrection of Christ for this reason — because he rose by
his own power, as he had often testified:

<span id="v.ii-p31"></span>“Destroy this temple, and in three days  
I will raise it up again,” (<span id="v.ii-p31.2"></span>[Joh
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="v.ii-p31.2"></span>;)

<span id="v.ii-p32"></span>“No man taketh it from me,” etc.; (<span
id="v.ii-p32.1"></span>[Joh 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="v.ii-p32.1"></span>)

<span id="v.ii-p33"></span>For he gained victory over death, (to which
he yielded with regard to the weakness of the flesh,) not by aid sought
from another, but by the celestial operation of his own Spirit.

<span id="v.ii-p34"></span><span id="v.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p35"></span>**5.** *Through whom we have received,*
*etc.* — Having completed his definition of the gospel, which he
introduced for the recommendation of his office, he now returns to speak
of his own call; and it was a great point that this should be proved to
the Romans. By mentioning grace and apostleship apart, he adopts a form
of speech,  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) which must be
understood as meaning, gratuitous apostleship or the favor of the
apostleship; by which he means, that it was wholly through divine favor,
not through his own worthiness, that he had been chosen for so high an
office. For though it has hardly any thing connected with it in the
estimation of the world, except dangers, labors, hatred, and disgrace;
yet before God and his saints, it possesses a dignity of no common or
ordinary kind. It is therefore deservedly counted a favor. If you prefer
to say, “I have received grace that I should be an Apostle,” the sense
would be the same.  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20)

<span id="v.ii-p38"></span>The expression, *on account of his name*, is
rendered by <span id="v.ii-p38.1"></span>Ambrose, “in his name,” as
though it meant, that the Apostle was appointed in the place of Christ
to preach the gospel, according to that passage, “We are ambassadors for
Christ,” etc. (<span id="v.ii-p38.2"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="v.ii-p38.2"></span>.)
Their opinion, however, seems better, who take *name* for knowledge; for
the gospel is preached for this end — that we may believe on the name of
the Son of God. (<span id="v.ii-p38.3"></span>[1Jo
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023)<span id="v.ii-p38.3"></span>.)
And Paul is said to have been a chosen vessel, to carry the name of
Christ among the Gentiles. (<span id="v.ii-p38.4"></span>[Ac
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span id="v.ii-p38.4"></span>.)
*On account* then *of* *his name*, which means the same, as though he
had said, that I might make known what Christ is.  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21)

<span id="v.ii-p41"></span>*For the obedience of faith,* *etc.* — That
is, we have received a command to preach the gospel among all nations,
and this gospel they obey by faith. By stating the design of his
calling, he again reminds the Romans of his office, as though he said,
“It is indeed my duty to discharge the office committed to me, which is
to preach the word; and it is your duty to hear the word and willingly
to obey it; you will otherwise make void the vocation which the Lord has
bestowed on me.”

<span id="v.ii-p42"></span>We hence learn, that they perversely resist
the authority of God and upset the whole of what he has ordained, who
irreverently and contemptuously reject the preaching of the gospel; the
design of which is to constrain us to obey God. We must also notice here
what faith is; the name of obedience is given to it, and for this reason
— because the Lord calls us by his gospel; we respond to his call by
faith; as on the other hand, the chief act of disobedience to God is
unbelief, I prefer rendering the sentence, “For the obedience of faith,”
rather than, “In order that they may obey the faith;” for the last is
not strictly correct, except taken figuratively, though it be found once
in the <span id="v.ii-p42.1"></span>[Ac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007)<span id="v.ii-p42.1"></span>.
Faith is properly that by which we obey the gospel.  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)

<span id="v.ii-p44"></span>*Among all nations,* *etc.* It was not enough
for him to have been appointed an Apostle, except his ministry had
reference to some who were to be taught: hence he adds, that his
apostleship extended to all nations. He afterwards calls himself more
distinctly the Apostle of the Romans, when he says, that they were
included in the number of the nations, to whom he had been given as a
minister. And further, the Apostles had in common the command to preach
the gospel to all the world; and they were not, as pastors and bishops,
set over certain churches. But Paul, in addition to the general
undertaking of the apostolic function, was constituted, by a special
appointment, to be a minister to proclaim the gospel among the Gentiles.
It is no objection to this, that he was forbidden to pass through
Macedonia and to preach the word in Mysia: for this was done, not that
there were limits prescribed to him, but that he was for a time to go
elsewhere; for the harvest was not as yet ripe there.

<span id="v.ii-p45"></span>*Ye are the called of Jesus Christ,* *etc.*
He assigns a reason more nearly connected with them — because the Lord
had already exhibited in them an evidence by which he had manifested
that he had called them to a participation of the gospel. It hence
followed, that if they wished their own calling to remain sure, they
were not to reject the ministry of Paul, who had been chosen by the same
election of God. I therefore take this clause, “the called of Jesus
Christ,” as explanatory, as though the particle “even” were inserted;
for he means, that they were by calling made partakers of Christ. For
they who shall be heirs of eternal life, are chosen by the celestial
Father to be children in Christ; and when chosen, they are committed to
his care and protection as their shepherd.  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)

<span id="v.ii-p47"></span><span id="v.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p48"></span>**7.** *To all of you who are at Rome,*
*etc.* By this happy arrangement he sets forth what there is in us
worthy of commendation; he says, that first the Lord through his own
kindness made us the objects of his favor and love; and then that he has
called us; and thirdly, that he has called us to holiness: but this high
honor only then exists, when we are not wanting to our call.

<span id="v.ii-p49"></span>Here a rich truth presents itself to us, to
which I shall briefly refer, and leave it to be meditated upon by each
individual: Paul does by no means ascribe the praise of our salvation to
ourselves, but derives it altogether from the fountain of God’s free and
paternal love towards us; for he makes this the first thing — God loves
us: and what is the cause of his love, except his own goodness alone? On
this depends our calling, by which in his own time he seals his adoption
to those whom he had before freely chosen. We also learn from this
passage that none rightly connect themselves with the number of the
faithful, except they feel assured that the Lord is gracious, however
unworthy and wretched sinners they may be, and except they be stimulated
by his goodness and aspire to holiness, for he hath not called us to
uncleanness, but to holiness. (<span id="v.ii-p49.1"></span>[1Th
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#007)<span id="v.ii-p49.1"></span>.) As
the Greek can be rendered in the second person, I see no reason for any
change.

<span id="v.ii-p50"></span>*Grace to you and peace,* *etc.* Nothing is
more desirable than to have God propitious to us, and this is signified
by *grace*; and then to have prosperity and success in all things
flowing from him, and this is intimated by *peace*; for however things
may seem to smile on us, if God be angry, even blessing itself is turned
to a curse. The very foundation then of our felicity is the favor of
God, by which we enjoy true and solid prosperity, and by which also our
salvation is promoted even when we are in adversities.  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) And then as he prays to God for peace, we
must understand, that whatever good comes to us, it is the fruit of
divine benevolence. Nor must we omit to notice, that he prays at the
same time to the Lord Jesus Christ for these blessings. Worthily indeed
is this honor rendered to him, who is not only the administrator and
dispenser of his Father’s bounty to us, but also works all things in
connection with him. It was, however, the special object of the Apostle
to show, that through him all God’s blessings come to us.  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)

<span id="v.ii-p53"></span>There are those who prefer to regard the word
*peace* as signifying quietness of conscience; and that this meaning
belongs to it sometimes, I do not deny: but since it is certain that the
Apostle wished to give us here a summary of God’s blessings, the former
meaning, which is adduced by *Bucer*, is much the most suitable.
Anxiously wishing then to the godly what makes up real happiness, he
betakes himself, as he did before, to the very fountain itself, even the
favor of God, which not only alone brings to us eternal felicity but is
also the source of all blessings in this life.

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
1:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>**8.** First, I thank my God through Jesus
Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole
world.

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span>**8.** Primum quidem gratias ago Deo meo per
Iesum Christum super vobis omnibus, quia fides vestra Prædicatur in
universo mundo.

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span>**9.** For God is my witness, whom I serve
with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make
mention of you always in my prayers;

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span>**9.** Testis enim mihi Deus, quem colo in
spiritu meo in Evangelio Filii ipsius, ut continenter memoriam vestri
faciam;

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span>**10.** Making request, if by any means now
at length I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God to come
unto you.

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span>**10.** Semper in orationibus meis,  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) rogans, si quomodo prosperum iter
aliquando mihi, obtingat per voluntatem Dei, veniendi ad vos.

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span>**11.** For I long to see you, that I may
impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be established;

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span>**11.** Desidero enim videre, vos, ut
aliquod impertiar vobis donum spirituale ad vos confirmandos;

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span>**12.** That is, that I may be comforted
together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me.

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span>**12.** Hoc est. ad cohortationem mutuo
percipiendam in vobis per Mutuam fidem, vestram atque meam.

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span><span id="v.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span>**8***. I first*  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) *indeed*, *etc.* Here the beginning
commences, altogether adapted to the occasion, as he seasonably prepares
them for receiving instruction by reasons connected with himself as well
as with them. What he states respecting them is, the celebrity of their
faith; for he intimates that they being honored with the public
approbation of the churches, could not reject an Apostle of the Lord,
without disappointing the good opinion entertained of them by all; and
such a thing would have been extremely uncourteous and in a manner
bordering on perfidy. As then this testimony justly induced the Apostle,
by affording him an assurance of their obedience, to undertake,
according to his office, to teach and instruct the Romans; so it held
them bound not to despise his authority. With regard to himself, he
disposes them to a teachable spirit by testifying his love towards them:
and there is nothing more effectual in gaining credit to an adviser,
than the impression that he is cordially anxious to consult our
wellbeing.

<span id="v.iii-p16"></span>The first thing worthy of remark is, that he
so commends their faith,  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) that he
implies that it had been received from God. We are here taught that
faith is God’s gift; for thanksgiving is an acknowledgment of a benefit.
He who gives thanks to God for faith, confesses that it comes from him.
And since we find that the Apostle ever begins his congratulations with
thanksgiving, let us know that we are hereby reminded, that all our
blessings are God’s free gifts. It is also needful to become accustomed
to such forms of speaking, that we may be led more fully to rouse
ourselves in the duty of acknowledging God as the giver of all our
blessings, and to stir up others to join us in the same acknowledgment.
If it be right to do this in little things, how much more with regard to
faith; Which is neither a small nor an indiscriminate (<span
id="v.iii-p17.3"></span>*promiscua*) gift of God. We have here besides
an example, that thanks ought to be given *through Christ,* according to
the Apostle’s command in <span id="v.iii-p17.4"></span>[Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span id="v.iii-p17.4"></span>;
inasmuch as in his name we seek and obtain mercy from the Father. — I
observe in the last place, that he calls him *his God*. This is the
faithful’s special privilege, and on them alone God bestows this honor.
There is indeed implied in this a mutual relationship, which is
expressed in this promise,

<span id="v.iii-p18"></span>“I will be to them a God;  
they shall be to me a people.” (<span id="v.iii-p18.2"></span>[Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)<span id="v.iii-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii-p19"></span>I prefer at the same time to confine this to
the character which Paul sustained, as an attestation of his obedience
to the end in the work of preaching the gospel. So Hezekiah called God
the God of Isaiah, when he desired him to give him the testimony of a
true and faithful Prophet. (<span id="v.iii-p19.1"></span>[Isa
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#004)<span id="v.iii-p19.1"></span>.)
So also he is called in an especial manner the God of Daniel. (<span
id="v.iii-p19.2"></span>[Da 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020)<span
id="v.iii-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii-p20"></span>*Through the whole world.* The eulogy of
faithful men was to Paul equal to that of the whole world, with regard
to the faith of the Romans; for the unbelieving, who deemed it
detestable, could not have given an impartial or a correct testimony
respecting it. We then understood that it was by the mouths of the
faithful that the faith of the Romans was proclaimed through the whole
world; and that they were alone able to judge rightly of it, and to
pronounce a correct opinion. That this small and despised handful of men
were unknown as to their character to the ungodly, even at Rome, was a
circumstance he regarded as nothing; for Paul made no account of their
judgment.

<span id="v.iii-p21"></span><span id="v.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p22"></span>**9.** *For God is my witness,* *etc.* He
proves his love by its effects; for had he not greatly loved them, he
would not have so anxiously commended them to the Lord, and especially
he would not have so ardently desired to promote their welfare by his
own labors. His anxiety then and his ardent desire were certain
evidences of his love; for had they not sprung from it, they would never
have existed. And as he knew it to be necessary for establishing
confidence in his preaching, that the Romans should be fully persuaded
of his sincerity, he added an oath — a needful remedy, whenever a
declaration, which ought to be received as true and indubitable
vacillates through uncertainty. For since an oath is nothing else but an
appeal to God as to the truth of what we declare, most foolish is it to
deny that the Apostle used here an oath. He did not notwithstanding
transgress the prohibition of Christ.

<span id="v.iii-p23"></span>It hence appears that it was not Christ’s
design (as the superstitious Anabaptists dream) to abolish oaths
altogether, but on the contrary to call attention to the due observance
of the law; and the law, allowing an oath, only condemns perjury and
needless swearing. If then we would use an oath aright, let us imitate
the seriousness and the reverent manner exhibited by the Apostles; and
that you may understand what it is, know that God is so called as a
witness, that he is also appealed to as an avenger, in case we deceive;
which Paul expresses elsewhere in these words,

<span id="v.iii-p24"></span>“God is a witness to my soul.” (<span
id="v.iii-p24.1"></span>[2Co 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii-p24.1"></span>.)  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)

<span id="v.iii-p26"></span>*Whom I serve with my spirit,* *etc.* It is
usual with profane men, who trifle with God, to pretend his name, no
less boldly than presumptuously; but the Apostle here speaks of his own
piety, in order to gain credit; and those, in whom the fear of God and
reverence for his name prevail, will dread to swear falsely. At the same
time, he sets his own spirit in opposition to the outward mask of
religion; for as many falsely pretend to be the worshippers of God, and
outwardly appear to be so, he testifies that he, from the heart served,
God.  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) It may be also that he
alluded to the ancient ceremonies, in which alone the Jews thought the
worship of God consisted. He then intimates, that though he retained not
observance of these, he was yet a sincere worshipper of God, according
to what he says in <span id="v.iii-p27.4"></span>[Php
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003)<span id="v.iii-p27.4"></span>,

<span id="v.iii-p28"></span>“We are the true circumcision, who in spirit
serve God,  
and glory not in the flesh.”

<span id="v.iii-p29"></span>He then glories that he served God with
sincere devotion of heart, which is true religion and approved worship.

<span id="v.iii-p30"></span>But it was expedient, as I have said, in
order that his oath might attain more credit, that Paul should declare
his piety towards God; for perjury is a sport to the ungodly, while the
pious dread it more than a thousand deaths; inasmuch as it cannot be,
but that where there is a real fear of God, there must be also a
reverence for his name. It is then the same thing, as though Paul had
said, that he knew how much sacredness and sincerity belonged to an
oath, and that he did not rashly appeal to God as a witness, as the
profane are wont to do. And thus, by his own example, he teaches us,
that whenever we swear, we ought to give such evidence of piety, that
the name of God, which we use in our declarations, may retain its
sacredness. And further, he gives a proof, even by his own ministry,
that he worshipped not God feignedly; for it was the fullest evidence,
that he was a man devoted to God’s glory, when he denied himself, and
hesitated not to undergo all the hardships of reproach, poverty, and
hatred, and even the peril of death, in advancing the kingdom of God.
 <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31)

<span id="v.iii-p32"></span>Some take this clause, as though Paul
intended to recommend that worship which he said he rendered to God, on
this account, — because it corresponded with what the gospel prescribes.
It is indeed certain that spiritual worship is enjoined on us in the
gospel; but the former interpretation is far the most suitable, — that
he devoted his service to God in preaching the gospel. He, however,
makes at the same time a difference between himself and hypocrites, who
have something else in view rather than to serve God; for ambition, or
some such thing, influences most men; and it is far from being the case,
that all engage cordially and faithfully in this office. The meaning is,
that Paul performed sincerely the office of teaching; for what he says
of his own devotion he applies to this subject.

<span id="v.iii-p33"></span>But we hence gather a profitable doctrine;
for it ought to add no little encouragement to the ministers of the
gospel, when they hear that, in preaching the gospel, they render an
acceptable and a valuable service to God. What, indeed, is there to
prevent them from regarding it an excellent service, when they know that
their labor is pleasing to God, and is approved by him? Moreover, he
calls it *the gospel of the Son* of God; for Christ is in it made known,
who has been appointed by the Father for this end, — that he, being
glorified, should also glorify the Father.

<span id="v.iii-p34"></span>*That continually*, *etc.* He still further
sets forth the ardor of his love by his very constancy in praying for
them. It was, indeed, a strong evidence, when he poured forth no prayers
to the Lord without making mention of them. That the meaning may be
clearer, I render <span id="v.iii-p34.1"></span>παντοτε, “always;” as
though it was said, “In all my prayers,” or, “whenever I address God in
prayer, I join a mention of you.”  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)
Now he speaks not of every kind of calling on God, but of those prayers
to which the saints, being at liberty, and laying aside all cares, apply
their whole attention to the work; for he might have often expressed
suddenly this or that wish, when the Romans did not come into his mind;
but whenever he had previously intended, and, as it were, prepared
himself to offer up prayers to God, among others he remembered them. He
then speaks peculiarly of those prayers, for which the saints
deliberately prepare themselves; as we find to have been the case with
our Lord himself, who, for this purpose, sought retirement. He at the
same time intimates how frequently, or rather, how unceasingly he was
engaged in such prayers, since he says that he prayed continually.

<span id="v.iii-p39"></span><span id="v.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p40"></span>**10.** *Requesting, if by any means,*
*etc.* As it is not probable that we from the heart study his benefit,
whom we are not ready to assist by our labors, he now adds, after having
said that he was anxious for their welfare, that he showed by another
proof his love to them, as before God, even by requesting that he might
be able to advance their interest. That you may, therefore, perceive the
full meaning, read the words as though the word *also* were inserted,
*requesting also, if by any means*, *etc.* By saying, *A prosperous
journey by the will of God* he shows, not only that he looked to the
Lord’s favor for success in his journey, but that he deemed his journey
prosperous, if it was approved by the Lord. According to this model
ought all our wishes to be formed.

<span id="v.iii-p41"></span><span id="v.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p42"></span>**11.** *For I greatly desire to see you* He
might, indeed, while absent, have confirmed their faith by his doctrine;
but as advice is better taken from one present, he had a desire to be
with them. But he explains what his object was, and shows that he wished
to undertake the toil of a journey, not for his own, but for their
advantage. — *Spiritual gifts*  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) he
calls those which he possessed, being either those of doctrine, or of
exhortation, or of prophesy which he knew had come to him through God’s
favor. He has here strikingly pointed out the use of gifts by the word,
*imparting*: for different gifts are distributed to each individual,
that all may in kindness mutually assist one another, and transfer to
others what each one possesses. See <span id="v.iii-p43.5"></span>[Rom.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003), [1 Cor.
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="v.iii-p43.5"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p44"></span>*To confirm you*, *etc.* He modifies what he
had said of imparting, lest he should seem to regard them such as were
yet to be instructed in the first elements of religion, as though they
were not hitherto rightly taught in Christ. He then says, that he wished
so to lend his aid to them, that they who had for the most part made a
proficiency, might be further assisted: for a confirmation is what we
all want, until Christ be fully formed in us. (<span
id="v.iii-p44.1"></span>[Eph 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span
id="v.iii-p44.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii-p45"></span><span id="v.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p46"></span>**12.** Being not satisfied with this modest
statement, he qualifies it, and shows, that he did not so occupy the
place of a teacher, but that he wished to learn also from them; as
though he said, “I desire so to confirm you according to the measure of
grace conferred on me, that your example may also add courage (<span
id="v.iii-p46.1"></span>*alacritatem* — alacrity) to my faith, and that
we may thus mutually benefit one another.”

<span id="v.iii-p47"></span>See to what degree of modesty his pious
heart submitted itself, so that he disdained not to seek confirmation
from unexperienced beginners: nor did he speak dissemblingly, for there
is no one so void of gifts in the Church of Christ, who is not able to
contribute something to our benefit: but we are hindered by our envy and
by our pride from gathering such fruit from one another. Such is our
high-mindedness, such is the inebriety produced by vain reputation, that
despising and disregarding others, every one thinks that he possesses
what is abundantly sufficient for himself. I prefer to read with Bucer,
*exhortation* (<span id="v.iii-p47.1"></span>*exhortationem* —
encouragement) rather than <span id="v.iii-p47.2"></span>*consolatim*;
for it agrees better with the former part.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)<span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>**13.** Now I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but was let
hitherto,) that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among
other Gentiles.

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>**13.** Nolo verò vos ignorare, fratres, quod
sæpe proposui venire ad vos, et impeditus sum hactenus,ut fructum
aliquem haberem in vobis, sicut et in reliquis gentibus.

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span>**14.** I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to
the Barbarians; both to the wise, and to the unwise.

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>**14.** Et Græcis et Barbaris et sapientbus et
stultis debitor sum.

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span>**15.** So, as much as in me is, I am ready to
preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also.

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span>**15.** Itaque quantum in me est, paratus sum
vobis quoque qui Romae estis Evangelizare.

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span><span id="v.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span>**13.** *I would not that you should be
ignorant*. What he has hitherto testified — that he continually
requested of the Lord that he might visit them, might have appeared a
vain thing, and could not have obtained credit, had he neglected to
seize the occasion when offered: he therefore says, that the effort had
not been wanting, but the opportunity; for he had been prevented from
executing a purpose often formed.

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span>We hence learn that the Lord frequently
upsets the purposes of his saints, in order to humble them, and by such
humiliation to teach them to regard his Providence, that they may rely
on it; though the saints, who design nothing without the Lord’s will,
cannot be said, strictly speaking, to be driven away from their
purposes. It is indeed the presumption of impiety to pass by God, and
without him to determine on things to come, as though they were in our
own power; and this is what James sharply reprehends in <span
id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>[Jas 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="v.iv-p11"></span>But he says that he was *hindered*: you must
take this in no other sense, but that the Lord employed him in more
urgent concerns, which he could not have neglected without loss to the
Church. Thus the hinderances of the godly and of the unbelieving differ:
the latter perceive only that they are hindered, when they are
restrained by the strong hand of the Lord, so as not to be able to move;
but the former are satisfied with an hinderance that arises from some
approved reason; nor do they allow themselves to attempt any thing
beyond their duty, or contrary to edification.

<span id="v.iv-p12"></span>*That I might obtain some fruit*, *etc.* He
no doubt speaks of that fruit, for the gathering of which the Lord sent
his Apostles,

<span id="v.iv-p13"></span>“I have chosen you, that ye may go and bring
forth fruit,  
and that your fruit may remain.” (<span id="v.iv-p13.2"></span>[Joh
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span id="v.iv-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv-p14"></span>Though he gathered it not for himself, but
for the Lord, he yet calls it his own; for the godly have nothing more
as their own than the work of promoting the glory of the Lord, with
which is connected all their happiness. And he records what had happened
to him with respect to *other nations*, that the Romans might entertain
hope, that his coming to them would not be unprofitable, which so many
nations had found to have been attended with so much benefit.

<span id="v.iv-p15"></span><span id="v.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p16"></span>**14.** *I am a debtor both to the Greeks and
to the Barbarians*, etc. Those whom he means by the Greeks and the
Barbarians, he afterwards explains by adding, *both to the wise and to
the foolish;* which words Erasmus has not rendered amiss by “learned and
unlearned,” (<span id="v.iv-p16.1"></span>*eruditos et rudes*,) but I
prefer to retain the very words of Paul. He then takes an argument from
his own office, and intimates that it ought not to be ascribed to his
arrogance, that he thought himself in a manner capable of teaching the
Romans, however much they excelled in learning and wisdom and in the
knowledge of things, inasmuch as it had pleased the Lord to make him a
debtor even to the wise.  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

<span id="v.iv-p19"></span>Two things are to be here considered — that
the gospel is by a heavenly mandate destined and offered to the wise, in
order that the Lord may subject to himself all the wisdom of this world,
and make all variety of talents, and every kind of science, and the
loftiness of all arts, to give way to the simplicity of his doctrine;
and what is more, they are to be reduced to the same rank with the
unlearned, and to be made so meek, as to be able to bear those to be
their fellow-disciples under their master, Christ, whom they would not
have deigned before to take as their scholars; and then that the
unlearned are by no means to be driven away from this school, nor are
they to flee away from it through groundless fear; for if Paul was
indebted to them, being a faithful debtor, he had doubtless discharged
what he owed; and thus they will find here what they will be capable of
enjoying. All teachers have also a rule here which they are to follow,
and that is, modestly and kindly to accommodate themselves to the
capacities of the ignorant and unlearned. Hence it will be, that they
will be able, with more evenness of mind, to bear with many absurdities
and almost innumerable things that may disgust them, by which they might
otherwise be overcome. They are, however, to remember, that they are not
so indebted to the foolish, as that they are to cherish their folly by
immoderate indulgence.

<span id="v.iv-p20"></span><span id="v.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p21"></span>**15.** *I am therefore ready*,  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) *etc.* He concludes what he had before
said of his desire — that as he knew it to be his duty to spread the
gospel among them, in order to gather fruit for the Lord, he was anxious
to fulfill God’s calling, as far as he was allowed to do so by the Lord.

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span>**16.** For I am not ashamed of the gospel of
Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

<span id="v.v-p3"></span>**16.** Non enim pudet me Evangelii Christi,
quandoquidem potentia est Dei, in salutem omni credenti, Iudæoprimum,
deinde Græco.

<span id="v.v-p4"></span>**17.** For therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by
faith.

<span id="v.v-p5"></span>**17.** Nam justitia Dei in eo revelatur ex
fide in fidem, sicut scriptum est, Justus ex fide sua vivet.

<span id="v.v-p6"></span><span id="v.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p7"></span>**16.** *I am not indeed ashamed,* *etc.* This
is an anticipation of an objection; for he declares beforehand, that he
cared not for the taunts of the ungodly; and he thus provides a way for
himself, by which he proceeds to pronounce an eulogy on the value of the
gospel, that it might not appear contemptible to the Romans. He indeed
intimates that it was contemptible in the eyes of the world; and he does
this by saying, that he was not ashamed of it. And thus he prepares them
for bearing the reproach of the cross of Christ, lest they should esteem
the gospel of less value by finding it exposed to the scoffs and
reproaches of the ungodly; and, on the other hand, he shows how valuable
it was to the faithful. If, in the first place, the power of God ought
to be extolled by us, that power shines forth in the gospel; if, again,
the goodness of God deserves to be sought and loved by us, the gospel is
a display of his goodness. It ought then to be reverenced and honored,
since veneration is due to God’s power; and as it avails to our
salvation, it ought to be loved by us.

<span id="v.v-p8"></span>But observe how much Paul ascribes to the
ministry of the word, when he testifies that God thereby puts forth his
power to save; for he speaks not here of any secret revelation, but of
vocal preaching. It hence follows, that those as it were willfully
despise the power of God, and drive away from them his delivering hand,
who withdraw themselves from the hearing of the word.

<span id="v.v-p9"></span>At the same time, as he works not effectually
in all, but only where the Spirit, the inward Teacher, illuminates the
heart, he subjoins, *To every one who believeth.* The gospel is indeed
offered to all for their salvation, but the power of it appears not
everywhere: and that it is the savor of death to the ungodly, does not
proceed from what it is, but from their own wickedness. By setting forth
but one Salvation he cuts off every other trust. When men withdraw
themselves from this one salvation, they find in the gospel a sure proof
of their own ruin. Since then the gospel invites all to partake of
salvation without any difference, it is rightly called the doctrine of
salvation: for Christ is there offered, whose peculiar office is to save
that which was lost; and those who refuse to be saved by him, shall find
him a Judge. But everywhere in Scripture the word salvation is simply
set in opposition to the word destruction: and hence we must observe,
when it is mentioned, what the subject of the discourse is. Since then
the gospel delivers from ruin and the curse of endless death, its
salvation is eternal life.  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37)

<span id="v.v-p12"></span>*First to the Jew and then to the Greek.*
Under the word Greek, he includes all the Gentiles, as it is evident
from the comparison that is made; for the two clauses comprehend all
mankind. And it is probable that he chose especially this nation to
designate other nations, because, in the first place, it was admitted,
next to the Jews, into a participation of the gospel covenant; and,
secondly, because the Greeks, on account of their vicinity, and the
celebrity of their language, were more known to the Jews. It is then a
mode of speaking, a part being taken for the whole, by which he connects
the Gentiles universally with the Jews, as participators of the gospel:
nor does he thrust the Jews from their own eminence and dignity, since
they were the first partakers of God’s promise and calling. He then
reserves for them their prerogative; but he immediately joins the
Gentiles, though in the second place, as being partakers with them.

<span id="v.v-p13"></span><span id="v.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p14"></span>**17.** *For*  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) *the righteousness of God,* *etc.* This
is an explanation and a confirmation of the preceding clause — that the
gospel is the power of God unto salvation. For if we seek salvation,
that is, life with God, righteousness must be first sought, by which
being reconciled to him, we may, through him being propitious to us,
obtain that life which consists only in his favor; for, in order to be
loved by God, we must first become righteous, since he regards
unrighteousness with hatred. He therefore intimates, that we cannot
obtain salvation otherwise than from the gospel, since nowhere else does
God reveal to us his righteousness, which alone delivers us from
perdition. Now this righteousness, which is the groundwork of our
salvation, is revealed in the gospel: hence the gospel is said to be the
power of God unto salvation. Thus he reasons from the cause to the
effect.

<span id="v.v-p16"></span>Notice further, how extraordinary and valuable
a treasure does God bestow on us through the gospel, even the
communication of his own righteousness. I take the righteousness of God
to mean, that which is approved before his tribunal;  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) as that, on the contrary, is usually
called the righteousness of men, which is by men counted and supposed to
be righteousness, though it be only vapor. Paul, however, I doubt not,
alludes to the many prophecies in which the Spirit makes known
everywhere the righteousness of God in the future kingdom of Christ.

<span id="v.v-p21"></span>Some explain it as the righteousness which is
freely given us by God: and I indeed confess that the words will bear
this sense; for God justifies us by the gospel, and thus saves us: yet
the former view seems to me more suitable, though it is not what I make
much of. Of greater moment is what some think, that this righteousness
does not only consist in the free remission of sins, but also, in part,
includes the grace of regeneration. But I consider, that we are restored
to life because God freely reconciles us to himself, as we shall
hereafter show in its proper place.

<span id="v.v-p22"></span>But instead of the expression he used before,
“to every one who believeth,” he says now, *from faith;* for
righteousness is offered by the gospel, and is received by faith. And he
adds, *to faith*: for as our faith makes progress, and as it advances in
knowledge, so the righteousness of God increases in us at the same time,
and the possession of it is in a manner confirmed. When at first we
taste the gospel, we indeed see God’s smiling countenance turned towards
us, but at a distance: the more the knowledge of true religion grows in
us, by coming as it were nearer, we behold God’s favor more clearly and
more familiarly. What some think, that there is here an implied
comparison between the Old and New Testament, is more refined than
well-founded; for Paul does not here compare the Fathers who lived under
the law with us, but points out the daily progress that is made by every
one of the faithful.

<span id="v.v-p23"></span>*As it is written*, *etc.* By the authority of
the Prophet Habakkuk he proves the righteousness of faith; for he,
predicting the overthrow of the proud, adds this — that the life of the
righteous consists in faith. Now we live not before God, except through
righteousness: it then follows, that our righteousness is obtained by
faith; and the verb being future, designates the real perpetuity of that
life of which he speaks; as though he had said, — that it would not be
momentary, but continue forever. For even the ungodly swell with the
false notion of having life; but when they say, “Peace and safety,” a
sudden destruction comes upon them, (<span id="v.v-p23.1"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="v.v-p23.1"></span>.) It
is therefore a shadow, which endures only for a moment. Faith alone is
that which secures the perpetuity of life; and whence is this, except
that it leads us to God, and makes our life to depend on him? For Paul
would not have aptly quoted this testimony had not the meaning of the
Prophet been, that we then only stand, when by faith we recumb on God:
and he has not certainly ascribed life to the faith of the godly, but in
as far as they, having renounced the arrogance of the world, resign
themselves to the protection of God alone.  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)

<span id="v.v-p25"></span>He does not indeed professedly handle this
subject; and hence he makes no mention of gratuitous justification: but
it is sufficiently evident from the nature of faith, that this testimony
is rightly applied to the present subject. Besides, we necessarily
gather from his reasoning, that there is a mutual connection between
faith and the gospel: for as the just is said to live by faith, he
concludes that this life is received by the gospel.

<span id="v.v-p26"></span>We have now the principal point or the main
hinge of the first part of this Epistle, — that we are justified by
faith through the mercy of God alone. We have not this, indeed as yet
distinctly expressed by Paul; but from his own words it will hereafter
be made very clear — that the righteousness, which is grounded on faith,
depends entirely on the mercy of God.

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
1:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span>**18.** For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness;

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span>**18.** Revelatur enim ira Dei e cœlo, super
omnem impietatem et injustitiam hominum, veritatem Dei injuste
continentium;

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span>**19.** Because that which may be known of God
is manifest in them; for God hath shewed *it* unto them.

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span>**19.** Quia quod cognoscitur de Deo
manifestum est in ipsis: Deus enim illis manifestavit.

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span>**20.** For the invisible things of him from
the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, *even* his eternal power and Godhead; so that they
are without excuse:

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span>**20.** Si quidem invisibilia ipsius, ex
creatione mundi operibus intellecta, conspiciuntur, æterna quoque ejus
potentia, et divinitas; ut sint inexcusabiles.

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span>**21.** Because that, when they knew God, they
glorified *him* not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span>**21.** Quoniam quum Deum cogno vissent, non
tanquam Deo gloriam dederunt, aut grati fuerunt; exinaniti sunt in
cogitationibus suis, et obtenebratum est stultum coreorum.

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span>**22.** Professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools,

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>**22.** Quum se putarent sapientes, stulti
facti sunt,

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span>**23.** And changed the glory of the
uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things.

<span id="v.vi-p13"></span>**23.** Et mutaverunt gloriam incorruptibilis
Dei similitudine imaginis corruptibilis hominis, et volucrum, et
quadrupedum, et serpentum.

<span id="v.vi-p14"></span><span id="v.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p15"></span>**18.** *For*  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) *revealed*, *etc.* He reasons now by
stating things of a contrary nature, and proves that there is no
righteousness except what is conferred, or comes through the gospel; for
he shows that without this all men are condemned: by it alone there is
salvation to be found. And he brings, as the first proof of
condemnation, the fact, — that though the structure of the world, and
the most beautiful arrangement of the elements, ought to have induced
man to glorify God, yet no one discharged his proper duty: it hence
appears that all were guilty of sacrilege, and of wicked and abominable
ingratitude.

<span id="v.vi-p18"></span>To some it seems that this is a main subject,
and that Paul forms his discourse for the purpose of enforcing
repentance; but I think that the discussion of the subject begins here,
and that the principal point is stated in a former proposition; for
Paul’s object was to teach us where salvation is to be found. He has
already declared that we cannot obtain it except through the gospel: but
as the flesh will not willingly humble itself so far as to assign the
praise of salvation to the grace of God alone, Paul shows that the whole
world is deserving of eternal death. It hence follows, that life is to
be recovered in some other way, since we are all lost in ourselves. But
the words, being well considered, will help us much to understand the
meaning of the passage.

<span id="v.vi-p19"></span>Some make a difference between *impiety* and
*unrighteousness*, and think, that by the former word is meant the
profanation of God’s worship, and by the latter, injustice towards men;
but as the Apostle immediately refers this unrighteousness to the
neglect of true religion, we shall explain both as referring to the same
thing.  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) And then, *all the impiety
of men* is to be taken, by a figure in language, as meaning “the impiety
of all men,” or, the impiety of which all men are guilty. But by these
two words one thing is designated, and that is, ingratitude towards God;
for we thereby offend in two ways: it is said to be <span
id="v.vi-p20.1"></span>ἀσέβεια, impiety, as it is a dishonoring of God;
it is <span id="v.vi-p20.2"></span>ἀδικία, unrighteousness, because man,
by transferring to himself what belongs to God, unjustly deprives God of
his glory. The word *wrath*, according to the usage of Scripture,
speaking after the manner of men, means the vengeance of God; for God,
in punishing, has, according to our notion, the appearance of one in
wrath. It imports, therefore, no such emotion in God, but only has a
reference to the perception and feeling of the sinner who is punished.
Then he says that it is *revealed from heaven;* though the expression,
*from heaven*, is taken by some in the sense of an adjective, as though
he had said “the wrath of the celestial God;” yet I think it more
emphatical, when taken as having this import, “Wheresoever a man may
look around him, he will find no salvation; for the wrath of God is
poured out on the whole world, to the full extent of heaven.”

<span id="v.vi-p21"></span>*The truth of God* means, the true knowledge
of God; and to *hold in* that, is to suppress or to obscure it: hence
they are charged as guilty of robbery. — What we render *unjustly*, is
given literally by Paul, *in unrighteousness*, which means the same
thing in Hebrew: but we have regard to perspicuity.  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)

<span id="v.vi-p26"></span><span id="v.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p27"></span>**19.** *Inasmuch as what may be known of
God,* *etc.* He thus designates what it behoves us to know of God; and
he means all that appertains to the setting forth of the glory of the
Lord, or, which is the same thing, whatever ought to move and excite us
to glorify God. And by this expression he intimates, that God in his
greatness can by no means be fully comprehended by us, and that there
are certain limits within which men ought to confine themselves,
inasmuch as God accommodates to our small capacities what he testifies
of himself. Insane then are all they who seek to know of themselves what
God is: for the Spirit, the teacher of perfect wisdom, does not in vain
invite our attention to what *may be known*, <span
id="v.vi-p27.1"></span>τὸ γνωστὸν; and by what means this is known, he
immediately explains. And he said, *in them* rather than *to them*, for
the sake of greater emphasis: for though the Apostle adopts everywhere
Hebrew phrases, and <span id="v.vi-p27.2"></span>ב, *beth*, is often
redundant in that language, yet he seems here to have intended to
indicate a manifestation, by which they might be so closely pressed,
that they could not evade; for every one of us undoubtedly finds it to
be engraven on his own heart,  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) By
saying, that *God has made it manifest,* he means, that man was created
to be a spectator of this formed world, and that eyes were given him,
that he might, by looking on so beautiful a picture, be led up to the
Author himself.

<span id="v.vi-p29"></span><span id="v.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p30"></span>**20.** *Since his invisible things*,  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) *etc.* God is in himself invisible; but
as his majesty shines forth in his works and in his creatures
everywhere, men ought in these to acknowledge him, for they clearly set
forth their Maker: and for this reason the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Hebrews says, that this world is a mirror, or the representation of
invisible things. He does not mention all the particulars which may be
thought to belong to God; but he states, that we can arrive at the
knowledge of his eternal power and divinity;  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) for he who is the framer of all things,
must necessarily be without beginning and from himself. When we arrive
at this point, the divinity becomes known to us, which cannot exist
except accompanied with all the attributes of a God, since they are all
included under that idea.

<span id="v.vi-p34"></span>*So that they are inexcusable.* It hence
clearly appears what the consequence is of having this evidence — that
men cannot allege any thing before God’s tribunal for the purpose of
showing that they are not justly condemned. Yet let this difference be
remembered, that the manifestation of God, by which he makes his glory
known in his creation, is, with regard to the light itself, sufficiently
clear; but that on account of our blindness, it is not found to be
sufficient. We are not however so blind, that we can plead our ignorance
as an excuse for our perverseness. We conceive that there is a Deity;
and then we conclude, that whoever he may be, he ought to be worshipped:
but our reason here fails, because it cannot ascertain who or what sort
of being God is. Hence the Apostle in <span id="v.vi-p34.1"></span>[Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span id="v.vi-p34.1"></span>,
ascribes to faith the light by which man can gain real knowledge from
the work of creation, and not without reason; for we are prevented by
our blindness, so that we reach not to the end in view; we yet see so
far, that we cannot pretend any excuse. Both these things are strikingly
set forth by Paul in <span id="v.vi-p34.2"></span>[Ac
14:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016)<span id="v.vi-p34.2"></span>,
when he says, that the Lord in past times left the nations in their
ignorance, and yet that he left them not without witness (<span
id="v.vi-p34.3"></span>*amarturon*,) since he gave them rain and
fertility from heaven. But this knowledge of God, which avails only to
take away excuse, differs greatly from that which brings salvation,
which Christ mentions in <span id="v.vi-p34.4"></span>[Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="v.vi-p34.4"></span>, and
in which we are to glory, as Jeremiah teaches us, <span
id="v.vi-p34.5"></span>[Jer 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span
id="v.vi-p34.5"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p35"></span><span id="v.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p36"></span>**21.** *For when they knew God*, *etc.* He
plainly testifies here, that God has presented to the minds of all the
means of knowing him, having so manifested himself by his works, that
they must necessarily see what of themselves they seek not to know —
that there is some God; for the world does not by chance exist, nor
could it have proceeded from itself. But we must ever bear in mind the
degree of knowledge in which they continued; and this appears from what
follows.

<span id="v.vi-p37"></span>*They glorified him not as God*. No idea can
be formed of God without including his eternity, power, wisdom,
goodness, truth, righteousness, and mercy. His eternity appears evident,
because he is the maker of all things — his power, because he holds all
things in his hand and continues their existence — his wisdom, because
he has arranged things in such an exquisite order — his goodness, for
there is no other cause than himself, why he created all things, and no
other reason, why he should be induced to preserve them — his justice,
because in his government he punishes the guilty and defends the
innocent — his mercy, because he bears with so much forbearance the
perversity of men — and his truth, because he is unchangeable. He then
who has a right notion of God ought to give him the praise due to his
eternity, wisdom, goodness, and justice. Since men have not recognized
these attributes in God, but have dreamt of him as though he were an
empty phantom, they are justly said to have impiously robbed him of his
own glory. Nor is it without reason that he adds, *that they were not
thankful*,  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) for there is no one who
is not indebted to him for numberless benefits: yea, even on this
account alone, because he has been pleased to reveal himself to us, he
has abundantly made us indebted to him. *But they became vain*,  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) *etc.*; that is, having forsaken the
truth of God, they turned to the vanity of their own reason, all the
acuteness of which is fading and passes away like vapor. And thus their
foolish mind, being involved in darkness, could understand nothing
aright but was carried away headlong, in various ways, into errors and
delusions. Their unrighteousness was this — they quickly choked by their
own depravity the seed of right knowledge, before it grew up to
ripeness.

<span id="v.vi-p42"></span><span id="v.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p43"></span>**22.** *While they were thinking,* *etc.* It
is commonly inferred from this passage, that Paul alludes here to those
philosophers, who assumed to themselves in a peculiar manner the
reputation of wisdom; and it is thought that the design of his discourse
is to show, that when the superiority of the great is brought down to
nothing, the common people would have no reason to suppose that they had
any thing worthy of being commended: but they seem to me to have been
guided by too slender a reason; for it was not peculiar to the
philosophers to suppose themselves wise in the knowledge of God, but it
was equally common to all nations, and to all ranks of men. There were
indeed none who sought not to form some ideas of the majesty of God, and
to make him such a God as they could conceive him to be according to
their own reason. This presumption I hold is not learned in the schools,
but is innate, and comes with us, so to speak, from the womb. It is
indeed evident, that it is an evil which has prevailed in all ages —
that men have allowed themselves every liberty in coining superstitions.
The arrogance then which is condemned here is this — that men sought to
be of themselves wise, and to draw God down to a level with their own
low condition, when they ought humbly to have given him his own glory.
For Paul holds this principle, that none, except through their own
fault, are unacquainted with the worship due to God; as though he said,
“As they have proudly exalted themselves, they have become infatuated
through the righteous judgment of God.” There is an obvious reason,
which contravenes the interpretation which I reject; for the error of
forming an image of God did not originate with the philosophers; but
they, by their consent, approved of it as received from others.  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)

<span id="v.vi-p47"></span><span id="v.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p48"></span>**23.** *And changed*, *etc.* Having feigned
such a God as they could comprehend according to their carnal reason,
they were very far from acknowledging the true God: but devised a
fictitious and a new god, or rather a phantom. And what he says is, that
they *changed* the glory of God; for as though one substituted a strange
child, so they departed from the true God. Nor are they to be excused
for this pretense, that they believe that God dwells in heaven, and that
they count not the wood to be God, but his image; for it is a high
indignity to God, to form so gross an idea of his majesty as to dare to
make an image of him. But from the wickedness of such a presumption none
were exempt, neither priests, nor statesmen, nor philosophers, of whom
the most sound-minded, even Plato himself, sought to find out some
likeness of God.

<span id="v.vi-p49"></span>The madness then here noticed, is, that all
attempted to make for themselves an image of God; which was a certain
proof that their notions of God were gross and absurd. And, first, they
befouled the majesty of God by forming him in the likeness of *a
corruptible man*: for I prefer this rendering to that of *mortal man*,
which is adopted by <span id="v.vi-p49.1"></span>Erasmus*;* for Paul
sets not the immortality of God in opposition to the mortality of man,
but that glory, which is subject to no defects, to the most wretched
condition of man. And then, being not satisfied with so great a crime,
they descended even to beasts and to those of the most filthy kind; by
which their stupidity appeared still more evident. You may see an
account of these abominations in *Lactantius*, in <span
id="v.vi-p49.2"></span>Eusebius*,* and in <span
id="v.vi-p49.3"></span>Augustine in his book *on the city of God.*

<span id="v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
1:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)<span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span>**24.** Wherefore God also gave them up to
uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their
own bodies between themselves:

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span>**24.** Propterea tradidit illos Deus in
cupiditates cordium suorum in immunditiem, ut ignominia afficerent
corpora sua in seipsis:

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span>**25.** Who changed the truth of God into a
lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who
is blessed for ever. Amen.

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span>**25.** Qui transmutarunt veritatem ejus in
mendacium et coluerunt ac venerati sunt creaturam supra, Creatorem, qui
est benedictus in secula: Amen.

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span>**26.** For this cause God gave them up unto
vile affections: for even their women did change the natural use into
that which is against nature:

<span id="v.vii-p7"></span>**26.** Propterea, inquam, tradidit illos
Deus in passiones ignominiosas: ac enim feminæ ipsorum transmutarunt
natura- lem usum in eum qui est præter naturam:

<span id="v.vii-p8"></span>**27.** And likewise also the men, leaving
the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another;
men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves
that recompence of their error which was meet.

<span id="v.vii-p9"></span>**27.** Similiter et viri quoque, amisso
naturali usu feminæ, exarserunt mutua libidine, alii in alios; masculi
in masculis fœditatem per petrantes et quam decebat erroris sui mercedem
in seipsis recipientes.

<span id="v.vii-p10"></span>**28.** And even as they did not like to
retain God in *their* knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind,
to do those things which are not convenient;

<span id="v.vii-p11"></span>**28.** Et quemadmodum non probaverunt Deum
habere in notitia, tradidit illos Deus in reprobam mentem, ad facienda
quæ non decerent;

<span id="v.vii-p12"></span>**29.** Being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness;
full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers,

<span id="v.vii-p13"></span>**29.** Ut essent pleni omni injustitia,
nequitia, libidine, avaritia, malitia; referti invidia, homicidio,
contentione, dolo, perversitate; susurrones,

<span id="v.vii-p14"></span>**30.** Backbiters, haters of God,
despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to
parents,

<span id="v.vii-p15"></span>**30.** Obtrectatores, osores Dei, malefici,
contumeliosi, fastuosi, repertores malorum, parentibus immorigeri,

<span id="v.vii-p16"></span>**31.** Without understanding,
covenantbreakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful:

<span id="v.vii-p17"></span>**31.** Intelligentiæ expertes,
insociabiles, affectu humanitatis carentes, fœdifragi, sine misericordiæ
sensu;

<span id="v.vii-p18"></span>**32** Who knowing the judgment of God, that
they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them.

<span id="v.vii-p19"></span>**32.** Qui, quum Dei judicium cognoverint,
quod qui talia agunt, digni sunt morte, non tantum ea faciunt, sed
assentiuntur facientibus.

<span id="v.vii-p20"></span><span id="v.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p21"></span>**24.** *God therefore gave them up,* *etc.*
As impiety is a hidden evil, lest they should still find an evasion, he
shows, by a more palpable demonstration, that, they cannot escape, but
must be held fast by a just condemnation, since such fruits have
followed this impiety as cannot be viewed otherwise than manifest
evidences of the Lord’s wrath. As the Lord’s wrath is always just, it
follows, that what has exposed them to condemnation, must have preceded
it. By these evidences then he now proves the apostasy and defection of
men: for the Lord indeed does so punish those, who alienate themselves
from his goodness, that he casts them headlong into various courses
which lead to perdition and ruin. And by comparing the vices, of which
they were guilty, with the impiety, of which he had before accused them,
he shows that they suffered punishment through the just judgment of God:
for since nothing is dearer to us than our own honor, it is extreme
blindness, when we fear not to bring disgrace on ourselves; and it is
the most suitable punishment for a reproach done to the Divine Majesty.
This is the very thing which he treats of to the end of the chapter; but
he handles it in various ways, for the subject required ample
illustration.

<span id="v.vii-p22"></span>What then, in short, he proves to us is
this, — that the ingratitude of men to God is incapable of being
excused; for it is manifest, by unequivocal evidences, that the wrath of
God rages against them: they would have never rolled themselves in lusts
so filthy, after the manner of beasts, had not the majesty of God been
provoked and incensed against them. Since, then, the worst abominations
abounded everywhere, he concludes that there existed among them
evidences of divine vengeance. Now, as this never rages without reason,
or unjustly, but ever keeps within the limits of what is right, he
intimates that it hence appears that perdition, not less certain than
just, impended over all.

<span id="v.vii-p23"></span>As to the manner in which God gives up or
delivers men to wickedness, it is by no means necessary in this place to
discuss a question so intricate, (<span id="v.vii-p23.1"></span>*longam*
— tedious.) It is indeed certain, that he not only permits men to fall
into sin, by allowing them to do so, and by conniving at them; but that
he also, by his equitable judgment, so arranges things, that they are
led and carried into such madness by their own lusts, as well as by the
devil. He therefore adopts the word, *give up*, according to the
constant usage of Scripture; which word they forcibly wrest, who think
that we are led into sin only by the permission of God: for as Satan is
the minister of God’s wrath, and as it were the executioner, so he is
armed against us, not through the connivance, but by the command of his
judge. God, however, is not on this account cruel, nor are we innocent,
inasmuch as Paul plainly shows, that we are not delivered up into his
power, except when we deserve such a punishment. Only we must make this
exception, that the cause of sin is not from God, the roots of which
ever abide in the sinner himself; for this must be true,

<span id="v.vii-p24"></span>“Thine is perdition, O Israel; in me only is
thy help.”  
(<span id="v.vii-p24.2"></span>[Ho
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009)<span id="v.vii-p24.2"></span>)
 <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)

<span id="v.vii-p29"></span>By connecting the *desires or lusts* of
man’s heart with uncleanness, he indirectly intimates what sort of
progeny our heart generates, when left to itself. The expression, *among
themselves,* is not without its force; for it significantly expresses
how deep and indelible are the marks of infamy imprinted on our bodies.

<span id="v.vii-p30"></span><span id="v.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p31"></span>**25.** *Who changed*, *etc.* He repeats
what he had said before, though in different words, in order to fix it
deeper in our minds. When the truth of God is turned to a lie, his glory
is obliterated. It is then but just, that they should be besprinkled
with every kind of infamy, who strive to take away from God his honor,
and also to reproach his name. —

<span id="v.vii-p32"></span>*And worshipped*, *etc.* That I might
include two words in one, I have given this rendering. He points out
especially the sin of idolatry; for religious honor cannot be given to a
creature, without taking it away, in a disgraceful and sacrilegious
manner, from God: and vain is the excuse that images are worshipped on
God’s account, since God acknowledges no such worship, nor regards it as
acceptable; and the true God is not then worshipped at all, but a
fictitious God, whom the flesh has devised for itself.  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) What is added, *Who is blessed for ever*,
I explain as having been said for the purpose of exposing idolaters to
greater reproach, and in this way, “He is one whom they ought alone to
have honored and worshipped, and from whom it was not right to take away
any thing, no, not even the least.”

<span id="v.vii-p34"></span><span id="v.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p35"></span>**26.** *God therefore gave them up*, *etc.*
After having introduced as it were an intervening clause, he returns to
what he had before stated respecting the judgment of God: and he brings,
as the first example, the dreadful crime of unnatural lust; and it hence
appears that they not only abandoned themselves to beastly lusts, but
became degraded beyond the beasts, since they reversed the whole order
of nature. He then enumerates a long catalogue of vices which had
existed in all ages, and then prevailed everywhere without any
restraint.

<span id="v.vii-p36"></span>It is not to the purpose to say, that every
one was not laden with so great a mass of vices; for in arraigning the
common baseness of men, it is proof enough if all to a man are
constrained to acknowledge some faults. So then we must consider, that
Paul here records those abominations which had been common in all ages,
and were at that time especially prevalent everywhere; for it is
marvelous how common then was that filthiness which even brute beasts
abhor; and some of these vices were even popular. And he recites a
catalogue of vices, in some of which the whole race of man were
involved; for though all were not murderers, or thieves, or adulterers,
yet there were none who were not found polluted by some vice or another.
He calls those *disgraceful passions*, which are shameful even in the
estimation of men, and redound to the dishonoring of God.

<span id="v.vii-p37"></span><span id="v.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p38"></span>**27.** *Such a reward for their error as
was meet.* They indeed deserved to be blinded, so as to forget
themselves, and not to see any thing befitting them, who, through their
own malignity, closed their eyes against the light offered them by God,
that they might not behold his glory: in short, they who were not
ashamed to extinguish, as much as they could, the glory of God, which
alone gives us light, deserved to become blind at noonday.

<span id="v.vii-p39"></span><span id="v.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p40"></span>**28.** *And as they chose not,* *etc.*
There is an evident comparison to be observed in these words, by which
is strikingly set forth the just relation between sin and punishment. As
they chose not to continue in the knowledge of God, which alone guides
our minds to true wisdom, the Lord gave them a perverted mind, which can
choose nothing that is right.  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) And
by saying, that they chose not, (<span id="v.vii-p42.4"></span>non
probasse - approved not,) it is the same as though he had said, that
they pursued not after the knowledge of God with the attention they
ought to have done, but, on the contrary, turned away their thoughts
resignedly from God. He then intimates, that they, making a depraved
choice, preferred their own vanities to the true God; and thus the
error, by which they were deceived, was voluntary.

<span id="v.vii-p43"></span>*To do those things which were not meet* As
he had hitherto referred only to one instance of abomination, which
prevailed indeed among many, but was not common to all, he begins here
to enumerate vices from which none could be found free: for though every
vice, as it has been said, did not appear in each individual, yet all
were guilty of some vices, so that every one might separately be accused
of manifest depravity. As he calls them in the first instance *not
meet*, understand him as saying, that they were inconsistent with every
decision of reason, and alien to the duties of men: for he mentions it
as an evidence of a perverted mind, that men addicted themselves,
without any reflection, to those vices, which common sense ought to have
led them to renounce.

<span id="v.vii-p44"></span>But it is labor in vain so to connect these
vices, as to make them dependent one on another, since this was not
Paul’s design; but he set them down as they occurred to his mind. What
each of them signifies, we shall very briefly explain.

<span id="v.vii-p45"></span><span id="v.vii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p46"></span>**29.** Understand by *unrighteousness,* the
violation of justice among men, by not rendering to each his due. I have
rendered <span id="v.vii-p46.1"></span>πονηρίαν, according to the
opinion of Ammonium, *wickedness;* for he teaches us that <span
id="v.vii-p46.2"></span>πονηρον, the wicked, is <span
id="v.vii-p46.3"></span>δραστίκον κακου, the doer of evil. The word
(<span id="v.vii-p46.4"></span>*nequitia*) then means practiced
wickedness, or licentiousness in doing mischief: but maliciousness
(<span id="v.vii-p46.5"></span>*malitia*) is that depravity and
obliquity of mind which leads us to do harm to our neighbour.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) For the word <span
id="v.vii-p47.3"></span>πορνείαν, which Paul uses, I have put lust,
(<span id="v.vii-p47.4"></span>*libidinem*.) I do not, however, object,
if one prefers to render it fornication; but he means the inward passion
as well as the outward act.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) The
words *avarice*, *envy*, and *murder*, have nothing doubtful in their
meaning. Under the word *strife*, (<span
id="v.vii-p48.3"></span>*contentione*,)  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) he includes quarrels, fightings, and
seditions. We have rendered <span id="v.vii-p49.3"></span>κακοηθείαν,
*perversity*, (<span id="v.vii-p49.4"></span>*perversitatem*;)  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) which is a notorious and uncommon
wickedness; that is, when a man, covered over, as it were, with
hardness, has become hardened in a corrupt course of life by custom and
evil habit.

<span id="v.vii-p51"></span><span id="v.vii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p52"></span>**30.** The word <span
id="v.vii-p52.1"></span>θεοστυγεῖς, means, no doubt, *haters of God*;
for there is no reason to take it in a passive sense, (hated of God,)
since Paul here proves men to be guilty by manifest vices. Those, then,
are designated, who hate God, whose justice they seem to resist by doing
wrong. *Whisperers* (<span id="v.vii-p52.2"></span>*susurrones*) and
*slanderers* (<span id="v.vii-p52.3"></span>*obtrectatores*)  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) are to be thus distinguished; the former,
by secret accusations, break off the friendships of good men, inflame
their minds with anger, defame the innocent, and sow discords; and the
latter through an innate malignity, spare the reputation of no one, and,
as though they were instigated by the fury of evilspeaking, they revile
the deserving as well as the undeserving We have translated <span
id="v.vii-p53.2"></span>ὑβριστὰς, *villanous*, (<span
id="v.vii-p53.3"></span>*maleficos*;) for the Latin authors are wont to
call notable injuries villanies, such as plunders, thefts, burnings, and
sorceries; and these where the vices which Paul meant to point out here.
 <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) I have rendered the word <span
id="v.vii-p54.2"></span>ὑπερήφανους, used by Paul, *insolent*, (<span
id="v.vii-p54.3"></span>*contumeliosos;*) for this is the meaning of the
Greek word: and the reason for the word is this, — because such being
raised, as it were, on high, look down on those who are, as it were,
below them with contempt, and they cannot bear to look on their equals.
*Haughty* are they who swell with the empty wind of overweeningness.
*Unsociable*  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) are those who, by
their iniquities, unloose the bands of society, or those in whom there
is no sincerity or constancy of faith, who may be called truce-breakers.

<span id="v.vii-p58"></span><span id="v.vii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p59"></span>**31.** *Without the feelings of humanity*
are they who have put off the first affections of nature towards their
own relations. As he mentions the want of *mercy* as an evidence of
human nature being depraved, <span id="v.vii-p59.1"></span>Augustine, in
arguing against the Stoics, concludes, that mercy is a Christian virtue.

<span id="v.vii-p60"></span><span id="v.vii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p61"></span>**32.** *Who, knowing the judgement*  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) *of God*, *etc.* Though this passage is
variously explained, yet the following appears to me the correctest
interpretation, — that men left nothing undone for the purpose of giving
unbridled liberty to their sinful propensities; for having taken away
all distinction between good and evil, they approved in themselves and
in others those things which they knew displeased God, and would be
condemned by his righteous judgment. For it is the summit of all evils,
when the sinner is so void of shame, that he is pleased with his own
vices, and will not bear them to be reproved, and also cherishes them in
others by his consent and approbation. This desperate wickedness is thus
described in Scripture:

<span id="v.vii-p63"></span>“They boast when they do evil,” (<span
id="v.vii-p63.1"></span>[Pr 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#014)<span
id="v.vii-p63.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.vii-p64"></span>“She has spread out her feet,  
and gloried in her wickedness,” (<span id="v.vii-p64.2"></span>[Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025)<span id="v.vii-p64.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.vii-p65"></span>For he who is ashamed is as yet healable;
but when such an impudence is contracted through a sinful habit, that
vices, and not virtues, please us, and are approved, there is no more
any hope of reformation. Such, then, is the interpretation I give; for I
see that the Apostle meant here to condemn something more grievous and
more wicked than the very doing of vices: what that is I know not,
except we refer to that which is the summit of all wickedness, — that
is, when wretched men, having cast away all shame, undertake the
patronage of vices in opposition to the righteousness of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc38004.htm#fr_10) <span
id="v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span> “The inscription of the Pauline Epistles,”
says <span id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>Turrettin, “is according to the manner
of the ancients, both Greeks and Romans. They were wont to prefix their
name; and to those to whom they wrote they added their good wishes.” We
have an example in <span id="v.ii-p3.2"></span>[Ac
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#026)<span id="v.ii-p3.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc38004.htm#fr_11) <span
id="v.ii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span> Thereby expressing the meaning of Paulus,
which in Latin is little. “Paul,” says the quaint <span
id="v.ii-p5.1"></span>Elnathan Parr, “as signifies little, and indeed
not unfitly, for he is reported to have been low in stature, and to have
had a very small voice,” which is thought to have been objected to him
in <span id="v.ii-p5.2"></span>[2Co
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010)<span id="v.ii-p5.2"></span> —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc38004.htm#fr_12) <span
id="v.ii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span> Most writers agree in this view, regarding
*Saul* as his Hebrew name and *Paul* as his Roman name. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc38004.htm#fr_13) <span
id="v.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span> “A called Apostle — <span
id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>vocatus apostolus — κλητὸς απόστολος;” our version
is, “called *to be* an Apostle”. Most consider “called” here in the
sense of chosen or elected, “a chosen Apostle.” Professor <span
id="v.ii-p8.2"></span>Stuart observes, that κλητὸς in the writings of
Paul has always the meaning of efficient calling, and signifies not only
the invited, but the effectually invited. He refers to <span
id="v.ii-p8.3"></span>[1 Cor. 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024), [Rom.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007), [Rom.
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="v.ii-p8.3"></span>;
compared with <span id="v.ii-p8.4"></span>[Gal.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015), [Jude
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001), [Heb.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001), [Rom.
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029), [Eph.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)<span id="v.ii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span>He was an Apostle by a call, or as <span
id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>Beza renders it, “by the call *of God* — <span
id="v.ii-p9.2"></span>ex *Dei* vocatione apostolus.” The meaning is the
same as what he himself expresses it in <span id="v.ii-p9.3"></span>[Ga
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)<span id="v.ii-p9.3"></span>. <span
id="v.ii-p9.4"></span>Turrettin renders it, “<span
id="v.ii-p9.5"></span>Apostolus vocatione divina — an Apostle by divine
vocation.”

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span>The difference between “a called Apostle” and
“called to be an Apostle,” is this, that the first conveys the idea that
he obeyed the call, and the other does not. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc38004.htm#fr_14) <span
id="v.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span> Αφωρισμένος separated, set apart; “<span
id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>segregatus,” *Vulgate*; “<span
id="v.ii-p11.2"></span>separatus, <span id="v.ii-p11.3"></span>Beza.
“The Pharisees,” says <span id="v.ii-p11.4"></span>Leigh, “were termed
ἀφωρισμένος we may English them *Separatists:* they separated themselves
to the study of the law, in which respect they might be called
ἀφωρισμένος εἰς τὸν νόμον, separated to the law. In allusion to this,
saith <span id="v.ii-p11.5"></span>Drusius, the Apostle is thought to
have styled himself, <span id="v.ii-p11.6"></span>[Ro
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span id="v.ii-p11.6"></span>,
ἀφωρισμένον εἰς ἐυαγγέλιον, separated unto the Gospel, when he was
called from being a Pharisee to be a preacher of the Gospel.”
*Separated* is the word adopted both by <span
id="v.ii-p11.7"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="v.ii-p11.8"></span>Macknight, as well as by our own version. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc38004.htm#fr_15) <span
id="v.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span> Some combine the four separations. “Set
apart in the eternal counsel of God, and from his mother’s womb, <span
id="v.ii-p13.1"></span>[Ga 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)<span
id="v.ii-p13.1"></span>, and by the special commandment of the Holy
Ghost, <span id="v.ii-p13.2"></span>[Ac
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)<span id="v.ii-p13.2"></span>,
confirmed by constitution of the Church, <span
id="v.ii-p13.3"></span>[Ac 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)<span
id="v.ii-p13.3"></span>; <span id="v.ii-p13.4"></span>[Ga
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="v.ii-p13.4"></span>.” —
*Parr*. But the object here seems to have been that stated by <span
id="v.ii-p13.5"></span>Calvin: nor is it just or prudent to connect any
other idea with the word except that which the context requires; for to
do so only tends to create confusion. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc38004.htm#fr_16) <span
id="v.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span> Moses, Joshua, David, Nehemiah, etc., where,
in a similar sense, called servants; and also our Savior. They were
officially servants. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc38004.htm#fr_17) <span
id="v.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p20"></span> The verb is προεπηγγείλατο only here; it
comes from επαγγέλλομαι, which <span id="v.ii-p20.1"></span>Schleusner
says, means in the middle voice, to promise. “Which he had before
promised.” is then the proper rendering, and not “Which he formerly
published,” as proposed by Professor <span
id="v.ii-p20.2"></span>Stuart. Both <span
id="v.ii-p20.3"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="v.ii-p20.4"></span>Macknight have retained our version, with which
that of <span id="v.ii-p20.5"></span>Beza agrees. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc38004.htm#fr_18) <span
id="v.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p27"></span> “Declaratus,” ὁρισθέντος. Some of the
ancients, such as <span id="v.ii-p27.1"></span>Origen, <span
id="v.ii-p27.2"></span>Chrysostom, <span id="v.ii-p27.3"></span>Cyril,
and others, have given to this verb the meaning of is “proved —
δειχθέντος;” demonstrated — ἀποφανθέντος;” “exhibited —
ἀποδειχθώντος;”etc. But it is said that the word has not this meaning in
the New Testament, and that it means, limited, determined, decreed,
constituted. Besides here, it is found only in <span
id="v.ii-p27.4"></span>[Lu 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#022)<span
id="v.ii-p27.4"></span>; <span id="v.ii-p27.5"></span>[Ac
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023)<span id="v.ii-p27.5"></span>;
<span id="v.ii-p27.6"></span>[Ac
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042)<span id="v.ii-p27.6"></span>;
<span id="v.ii-p27.7"></span>[Ac
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029)<span id="v.ii-p27.7"></span>;
<span id="v.ii-p27.8"></span>[Ac
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026)<span id="v.ii-p27.8"></span>;
<span id="v.ii-p27.9"></span>[Heb
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#007)<span id="v.ii-p27.9"></span>. The
word, *determined*, or *constituted*, if adopted here, would amount to
the same thing, that is, that Christ was visibly determined or
constituted the Son of God through the resurrection, or by that event.
It was that which fixed, settled, determined, and manifestly exhibited
him as the Son of God, clothed and adorned with his own power. Professor
<span id="v.ii-p27.10"></span>Stuart has conjured a number of
difficulties in connection with this verse, for which there seems to be
no solid reason. The phrase, *the Son of God*, is so well known from the
usage of Scripture, that there is no difficulty connected with it: the
full phrase is the *only-begotten Son*. To say that Christ’s
resurrection was no evidence of his divine nature, as Lazarus and others
had been raised from the dead, appears indeed very strange. Did Lazarus
rise through his own power? Did Lazarus rise again for our
justification? Was his resurrection an attestation of any thing he had
previously declared? The Revelation A. <span
id="v.ii-p27.11"></span>Barnes very justly says, that the
*circumstances* connected with Christ were those which rendered his
resurrection a proof of his divinity.

<span id="v.ii-p28"></span>Professor <span id="v.ii-p28.1"></span>Hodge
gives what he conceives to be the import of the two verses in these
words, “Jesus Christ was, as to his human nature, the Son of David; but
he was clearly demonstrated to be, as to his divine nature, the Son of
God, by the resurrection from the dead.” This view is taken by many,
such as <span id="v.ii-p28.2"></span>Pareus, <span
id="v.ii-p28.3"></span>Beza, <span id="v.ii-p28.4"></span>Turrettin,
etc. But the words, “according to the Spirit of Holiness” — κατὰ πνεῦμα
ἁγιωσύνης, are taken differently by others, as meaning the Holy Spirit.
As the phrase is nowhere else found, it may be taken in either sense.
That the divine nature of Christ is called Spirit, is evident. See <span
id="v.ii-p28.5"></span>[1Co 15:45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045)<span
id="v.ii-p28.5"></span>; <span id="v.ii-p28.6"></span>[2Co
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span id="v.ii-p28.6"></span>;
<span id="v.ii-p28.7"></span>[Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)<span id="v.ii-p28.7"></span>,
<span id="v.ii-p28.8"></span>[1Pe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018)<span id="v.ii-p28.8"></span>
<span id="v.ii-p28.9"></span>Doddridge, <span
id="v.ii-p28.10"></span>Scott, and <span
id="v.ii-p28.11"></span>Chalmers, consider The Holy Spirit to be
intended. The last gives this paraphrase: — “*Declared*, or
determinately marked out to be the Son of God and with power. The thing
was demonstrated by an evidence, the exhibition of which required a
putting forth of power, which Paul in another place represents as a very
great and strenuous exertion, ‘According to the working of his mighty
power when he raised him from the dead.’ — *The Spirit of Holiness*, or
the Holy Spirit. It was through the operation of the Holy Spirit that
the divine nature was infused into the human at the birth of Jesus
Christ; and the very same agent, it is remarkable, was employed in the
work of the resurrection. ‘Put to death in the flesh,’ says Peter, and
‘quickened by the Spirit.’ We have only to do with the facts of the
case. He was demonstrated to be the Son of God by the power of the Holy
Spirit having been put forth in raising him from the dead.” As to the
genitive case after “resurrection,” see a similar instance in <span
id="v.ii-p28.12"></span>[Ac 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#032)<span
id="v.ii-p28.12"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p29"></span>The idea deduced by <span
id="v.ii-p29.1"></span>Calvin, that he is called here “the Spirit of
Holiness,” on account of the holiness he works in us, seems not
well-founded, though advanced by <span id="v.ii-p29.2"></span>Theodoret
and <span id="v.ii-p29.3"></span>Augustine. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc38004.htm#fr_19) <span
id="v.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p36"></span> “Hypellage,” a figure in grammar, by which a
noun or an adjective is put in a form or in a case different from that
in which it ought grammatically to be. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc38004.htm#fr_20) <span
id="v.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p37"></span> If this view be taken, the best mode would
be to render και, *even* “favor, even the apostleship.” But, as <span
id="v.ii-p37.1"></span>Wolfius says, “both words would perhaps be better
rendered separately, and “grace” or favor be referred to the conversion
of the Apostle himself, and “apostleship” to his office. See <span
id="v.ii-p37.2"></span>[1Ti
1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012)<span id="v.ii-p37.2"></span>,
and <span id="v.ii-p37.3"></span>[Ac
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span id="v.ii-p37.3"></span>,
<span id="v.ii-p37.4"></span>[Ac
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)<span id="v.ii-p37.4"></span>;
<span id="v.ii-p37.5"></span>[Ac
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021)<span id="v.ii-p37.5"></span>. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc38004.htm#fr_21) <span
id="v.ii-p38.5"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p39"></span> He has taken this clause before that which
follows, contrary to the order of the text, because he viewed it as
connected with the receiving of the apostleship.

<span id="v.ii-p40"></span>“<span id="v.ii-p40.1"></span>*Pro nomine
ipsius*,” — ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνὸματος αὐτοῦ; “<span id="v.ii-p40.2"></span>ad
nominis ejus gloriam — to the glory of his name,” <span
id="v.ii-p40.3"></span>Turrettin; “for the purpose of magnifying his
name,” <span id="v.ii-p40.4"></span>Chalmers <span
id="v.ii-p40.5"></span>Hodge observes, “Paul was an apostle that all
nations might be obedient, to the honor of Jesus Christ, that is, so
that his name may be known.” Some, as <span
id="v.ii-p40.6"></span>Tholuck, connect the words with “obedience to the
faith,” as they render the phrase, and, in this sense, “that obedience
might be rendered to the faith among all nations for the sake of his
name.” But it is better to connect the words with the receiving of the
apostleship: it was received for two purposes — that there might be the
obedience of faith, and that the name of Christ might be magnified. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc38004.htm#fr_22) <span
id="v.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p43"></span> It might be rendered, “that there might be
the obedience of faith,” or, “in order to produce,” or, “Promote the
obedience of faith.” The obedience is faith. The command is, “believe,”
and the obedience must correspond with it. To obey the faith, as in
<span id="v.ii-p43.1"></span>[Ac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007)<span id="v.ii-p43.1"></span>, is a
different form of expression: the article is prefixed there, it is *the*
faith, meaning the gospel. — See <span id="v.ii-p43.2"></span>[2Th
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008)<span id="v.ii-p43.2"></span>.
Professor <span id="v.ii-p43.3"></span>Stuart and <span
id="v.ii-p43.4"></span>Haldane, agree in this view. The latter refers to
<span id="v.ii-p43.5"></span>[Ro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="v.ii-p43.5"></span>,
where the Israelites are charged for not *submitting* to God’s
righteousness; and, in <span id="v.ii-p43.6"></span>[Ro
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016)<span id="v.ii-p43.6"></span>, it
is said, that they had not all *obeyed* the gospel, “for Esaias saith,
Lord, who hath *believed* our report?” Then to believe the gospel is in
an especial manner to obey it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc38004.htm#fr_23) <span
id="v.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p46"></span> “The called of Jesus Christ,” i.e., the
called who belong to Christ. Κλητὸς means, not only those to whom the
*external* call of the gospel has been addressed, but those who have
been also *internally* called.” — <span id="v.ii-p46.1"></span>Stuart.
The same author renders the words κλητοῖς ἁγίοις, in the next verse,
“chosen saints,” or, “saints effectually called.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc38004.htm#fr_24) <span
id="v.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p51"></span> “The ancient Greeks and Romans,” says <span
id="v.ii-p51.1"></span>Turrettin, “wished to those to whom they wrote,
in the inscription of their epistles, health, joy, happiness; but Paul
prays for far higher blessings even the *favor* of God, the fountain of
all good things, and *peace*, in which the Hebrews included all
blessings.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc38004.htm#fr_25) <span
id="v.ii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p52"></span> “*From God our Father,* — if God, then able;
if our Father, then willing to enrich us with his gifts: *and from our
Lord Jesus Christ,* — from our Lord, who has purchased them for us; from
Jesus, for without these we cannot be saved; from Christ, for he is
anointed with grace and peace, <span id="v.ii-p52.1"></span>[Joh
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span id="v.ii-p52.1"></span>.” —
<span id="v.ii-p52.2"></span>Parr

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc38004.htm#fr_26) <span
id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span> Margin, “in all my prayers.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc38004.htm#fr_27) <span
id="v.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p15"></span> “It does not mean here the first in point
of importance, but first in the order of time.” — <span
id="v.iii-p15.1"></span>Stuart. The same author thinks that men here has
its corresponding δε in <span id="v.iii-p15.2"></span>[Ro
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)<span id="v.iii-p15.2"></span>, Οὐ
θέλω δέ ὑμᾶς, etc., — *Ed*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc38004.htm#fr_28) <span
id="v.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p17"></span> “*Faith* is put here for the whole
religion, and means the same as your piety. Faith is one of the
principal things of religion, one of its first requirements, and hence
it signifies religion itself.” — <span id="v.iii-p17.1"></span>Barnes.
It is indeed the principal thing, the very basis of religion. <span
id="v.iii-p17.2"></span>[Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span
id="v.iii-p17.2"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc38004.htm#fr_29) <span
id="v.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p25"></span> The passage in <span
id="v.iii-p25.1"></span>[Mt
5:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033)<span id="v.iii-p25.1"></span>,
has been often wholly misunderstood. That oaths in common conversation
are alone prohibited, is quite evident from what the passage itself
contains. In solemn oaths there was no swearing by “heaven,” or by
“God’s throne,” or by “the earth,” or by “Jerusalem,” or by “the head.”
such forms were only used in conversation, as similar ones are still
used: and these kinds of swearing are alone condemned by our Savior. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc38004.htm#fr_30) <span
id="v.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p27.1"></span>*Sincerè et
verè* — sincerely and truly,” <span id="v.iii-p27.2"></span>Wolfius,
“not merely externally, but cordially,” <span
id="v.iii-p27.3"></span>Hodge.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc38004.htm#fr_31) <span
id="v.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p31"></span> ἐν τῶ εὐαγγελίω τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ “by the
preaching of the gospel, etc.” <span id="v.iii-p31.1"></span>Stuart.
“<span id="v.iii-p31.2"></span>In predicando evangelio — in preaching
the gospel,” <span id="v.iii-p31.3"></span>Beza. “I serve God, not in
teaching legal rites, but a much more celestial doctrine,” <span
id="v.iii-p31.4"></span>Grotius

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc38004.htm#fr_32) <span
id="v.iii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p35"></span> The order of the words, as arranged by
<span id="v.iii-p35.1"></span>Calvin, is better than that of our
version; he connects “always in my prayers,” or, “in all my prayers,”
with “requesting.” The simpler rendering would be as follows: —

<span id="v.iii-p36"></span>9. My witness indeed is God, whom I serve
with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, that I unceasingly make mention
of you, always requesting in my prayers,

<span id="v.iii-p37"></span>10. That by some means now at length I may,
through the will of God, have a free course to come to you.

<span id="v.iii-p38"></span>“In the gospel,” may either mean “according
to the gospel,” or, “in preaching the gospel.” <span
id="v.iii-p38.1"></span>Hodge prefers the first. The particle ει clearly
means “that” in this connection. That it is used in this sense in the
New Testament there can be no doubt; see <span
id="v.iii-p38.2"></span>[Acts 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#008),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023)<span id="v.iii-p38.2"></span>;
<span id="v.iii-p38.3"></span>[Heb
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#015)<span id="v.iii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc38004.htm#fr_33) <span
id="v.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p43"></span> The words, τι χάρισμα πνευματικὸν, some
spiritual gift, or benefit, seem to be of general import. Some, such as
<span id="v.iii-p43.1"></span>Chalmers and <span
id="v.iii-p43.2"></span>Haldane, have supposed that a miraculous power
is intended, which the Apostles alone conveyed, such as the power of
speaking with tongues: but most Commentators agree in the view here
given. The phrase is not found in any other place: χάρισμα, in the
plural number, is used to designate miraculous powers. <span
id="v.iii-p43.3"></span>[1Co 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009)<span
id="v.iii-p43.3"></span>; and τὰ πνευματικά mean the same, <span
id="v.iii-p43.4"></span>[1Co 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)<span
id="v.iii-p43.4"></span>. But here, no doubt, the expression includes
any gift or benefit, whether miraculous or ordinary, which the Apostle
might have been made the means of conveying. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc38004.htm#fr_34) <span
id="v.iii-p47.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p48"></span> The verb is συμπαρακληθὢναι, which <span
id="v.iii-p48.1"></span>Grotius connects with επιποθῶ in the preceding
verse; and adds, “He softens what he had said, by showing, that he would
not only bring some joy to them, but they also to him.” “<span
id="v.iii-p48.2"></span>Ut percipiam consolationem — that I may receive
consolation,” <span id="v.iii-p48.3"></span>Piscator*;* — “<span
id="v.iii-p48.4"></span>Ut unà recreemur — that we may be together
refreshed,” <span id="v.iii-p48.5"></span>Castelio. “<span
id="v.iii-p48.6"></span>Ad communem exhortationem percipiendam — in
order to receive common exhortation,” <span
id="v.iii-p48.7"></span>Beza; “<span id="v.iii-p48.8"></span>Ut gaudium
et voluptatem ex vobis precipiam — that I may receive joy and pleasure
from you;” <span id="v.iii-p48.9"></span>vel, “<span
id="v.iii-p48.10"></span>Ut mutuo solatio invicem nos erigamus atque
firmemus — that by mutual comfort we may console and strengthen one
another,” <span id="v.iii-p48.11"></span>Schleusner

<span id="v.iii-p49"></span>The verb with the prefix, συμ, is only found
here; but the verb παρακαλέω frequently occurs, and its common meaning
is, to beseech, to exhort to encourage, and by these means to comfort.

<span id="v.iii-p50"></span>With regard to this passage, Professor <span
id="v.iii-p50.1"></span>Stuart says, “I have rendered the word,
*comfort*, only because I cannot find any English word which will convey
the full sense of the original.”

<span id="v.iii-p51"></span>“The word rendered *to comfort*,” says
Professor <span id="v.iii-p51.1"></span>Hodge, “means *to invite*, *to
exhort*, *to instruct*, *to console*, etc. Which of these senses is to
be preferred here, it is not easy to decide. Most probably the Apostle
intended to use the word in a wide sense, as expressing the idea, that
he might be excited, encouraged, and comforted by his intercourse with
his Christian brethren.” — The two verses may be thus rendered: —

<span id="v.iii-p52"></span>**11.** For I desire much to see you, that I
may impart to you spiritual

<span id="v.iii-p53"></span>**12.** benefit, so that you may be
strengthened: this also is what *I desire*, to be encouraged together
with you, through the faith which is in both, even in you and in me.

<span id="v.iii-p54"></span><span id="v.iii-p54.1"></span>Grotius
observes, “ἐν ἀλλήλοις <span id="v.iii-p54.2"></span>impropriè dixit pro
*in utrisque*, in me et vobis. Dixit sic et Demosthenes, τα πρὸς
ἀλλήλοις — *Ed*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc38004.htm#fr_35) <span
id="v.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p17"></span> <span id="v.iv-p17.1"></span>Chalmers
paraphrases the text thus — “I am bound, or I am under obligation, laid
upon me by the duties of my office, to preach both to Greeks and
Barbarians, both to the wise and the unwise.”

<span id="v.iv-p18"></span>In modern phraseology, the words may be
rendered, “Both to the civilized and to the uncivilized, both to the
learned and to the unlearned, am I a debtor.” The two last terms are not
exactly parallel to the two first, as many unlearned were among the
Greeks, or the civilized, as well as among the Barbarians. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc38004.htm#fr_36) <span
id="v.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p22"></span> τὸ κατ ἐμὲ πρόθυμον, literally, “As to me
*there* is readiness;” or, according to <span
id="v.iv-p22.1"></span>Stuart “*There* is a readiness so far as it
respects me.” But, “I am ready,” or “I am prepared,” conveys the meaning
sufficiently, without the other words, “As much as in me is.” By saying
that *he* was prepared, he intimates that the event depended on another,
even on God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc38004.htm#fr_37) <span
id="v.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p10"></span> On *the power of God*, <span
id="v.v-p10.1"></span>Pareus observes, that the abstract, after the
Hebrew manner, is put for the concrete. *Power* means the instrument of
God’s power; that is, the gospel is an instrument rendered efficacious
by divine power to convey salvation to believers: or, as <span
id="v.v-p10.2"></span>Stuart says, “It is powerful through the energy
which he imparts, and so it is called his power.” <span
id="v.v-p10.3"></span>Chalmers gives this paraphrase, “It is that, which
however judged and despised as a weak instrument by the men of this
world — it is that, to which he, by his own power, gives effect for the
recovery of that life which all men had forfeited and lost by sin.”

<span id="v.v-p11"></span>“The gospel is a *divine act*, which continues
to operate through all ages of the world, and that not in the first
place outwardly, but inwardly, in the depths of the soul, and for
eternal purposes.” — <span id="v.v-p11.1"></span>Dr. Olshausen

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc38004.htm#fr_38) <span
id="v.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p15"></span> “The causative, γὰρ, indicates a connection
with the preceding, that the gospel is the power of God: the reason is,
because by the gospel is revealed the righteousness of God, that is,
made known by it is a way of righteousness and of obtaining life before
God, which neither the law, nor philosophy, nor any other doctrine, was
able to show.” — <span id="v.v-p15.1"></span>Pareus

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc38004.htm#fr_39) <span
id="v.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p17"></span> “The righteousness of God,” δικαιοσύνη θεοῦ,
has been the occasion of much toil to critics, but without reason: the
very context is sufficient to show its meaning, it being what the gospel
reveals, and what the gospel reveals is abundantly known from other
passages. Whether we saw, it is the righteousness which is approved of
God, as <span id="v.v-p17.1"></span>Calvin says, or provided by God, or
contrived by God, or imputed by God, the meaning does not materially
differ, and indeed all these things, as it is evident from Scripture,
are true respecting it.

<span id="v.v-p18"></span>There is more difficulty connected with the
following words, ἐκ πίστεως εἰς πίστιν. The view which <span
id="v.v-p18.1"></span>Calvin gives was adopted by some of the Fathers,
such as <span id="v.v-p18.2"></span>Theophylact and <span
id="v.v-p18.3"></span>Clemens Alexandrinus; and it is that of <span
id="v.v-p18.4"></span>Melancthon, <span id="v.v-p18.5"></span>Beza,
<span id="v.v-p18.6"></span>Scaliger, <span id="v.v-p18.7"></span>Locke,
and many others. From <span id="v.v-p18.8"></span>Poole we find that
<span id="v.v-p18.9"></span>Chrysostom gave this exposition, “From the
obscure and inchoate faith of the Old Testament to the clear and full
faith of the New;” and that <span id="v.v-p18.10"></span>Ambrose*’s*
exposition was the following, “From the faith or fidelity of God who
promises to the faith of him who believes.” But in all these views there
is not that which comports with the context, nor the construction very
intelligible-”revealed from faith,” What can it mean? To render the
passage intelligibly, ἐκ πίστεως must be connected with δικαιοσύνη θεοῦ,
as suggested by <span id="v.v-p18.11"></span>Hammond, and followed by
<span id="v.v-p18.12"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="v.v-p18.13"></span>Macknight. Then it would be, “The righteousness
of God by faith or, *which is* by faith:” this is revealed in the gospel
“to faith,” that is, in order that it may be believed; which is often
the force of εἰς before a noun; as, εἰς τὴν ἀνομίαν — in order to do
wickedness; or, εἰς ἁγιασμόν in order to practice holiness, <span
id="v.v-p18.14"></span>[Ro 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)<span
id="v.v-p18.14"></span> <span id="v.v-p18.15"></span>Chalmers, <span
id="v.v-p18.16"></span>Stuart, <span id="v.v-p18.17"></span>Barnes, and
<span id="v.v-p18.18"></span>Haldane take this view. The verse may be
thus rendered, —

<span id="v.v-p19"></span>For the righteousness of God by faith is in it
revealed in order to be believed, as it is written, “The just shall by
faith live.” The same truth is conveyed in <span
id="v.v-p19.1"></span>[Ro 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)<span
id="v.v-p19.1"></span>; and similar phraseology is found in <span
id="v.v-p19.2"></span>[Php 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009)<span
id="v.v-p19.2"></span>.

<span id="v.v-p20"></span><span id="v.v-p20.1"></span>Barnes seems fully
to express the import of the passage in these words, “God’s plan of
justifying men is revealed in the gospel, which plan is by faith, and
the benefits of which plan shall be extended to all that have faith or
that believe.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc38004.htm#fr_40) <span
id="v.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.v-p24"></span> Here is an instance in which Paul quotes the
Old Testament, \[<span id="v.v-p24.1"></span>[Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="v.v-p24.1"></span>\]
neither exactly from the Hebrew nor the Septuagint. The Hebrew is “the
just, — by his faith shall he live,” <span id="v.v-p24.2"></span>וצדיק
באמונתו היה: and the Septuagint, turns “his” into “my,” ὁ δὲ δίκαιος ἐκ
πίστεως μοῦ ζήσεται — “The just shall by my faith live,” — “by my
faith,” that is, according to the tenor of the passage, “by faith in
me.” The passage is quoted by him twice besides, in <span
id="v.v-p24.3"></span>[Ga 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011)<span
id="v.v-p24.3"></span>, and in <span id="v.v-p24.4"></span>[Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)<span id="v.v-p24.4"></span>, but
exactly in the same words, without the pronoun “his” or “my.” His object
in this, as in some similar instances, was to state the general truth
contained in the passage, and not to give a strictly verbal quotation. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc38004.htm#fr_41) <span
id="v.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p16"></span> The connection here is not deemed very
clear. <span id="v.vi-p16.1"></span>Stuart thinks that this verse is
connected, as the former one, with <span id="v.vi-p16.2"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="v.vi-p16.2"></span>. and
that it includes a reason why the Apostle was not ashamed of the gospel:
and <span id="v.vi-p16.3"></span>Macknight seems to have been of the
same opinion, for he renders γαρ, *besides.* In this case the revelation
of wrath from heaven is that which is made by the gospel. This certainly
gives a meaning to the words, “from heaven” which is hardly done by any
other views. That the gospel reveals “wrath,” as well as righteousness
to be obtained by faith, is what is undeniable. Salvation to the
believer, and condemnation to the unbeliever, is its sum and substance.
The objection made by <span id="v.vi-p16.4"></span>Haldane is of no
force, — that the Apostle subsequently shows the sins of mankind as
committed against the light of nature, and not against the gospel; for
he seems to have brought forward the evidence from the light of nature,
in order to confirm the evidence from the light of revelation. The
expression is, “Revealed *is* the wrath of God,” and not *has been*. See
<span id="v.vi-p16.5"></span>[Acts
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span id="v.vi-p16.5"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p17"></span>This is the view taken by <span
id="v.vi-p17.1"></span>Turrettin; and <span
id="v.vi-p17.2"></span>Pareus says, “There is nothing to prevent us from
referring the revelation of wrath, as well as the revelation of
righteousness, to the gospel” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc38004.htm#fr_42) <span
id="v.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p20"></span> It is true that the immediate subject is the
neglect of religion; but then injustice towards men is afterwards
introduced, and most critics take it in this sense. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc38004.htm#fr_43) <span
id="v.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p22"></span> This clause, τῶν τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἐν ἀδικία
κατεχόντων is differently rendered, “<span
id="v.vi-p22.1"></span>Veritatem injuste detinentes — unjustly detaining
the truth,” <span id="v.vi-p22.2"></span>Turrettin*;* “Who stifle the
truth in unrighteousness,” <span id="v.vi-p22.3"></span>Chalmers*;* “Who
hinder the truth by unrighteousness,” <span
id="v.vi-p22.4"></span>Stuart; “Who wickedly oppose the truth,” <span
id="v.vi-p22.5"></span>Hodge*;* “Who confine the truth by
unrighteousness,” <span id="v.vi-p22.6"></span>Macknight

<span id="v.vi-p23"></span>“They rushed headlong,” says <span
id="v.vi-p23.1"></span>Pareus, “into impiety against God and into
injustice against one another, not through ignorance, but knowingly, not
through weakness, but willfully and maliciously: and this the Apostle
expresses by a striking metaphor, taken from tyrants, who, against right
and justice, by open violence, oppress the innocent, bind them in
chains, and detain them in prison.”

<span id="v.vi-p24"></span>The sense given by <span
id="v.vi-p24.1"></span>Schleusner and some others, “<span
id="v.vi-p24.2"></span>Qui cum veri Dei cognitione pravitatem vitæ
conjungunt — who connect with a knowledge of the true God a wicked
life,” seems not to comport with the context.

<span id="v.vi-p25"></span>“The truth” means that respecting the being
and power of God afterwards specified. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc38004.htm#fr_44) <span
id="v.vi-p27.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p28"></span> Some take ἐν αὐτοῖς, to mean *among them*,
i.e., as <span id="v.vi-p28.1"></span>Stuart says, “in the midst of
them, or before their eyes,” that is, in the visible world; though many
refer it with <span id="v.vi-p28.2"></span>Calvin, to the moral sense,
and that the expression is the same with “written in their hearts,” in
<span id="v.vi-p28.3"></span>[Ro
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015)<span id="v.vi-p28.3"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc38004.htm#fr_45) <span
id="v.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p31"></span> There is a passage quoted by <span
id="v.vi-p31.1"></span>Wolfius from <span
id="v.vi-p31.2"></span>Aristotle in his book <span
id="v.vi-p31.3"></span>De Mundo, which remarkably coincides with a part
of this verse — “πάσὟ θνητὣ φύσει γενομενος ἀθεώρητος ἀπ αὐτῶν τῶν ἔργων
θεορεῖται ὁ θεός — God, unseen by any mortal nature, is to be seen by
the works themselves.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc38004.htm#fr_46) <span
id="v.vi-p31.4"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p32"></span> <span id="v.vi-p32.1"></span>*Divinitas*,
θείοτης, here only, and not θεότης as in <span
id="v.vi-p32.2"></span>[Col 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009)<span
id="v.vi-p32.2"></span> <span id="v.vi-p32.3"></span>Elsner and others
make a difference between these two words and say, that the former means
the divinity or majesty of God, and the latter his nature or being.
There seems to be the idea of goodness conveyed in the word, θείοτης:
for in the following verse there are two things laid to the charge of
the Gentiles which bear a reference to the two things said here — they
did not glorify him as God, and they were not thankful. He made himself
known by *power* as God, and by the beneficent exercise of that power,
he had laid a claim to the gratitude of his creatures. See <span
id="v.vi-p32.4"></span>[Ac 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)<span
id="v.vi-p32.4"></span>; and <span id="v.vi-p32.5"></span>[Acts
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#025),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span id="v.vi-p32.5"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p33"></span><span id="v.vi-p33.1"></span>Venema, in his
note on this passage, shows, that goodness was regarded by many of the
heathens as the primary attribute of Deity. Among the Greeks, *goodness*
— τὸ ἀγαθὸν, was the expression by which the Supreme Being was
distinguished. And it appears evident from the context that the Apostle
included this idea especially in the word θείοτης. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc38004.htm#fr_47) <span
id="v.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p38"></span> The conjunctive, ἤ, is for ουτε, says <span
id="v.vi-p38.1"></span>Piscator*:* but it is a Hebraism, for <span
id="v.vi-p38.2"></span>ו is sometimes used in Hebrew without the
negative, which belongs to a former clause. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc38004.htm#fr_48) <span
id="v.vi-p38.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p39"></span> The original words are, ἐματαιώθησαν ἐν τοῖς
διαλογισμοῖς αὐτῶν, “<span id="v.vi-p39.1"></span>Vani facti sunt in
ratiocinationibus suis — they became vain in their reasonings” <span
id="v.vi-p39.2"></span>Pareus, <span id="v.vi-p39.3"></span>Beza*,*
<span id="v.vi-p39.4"></span>Turrettin*, and* <span
id="v.vi-p39.5"></span>Doddridge*;* “They became foolish by their own
reasonings,” <span id="v.vi-p39.6"></span>Macknight

<span id="v.vi-p40"></span>“Whatever the right reason within,” says
<span id="v.vi-p40.1"></span>Pareus, “or the frame of the world without,
might have suggested respecting God, they indulged in pleasing
speculations, specious reasonings, and in subtle and frivolous
conclusions; some denied the existence of a God, as Epicurus and
Democritus — others doubted, as Protagoras and Diagoras — others
affirmed the existence of many gods, and these, as the Platonics,
maintained that they are not corporeal, while the Greeks and Romans held
them to be so, who worshipped dead men, impious, cruel, impure, and
wicked. There were also the Egyptians, who worshipped as gods, brute
animals, oxen, geese, birds, crocodiles, yea, what grew in their
gardens, garlic’s and onions. A very few, such as Plato and Aristotle,
acknowledged one Supreme Being; but even these deprived him of his
providence. These, and the like, were the monstrous opinions which the
Gentiles deduced from their reasonings. They became *vain*, foolish,
senseless.”

<span id="v.vi-p41"></span>“And darkened became their foolish heart,” —
ἡ ἀσύνετος αὐτῶν καρδία; “<span id="v.vi-p41.1"></span>Corinthians eorum
intelligentia carens — their heart void of understanding;” “their
unintelligent heart,” <span id="v.vi-p41.2"></span>Doddridge. Perhaps
“undiscerning heart” would be the most suitable. See <span
id="v.vi-p41.3"></span>[Mt 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016)<span
id="v.vi-p41.3"></span>. Heart, after the manner of the Hebrews, is to
be taken here for the whole soul, especially the mind. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc38004.htm#fr_49) <span
id="v.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p44"></span> <span id="v.vi-p44.1"></span>Calvin is
peculiar in his exposition of this verse. Most critics agree in thinking
that those referred to here were those reputed learned among all
nations, as <span id="v.vi-p44.2"></span>Beza says, “Such as the Druids
of the Gauls, the soothsayers of the Tuscans, the philosophers of the
Greeks, the priests of the Egyptians, the magi of the Persians, the
gymnosophists of the Indians, and the Rabbins of the Jews.” He considers
that the Apostle refers especially to such as these, though he speaks of
all men as appearing to themselves very wise in their insane devices as
to the worship of God. The wiser they thought themselves, the more
foolish they became. See <span id="v.vi-p44.3"></span>[Jer.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#009)<span id="v.vi-p44.3"></span>; <span
id="v.vi-p44.4"></span>[1Co
1:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019)<span id="v.vi-p44.4"></span>.

<span id="v.vi-p45"></span>“This is the greatest unhappiness of man, not
only not to feel his malady, but to extract matter of pride from what
ought to be his shame. What they deemed to be their wisdom was truly
their folly.” — <span id="v.vi-p45.1"></span>Haldane.

<span id="v.vi-p46"></span>It is a just remark of <span
id="v.vi-p46.1"></span>Hodge, “That the higher the advancement of the
nations in refinement and philosophy, the greater, as a general rule,
the degradation and folly of their systems of religion.” As a proof he
mentions the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, as compared with the
aborigines of America. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc38004.htm#fr_50) <span
id="v.vii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p25"></span> On this subject <span
id="v.vii-p25.1"></span>Augustine, as quoted by <span
id="v.vii-p25.2"></span>Poole, uses a stronger language than which we
find here: — <span id="v.vii-p25.3"></span>*Tradidit non solum per
patientiam et permissionem, sed per potentiam et quasi actionem; non
faciendo voluntates malas, sed eis jam malis utendo ut voluerit; multa
et intra ipsos et exrtra ipsos operando, a quibus illi occasionem
capiunt gravius peccandi; largiendo illis admonitiones, flagella,
beneficia, etc., quibus quoque eos scivit Deus ad suam perniciem
abusuros* — “He delivered them up, not only by sufferance and
permission, but by power, and as it were by an efficient operation; not
by making evil their wills, but by using them, being already evil, as he
pleased; by working many things both within and without them, from which
they take occasion to sin more grievously, by giving them warnings,
scourges, benefits, etc., which God knew they would abuse to their own
destruction.” — This is an awful view of God’s proceedings towards those
who willfully resist the truth, but no doubt a true one. Let all who
have the opportunity of knowing the truth tremble at the thought of
making light of it.

<span id="v.vii-p26"></span>The preposition ἐν before *desires* or
lusts, is used after the Hebrew manner, in the sense of *to* or *into;*
for <span id="v.vii-p26.1"></span>ב *beth*, means *in*, and *to*, and
also *by* or *through;* and such is the import of ἐν as frequently used
by the Apostle. It is so used in the preceding verse — ἐν ὁμοιώματι —
into the likeness, etc. Then the verse would be, as Calvin in sense
renders it, —

<span id="v.vii-p27"></span>God also on this account delivered them up
to the lusts of their own hearts to work uncleanness, that they might
dishonor their bodies among themselves.

<span id="v.vii-p28"></span>The import of εἰς ἀκαθαρσίαν, in order to
uncleanness, is no doubt, to work uncleanness; the Apostle frequently
uses this kind of expression. <span id="v.vii-p28.1"></span>Stuart
labors here unnecessarily to show, that God gave them up, *being* in
their lusts, etc., taking the clause as a description of those who were
given up; but the plainest meaning is that which Calvin gives. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc38004.htm#fr_51) <span
id="v.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p33"></span> The words, “the truth of God,” and
“falsehood,” or, a lie, are Hebraistic in their meaning, signifying “the
true God,” and “an idol.” The word, which means a lie, is often in
Hebrew applied to any thing made to be worshipped. See <span
id="v.vii-p33.1"></span>[Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017)<span id="v.vii-p33.1"></span>,
compared with <span id="v.vii-p33.2"></span>[Isa.
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020), [Jer.
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#025)<span id="v.vii-p33.2"></span>
<span id="v.vii-p33.3"></span>Stuart renders the sentence, “Who
exchanged the true God for a false one.” <span
id="v.vii-p33.4"></span>Wolfius objects to this view, and says, “I
prefer to take ἀλήθειαν τοῦ θεοῦ, *for the truth* made known by *God* to
the Gentiles, of which see <span id="v.vii-p33.5"></span>[Ro
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span id="v.vii-p33.5"></span>,
and the following verses: they *changed* this into a *lie, i.e*., into
those insane and absurd notions, into which they were led by their
διαλογισμοῖς — reasonings, <span id="v.vii-p33.6"></span>[Ro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span id="v.vii-p33.6"></span>.”
The expression — παρὰ τὸν κτίσαντα has been rendered by <span
id="v.vii-p33.7"></span>Erasmus*,* “above the creator,” by <span
id="v.vii-p33.8"></span>Luther*,* “rather than the Creator;” by <span
id="v.vii-p33.9"></span>Beza, “to the neglect of the Creator — <span
id="v.vii-p33.10"></span>præterito conditore;” and by <span
id="v.vii-p33.11"></span>Grotius, “in the place of the Creator.” The two
last are more consonant with the general tenor of the context; for the
persons here spoken of, according to the description given them, did not
worship God at all; παρὰ is evidently used in the sense of exclusion and
opposition παρὰ τὸν νόμον — contrary to the law, <span
id="v.vii-p33.12"></span>[Ac
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#013)<span id="v.vii-p33.12"></span>;
παρὰ φύσιν — contrary to nature, <span id="v.vii-p33.13"></span>[Ro
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026)<span id="v.vii-p33.13"></span>.
See <span id="v.vii-p33.14"></span>[Ga
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="v.vii-p33.14"></span> —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc38004.htm#fr_52) <span
id="v.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p41"></span> There is a correspondence between the words
οὐκ ἐδοκίμασαν — they did not approve, or think worthy, and ἀδόκιμον —
unapproved, or worthless, which is connected with νοῦν, mind. The verb
means to *try* or *prove* a thing, as metal by fire, then to
*distinguish* between what is genuine or otherwise, and also to
*approve* of what is good and valuable. To *approve* or think fit or
worthy seems to be the meaning here. Derived from this verb is ἀδόκιμος,
which is applied to unapproved or adulterated money, — to men *unsound,*
not able to bear the test, not genuine as Christians, <span
id="v.vii-p41.1"></span>[2Co 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#005)<span
id="v.vii-p41.1"></span>, — to the earth that is *unfit* to produce
fruits, <span id="v.vii-p41.2"></span>[Heb
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008)<span id="v.vii-p41.2"></span>. The
nearest alliteration that can perhaps be presented is the following,
“And as they did not deem it worth while to acknowledge God, God
delivered them up to a worthless mind,” that is, a mind unfit to discern
between right and wrong. <span id="v.vii-p41.3"></span>Beza gives this
meaning, “<span id="v.vii-p41.4"></span>Mentem omnis judicii expertem —
a mind void of all judgment.” <span id="v.vii-p41.5"></span>Locke*’s*
“unsearching mind,” and <span id="v.vii-p41.6"></span>Macknight’s
“unapproving mind,” and <span id="v.vii-p41.7"></span>Doddridge’s
“undiscerning mind,” do not exactly convey the right idea, though the
last comes nearest to it. It is an unattesting mind, not capable of
bringing things to the test — δοκίμιον not able to distinguish between
things of the most obvious nature.

<span id="v.vii-p42"></span>“To acknowledge God” is literally “to have
God in recognition τὸν θεὸν ἔχειν ἐν ἐπιγνώσει.” <span
id="v.vii-p42.1"></span>Venema says, that this is a purely Greek idiom,
and adduces passages from <span id="v.vii-p42.2"></span>Herodotus and
<span id="v.vii-p42.3"></span>Xenophon*;* from the first, the following
phrase, ἐν αλογίῃ ἔχειν — to have in contempt, *i.e.,* to contemn or
despise. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc38004.htm#fr_53) <span
id="v.vii-p46.6"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p47"></span> The two words are πονηρία and κακία <span
id="v.vii-p47.1"></span>Doddridge renders them “mischief and malignity.”
<span id="v.vii-p47.2"></span>Pareus says that κακία is vice, opposed to
τη αρετη — virtue. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc38004.htm#fr_54) <span
id="v.vii-p47.5"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p48"></span> “Πορνεία has an extended sense,
comprehending *all illicit intercourse*, whether fornication, adultery,
incest, or any other <span id="v.vii-p48.1"></span>*venus illicita*.”
—<span id="v.vii-p48.2"></span>Stuart

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc38004.htm#fr_55) <span
id="v.vii-p48.4"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p49"></span> Improperly rendered “debate” in our version
— ἔριδος, “strife”, by <span id="v.vii-p49.1"></span>Macknight*,* and
“contention,” by <span id="v.vii-p49.2"></span>Doddridge. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc38004.htm#fr_56) <span
id="v.vii-p49.5"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p50"></span> In our versions “malignity;” by <span
id="v.vii-p50.1"></span>Macknight*,* “bad disposition;” and by <span
id="v.vii-p50.2"></span>Doddridge, “inveteracy of evil habits.” <span
id="v.vii-p50.3"></span>Schleusner thinks that it means here
“malevolence.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc38004.htm#fr_57) <span
id="v.vii-p52.4"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p53"></span> Καταλάλους, literally gainsayers, or those
who speak against others, — defamers, calumniators; rendered “revilers,”
by <span id="v.vii-p53.1"></span>Macknight. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc38004.htm#fr_58) <span
id="v.vii-p53.4"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p54"></span> The three words, ὑβιστὰς ὑπερηφάνους, and
ἀλαζόνας seem to designate three properties of a proud spirit —
disdainful or insolent, haughty and vainglorious. The ὑβρισται are those
who treat others petulantly, contumeliously, or insultingly “Insolent,”
as given by <span id="v.vii-p54.1"></span>Macknight, is the most
suitable word. The ὑπερηφάνος is one who sets himself to view above
others, the high and elevated, who exhibits himself as superior to
others. The αλαζων is the boaster, who assumes more than what belongs to
him, or promises more than what he can perform. These three forms of
pride are often seen in the world. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc38004.htm#fr_59) <span
id="v.vii-p54.4"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p55"></span> <span
id="v.vii-p55.1"></span>*Unsociabiles* — ἀσυνθετους. “Faithless,”
perhaps, would be the most suitable word. “Who adhere not to compacts,”
is the explanation of <span id="v.vii-p55.2"></span>Hesychius

<span id="v.vii-p56"></span>To preserve the same negative according to
what is done in Greek, we may render <span id="v.vii-p56.1"></span>[Ro
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#031)<span id="v.vii-p56.1"></span> as
follows: —

<span id="v.vii-p57"></span>**31.** Unintelligent, unfaithful,
unnatural, unappeasable, unmerciful. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc38004.htm#fr_60) <span
id="v.vii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p62"></span> <span id="v.vii-p62.1"></span>Calvin has
“<span id="v.vii-p62.2"></span>justitiam“ here, though “<span
id="v.vii-p62.3"></span>judicium“ is given in the text. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc38005)
