[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38017)  [Next](cc38019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 15  <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435)

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
15:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** We then that are strong ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Debemus autem nos qui potentes sumus,
infirmitates impotentium portare, et non placere nobis ipsis:

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>**2.** Let every one of us please *his*
neighbour for *his* good to edification.

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Unusquisque enim nostrum proximo
placeat in bonum, ad aedificationem.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>**3.** For even Christ pleased not himself;
but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell
on me.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Etenim Christus non placuit sibi ipsi;
sed quemadmodum scriptum est, Opprobria exprobrantium tibi, ceciderunt
super me.

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span><span id="xix.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>**1.** *We then who are strong, etc.* Lest
they who had made more advances than others in the knowledge of God
should think it unreasonable, that more burden was to be laid on them
than on others, he shows for what purpose this strength, by which they
excelled others, was bestowed on them, even that they might so sustain
the weak as to prevent them to fall. For as God has destined those to
whom he has granted superior knowledge to convey instruction to the
ignorant, so to those whom he makes strong he commits the duty of
supporting the weak by their strength; thus ought all gifts to be
communicated among all the members of Christ. The stronger then any one
is in Christ, the more bound he is to bear with the weak.  <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436)

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>By saying that a Christian ought not to
*please* himself, he intimates, that he ought not to be bent on
satisfying himself, as they are wont to be, who are content with their
own judgment, and heedlessly neglect others: and this is indeed an
admonition most suitable on the present subject; for nothing impedes and
checks acts of kindness more than when any one is too much swallowed up
with himself, so that he has no care for others, and follows only his
own counsels and feelings.

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span><span id="xix.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span>**2.** *Let indeed*  <span
id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) *every one of us, etc.* He teaches us
here, that we are under obligations to others, and that it is therefore
our duty to please and to serve them, and that there is no exception in
which we ought not to accommodate ourselves to our brethren when we can
do so, according to God’s word, to their edification.

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>There are here two things laid down, — that
we are not to be content with our own judgment, nor acquiesce in our own
desires, but ought to strive and labor at all times to please our
brethren, — and then, that in endeavoring to accommodate ourselves to
our brethren, we ought to have regard to God, so that our object may be
their edification; for the greater part cannot be pleased except you
indulge their humor; so that if you wish to be in favor with most men,
their salvation must not be so much regarded, but their folly must be
flattered; nor must you look to what is expedient, but to what they seek
to their own ruin. You must not then strive to please those to whom
nothing is pleasing but evil.

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span><span id="xix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>**3.** *For even Christ pleased not himself,
etc.* Since it is not right that a servant should refuse what his lord
has himself undertaken, it would be very strange in us to wish an
exemption from the duty of bearing the infirmities of others, to which
Christ, in whom we glory as our Lord and King, submitted himself; for he
having no regard for himself, gave up himself wholly to this service.
For in him was really verified what the Prophet declares in <span
id="xix.i-p18.1"></span>[Ps. 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009),
[Ps. 10:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#000)<span
id="xix.i-p18.1"></span>: and among other things he mentions this, that
“zeal for God’s house had eaten him up,” and that “the reproaches of
those who reproached God fell on him.” By these words it is intimated,
that he burned with so much fervor for God’s glory that he was possessed
by such a desire to promote his kingdom, that he forgot himself, and
was, as it were, absorbed with this one thought, and that he so devoted
himself to the Lord that he was grieved in his soul whenever he
perceived his holy name exposed to the slandering of the ungodly.  <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438)

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>The second part, “the reproaches of God,”
may indeed be understood in two ways, — either that he was not less
affected by the contumelies which were heaped on God, than if he himself
had endured them, — or, that he grieved not otherwise to see the wrong
done to God, than if he himself had been the cause. But if Christ reigns
in us, as he must necessarily reign in his people, this feeling is also
vigorous in our hearts, so that whatever derogates from the glory of God
does not otherwise grieve us than if it was done to ourselves. Away then
with those whose highest wish is to gain honors from them who treat
God’s name with all kinds of reproaches, tread Christ under foot,
contumeliously rend, and with the sword and the flame persecute his
gospel. It is not indeed safe to be so much honored by those by whom
Christ is not only despised but also reproachfully treated.

<span id="xix.ii"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p1"></span><span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
15:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p2"></span>**4.** For whatsoever things were written
aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the scriptures might have hope.

<span id="xix.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Quaecunque enim ante scripta sunt, in
nostram doctrinam sunt scripta, ut per patientain et consolationem
Scripturarum spem habeamus.

<span id="xix.ii-p4"></span>**5.** Now the God of patience and
consolation grant you to be likeminded one toward another, according to
Christ Jesus:

<span id="xix.ii-p5"></span>**5.** Deus autem patientiae et
consolationis det vobis idem mutuo cogitare secundum Christum Iesum;

<span id="xix.ii-p6"></span>**6.** That ye may with one mind *and* one
mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="xix.ii-p7"></span>**6.** Ut uno animo, uno ore, glorificetis
Deum et Patrem Domini nostri Iesu Christi.

<span id="xix.ii-p8"></span><span id="xix.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p9"></span>**4.** *For whatsoever things, etc.* This is
an application of the example, lest any one should think, that to exhort
us to imitate Christ was foreign to his purpose; “Nay,” he says, “there
is nothing in Scripture which is not useful for your instruction, and
for the direction of your life.”  <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439)

<span id="xix.ii-p11"></span>This is an interesting passage, by which we
understand that there is nothing vain and unprofitable contained in the
oracles of God; and we are at the same time taught that it is by the
reading of the Scripture that we make progress in piety and holiness of
life. Whatever then is delivered in Scripture we ought to strive to
learn; for it were a reproach offered to the Holy Spirit to think, that
he has taught anything which it does not concern us to know; let us also
know, that whatever is taught us conduces to the advancement of
religion. And though he speaks of the Old Testament, the same thing is
also true of the writings of the Apostles; for since the Spirit of
Christ is everywhere like itself, there is no doubt but that he has
adapted his teaching by the Apostles, as formerly by the Prophets, to
the edification of his people. Moreover, we find here a most striking
condemnation of those fanatics who vaunt that the Old Testament is
abolished, and that it belongs not in any degree to Christians; for with
what front can they turn away Christians from those things which, as
Paul testifies, have been appointed by God for their salvation?

<span id="xix.ii-p12"></span>But when he adds, *that through the
patience and the consolation of the Scriptures we might have hope,*
 <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) he does not include the whole
of that benefit which is to be derived from God’s word; but he briefly
points out the main end; for the Scriptures are especially serviceable
for this purpose — to raise up those who are prepared by patience, and
strengthened by consolations, to the hope of eternal life, and to keep
them in the contemplation of it.  <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) The word *consolation* some render
exhortation; and of this I do not disapprove, only that consolation is
more suitable to patience, for this arises from it; because then only we
are prepared to bear adversities with patience, when God blends them
with consolation. The patience of the faithful is not indeed that
hardihood which philosophers recommend, but that meekness, by which we
willingly submit to God, while a taste of his goodness and paternal love
renders all things sweet to us: this nourishes and sustains hope in us,
so that it fails not.

<span id="xix.ii-p16"></span><span id="xix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p17"></span>**5.** *And the God of patience, etc.* God
is so called from what he produces; the same thing has been before very
fitly ascribed to the Scriptures, but in a different sense: God alone is
doubtless the author of patience and of consolation; for he conveys both
to our hearts by his Spirit: yet he employs his word as the instrument;
for he first teaches us what is true consolation, and what is true
patience; and then he instills and plants this doctrine in our hearts.

<span id="xix.ii-p18"></span>But after having admonished and exhorted
the Romans as to what they were to do, he turns to pray for them: for he
fully understood, that to speak of duty was to no purpose, except God
inwardly effected by his Spirit what he spoke by the mouth of man. The
sum of his prayer is, — that he would bring their minds to real
unanimity, and make them united among themselves: he also shows at the
same time what is the bond of unity, for he wished them to agree
together *according to Christ Jesus* Miserable indeed is the union which
is unconnected with God, and that is unconnected with him, which
alienates us from his truth.  <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442)

<span id="xix.ii-p22"></span>And that he might recommend to us an
agreement in Christ, he teaches us how necessary it is: for God is not
truly glorified by us, unless the hearts of all agree in giving him
praise, and their tongues also join in harmony. There is then no reason
for any to boast that he will give glory to God after his own manner;
for the unity of his servants is so much esteemed by God, that he will
not have his glory sounded forth amidst discords and contentions. This
one thought ought to be sufficient to check the wanton rage for
contention and quarreling, which at this day too much possesses the
minds of many.

<span id="xix.iii"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p1"></span><span id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
15:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#007)<span id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p2"></span>**7.** Wherefore receive ye one another, as
Christ also received us to the glory of God.

<span id="xix.iii-p3"></span>**7.** Itaque suscipite vos mutuo,
quemadmodum Christus vos suscepit, in gloriam Dei.

<span id="xix.iii-p4"></span>**8.** Now I say that Jesus Christ was a
minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises *made* unto the fathers:

<span id="xix.iii-p5"></span>**8.** Dico autem Iesum Christum
ministerium fuisse circumcisionis super veritate Dei ad promissiones
Patrum confirmandas:

<span id="xix.iii-p6"></span>**9.** And that the Gentiles might glorify
God for *his* mercy; as it is written, For this cause I will confess to
thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name.

<span id="xix.iii-p7"></span>**9.** Gentes autem pro misericordia
glorificare debent Deum; quemadmodum scriptum est, Propter hoc
confitebor tibi inter Gentes et nomini tuo psallam:

<span id="xix.iii-p8"></span>**10.** And again he saith, Rejoice, ye
Gentiles, with his people.

<span id="xix.iii-p9"></span>**10.** Et rursum dicit, Exultate Gentes
cum populo ejus;

<span id="xix.iii-p10"></span>**11.** And again, Praise the Lord, all ye
Gentiles; and laud him, all ye people.

<span id="xix.iii-p11"></span>**11.** Et rursum, Laudate Dominum omnes
Gentes, et collaudate eum omnes populi.

<span id="xix.iii-p12"></span>**12.** And again, Esaias saith, There
shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the
Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles trust.

<span id="xix.iii-p13"></span>**12.** Et rursum Iesaias dicit, Erit
radix Jesse, et qui exurget ad imperandum Gentibus; in ipso Gentes
sperabunt.

<span id="xix.iii-p14"></span><span id="xix.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p15"></span>**7.** *Receive ye then, etc.* He returns
to exhortation; and to strengthen this he still retains the example of
Christ. For he, having received, not one or two of us, but all together,
has thus connected us, so that we ought to cherish one another, if we
would indeed continue in his bosom. Only thus then shall we confirm our
calling, that is, if we separate not ourselves from those whom the Lord
has bound together.

<span id="xix.iii-p16"></span>The words, *to the glory of God,* may be
applied to us only, or to Christ, or to him and us together: of the last
I mostly approve, and according to this import, — “As Christ has made
known the glory of the Father in receiving us into favor, when we stood
in need of mercy; so it behooves us, in order to make known also the
glory of the same God, to establish and confirm this union which we have
in Christ.”  <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443)

<span id="xix.iii-p18"></span><span id="xix.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p19"></span>**8.** *Now I say, that Jesus Christ,
etc.* He now shows that Christ has embraced us all, so that he leaves no
difference between the Jews and the Gentiles, except that in the first
place he was promised to the Jewish nation, and was in a manner
peculiarly destined for them, before he was revealed to the Gentiles.
But he shows, that with respect to that which was the seed of all
contentions, there was no difference between them; for he had gathered
them both from a miserable dispersion, and brought them, when gathered,
into the Father’s kingdom, that they might be one flock, in one
sheepfold, under one shepherd. It is hence right, he declares, that they
should continue united together, and not despise one another; for Christ
despised neither of them.  <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444)

<span id="xix.iii-p24"></span>He then speaks first of the Jews, and
says, that Christ was sent to them, in order to accomplish the truth of
God by performing the promises given to the Fathers: and it was no
common honor, that Christ, the Lord of heaven and earth, put on flesh,
that he might procure salvation for them; for the more he humbled
himself for their sake, the greater was the honor he conferred on them.
But this point he evidently assumes as a thing indubitable. The more
strange it is, that there is such effrontery in some fanatical heads,
that they hesitate not to regard the promises of the Old Testament as
temporal, and to confine them to the present world. And lest the
Gentiles should claim any *excellency* above the Jews, Paul *expressly*
declares, that the salvation which Christ has brought belonged by
covenant to the Jews; for by his coming he fulfilled what the Father had
formerly promised to Abraham, and thus he became the minister of that
people. It hence follows that the old covenant was in reality spiritual,
though it was annexed to earthly types; for the fulfillment, of which
Paul now speaks, must necessarily relate to eternal salvation. And
further, lest any one should cavil, and say, that so great a salvation
was promised to posterity, when the covenant was deposited in the hand
of Abraham, he expressly declares that the promises were made to the
Fathers. Either then the benefits of Christ must be confined to temporal
things, or the covenant made with Abraham must be extended beyond the
things of this world.

<span id="xix.iii-p25"></span><span id="xix.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p26"></span>**9.** *The Gentiles also,*  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445) *etc.* This is the second point, on
proving which he dwells longer, because it was not so evident. The first
testimony he quotes is taken from <span id="xix.iii-p28.3"></span>[Ps
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#000)<span id="xix.iii-p28.3"></span>;
which psalm is recorded also in <span id="xix.iii-p28.4"></span>[2Sa
22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#000)<span id="xix.iii-p28.4"></span>,
where no doubt a prophecy is mentioned concerning the kingdom of Christ;
and from it Paul proves the calling of the Gentiles, because it is there
promised, that a confession to the glory of God should be made among the
Gentiles; for we cannot really make God known, except among those who
hear his praises while they are sung by us. Hence that God’s name may be
known among the Gentiles, they must be favored with the knowledge of
him, and come into communion with his people: for you may observe this
everywhere in Scripture, that God’s praises cannot be declared, except
in the assembly of the faithful, who have ears capable of hearing his
praise.

<span id="xix.iii-p29"></span><span id="xix.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p30"></span>**10** *Exult, ye Gentiles, with his
people* This verse is commonly considered as if it was taken from the
song of Moses; but with this I cannot agree; for Moses’ design there was
to terrify the adversaries of Israel by setting forth his greatness,
rather than to invite them to a common joy. I hence think that this is
quoted from <span id="xix.iii-p30.1"></span>[Ps
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005)<span id="xix.iii-p30.1"></span>,
where it is written, “Exult and rejoice let the Gentiles, because thou
judgest the nations in equity, and the Gentiles on the earth thou
guidest.” And Paul adds, *with his people,* and he did this by way of
explanation; for the Prophet in that psalm no doubt connects the
Gentiles with Israel, and invites both alike to rejoice; and there is no
joy without the knowledge of God.  <span
id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446)

<span id="xix.iii-p32"></span><span id="xix.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p33"></span>**11.** *Praise God, all ye Gentiles,
etc.* This passage is not inaptly applied; for how can they, who know
not God’s greatness, praise him? They could no more do this than to call
on his name, when unknown. It is then a prophecy most suitable to prove
the calling of the Gentiles; and this appears still more evident from
the reason which is there added; for he bids them to give thanks for
God’s truth and mercy. (<span id="xix.iii-p33.1"></span>[Ps
117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001)<span
id="xix.iii-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.iii-p34"></span><span id="xix.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p35"></span>**12.** *And again, Isaiah, etc.,* This
prophecy is the most illustrious of them all: for in that passage, the
Prophet, when things were almost past hope, comforted the small remnant
of the faithful, even by this, — that there would arise a shoot from the
dry and the dying trunk of David’s family, and that a branch would
flourish from his despised root, which would restore to God’s people
their pristine glory. It is clear from the account there given, that
this shoot was Christ, the Redeemer of the world. And then, he added,
that he would be raised for a sign to the Gentiles, that might be to
them for salvation. The words do indeed differ a little from the Hebrew
text; for we read here, *arise,* while in Hebrew it is *stand for a
sign,* which is the same; for he was to appear conspicuous like a sign.
What is here *hope,* is in Hebrew *seek;* but according to the most
common usage of Scripture, to seek God is nothing else but to hope in
him.  <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447)

<span id="xix.iii-p37"></span>But twice in this prophecy is the calling
of the Gentiles confirmed, — by the expression, that Christ was to be
raised up as a sign, and he reigns among the faithful alone, — and by
the declaration, that they shall hope in Christ, which cannot take place
without the preaching of the word and illumination of the Spirit. With
these things corresponds the song of Simeon. It may be further added,
that hope in Christ is an evidence of his divinity.

<span id="xix.iv"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p1"></span><span id="xix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
15:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013)<span id="xix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p2"></span>**13.** Now the God of hope fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the
power of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="xix.iv-p3"></span>**13.** Deus autem spei impleat vos omni
gaudio et pace in credendo, quo abundetis in spe per potentiam Spiritus
sancti.

<span id="xix.iv-p4"></span>**14.** And I myself also am persuaded of
you, my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all
knowledge, able also to admonish one another.

<span id="xix.iv-p5"></span>**14.** Persuasus autem sum, fratres mei,
ipse quoque de vobis, quod et ipsi pleni sitis bonitate, referti omni
cognitione, idonei ad vos mutuo admonendos.

<span id="xix.iv-p6"></span>**15.** Nevertheless, brethren, I have
written the more boldly unto you in some sort, as putting you in mind,
because of the grace that is given to me of God,

<span id="xix.iv-p7"></span>**15.** Audacius antera scripsi vobis,
fratres, ex parte, veluti commonefaciens vos, propter gratiam mihi datam
a Deo;

<span id="xix.iv-p8"></span>**16.** That I should be the minister of
Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that the
offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the
Holy Ghost.

<span id="xix.iv-p9"></span>**16.** Ut sim minister Christi erga Gentes,
consecrans evangelium Christi, ut sit oblatio Gentium acceptabilis,
sanctificata per Spiritum sanctum.

<span id="xix.iv-p10"></span><span id="xix.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p11"></span>**13.** *And may the God, etc.* He now
concludes the passage, as before, with prayer; in which he desires the
Lord to give them whatever he had commanded. It hence appears, that the
Lord does in no degree measure his precepts according to our strength or
the power of free-will; and that he does not command what we ought to
do, that we, relying on our own power, may gird up ourselves to render
obedience; but that he commands those things which require the aid of
his grace, that he may stimulate us in our attention to prayer.

<span id="xix.iv-p12"></span>In saying *the God of hope,* he had in view
the last verse; as though he said, — “May then the God in whom we all
hope fill you with joy, that is, with cheerfulness of heart, and also
with unity and concord, and this by believing:”  <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) for in order that our peace may be
approved by God, we must be bound together by real and genuine faith. If
any one prefers taking *in believing,* for, *in order to believe*,
 <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449) the sense will be, — that they
were to cultivate peace for the purpose of believing; for then only are
we rightly prepared to believe, when we, being peaceable and unanimous,
do willingly embrace what is taught us. It is however preferable, that
faith should be connected with peace and joy; for it is the bond of holy
and legitimate concord, and the support of godly joy. And though the
peace which one has within with God may also be understood, yet the
context leads us rather to the former explanation.  <span
id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450)

<span id="xix.iv-p17"></span>He further adds, *that ye may abound in
hope;* for in this way also is hope confirmed and increased in us. The
words, *through the power of the Holy Spirit,* intimate that all things
are the gifts of the divine bounty: and the word *power* is intended
emphatically to set forth that wonderful energy, by which the Spirit
works in us faith, hope, joy, and peace.

<span id="xix.iv-p18"></span><span id="xix.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p19"></span>**14.** *But even I myself am persuaded,
etc.* This was said to anticipate an objection, or it may be deemed a
kind of concession, made with the view of pacifying the Romans; in case
they thought themselves reproved by so many and so urgent admonitions,
and thus unjustly treated. He then makes an excuse for having ventured
to assume towards them the character of a teacher and of an exhorter;
and he says, that he had done so, not *because* he had any doubt as to
their wisdom, or kindness, or perseverance; but because he was
constrained by his *office.* Thus he removed every suspicion of
presumption, which especially shows itself when any one thrusts himself
into an office which does not belong to him, or speaks of those things
which are unsuitable to him. We see in this instance the singular
modesty of this holy man, to whom nothing was more acceptable than to be
thought of no account, provided the doctrine he preached retained its
authority.

<span id="xix.iv-p20"></span>There was much pride in the Romans; the
name even of their city made the lowest of the people proud; so that
they could hardly bear a teacher of another nation, much less a
barbarian and a Jew. With this haughtiness Paul would not contend in his
own private name: he however subdued it, as it were, by soothing means;
for he testified that he undertook to address them on account of his
Apostolic office.

<span id="xix.iv-p21"></span>*Ye are full of goodness, being filled with
knowledge, etc.* Two qualifications are especially necessary for him who
gives admonitions: the first is kindness, which disposes his mind to aid
his brethren by his advice, and also tempers his countenance and his
words with courtesy, — and the second is skill in advice or prudence,
which secures authority to him, inasmuch as he is able to benefit the
hearers whom he addresses. There is indeed nothing more opposed to
brotherly admonitions than malignity and arrogance, which make us
disdainfully to despise the erring, and to treat them with ridicule,
rather than to set them right. Asperity also, whether it appears in
words or in the countenance, deprives our admonitions of their fruit.
But however you may excel in the feeling of kindness, as well as in
courtesy, you are not yet fit to advise, except you possess wisdom and
experience. Hence he ascribes both these qualifications to the Romans,
bearing them a testimony, — that they were themselves sufficiently
competent, without the help of another, to administer mutual
exhortations: for he admits, that they abounded both in kindness and
wisdom. It hence follows, that they were able to exhort.

<span id="xix.iv-p22"></span><span id="xix.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p23"></span>**15.** *The more boldly, however, have I
written to you, etc.* The excuse follows, and in adducing this, that he
might more fully show his modesty, he says, by way of concession, that
he acted boldly in interposing in a matter which they themselves were
able to do; but he adds that he was led to be thus bold on account of
his office, because he was the minister of the gospel to the Gentiles,
and could not therefore pass by them who were also Gentiles. He however
thus humbles himself, that he might exalt the excellency of his office;
for by mentioning the favor of God, by which he was elevated to that
high honor, he shows that he could not suffer what he did according to
his apostolic office to be despised. Besides, he denies that he had
assumed the part of a teacher, but that of an admonisher,  <span
id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451)

<span id="xix.iv-p25"></span><span id="xix.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p26"></span>**16.** *Consecrating the gospel, etc.*
This rendering I prefer to that which <span
id="xix.iv-p26.2"></span>Erasmus in the first place adopts, that is,
“Administering;” for nothing is more certain than that Paul here alludes
to the holy mysteries which were performed by the priest. He then makes
himself a chief priest or a priest in the ministration of the gospel, to
offer up as a sacrifice the people whom he gained for God, and in this
manner he labored in the holy mysteries of the gospel. And doubtless
this is the priesthood of the Christian pastor, that is, to sacrifice
men, as it were, to God, by bringing them to obey the gospel, and not,
as the Papists have hitherto haughtily vaunted, by offering up Christ to
reconcile men to God. He does not, however, give here the name of
priests to the pastors of the Church simply as a perpetual title, but
intending to commend the honor and power of the ministry, Paul availed
himself of the opportunity of using this metaphor. Let then the
preachers of the gospel have this end in view while discharging their
office, even to offer up to God souls purified by faith.

<span id="xix.iv-p27"></span>What <span id="xix.iv-p27.1"></span>Erasmus
afterwards puts down as being more correct, “sacrificing the gospel,” is
not only improper but obscures also the meaning; for the gospel is, on
the contrary, like a sword, by which the minister sacrifices men as
victims to God.  <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452)

<span id="xix.iv-p29"></span>He adds that such sacrifices are
*acceptable* to God; which is not only a commendation of the ministry,
but also a singular consolation to those who surrender themselves to be
thus consecrated. Now as the ancient victims were dedicated to God,
having been externally sanctified and washed, so these victims are
consecrated to the Lord by the Spirit of holiness, through whose power,
inwardly working in them, they are separated from this world. For though
the purity of the soul proceeds from faith in the word, yet as the voice
of man is in itself inefficacious and lifeless, the work of cleansing
really and properly belongs to the Spirit.

<span id="xix.v"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p1"></span><span id="xix.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
15:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#017)<span id="xix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p2"></span>**17.** I have therefore whereof I may glory
through Jesus Christ in those things which pertain to God.

<span id="xix.v-p3"></span>**17.** Habeo igitur quod glorier per Iesum
Christum in iis quae ad Deum pertinent.

<span id="xix.v-p4"></span>**18.** For I will not dare to speak of any
of those things which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the
Gentiles obedient, by word and deed,

<span id="xix.v-p5"></span>**18.** Non enim ausim loqui quicquam de iis
quae non effecit Christus per me, in obedientiam Gentium, sermone et
opere;

<span id="xix.v-p6"></span>**19.** Through mighty signs and wonders, by
the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about
unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.

<span id="xix.v-p7"></span>**19.** In potentia signorum et prodigiorum,
in potentia Spiritus Dei, ut ab Ierusalem et in circuitu usque in
Illyricum impleverim evangelium Christi:

<span id="xix.v-p8"></span>**20.** Yea, so have I strived to preach the
gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another
man’s foundation:

<span id="xix.v-p9"></span>**20.** Ira annitens praedicare evangelium,
non ubi nominatus erat Christus, ne super alienum fundamentum
aedificarem;

<span id="xix.v-p10"></span>**21.** But as it is written, To whom he was
not spoken of, they shall see: and they that have not heard shall
understand.

<span id="xix.v-p11"></span>**21.** Sed quemadmodum scripture est, Ii
quibus non annuntiatum est de eo, videbunt, et qui non audierunt,
intelligent.

<span id="xix.v-p12"></span><span id="xix.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p13"></span>**17.** *I have then, etc.* After having in
general commended his own calling, that the Romans might know that he
was a true and undoubted apostle of Christ, he now adds testimonies, by
which he proved that he had not only taken upon him the apostolic office
conferred on him by God’s appointment, but that he had also eminently
adorned it. He at the same time records the fidelity which he had
exhibited in discharging his office. It is indeed to little purpose that
we are appointed, except we act agreeably to our calling and fulfill our
office. He did not make this declaration from a desire to attain glow,
but because nothing was to be omitted which might procure favor and
authority to his doctrine among the Romans. In God then, not in himself,
did he glory; for he had nothing else in view but that the whole praise
should redound to God.

<span id="xix.v-p14"></span>And that he speaks only negatively, it is
indeed an evidence of his modesty, but it availed also to gain credit to
what he was proceeding to announce, as though he said, “The truth itself
affords me such cause for glowing, that I have no need to seek false
praises, or those of another, I am content with such as are true.” It
may be also that he intended to obviate the unfavorable reports which he
knew were everywhere scattered by the malevolent, he therefore mentioned
beforehand that he would not speak but of things well known.

<span id="xix.v-p15"></span><span id="xix.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p16"></span>**18.** *In order to make the Gentiles
obedient, etc.* These words prove what his object was, even to render
his ministry approved by the Romans, that his doctrine might not be
without fruit. He proves then by evidences that God by the presence of
his power had given a testimony to his preaching, and in a manner sealed
his apostleship, so that no one ought to have doubted, but, that he was
appointed and sent by the Lord. The evidences were *word, work,* and
*miracles.* It hence appears that the term *work* includes more than
*miracles.* He at last concludes with this expression, *through the
power of the Spirit;* by which he intimates that these things could not
have been done without the Spirit being the author. In short, he
declares that with regard to his teaching as well as his doing, he had
such strength and energy in preaching Christ, that it was evidently the
wonderful power of God, and that miracles were also added, which were
seals to render the evidence more certain.

<span id="xix.v-p17"></span>He mentions *word* and *work* in the first
place, and then he states one kind of work, even the power of performing
miracles. The same order is observed by Luke, when he says that Christ
was mighty in word and work, (<span id="xix.v-p17.1"></span>[Lu
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#019)<span id="xix.v-p17.1"></span>;)
and John says that Christ referred the Jews to his own works for a
testimony of his divinity. (<span id="xix.v-p17.2"></span>[Joh
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036)<span id="xix.v-p17.2"></span>.)
Nor does he simply mention miracles, but gives them two designations.
But instead of what he says here, *the power of signs and of wonders,*
Peter has “miracles and signs and wonders.” (<span
id="xix.v-p17.3"></span>[Ac 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span
id="xix.v-p17.3"></span>.) And doubtless they were testimonies of divine
power to awaken men, that being struck with God’s power, they might
admire and at the same time adore him; nor are they without an especial
meaning, but intended to stimulate us, that we may understand what God
is.

<span id="xix.v-p18"></span>This is a striking passage respecting the
benefit of miracles: they are designed to prepare men to reverence and
to obey God. So you read in Mark, that the Lord confirmed the truth by
the signs which followed. (<span id="xix.v-p18.1"></span>[Mr
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020)<span id="xix.v-p18.1"></span>.)
Luke declares in the Acts, that the Lord by miracles gave testimony to
the word of his grace. (<span id="xix.v-p18.2"></span>[Ac
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003)<span id="xix.v-p18.2"></span>.)
It is then evident that those miracles which bring glory to creatures
and not to God, which secure credit to lies and not to God’s word, are
from the devil. *The power of the Spirit,* which he mentions in the
third place, I apply to both the preceding clauses.  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453)

<span id="xix.v-p20"></span><span id="xix.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p21"></span>**19.** *So that from Jerusalem, etc.* He
joins also a testimony from the effect; for the success which followed
his preaching exceeded all the thoughts of men. For who could have
gathered so many churches for Christ, without being aided by the power
of God? “From Jerusalem,” he says, “I have propagated the gospel as far
as Illyricum, and not by hastening to the end of my course by a straight
way, but by going all around, and through the intervening countries.”
But the verb <span id="xix.v-p21.1"></span>πεπληρωκέναι*,* which after
others I have rendered *filled up* or completed, means both to perfect
and to supply what is wanting. Hence <span
id="xix.v-p21.2"></span>πλήρωμα in Greek means perfection as well as a
supplement. I am disposed to explain it thus, — that he diffused, as it
were by filling up, the preaching of the gospel; for others had before
begun, but he spread it wider.  <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454)

<span id="xix.v-p23"></span><span id="xix.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p24"></span>**20.** *Thus striving to preach the gospel,
etc.* As it was necessary for Paul not only to prove himself to be the
servant of Christ and a pastor of the Christian Church, but also to show
his title to the character and office of an Apostle, that he might gain
the attention of the Romans, he mentions here the proper and peculiar
distinction of the apostleship; for the work of an Apostle is to
propagate the gospel where it had not been preached, according to that
command,

<span id="xix.v-p25"></span>“Go ye, preach the gospel to every
creature.” (<span id="xix.v-p25.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span id="xix.v-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.v-p26"></span>And this is what we ought carefully to
notice, lest we make a general rule of what specially belongs to the
Apostolic order: nor ought we to consider it a fault, that a successor
was substituted who built up the Church. The Apostles then were the
founders as it were of the Church; the pastors who succeeded them, had
to strengthen and amplify the building raised up by them.  <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) He calls that *another’s foundation,*
which had been laid by the hand of another: otherwise Christ is the only
stone on which the Church is founded. See <span
id="xix.v-p27.8"></span>[1Co 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="xix.v-p27.8"></span>; and <span id="xix.v-p27.9"></span>[Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="xix.v-p27.9"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p28"></span><span id="xix.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p29"></span>**21.** *But as it is written, etc.* He
confirms by the testimony of Isaiah what he had said of the *evidence*
of his apostleship; for in <span id="xix.v-p29.1"></span>[Isa
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015)<span id="xix.v-p29.1"></span>,
speaking of the kingdom of Messiah, among other things he predicts, that
the knowledge of Christ would be spread among the Gentiles throughout
the whole world, that his name would be declared to those by whom it had
not been heard of before. It was meet that this should be done by the
Apostles, to whom the command was specifically given. Hence the
apostleship of Paul was made evident from this circumstance, — that this
prophecy was fulfilled in him.  <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456)

<span id="xix.v-p33"></span>It is absurd for any one to attempt to apply
what is here said to the pastoral office; for we know that in Churches
rightly formed, where the truth of the gospel has been already received,
Christ’s name must be constantly preached. Paul then was a preacher of
Christ, yet unknown to foreign nations, for this end, — that after his
departure the same doctrine should be daily proclaimed in every place by
the mouth of the pastors; for it is certain that the Prophet speaks of
the commencement of the kingdom of Christ.

<span id="xix.vi"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p1"></span><span id="xix.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
15:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022)<span id="xix.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p2"></span>**22.** For which cause also I have been
much hindered from coming to you.

<span id="xix.vi-p3"></span>**22.** Itaque impeditus etiam saepius fui
quominus venirem ad vos:

<span id="xix.vi-p4"></span>**23.** But now having no more place in
these parts, and having a great desire these many years to come unto
you;

<span id="xix.vi-p5"></span>**23.** Nunc vero nullum amplius locum
habens in his regionibus, desiderium autem habens a multis annis
veniendi ad vos;

<span id="xix.vi-p6"></span>**24.** Whensoever I take my journey into
Spain, I will come to you: for I trust to see you in my journey, and to
be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat filled
with your *company*

<span id="xix.vi-p7"></span>**24.** Si quando in Hispaniam proficiscar,
veniam ad vos:  <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) spero enim fore
ut istac iter faciens videam vos, et illuc a vobis deducar, si tamen
prius ex parte vestra consuetudine fuero expletus.

<span id="xix.vi-p11"></span><span id="xix.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p12"></span>**22.** *And on this account, etc.* What he
had said of his apostleship he applies now to another point, even for
the purpose of excusing himself for not having come to them, though he
was destined for them as well as for others. He, in passing, then
intimates, that in propagating the gospel from Judea as far as to
Illyricum, he performed, as it were, a certain course enjoined him by
the Lord; which being accomplished, he purposed not to neglect them. And
lest they should yet think that they had been neglected, he removes this
suspicion by testifying, that there had been for a long time no want of
desire. Hence, that he had not done this sooner was owing to a just
impediment: he now gives them a hope, as soon as his calling allowed
him.

<span id="xix.vi-p13"></span>From this passage is drawn a weak argument
respecting his going to Spain. It does not indeed immediately follow
that he performed this journey, because he intended it: for he speaks
only of hope, in which he, as other faithful men, might have been
sometimes frustrated.  <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458)

<span id="xix.vi-p15"></span><span id="xix.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p16"></span>**24.** *For I hope, etc.* He refers to the
reason why he had for a long time wished to come to them, and now
intended to do so, — even that he might see them, enjoy an interview and
an intercourse with them, and make himself known to them in his official
character; for by the coming of the Apostles the gospel also came.

<span id="xix.vi-p17"></span>By saying, to *be brought on my way thither
by you,* he intimates how much he *expected* from their kindness; and
this, as we have already observed, is the best way for conciliating
favor; for the more confidence any one hears is reposed in him, the
stronger are the obligations under which he feels himself; inasmuch as
we deem it base and discourteous to disappoint the good opinion formed
of us. And by adding, *When I shall first be in part filled, etc.*, he
bears witness to the benevolence of his mind towards them; and to
convince them of this was very necessary for the interest of the gospel.

<span id="xix.vii"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p1"></span><span id="xix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
15:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)<span
id="xix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p2"></span>**25.** But now I go unto Jerusalem to
minister unto the saints.

<span id="xix.vii-p3"></span>**25.** Nunc verb proficiscor Ierosolymam
ad ministrandum sanctis.

<span id="xix.vii-p4"></span>**26.** For it hath pleased them of
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints
which are at Jerusalem.

<span id="xix.vii-p5"></span>**26.** Placuit enim Macedoniae et Achaiae
communicationem facere in pauperes sanctos qui sunt Ierosolymis:

<span id="xix.vii-p6"></span>**27.** It hath pleased them verily; and
their debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of
their spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in
carnal things.

<span id="xix.vii-p7"></span>**27.** Placuit, inquam, et debitores sunt
ipsorum; si enim spiritualibus ipsorum communicarunt Gentes, debent et
in carnalibus  <span id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) ministrare ipsis.

<span id="xix.vii-p9"></span>**28.** When therefore I have performed
this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I will come by you into Spain.

<span id="xix.vii-p10"></span>**28.** Hoc igitur quum perfecero, et
obsignavero illis fructum hunc, pro-ficiscar per vos in Hispaniam.

<span id="xix.vii-p11"></span>**29.** And I am sure that, when I come
unto you, I shall come in the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of
Christ.

<span id="xix.vii-p12"></span>**29.** Scio autem quod quum venero ad
vos, in plenitudine benedictionis evangelii Christi venturus sum.

<span id="xix.vii-p13"></span><span id="xix.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p14"></span>**25.** *But I am going now, etc.* Lest
they should expect his immediate coming, and think themselves deceived,
if he had not come according to their expectation, he declares to them
what business he had then in hand, which prevented him from going soon
to them, and that was, — that he was going to Jerusalem to bear the alms
which had been gathered in Macedonia and Achaia. Availing himself at the
same time of this opportunity, he proceeds to commend that contribution;
by which, as by a kind of intimation, he stirs them up to follow this
example: for though he does not openly ask them, yet, by saying that
Macedonia and Achaia had done what they ought to have done, he
intimates, that it was also the duty of the Romans, as they were under
the same obligation; and that he had this view, he openly confesses to
the Corinthians, —

<span id="xix.vii-p15"></span>“I boast,” he says, “of your promptitude
to all the Churches, that they may be stirred up by your example.”  
(<span id="xix.vii-p15.2"></span>[2Co
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002)<span id="xix.vii-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.vii-p16"></span>It was indeed a rare instance of kindness,
that the Grecians, having heard that their brethren at Jerusalem were
laboring under want, considered not the distance at which they were
separated from them; but esteeming those sufficiently nigh, to whom they
were united by the bond of faith, they relieved their necessities from
their own abundance. The word *communication,* which is here employed,
ought to be noticed; for it well expresses the feeling, by which it
behooves us to succor the wants of our brethren, even because there is
to be a common and mutual regard on account of the unity of the body. I
have not rendered the pronoun <span id="xix.vii-p16.1"></span>τινὰ,
because it is often redundant in Greek, and seems to lessen the emphasis
of this passage.  <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) What we have
rendered *to minister,* is in Greek a participle, *ministering;* but the
former seems more fitted to convey the meaning of Paul: for he excuses
himself, that by a lawful occupation he was prevented from going
immediately to Rome.

<span id="xix.vii-p18"></span><span id="xix.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p19"></span>**27.** *And their debtors they are, etc.*
Every one perceives, that what is said here of obligation, is said not
so much for the sake of the Corinthians as for the Romans themselves;
for the Corinthians or the Macedonians were not more indebted to the
Jews than the Romans. And he adds the ground of this obligation, — that
they had received the gospel from them: and he takes his argument from
the comparison of the less with the greater. He employs also the same in
another place, that is, that it ought not to have appeared to them an
unjust or a grievous compensation to exchange carnal things, which are
immensely of less value, for things spiritual. (<span
id="xix.vii-p19.1"></span>[2Co
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#011)<span id="xix.vii-p19.1"></span>.)
And it shows the value of the gospel, when he declares, that they were
indebted not only to its ministers, but also to the whole nation, from
whom they had come forth.

<span id="xix.vii-p20"></span>And mark the verb <span
id="xix.vii-p20.1"></span>λειτουργὢσαι*,* *to minister;* which means to
discharge one’s office in the commonwealth, and to undergo the burden of
one’s calling: it is also sometimes applied to sacred things. Nor do I
doubt but that Paul meant that it is a kind of sacrifice, when the
faithful gave of their own to relieve the wants of their brethren; for
they thus perform that duty of love which they owe, and offer to God a
sacrifice of an acceptable odor. But in this place what he had
peculiarly in view was the mutual right of compensation.

<span id="xix.vii-p21"></span><span id="xix.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p22"></span>**28.** *And sealed to them this fruit,
etc.* I disapprove not of what some think, that there is here an
allusion to a practice among the ancients, who closed up with their
seals what they intended to lay up in safety. Thus Paul commends his own
faithfulness and integrity; as though he had said, that he was an honest
keeper of the money deposited in his hands, no otherwise than if he
carried it sealed up.  <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) — The
word *fruit* seems to designate the produce, which he had before said
returned to the Jews from the propagation of the gospel, in a way
similar to the land, which by bringing forth fruit supports its
cultivator.

<span id="xix.vii-p24"></span><span id="xix.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p25"></span>**29.** *And I know, that when I come,
etc.* These words may be explained in two ways: the first meaning is, —
that he should find a plentiful fruit from the gospel at Rome; for the
blessing of the gospel is, when it fructifies by good works: but to
confine this to alms, as some do, is not what I approve. The second is,
that in order to render his coming to them more an object of desire, he
says, that he hopes that it would not be unfruitful, but that it would
make a great accession to the gospel; and this he calls *fullness of
blessing,* which signifies a full blessing; by which expression he means
great success and increase. But this blessing depended partly on his
ministry and partly on their faith. Hence he promises, that his coming
to them would not be in vain, as he would not disappoint them of the
grace given to him, but would bestow it with the same alacrity with
which their minds were prepared to receive the gospel.

<span id="xix.vii-p26"></span>The former exposition has been most
commonly received, and seems also to me the best; that is, that he hoped
that at his coming he would find what he especially wished, even that
the gospel flourished among them and prevailed with evident success, —
that they were excelling in holiness and in all other virtues. For the
reason he gives for his desire is, that he hoped for no common joy in
seeing them, as he expected to see them abounding in all the spiritual
riches of the gospel.  <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462)

<span id="xix.viii"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p1"></span><span id="xix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
15:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030)<span
id="xix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p2"></span>**30.** Now I beseech you, brethren, for
the Lord Jesus Christ’s sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye
strive together with me in *your* prayers to God for me;

<span id="xix.viii-p3"></span>**30.** Obsecro autem vos fratres, per
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum et per dilectionem Spiritus, ut
concertetis mihi in precibus vestris pro me ad Deum;

<span id="xix.viii-p4"></span>**31.** That I may be delivered from them
that do not believe in Judaea; and that my service which *I have* for
Jerusalem may be accepted of the saints;

<span id="xix.viii-p5"></span>**31.** Ut liberer ab incredulis in Iudea,
et ut ministerium meum quod suscipio erga Ierusalem acceptum sit
sanctis;

<span id="xix.viii-p6"></span>**32.** That I may come unto you with joy
by the will of God, and may with you be refreshed.

<span id="xix.viii-p7"></span>**32.** Ut cum gaudio veniam ad vos per
voluntatem Dei, unique vobiscum refociller.

<span id="xix.viii-p8"></span>**33.** Now the God of peace *be* with you
all. Amen.

<span id="xix.viii-p9"></span>**33.** Dens autem pacts sit cure omnibus
vobis. Amen.  <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463)

<span id="xix.viii-p11"></span><span id="xix.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p12"></span>**30.** *Now I beseech you, etc.* It is
well known from many passages how much ill-will prevailed against Paul
in his own nation on account of false reports, as though he taught a
departure from Moses. He knew how much calumnies might avail to oppress
the innocent, especially among those who are carried away by
inconsiderate zeal. Added also to this, was the testimony of the Spirit,
recorded in <span id="xix.viii-p12.1"></span>[Ac
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023)<span
id="xix.viii-p12.1"></span>; by which he was forewarned, that bonds and
afflictions awaited him at Jerusalem. The more danger then he perceived,
the more he was moved: hence it was, that he was so solicitous to
commend his safety to the Churches; nor let us wonder, that he was
anxious about his life, in which he knew so much danger to the Church
was involved.

<span id="xix.viii-p13"></span>He then shows how grieved his godly mind
was, by the earnest protestation he makes, in which he adds to the name
of the *Lord, the love of the Spirit,* by which the saints ought to
embrace one another. But though in so great a fear, he yet continued to
proceed; nor did he so dread danger, but that he was prepared willingly
to meet it. At the same time he had recourse to the remedies given him
by God; for he solicited the aid of the Church, so that being helped by
its prayers, he might find comfort, according to the Lord’s promise, —

<span id="xix.viii-p14"></span>“Where two or three shall assemble in my
name, there in the midst of them am I,” (<span
id="xix.viii-p14.1"></span>[Mt
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span
id="xix.viii-p14.1"></span>;)

<span id="xix.viii-p15"></span>and,

<span id="xix.viii-p16"></span>“Whatsoever they agree in on earth, they
shall obtain in heaven,” (<span id="xix.viii-p16.1"></span>[Mt
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019)<span
id="xix.viii-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.viii-p17"></span>And lest no one should think it an
unmeaning commendation, he besought them both by Christ and by the love
of the Spirit. The love of the Spirit is that by which Christ joins us
together; for it is not that of the flesh, nor of the world, but is from
his Spirit, who is the bond of our unity.

<span id="xix.viii-p18"></span>Since then it is so great a favor from
God to be helped by the prayers of the faithful, that even Paul, a most
choice instrument of God, did not think it right to neglect this
privilege, how great must be our stupidity, if we, who are abject and
worthless creatures, disregard it? But to take a handle from such
passages for the purpose of maintaining the intercessions of dead
saints, is an instance of extreme effrontery.  <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464)

<span id="xix.viii-p20"></span>*That ye strive together with me,*  <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) *etc.* <span
id="xix.viii-p21.8"></span>Erasmus has not given an unsuitable
rendering, “That ye help me laboring:” but, as the Greek word, used by
Paul, has more force, I have preferred to give a literal rendering: for
by the word *strive,* or contend, he alludes to the difficulties by
which he was oppressed, and by bidding them to assist in this contest,
he shows how the godly ought to pray for their brethren, that they are
to assume their person, as though they were placed in the same
difficulties; and he also intimates the effect which they have; for he
who commends his brother to the Lord, by taking to himself a part of his
distress, do so far relieve him. And indeed if our strength is derived
from prayer to God, we can in no better way confirm our brethren, than
by praying to God for them.

<span id="xix.viii-p22"></span><span id="xix.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p23"></span>**31.** *That my ministration, etc.*
Slanderers had so prevailed by their accusations, that he even feared
that the present would hardly be acceptable, as coming from his hands,
which otherwise, under such a distress, would have been very seasonable.
And hence appears his wonderful meekness, for he ceased not to labor for
those to whom he doubted whether he would be acceptable. This
disposition of mind we ought to imitate, so that we may not cease to do
good to those of whose gratitude we are by no means certain. We must
also notice that he honors with the name of *saints* even those by whom
he feared he would be suspected, and deemed unwelcome. He also knew
that, saints may sometimes be led away by false slanders into
unfavorable opinions, and though he knew that they wronged him, he yet
ceased not to speak honorably of them.

<span id="xix.viii-p24"></span>By adding *that I may come to you,* he
intimates that this prayer would be profitable also to them, and that it
concerned them that he should not be killed in Judea. To the same
purpose is the expression *with joy;* for it would be advantageous to
the Romans for him to come to them in a cheerful state of mind and free
from all grief, that he might in a more lively and strenuous manner
labor among them. And by the word *refreshed,*  <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) or satisfied, he again shows how fully
persuaded he was of their brotherly love. The words *by the will of God*
remind us how necessary it is to be diligent in prayer, for God alone
directs all our ways by his providence.

<span id="xix.viii-p26"></span>*And the God of peace,*  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) *etc.* From the universal word *all,*
I conclude that he did not simply pray that God would be present with
and favor the Romans in a general sense, but that he would rule and
guide every one of them. But the word *peace* refers, I think, to their
circumstances at the time, that God, the author of peace, would keep
them all united together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_435"></span>[436](cc38018.htm#fr_435) <span
id="xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix-p2"></span> Introduced here, as the conclusion of the last
chapter, by <span id="xix-p2.1"></span>Griesbach and other collators of
MSS., are the three last verses of the Epistle, <span
id="xix-p2.2"></span>[Ro 16:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span
id="xix-p2.2"></span>. It appears that the largest number of copies is
in favor of this arrangement, countenanced by the Greek fathers, and the
Syriac and Arabic versions. In favor of the present order, as in our
version, there are some good MSS., the Latin fathers, and the Vulgate,
etc. What strongly favors and decidedly confirms the order which we
have, is the evident connection as to matter between this and the last
chapter, which shows the impropriety of having those verses intervening
between them. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_436"></span>[437](cc38018.htm#fr_436) <span
id="xix.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span> The word for “strong” is δυνατοὶ, “able,”
which <span id="xix.i-p10.1"></span>Calvin renders <span
id="xix.i-p10.2"></span>*potentes*, powerful, or able. They were the
more advanced in knowledge and in piety. They were to “bear,” βαστάζειν,
in the sense of carrying or sustaining the infirmities of the weak,
<span id="xix.i-p10.3"></span>*impotentium*, “the unable,” ἀδυνάτων,
such as were unable to carry their own burdens. The duty is not merely
to bear with or tolerate weaknesses, (for this is not the meaning of the
verb,) but to help and assist the weak and the feeble to carry them. The
most literal rendering is —

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>“We then who are able ought to bear (or
carry)  
the infirmities of the unable.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_437"></span>[438](cc38018.htm#fr_437) <span
id="xix.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span> The γὰρ in this verse is considered by
<span id="xix.i-p15.1"></span>Griesbach as wholly spurious; and <span
id="xix.i-p15.2"></span>Beza has left it out. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_438"></span>[439](cc38018.htm#fr_438) <span
id="xix.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span> The intention of producing Christ’s example
here is to enjoin disinterestedness. He denies himself for the sake of
glorifying God in the salvation of men: so his followers ought to show
the same spirit; they ought to inconvenience themselves, and undergo
toil, trouble, suffering, and reproaches, if necessary, in order to help
and assist their fellow-Christians. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_439"></span>[440](cc38018.htm#fr_439) <span
id="xix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p10"></span> “The object of this verse is not so much
to show the propriety of applying the passage quoted from the Psalms to
Christ, as to show that the facts recorded in the Scriptures are
designed for our instruction.” — <span id="xix.ii-p10.1"></span>Hodge

<span id="fn_440"></span>[441](cc38018.htm#fr_440) <span
id="xix.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p13"></span> Or, That we might possess, enjoy, or
retain hope. He does not describe this hope, it being sufficiently
evident — the hope of the gospel. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_441"></span>[442](cc38018.htm#fr_441) <span
id="xix.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p14"></span> Some take “patience” apart from
“consolation,” — “through patience, and the consolation of the
Scriptures;” but what is evidently meant is the patience and consolation
which the Scriptures teach and administer, or are the means of
supplying; for it is the special object of the passage to show the
benefits derived from the Scriptures. Then it is no doubt “consolation,”
and not exhortation, though the word has also that meaning; for in the
next verse it clearly means consolation. It is thus rendered, and in
connection with “patience,” by <span id="xix.ii-p14.1"></span>Beza,
<span id="xix.ii-p14.2"></span>Pareus, <span
id="xix.ii-p14.3"></span>Doddridge, <span
id="xix.ii-p14.4"></span>Macknight, etc.

<span id="xix.ii-p15"></span>In our version it is “comfort” in <span
id="xix.ii-p15.1"></span>[Ro 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span
id="xix.ii-p15.1"></span>, and “consolation” in <span
id="xix.ii-p15.2"></span>[Ro 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005)<span
id="xix.ii-p15.2"></span>; but it would have been better to have
retained the same word. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_442"></span>[443](cc38018.htm#fr_442) <span
id="xix.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p19"></span> There is a difference of opinion as to the
unity contemplated here, whether it be that of sentiment or of feeling.
The phrase, τὸ αὐτὸ φρονεῖν, occurs in the following places, <span
id="xix.ii-p19.1"></span>[Rom. 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016),
[Rom. 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005), [2 Cor.
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011)<span id="xix.ii-p19.1"></span>;
<span id="xix.ii-p19.2"></span>[Phil.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002), [Phil.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#016), [Phil.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002)<span id="xix.ii-p19.2"></span>
<span id="xix.ii-p19.3"></span>Leigh says, that the phrase signifies to
be of *one mind*, of *one judgment*, of *one affection*, towards one
another. But though the verb φρονεῖν may admit of these three
significations, yet the Apostle no doubt had in view a specific idea;
and when we consider that he had been inculcating the principle of
toleration as to unity of sentiment with regard to the eating of meats
and of observing of days, and that he has been enforcing the duty of
forbearance, and of sympathy, and of love towards each other, it appears
probable that unity of feeling and of concern for each other’s welfare
is what is intended here. <span id="xix.ii-p19.4"></span>Beza, <span
id="xix.ii-p19.5"></span>Scott, and <span
id="xix.ii-p19.6"></span>Chalmers take this view, while <span
id="xix.ii-p19.7"></span>Pareus, <span id="xix.ii-p19.8"></span>Mede,
and <span id="xix.ii-p19.9"></span>Stuart take the other, that is, that
unity of sentiment is what is meant.

<span id="xix.ii-p20"></span>What confirms the former, in addition to
the general import of the context, is the clause which follows,
“according to Christ Jesus,” which evidently means, “according to his
example,” as mentioned in verse 3.

<span id="xix.ii-p21"></span>Then in the next verse, the word ὁμοθυμαδὸν
refers to the unity of feeling and of action, rather than to that of
sentiment. It occurs, besides here, in these places, <span
id="xix.ii-p21.1"></span>[Acts 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014),
[Acts 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001), Acts 46:0<span
id="xix.ii-p21.1"></span>; <span id="xix.ii-p21.2"></span>[Acts
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024), [Acts
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#012)<span id="xix.ii-p21.2"></span>;
<span id="xix.ii-p21.3"></span>[Acts
7:57](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057), [Acts
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#006)<span id="xix.ii-p21.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.ii-p21.4"></span>[Acts
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#020), [Acts
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#025)<span id="xix.ii-p21.4"></span>;
<span id="xix.ii-p21.5"></span>[Acts
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012), [Acts
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029)<span id="xix.ii-p21.5"></span>.
It is used by the *Septuagint* for <span id="xix.ii-p21.6"></span>יחד,
which means “together.” It is rendered “<span
id="xix.ii-p21.7"></span>unanimiter — unanimously,” <span
id="xix.ii-p21.8"></span>Beza; “with one mind,” by <span
id="xix.ii-p21.9"></span>Doddridge; and “unanimously,” by <span
id="xix.ii-p21.10"></span>Macknight. It is thus paraphrased by <span
id="xix.ii-p21.11"></span>Grotius, “with a mind full of mutual love,
free from contempt, free from hatred.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_443"></span>[444](cc38018.htm#fr_443) <span
id="xix.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p17"></span> <span id="xix.iii-p17.1"></span>*In
gloriam Dei,* εἰς δόξαν Θεοῦ, *i.e.*, in order to set forth the glory of
God, or, in other words, that God might be glorified. So <span
id="xix.iii-p17.2"></span>Erasmus, <span
id="xix.iii-p17.3"></span>Chalmers, and <span
id="xix.iii-p17.4"></span>Stuart. Others regard this “glory” as that
which God bestows, even eternal happiness, according to this meaning, —
“Receive ye one another into communion and fellowship, as Christ has
received you into the glory of God,” that is, into that glorious state
which God has provided and promised. See <span
id="xix.iii-p17.5"></span>[Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024)<span id="xix.iii-p17.5"></span>.
For “you,” our version has “us;” but <span
id="xix.iii-p17.6"></span>Griesbach considers “you” as the true reading.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](cc38018.htm#fr_444) <span
id="xix.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p20"></span> The beginning of this verse, “Now I say,”
<span id="xix.iii-p20.1"></span>*Dico autem,* Λέγω δὲ, is read by <span
id="xix.iii-p20.2"></span>Beza and <span
id="xix.iii-p20.3"></span>Grotius, Λέγω γὰρ, “For I say,” and <span
id="xix.iii-p20.4"></span>Griesbach regards it of nearly equal
authority. If we retain δὲ, it may be rendered “moreover,” or “further;”
and to render the clause more distinct, the word “this,” as proposed by
<span id="xix.iii-p20.5"></span>Beza and <span
id="xix.iii-p20.6"></span>Pagninus, may be added, — “I further say
*this*,” etc. The two verses may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xix.iii-p21"></span>**8.** I further say *this*, that Christ
became a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, that he
might confirm the promises *made* to

<span id="xix.iii-p22"></span>**9.** the fathers, and that the Gentiles
might glorify God for *his* mercy, as it is written, “I will therefore
confess thee among the nations, and to thy name will I sing.”

<span id="xix.iii-p23"></span>The reasons for this rendering are given
in the next note. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](cc38018.htm#fr_445) <span
id="xix.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p27"></span> The construction of this first sentence
is differently viewed. <span id="xix.iii-p27.1"></span>Grotius and <span
id="xix.iii-p27.2"></span>Stuart connect it with “I say” at the
beginning of the former verse; but <span id="xix.iii-p27.3"></span>Beza
and <span id="xix.iii-p27.4"></span>Pareus connect it with the last
clause, and consider εἰς τὸ as being here understood: and this seems to
be the best construction. Christ became the minister of the
circumcision, a minister under the Abrahamic economy, for two objects, —
that he might confirm the promises made to the Fathers, — and that the
Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy. Mercy was destined to come to
the Gentiles through the covenant made with Abraham, of which
circumcision was the sign and seal. The promise, “In thee shall the
nations of the earth be blessed,” was made to Abraham, and not to the
Gentiles. Hence it is called “mercy” to them, there being to previous
promise made distinctly *to them*, while the same mercy as to the Jews
is called “truth,” because it was the fulfillment of a promise. A
remarkable instance of this difference, noticed by <span
id="xix.iii-p27.5"></span>Haldane, is found in <span
id="xix.iii-p27.6"></span>[Mic
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#020)<span id="xix.iii-p27.6"></span>.
What is said to be “mercy” to Abraham, to whom the promise was first
made, is said to be “truth” to Jacob, to whom it was confirmed. It may
also, by the way, be observed, that this verse in Micah affords an
example of what we often find in Paul’s style; for in mentioning two or
more things, he often reverses the regular order. What Micah mentions
first is “truth” to Jacob, and then he goes back to God’s “mercy” to
Abraham.

<span id="xix.iii-p28"></span>The quotation from <span
id="xix.iii-p28.1"></span>[Ps
18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049)<span id="xix.iii-p28.1"></span>,
is verbatim from the Septuagint. The Hebrew verb with its postfix, <span
id="xix.iii-p28.2"></span>אודך, in our version, “I will give thanks to
thee,” may more properly be rendered, “I will confess thee.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](cc38018.htm#fr_446) <span
id="xix.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p31"></span> This passage is evidently taken from
<span id="xix.iii-p31.1"></span>[De
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)<span id="xix.iii-p31.1"></span>,
given literally as it is found in the Septuagint, and literally too from
the Hebrew, if the reading of two copies, referred to by *Kennicalt*, be
adopted, in which <span id="xix.iii-p31.2"></span>את, “with,” is placed
before <span id="xix.iii-p31.3"></span>עשו, “his people.” It is no
objection that “adversaries” are mentioned in the context. There have
ever been adversaries to God’s people; and God even now denounces his
judgments on his adversaries, though the Gentiles as a people, as a
separate class from the Jews, have been long ago admitted to the
privilege of rejoicing with his people. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](cc38018.htm#fr_447) <span
id="xix.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p36"></span> <span id="xix.iii-p36.1"></span>[Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span id="xix.iii-p36.1"></span>.
The whole of this quotation is given as it is found in the Septuagint.
The difference, as noticed by <span id="xix.iii-p36.2"></span>Calvin,
between the words as given in Hebrew, is considerable. The language of
the Prophet is metaphorical, the Septuagint interpreted it, and this
interpretation the Apostle approved and adopted. The Messiah is
represented by the Prophet as a general or a leader of an army, raising
his banner for the nations, (<span id="xix.iii-p36.3"></span>עמיש, not
“people,” as in our version:) and the Gentiles repair or resort to this
banner for protection; and so <span id="xix.iii-p36.4"></span>Lowth
renders the verb <span id="xix.iii-p36.5"></span>ידרשו, only he does not
preserve the metaphor, by rendering <span
id="xix.iii-p36.6"></span>אליו, “unto him,” instead of “to it,” as in
our version. It hence appears evident, that the passage is substantially
the same; and indeed the verb ἄρχειν, retains in some measure the idea
of the original, for it strictly means to be a leader, to rule as a
chief. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](cc38018.htm#fr_448) <span
id="xix.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p13"></span> The God of hope may mean one of two
things, — the giver or author of hope, as in <span
id="xix.iv-p13.1"></span>[1Pe 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003)<span
id="xix.iv-p13.1"></span>, — or the object of hope, he in whom hope is
placed, as in <span id="xix.iv-p13.2"></span>[1Ti
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)<span id="xix.iv-p13.2"></span>.

<span id="xix.iv-p14"></span>Why does he mention joy before peace? It is
in accordance with his usual manner, — the most visible, the stream
first, then the most hidden, the spring. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_449"></span>[450](cc38018.htm#fr_449) <span
id="xix.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p15"></span> That is εἰς τὸ, instead of ἐν τῷ. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_450"></span>[451](cc38018.htm#fr_450) <span
id="xix.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p16"></span> This is the view approved by <span
id="xix.iv-p16.1"></span>Theophylact, <span
id="xix.iv-p16.2"></span>Beza, <span id="xix.iv-p16.3"></span>Grotius,
<span id="xix.iv-p16.4"></span>Mede, and <span
id="xix.iv-p16.5"></span>Hammond: but <span
id="xix.iv-p16.6"></span>Doddridge, <span
id="xix.iv-p16.7"></span>Scott, <span id="xix.iv-p16.8"></span>Stuart,
and <span id="xix.iv-p16.9"></span>Chalmers consider “peace” here to be
that with God, and “joy” as its accompaniment; while <span
id="xix.iv-p16.10"></span>Pareus and <span
id="xix.iv-p16.11"></span>Hodge view both as included, especially the
latter. If we consider the subject in hand, that the Apostle was
attempting to produce union and concord between the Jews and the
Gentiles, we shall see reason to accede to <span
id="xix.iv-p16.12"></span>Calvin*’s* explanations. This joy and peace
seem to be the same as in <span id="xix.iv-p16.13"></span>[Ro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)<span id="xix.iv-p16.13"></span>.
Concord, union, and mutual enjoyment, are graces which come by
believing, or by faith, as well as concord or peace with God, and its
accompanying joy; and these graces have no doubt an influence on hope,
so as to make it brighter and stronger, when they are produced by the
Holy Spirit. There are three things which distinguish these graces from
such as are fictitious, — they proceed from faith, — they increase hope,
— they are produced by the Spirit. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_451"></span>[452](cc38018.htm#fr_451) <span
id="xix.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p24"></span> It does not clearly appear what meaning
<span id="xix.iv-p24.1"></span>Calvin attached to the words ἀπο μέρους,
which he renders <span id="xix.iv-p24.2"></span>*ex parte*. Some, like
<span id="xix.iv-p24.3"></span>Origen, connect the expression with the
verb, “I have written to you in part,” that is, not fully, which seems
to have no meaning consistently with the evident tenor of the passage.
Others, as <span id="xix.iv-p24.4"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="xix.iv-p24.5"></span>Erasmus, and <span
id="xix.iv-p24.6"></span>Pareus, connect the words with the adjective,
“I have in part (or somewhat) more boldly (or more freely, or more
confidently) written to you.” <span id="xix.iv-p24.7"></span>Macknight
connects them with the following clause, “partly as calling things to
your remembrance.” <span id="xix.iv-p24.8"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="xix.iv-p24.9"></span>Stuart render them “in *this* part of *the
Epistle*.” The most suitable view is to consider them as qualifying the
adjective. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_452"></span>[453](cc38018.htm#fr_452) <span
id="xix.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="xix.iv-p28.1"></span>Consecrans
evangelium,” so <span id="xix.iv-p28.2"></span>Augustine; ἱερουργοῦντα
τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, “<span id="xix.iv-p28.3"></span>operans evangelio — being
employed in the gospel,” <span id="xix.iv-p28.4"></span>Beza and <span
id="xix.iv-p28.5"></span>Pareus; “<span id="xix.iv-p28.6"></span>docens
sacrum evangelium — teaching the holy gospel,” <span
id="xix.iv-p28.7"></span>Vatablus. The verb means to “perform sacred
rites,” or to officiate in holy things. It has no connection, as some
think, with a sacrificing priest; indeed ἱερεὺς itself, that is a
priest, is a holy person, who did sacrifice no doubt among other things,
but the word does not import a sacrificer any more than <span
id="xix.iv-p28.8"></span>כהן in Hebrew. The word here does not mean to
consecrate, or to sanctify, or to sacrifice, but to discharge a holy
function. Perhaps the most literal rendering would be “performing a holy
office as to the gospel,” but dispensing, administering, or preaching
the gospel would be the best version. The Apostle had previously called
himself λειτουργὸν, a public functionary, a public minister of Jesus
Christ; he now designates his work as such, being a sacred administrator
of the gospel, and then he states the object, that the offering of the
Gentiles, that is, that the Gentiles being offered, might be an
acceptable sacrifice to God, sanctified by the Spirit. See <span
id="xix.iv-p28.9"></span>[Ro 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span
id="xix.iv-p28.9"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_453"></span>[454](cc38018.htm#fr_453) <span
id="xix.v-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p19"></span> Some, as <span id="xix.v-p19.1"></span>Beza
and <span id="xix.v-p19.2"></span>Grotius, understand by the last
clause, “through the power of the Spirit of God,” the internal power of
speaking with tongues, etc., and by “signs and wonders,” the external
work of healing the sick, etc. But this passage is evidently an instance
of the Apostle’s usual mode of stating things. “Word” means preaching;
and “work,” the doing of miracles. He first specifies the last, the work
was that of “signs and wonders;” and then he mentions what belongs to
the first, and shows how it became effectual, that is, through the power
of the Spirit. See a similar arrangement in <span
id="xix.v-p19.3"></span>[1Co 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span
id="xix.v-p19.3"></span>; where he mentions washed, sanctified and
justified; and then he mentions first what belongs to the last, “in the
name of the Lord Jesus,” and afterwards what appertains to the first
words, “and by the Spirit of our God.” “Signs and wonders” are often
mentioned together: they designate the same things by different names:
miracles were called “signs,” because they were evidences of divine
power, and they were called “wonders,” or prodigies, because they were
not according to the course of nature, but were extraordinary things. By
these words their design and character are set forth. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_454"></span>[455](cc38018.htm#fr_454) <span
id="xix.v-p21.3"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p22"></span> The clause is rendered by <span
id="xix.v-p22.1"></span>Beza and <span id="xix.v-p22.2"></span>Grotius,
“<span id="xix.v-p22.3"></span>Impleverim praedicandi evangelii Christi
munus — I have fulfilled the office of preaching the gospel of Christ.”
The gospel is put for preaching the gospel. See <span
id="xix.v-p22.4"></span>[Ac 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025)<span
id="xix.v-p22.4"></span>; <span id="xix.v-p22.5"></span>[Col
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025)<span id="xix.v-p22.5"></span>
<span id="xix.v-p22.6"></span>Vatablus renders the verb “<span
id="xix.v-p22.7"></span>plene annunciaverim — I have fully announced;”
and <span id="xix.v-p22.8"></span>Mede, “<span
id="xix.v-p22.9"></span>propagaverim — I have propagated.” Some, as
<span id="xix.v-p22.10"></span>Wolfius and <span
id="xix.v-p22.11"></span>Vitringa, think the verb is used in a sense
borrowed from Hebrew: the verb <span id="xix.v-p22.12"></span>גמר, which
in its common meaning is to *fill* or to finish, is used in the sense of
teaching, not indeed in the Hebrew bible, but in the Talmud. That the
idea of teaching, or propagating, or preaching, belongs to it here, and
in <span id="xix.v-p22.13"></span>[Col
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025)<span id="xix.v-p22.13"></span>,
is evident. The notion of filling up, which <span
id="xix.v-p22.14"></span>Calvin gives to it, is hardly consistent with
what the Apostle says in <span id="xix.v-p22.15"></span>[Ro
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#020)<span id="xix.v-p22.15"></span>.
The *full* preaching is referred by <span
id="xix.v-p22.16"></span>Erasmus, not to its extent, but to its
fidelity, “omitting nothing which a faithful evangelist ought to have
proclaimed.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_455"></span>[456](cc38018.htm#fr_455) <span
id="xix.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p27"></span> The participle, “striving,” rendered <span
id="xix.v-p27.1"></span>*annitens* by <span
id="xix.v-p27.2"></span>Calvin and by <span
id="xix.v-p27.3"></span>Erasmus, is φιλοτιμούμενος, which means to
strive honorably: it is to seek a thing as an object of honor or
ambition. It may be rendered here, “honorably striving;” <span
id="xix.v-p27.4"></span>Doddridge has, “It hath been the object of my
ambition;” <span id="xix.v-p27.5"></span>Stuart, “I was strongly
desirous;” and <span id="xix.v-p27.6"></span>Wolfius, “<span
id="xix.v-p27.7"></span>honori mihi ducentem — esteeming it an honor to
me.” It is used to express both an honorable and an earnest or diligent
pursuit. It is found in two other places, teeming it an honor,” or,
“Being ambitious.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](cc38018.htm#fr_456) <span
id="xix.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p30"></span> <span id="xix.v-p30.1"></span>[Isa
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015)<span id="xix.v-p30.1"></span>.
The quotation is literally from the Septuagint, and is nearly according
to the Hebrew, only the tense is altered, it being the past in that
language, as prophecies are often found to be, in order to show their
certainty. The Hebrew is as follows, —

<span id="xix.v-p31"></span>For what had not been told them, have they
seen,  
And what they had not heard, have they understood.

<span id="xix.v-p32"></span>To render the last verb “consider,” as in
our version, is not proper; it means to distinguish between things, to
discern, to understand. It bears strictly the same meaning with the
Greek verb here used. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](cc38018.htm#fr_457) <span
id="xix.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p8"></span> This clause, and γὰρ in the next, <span
id="xix.vi-p8.1"></span>Griesbach dismisses as being spurious: then the
verse would be, —

<span id="xix.vi-p9"></span>**24.** “Whenever I go into Spain, I hope,
in passing through, to see you, and to be by you sent there, when I
shall first be in a measure refreshed by you;” or, literally, “filled
with you;” or it may be rendered, “satisfied with you.”

<span id="xix.vi-p10"></span>The *Vulgate* renders the words, “<span
id="xix.vi-p10.1"></span>Si vobis primum ex parte fruitus fuero — when I
shall first in part enjoy you, *i.e.*, your society. <span
id="xix.vi-p10.2"></span>Stuart*’s* version is, “When I am in part first
satisfied with your company.” The expression, “in part,” seems to imply
that his stay would not be long. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_458"></span>[459](cc38018.htm#fr_458) <span
id="xix.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p14"></span> On this subject <span
id="xix.vi-p14.1"></span>Wolfius says, “Paul’s journey to Spain was
unknown to <span id="xix.vi-p14.2"></span>Origen and <span
id="xix.vi-p14.3"></span>Eusebius; nor does it comport with the records
connected with him. The Apostle, when freed from the chains of <span
id="xix.vi-p14.4"></span>Nero, did not go to Spain, but to Asia; and
there is no vestige of a Church founded by Paul in Spain. <span
id="xix.vi-p14.5"></span>Basnage has carefully examined this subject as
well as <span id="xix.vi-p14.6"></span>W. Wall in his critical Notes in
English on the New Testament.” As is common in many things connected
with antiquity, fathers later than <span id="xix.vi-p14.7"></span>Origen
and <span id="xix.vi-p14.8"></span>Eusebius came to know of this
journey, but how, it is not easy to know: and in process of time various
particulars were discovered, or rather invented, in connection with this
journey. It is something similar to the story of Peter being the founder
of the Church of Rome. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_459"></span>[460](cc38018.htm#fr_459) <span
id="xix.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p8"></span> “<span id="xix.vii-p8.1"></span>In
carnalibus;” ἐν τοῖς σαρκικοῖς. The word “carnal” in our language does
not convey the meaning. The Apostle uses it here in opposition to what
is “spiritual,” and therefore “temporal” expresses its meaning. See
<span id="xix.vii-p8.2"></span>[1Co
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011)<span id="xix.vii-p8.2"></span>.
It sometimes means “human,” as in <span id="xix.vii-p8.3"></span>[2Co
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span id="xix.vii-p8.3"></span>,
where man’s wisdom is set in contrast with God’s wisdom. In <span
id="xix.vii-p8.4"></span>[2Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004)<span id="xix.vii-p8.4"></span>,
it means “weak,” or feeble, or powerless, being opposed to the “mighty”
weapons of God. It has its own proper meaning in <span
id="xix.vii-p8.5"></span>[Ro 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="xix.vii-p8.5"></span>, and in <span id="xix.vii-p8.6"></span>[1Pe
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011)<span id="xix.vii-p8.6"></span>,
“carnal,” that is, wicked, sinful, corrupt, depraved. In <span
id="xix.vii-p8.7"></span>[1Co 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span
id="xix.vii-p8.7"></span>, it signifies weak, ignorant, imperfect in
knowledge, as opposed to spiritual and enlightened persons. And in <span
id="xix.vii-p8.8"></span>[Heb
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)<span id="xix.vii-p8.8"></span>,
it expresses what is fleeting and transitory. In no language is there
one word which can convey all the meanings of a similar word in another:
hence the necessity of changing a word sometimes in a translation. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_460"></span>[461](cc38018.htm#fr_460) <span
id="xix.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p17"></span> The words are, κοινωνίαν τινὰ ποιήσασθαι,
“to make a certain contribution,” or, “some contribution,” or, as <span
id="xix.vii-p17.1"></span>Doddridge has it, “a certain collection.”
There seems to be no necessity for leaving out the word τινὰ. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_461"></span>[462](cc38018.htm#fr_461) <span
id="xix.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p23"></span> More satisfactory is the explanation of
<span id="xix.vii-p23.1"></span>Stuart: he says, that the word “sealed”
means that the instrument to which a seal is applied is *authenticated*,
*made valid, i.e.*, “sure to answer the purpose intended. So here the
Apostle would not stop short in the performance of his duty, as the
almoner of the Churches, until he had seen the actual distribution of
their charity.” It seems then that “sealed” here means “secured,” or
safely conveyed. “Delivered to them safely,” is the paraphrase of <span
id="xix.vii-p23.2"></span>Hammond. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_462"></span>[463](cc38018.htm#fr_462) <span
id="xix.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p27"></span> This explanation is that of <span
id="xix.vii-p27.1"></span>Chrysostom*;* but how to make the words to
give such a meaning is a matter of some difficulty. The obvious import
of the passage corresponds with <span id="xix.vii-p27.2"></span>[Ro
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)<span id="xix.vii-p27.2"></span>.
All the authors quoted by <span id="xix.vii-p27.3"></span>Poole, except
<span id="xix.vii-p27.4"></span>Estius, take the other view, such as
<span id="xix.vii-p27.5"></span>Grotius, <span
id="xix.vii-p27.6"></span>Beza, <span id="xix.vii-p27.7"></span>Mede,
etc. The last gives the following as the sentiments of <span
id="xix.vii-p27.8"></span>Origen and <span
id="xix.vii-p27.9"></span>Anselm — “My preaching and conversation shall
impart to you an abundant knowledge of the gospel mysteries, love,
comfort, grace, and spiritual fruit.” The word “blessing,” εὐλογία, is
said by <span id="xix.vii-p27.10"></span>Grotius to mean everything that
is freely bestowed on us. See <span id="xix.vii-p27.11"></span>[Ga
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#014)<span id="xix.vii-p27.11"></span>;
<span id="xix.vii-p27.12"></span>[Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)<span id="xix.vii-p27.12"></span>.
The words τοῦ εὐαγγελίου τοῦ, are not considered genuine by <span
id="xix.vii-p27.13"></span>Griesbach and by most critics. This makes no
difference in the meaning: the clause then would be, — “With the
fullness of the blessings of Christ,” or, with the abounding blessings
of Christ; or, as <span id="xix.vii-p27.14"></span>Beza renders it,
“with the full blessing of Christ.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_463"></span>[464](cc38018.htm#fr_463) <span
id="xix.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p10"></span> The word “Amen,” is regarded as
spurious: <span id="xix.viii-p10.1"></span>Griesbach and other have left
it out. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_464"></span>[465](cc38018.htm#fr_464) <span
id="xix.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p19"></span> <span id="xix.viii-p19.1"></span>Scott
quotes the following from <span id="xix.viii-p19.2"></span>Whitby, — “If
Paul, saith <span id="xix.viii-p19.3"></span>Estius, might desire the
prayers of the Romans, why might not the Romans desire the prayers of
Paul? I answer, they might desire his prayers, *as* he did theirs, by a
letter directed to him to pray for them. He adds, If they might desire
his prayers for them when living, why not when dead and reigning with
Christ? I answer, Because they could direct no epistle to him, or in any
other way acquaint him with their mind.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_465"></span>[466](cc38018.htm#fr_465) <span
id="xix.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p21"></span> “<span id="xix.viii-p21.1"></span>Ut
concertetis mihi,” συναγωνίσασθαί μοι; “<span
id="xix.viii-p21.2"></span>ut mecum certetis — that ye strive with me,”
— <span id="xix.viii-p21.3"></span>Beza; “<span
id="xix.viii-p21.4"></span>ut mecum laboretis — that ye labor with me,”
— *Tremelius*, from the Syriac. Literally it is, “that ye agonize with
me.” It is an allusion, says <span id="xix.viii-p21.5"></span>Grotius,
to Jacob’s wrestling with the angel. <span
id="xix.viii-p21.6"></span>[Ge
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024)<span
id="xix.viii-p21.6"></span>. A strenuous and earnest supplication is
intended. <span id="xix.viii-p21.7"></span>Pareus says, that it is a
metaphor taken from warfare, when a soldier comes to the help of
another: but rather from the games, when there is a striving for the
prize. He would have the Romans to make a similar strenuous effort for
him in prayer to God. The word ἀγὼν, is an agonistic and not a military
term. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_466"></span>[467](cc38018.htm#fr_466) <span
id="xix.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p25"></span> It was a mutual refreshment, according
to <span id="xix.viii-p25.1"></span>[Ro
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012)<span id="xix.viii-p25.1"></span>.
The verb here used, says <span id="xix.viii-p25.2"></span>Grotius, means
to *give* and to *receive* comfort. The verb without its compound σὺν,
is found in <span id="xix.viii-p25.3"></span>[1Co
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#018)<span
id="xix.viii-p25.3"></span>; <span id="xix.viii-p25.4"></span>[2Co
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013)<span id="xix.viii-p25.4"></span>;
<span id="xix.viii-p25.5"></span>[Phm
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#007)<span id="xix.viii-p25.5"></span>,
etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_467"></span>[468](cc38018.htm#fr_467) <span
id="xix.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p27"></span> Lover, author, or bestower of peace.
This intimates that there were strifes and contentions among them. Paul
often speaks of God as the God of peace, especially when referring to
the discords which prevailed among Christians. See <span
id="xix.viii-p27.1"></span>[1Co
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033)<span
id="xix.viii-p27.1"></span>; <span id="xix.viii-p27.2"></span>[2Co
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011)<span
id="xix.viii-p27.2"></span>; <span id="xix.viii-p27.3"></span>[Php
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009)<span id="xix.viii-p27.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.viii-p27.4"></span>[1Th
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="xix.viii-p27.4"></span>;
<span id="xix.viii-p27.5"></span>[2Th
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016)<span id="xix.viii-p27.5"></span>;
<span id="xix.viii-p27.6"></span>[Heb
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020)<span
id="xix.viii-p27.6"></span>. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](cc38019)
