[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc38019)  [Next](cc38021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xxi-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xxi-p3"></span>THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span>**1** Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, a
called Apostle, chosen for the gospel of God,

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span>**2** Which he had before promised by his
Prophets in the holy Scriptures,

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span>**3** Concerning his Son, who came from the
seed of David according to the flesh;

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>**4** Declared the Son of’ God in power,
through the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead,
*even* Jesus Christ our Lord;

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span>**5** Through whom we have received grace and
apostleship for the obedience of faith among all nations, for his name’s
sake;

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**6** Among whom ye are also the called of
Jesus Christ;

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span>**7** To all of you who are at Rome, beloved
by God, called saints: grace to you, and peace from God the Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>**8** First indeed I give thanks to my God,
through Jesus Christ, for you all, because your faith is proclaimed
through the whole world.

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span>**9** For my witness is God, whom I serve
with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, that I continually make mention
of you, in all my prayers,

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span>**10** Requesting that by some means a
prosperous journey may some time be given me, through God’s will, to
come to you:

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span>**11** For I desire to see you, that I may
impart to you some spiritual gift to confirm you;

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span>**12** That is, that we may mutually partake
of encouragement through mutual faith, even yours and mine.

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span>**13** And I would not that you should not
know, brethren, that I have often proposed to come to you, (and have
been hitherto hindered,) that I might have some fruit among you as also
among other nations.

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>**14** Both to the Greeks and to the
barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish, am I a debtor;

<span id="xxi.i-p17"></span>**15** So that, as far as I can, I am ready
to preach the gospel to you also who are at Rome;

<span id="xxi.i-p18"></span>**16** For I am not ashamed of the gospel of
Christ, since it is the power of God for salvation to every one who
believes, to the Jew first, then to the Greek;

<span id="xxi.i-p19"></span>**17** For the righteousness of God is in it
revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, “The just by his faith
shall live.”

<span id="xxi.i-p20"></span>**18** Revealed also is the wrath of God
from heaven, against all the impiety and injustice of men, who unjustly
suppress the truth of God;

<span id="xxi.i-p21"></span>**19** Because what may be known of God, is
manifest in them, for God has manifested it to them;

<span id="xxi.i-p22"></span>**20** Since his invisible things are seen
from the creation of the world, being understood by his works, even his
eternal power and divinity, so that they are inexcusable;

<span id="xxi.i-p23"></span>**21** inasmuch as when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, nor were thankful; but became vain in their
thoughts, and darkened was their foolish heart:

<span id="xxi.i-p24"></span>**22** When they thought themselves wise,
they became fools,

<span id="xxi.i-p25"></span>**23** And changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into the likeness of an image, *into that* of a
corruptible man and of birds and of quadrupeds and of reptiles.

<span id="xxi.i-p26"></span>**24** Therefore God gave them up to the
lusts of their own hearts for uncleanness, that they might degrade their
bodies among themselves,

<span id="xxi.i-p27"></span>**25** Who had transformed the truth
respecting God into falsehood, and worshipped and adored the creature
above the Creator; who is blessed for ever; Amen

<span id="xxi.i-p28"></span>**26** Therefore, I say, God gave them up to
disgraceful passions; for their women turned the natural habit into that
which is contrary to nature;

<span id="xxi.i-p29"></span>**27** And in like manner the men also,
having left off the natural use of the woman, burned with mutual lust,
one towards another, males working filthiness with males, and receiving
in themselves the reward due to them for their going astray.

<span id="xxi.i-p30"></span>**28** And as they chose not to retain the
knowledge of God, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do things not
becoming;

<span id="xxi.i-p31"></span>**29** That they might be full of all
unrighteousness, wickedness, lust, avarice, malignity, being filled with
envy, murder, strife, guile, perversity, *being* whisperers,

<span id="xxi.i-p32"></span>**30** Calumniators, haters of God,
villaneus, disdainful, haughty, inventors of evils, disobedient to
parents,

<span id="xxi.i-p33"></span>**31** Without understanding, insociable,
void of natural affections, truce-breakers, merciless;

<span id="xxi.i-p34"></span>32 Who, when they knew the judgment of God,
that they who do such things are worthy of death, not only do them, but
approve of those who do them.

<span id="xxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="xxi.ii-p3"></span>**1** Therefore inexcusable art thou, O man,
who judgest; for in what thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself,
for the same things doest thou who judgest.

<span id="xxi.ii-p4"></span>**2** Now we know that God’s judgment is
according to truth on those who do such things.

<span id="xxi.ii-p5"></span>**3** And thinkest thou, O man, who judgest
those who do such things and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the
judgment of God?

<span id="xxi.ii-p6"></span>**4** Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance and gentleness, not knowing that the goodness
of God leads thee to repentance?

<span id="xxi.ii-p7"></span>**5** But according to thy hardness and a
heart that cannot repent, thou treasurest for thyself wrath for the day
of wrath and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God;

<span id="xxi.ii-p8"></span>**6** Who will render to every one according
to his works, —

<span id="xxi.ii-p9"></span>**7** To those indeed, who by perseverance
in doing good, seek glory and honor and immortality, eternal life;

<span id="xxi.ii-p10"></span>**8** But to those who are contentious and
disobedient to the truth and obey unrighteousness, *there shall be*
indignation and wrath,

<span id="xxi.ii-p11"></span>**9** Tribulation and anguish *shall be* on
every soul of man who doeth evil, the Jew first, then the Greek;

<span id="xxi.ii-p12"></span>**10** But glory and honor and peace *shall
be* to every one who works good, to the Jew first, then to the Greek;

<span id="xxi.ii-p13"></span>**11** Since there is no respect of persons
with God.

<span id="xxi.ii-p14"></span>**12** For whosoever have without the law
sinned, shall also without the law perish; but whosoever have under the
law sinned, shall by the law be judged,

<span id="xxi.ii-p15"></span>**13** For not the hearers of the law are
just before God; but they who do the law shall be justified.

<span id="xxi.ii-p16"></span>**14** When indeed the Gentiles, who have
not the law, do by nature the things of the law, they, having not the
law, are a law to themselves;

<span id="xxi.ii-p17"></span>**15** Who show the work of the law written
on their hearts, their conscience at the same time attesting, and their
thoughts accusing or excusing each other,

<span id="xxi.ii-p18"></span>**16** In the day in which God will judge
the secrets of men, according to my gospel, through Jesus Christ.

<span id="xxi.ii-p19"></span>**17** Behold, thou art named a Jew, and
restest in the law and gloriest in God,

<span id="xxi.ii-p20"></span>**18** And knowest his will and approvest
of things excellent, being instructed from the law,

<span id="xxi.ii-p21"></span>**19** And art confident that thou thyself
art a leader to the blind, a light to those who are in darkness,

<span id="xxi.ii-p22"></span>**20** An instructor to the foolish, a
teacher to the ignorant, because thou hast the form of knowledge and of’
the truth according to the law:

<span id="xxi.ii-p23"></span>**21** Yet thou who teachest another, dost
not teach thyself; thou who preachest “steal not,” stealest;

<span id="xxi.ii-p24"></span>**22** Thou who sayest, “commit no
adultery,” committest adultery; thou who hatest idols, committest
sacrilege;

<span id="xxi.ii-p25"></span>**23** Thou who gloriest in the law, by
transgressing the law dishonorest God; for the name of God,

<span id="xxi.ii-p26"></span>**24** As it is written, is reproached on
your account among the nations.

<span id="xxi.ii-p27"></span>**25** For circumcision indeed profits, if
thou keep the law; but if thou be a transgressor of the law, thy
circumcision is turned into uncircumcision.

<span id="xxi.ii-p28"></span>**26** If then the uncircumcision keep the
righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for
circumcision?

<span id="xxi.ii-p29"></span>**27** And shall not he who is by nature
uncircumcision judge thee, (if he keep the law,) who by the letter and
circumcision art a transgressor of the law?

<span id="xxi.ii-p30"></span>**28** For not he who is *a Jew* openly, is
a Jew; nor is that circumcision which is openly in the flesh:

<span id="xxi.ii-p31"></span>29 But he who is one in secret is a Jew;
and circumcision is *that* of the heart, in the spirit, not in the
letter; the praise of whom is not from men, but from God.

<span id="xxi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="xxi.iii-p3"></span>**1** What then is the privilege of the
Jew, or what is the benefit of circumcision?

<span id="xxi.iii-p4"></span>**2** Much in every way; and first indeed,
because to them have been intrusted the oracles of God.

<span id="xxi.iii-p5"></span>**3** What indeed if some have not
believed? Shall their unbelief render void the faithfulness of God?

<span id="xxi.iii-p6"></span>**4** By no means; but let God be true, and
every man false, as it is written, “That thou mightest be justified in
thy words, and overcome when thou art judged.”

<span id="xxi.iii-p7"></span>**5** But if our unrighteousness commend
the righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God unjust who executes
wrath? (according to man I speak:)

<span id="xxi.iii-p8"></span>**6** By no means; for how then shall God
judge the world?

<span id="xxi.iii-p9"></span>**7** If indeed the truth of God has
through my falsehood redounded to his glory, why still am even I judged
as a sinner, —

<span id="xxi.iii-p10"></span>**8** And *why* not (as we are reproached,
and as some declare that we say) “Let us do evils, that good things may
come?” the judgment of whom is just.

<span id="xxi.iii-p11"></span>**9** What then? do we excel? Not at all;
for we have before brought a charge against both Jews and Greeks, that
they are all under sin;

<span id="xxi.iii-p12"></span>**10** As it is written, “There is none
righteous, not indeed one;

<span id="xxi.iii-p13"></span>**11** There is none who understands,
There is none who seeks God;

<span id="xxi.iii-p14"></span>**12** All have turned aside; they have
become together unprofitable; there is none who doeth kindness, no, not
even one:

<span id="xxi.iii-p15"></span>**13** An open grave is their throat; with
*their* tongues have they dealt deceitfully: The poison of asps is under
their lips:

<span id="xxi.iii-p16"></span>**14** Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness:

<span id="xxi.iii-p17"></span>**15** Swift are their feet to shed blood;

<span id="xxi.iii-p18"></span>**16** Ruin and misery are in their ways;

<span id="xxi.iii-p19"></span>**17** And the way of peace have they not
known:

<span id="xxi.iii-p20"></span>**18** There is no fear of God before
their eyes.”

<span id="xxi.iii-p21"></span>**19** Now we know that whatever the law
says, it speaks to those who are under the law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and the whole world may become guilty before God:

<span id="xxi.iii-p22"></span>**20** Because no flesh shall by the works
of the law be justified before him, since by the law is the knowledge of
sin.

<span id="xxi.iii-p23"></span>**21** But now the righteousness of God
without the law is manifested, being approved by the law and the
Prophets, —

<span id="xxi.iii-p24"></span>**22** Even the righteousness of God
through faith in Jesus Christ, *which is* to all and upon all who
believe: there is indeed no difference;

<span id="xxi.iii-p25"></span>**23** For all have sinned, and are become
destitute of the glory of God;

<span id="xxi.iii-p26"></span>**24** And they are justified gratuitously
by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus;

<span id="xxi.iii-p27"></span>**25** Whom God has set forth *as* a
propitiatory through faith in his blood, for a demonstration of his
righteousness on account of the remission of sins, which before existed
through the forbearance of God, —

<span id="xxi.iii-p28"></span>**26** For a demonstration of his
righteousness, at this time, that he might be just. and the justifier of
him who believes in Jesus.

<span id="xxi.iii-p29"></span>**27** Where then is glorying? It is
excluded: by what law? Of works? no; but by the law of faith.

<span id="xxi.iii-p30"></span>**28** We then conclude, that by faith is
man justified without the works of the law.

<span id="xxi.iii-p31"></span>**29** Is he the God of the Jews only? and
not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also;

<span id="xxi.iii-p32"></span>30 Since one is God, who will justify the
circumcision by faith and the uncircumcision through faith.

<span id="xxi.iii-p33"></span>31 Do we then make void the law by faith?
By no means; but we confirm the law.

<span id="xxi.iv"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="xxi.iv-p3"></span>**1** What shall we then say, that Abraham,
our father according to the flesh, had obtained?

<span id="xxi.iv-p4"></span>**2** For if Abraham was by works justified,
he has what he may glory in, but not before God.

<span id="xxi.iv-p5"></span>**3** But what saith the Scripture? “Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.”

<span id="xxi.iv-p6"></span>**4** To him indeed who works the reward is
not imputed as a grace, but as a debt:

<span id="xxi.iv-p7"></span>**5** But to him who works not, but believes
on him who justifies the ungodly, imputed is his faith for
righteousness.

<span id="xxi.iv-p8"></span>**6** As David also describes the
blessedness of the man, to whom God imputes righteousness without works,

<span id="xxi.iv-p9"></span>**7** “Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered;

<span id="xxi.iv-p10"></span>**8** Blessed is the man to whom God has
not imputed sin.”

<span id="xxi.iv-p11"></span>**9** *Was* then this blessedness on the
circumcision *only,* or also on the uncircumcision? for we say, that
imputed to Abraham was faith for righteousness:

<span id="xxi.iv-p12"></span>**10** How then was it imputed? when he was
in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision;

<span id="xxi.iv-p13"></span>**11** And he received the sign of
circumcision *as* a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had
in uncircumcision, that he might be the father of all who believe while
in uncircumcision, in order that to them also righteousness might be
imputed, —

<span id="xxi.iv-p14"></span>**12** And the father of the circumcision,
not to those who are in circumcision only, but who walk in the footsteps
of that faith which our father Abraham had in uncircumcision.

<span id="xxi.iv-p15"></span>**13** It was not indeed by the law that
the promise was to Abraham and to his seed, that he should be the heir
of the world, but through the righteousness of faith.

<span id="xxi.iv-p16"></span>**14** For if they who are of the law are
heirs, *then* made void is faith, and abolished is the promise.

<span id="xxi.iv-p17"></span>**15** For the law causeth wrath: but where
no law is, there is also no transgression.

<span id="xxi.iv-p18"></span>**16** It is therefore by faith, that *it
might be* through grace, in order that the promise might be sure to all
the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but which also is of the
faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all,

<span id="xxi.iv-p19"></span>**17** (As it is written, “The father of
many nations have I made thee,”) before God whom he believed, who
quickens the dead, and calls things which are not, as though they were:

<span id="xxi.iv-p20"></span>**18** Who against hope believed through
hope, that he would be the father of many nations, according to what had
been said, “So shall thy seed be.”

<span id="xxi.iv-p21"></span>**19** And being not in faith weak, he
considered not his own body, now dead, when he was nearly an hundred
years old, nor the dead womb of Sarah;

<span id="xxi.iv-p22"></span>**20** Nor did he indeed search into the
promise of God through unbelief, but was strengthened by faith, giving
glory to God;

<span id="xxi.iv-p23"></span>**21** And being assuredly persuaded, that
what he had promised he was also able to perform:

<span id="xxi.iv-p24"></span>**22** And it was therefore imputed to him
for righteousness.

<span id="xxi.iv-p25"></span>**23** Now it was not written on his
account only, that it was imputed to him

<span id="xxi.iv-p26"></span>**24** But also on our account, to whom it
shall be imputed, *even to us* who believe on him, who raised Jesus our
Lord from the dead;

<span id="xxi.iv-p27"></span>25 Who was delivered for our offenses and
raised for our justification.

<span id="xxi.v"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xxi.v-p3"></span>**1** Being then justified, we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="xxi.v-p4"></span>**2** Through whom we have had access by
faith to this grace in which we stand, and glory in the hope of the
glory of God:

<span id="xxi.v-p5"></span>**3** And not only so, but we glory also in
tribulations; knowing that tribulation produces patience;

<span id="xxi.v-p6"></span>**4** And patience, experience; and
experience, hope:

<span id="xxi.v-p7"></span>**5** Moreover, hope makes *us* not ashamed,
because the love of God is diffused in our hearts by the Holy Spirit,
who has been given to us.

<span id="xxi.v-p8"></span>**6** For Christ, when we were as yet as to
time weak, died for the ungodly.

<span id="xxi.v-p9"></span>**7** Hardly indeed for the just will any one
die; but for the good perhaps some one may even venture to die:

<span id="xxi.v-p10"></span>**8** But God confirms his love towards us,
because when we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

<span id="xxi.v-p11"></span>**9** Much more then, having been now
justified by his blood, shall we be saved by him from wrath.

<span id="xxi.v-p12"></span>**10** If indeed when we were enemies we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, having been
reconciled, shall we be saved through his life:

<span id="xxi.v-p13"></span>**11** And not only so, but we also glory in
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received
reconciliation.

<span id="xxi.v-p14"></span>**12** Wherefore as by one man sin entered
into the world, and through sin death; and so over all men has death
spread, since all have sinned;

<span id="xxi.v-p15"></span>**13** (For until the law sin was in the
world; but sin is not imputed when there is no law.

<span id="xxi.v-p16"></span>**14** Yet reign did sin from Adam to Moses,
even over them who had not sinned after the likeness of the
transgression of Adam, who is the figure of him that was to come.

<span id="xxi.v-p17"></span>**15** But not as the offense, so also the
gift: for if through the offense of one many died, much more has the
grace of God, and the gift of God through grace, abounded unto many.

<span id="xxi.v-p18"></span>**16** And not as through one who had
sinned, so the gift; for judgment was from one *offense* to
condemnation, but the gift is from many offenses unto justification.

<span id="xxi.v-p19"></span>**17** For if by the offense of one death
reigned through one, much more shall they who have received abundance of
grace, and the gift of righteousness, reign in life through one, Jesus
Christ.)

<span id="xxi.v-p20"></span>**18** Therefore as through the offense of
one *judgment came* on all men to condemnation, so also through the
justification of one, *the gift comes* to all men to the justification
of life:

<span id="xxi.v-p21"></span>**19** For as through the disobedience of
one man many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of one
many shall be made righteous.

<span id="xxi.v-p22"></span>**20** But the law intervened, that the
offense might abound: but where sin abounded, grace has superabounded;

<span id="xxi.v-p23"></span>21 That as sin has reigned through death, so
grace also might reign through righteousness unto eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="xxi.vi"></span>

<span id="xxi.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xxi.vi-p3"></span>**1** What then shall we say? Shall we
continue in sin that grace may abound

<span id="xxi.vi-p4"></span>**2** By no means: we who have died to sin,
how shall we still live in it?

<span id="xxi.vi-p5"></span>**3** Know ye not, that we all, who have
been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death?

<span id="xxi.vi-p6"></span>**4** Buried then have we been with him
through baptism unto death, that as Christ was raised from the dead by
the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life:

<span id="xxi.vi-p7"></span>**5** For if we have been ingrafted in the
likeness of his death, doubtless we shall also be partakers of *his*
resurrection;

<span id="xxi.vi-p8"></span>**6** Knowing this, that our old man was
crucified, together with him, that abolished might be the body of sin,
so that we may no longer serve sin:

<span id="xxi.vi-p9"></span>**7** For he who has died, has been freed
from sin.

<span id="xxi.vi-p10"></span>**8** Now if we have died with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him;

<span id="xxi.vi-p11"></span>**9** Knowing that Christ, having been
raised from the dead, dies no more, death no more reigns over him:

<span id="xxi.vi-p12"></span>**10** For that he died, he once for sin
died; and that he lives, he lives to God.

<span id="xxi.vi-p13"></span>**11** So also regard ye yourselves to be
dead indeed to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="xxi.vi-p14"></span>**12** Let not sin then reign in your
mortal body, so as to obey it. in its lusts.

<span id="xxi.vi-p15"></span>**13** Neither present your members, as
weapons of unrighteousness, to sin; but present yourselves to God, as
alive from the dead, and your members, as weapons of righteousness, to
God:

<span id="xxi.vi-p16"></span>**14** For sin shall not rule over you,
since ye are not under the law, but under grace.

<span id="xxi.vi-p17"></span>**15** What then? Shall we sin, because we
are not under the law, but under grace? By no means:

<span id="xxi.vi-p18"></span>**16** Know ye not that to whom ye present
yourselves servants for obedience, ye are the servants of him whom ye
obey, whether of sin for death, or of obedience for righteousness?

<span id="xxi.vi-p19"></span>**17** But thanks to God; for ye have been
the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart the form of
doctrine into which you were delivered;

<span id="xxi.vi-p20"></span>**18** And having been freed from sin, ye
became the servants of righteousness.

<span id="xxi.vi-p21"></span>**19** I speak what is human on account of
the infirmity of your flesh: As ye have presented your members to
uncleanness and to iniquity for iniquity, so also now present your
members servants to righteousness for holiness:

<span id="xxi.vi-p22"></span>**20** For when ye were the servants of
sin, ye were free from righteousness.

<span id="xxi.vi-p23"></span>**21** What fruit therefore had you then in
those things, of which ye are now ashamed? for their end is death;

<span id="xxi.vi-p24"></span>22 But now, having been freed from sin and
made servants to God, ye have your fruit, holiness, and *your* end,
eternal life:

<span id="xxi.vi-p25"></span>23 For the wages of sin is death; but the
gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="xxi.vii"></span>

<span id="xxi.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xxi.vii-p3"></span>**1** Know ye not, brethren, (for to those
who know the law I speak,) that the law rules over a man as long as he
lives.

<span id="xxi.vii-p4"></span>**2** For a woman, subject to a husband, is
bound by the law to a living husband: but if the husband die, she is
loosed from the law of *her* husband.

<span id="xxi.vii-p5"></span>**3** While then the husband is living, she
shall be called an adulteress, if she be united to another man: but if
the husband be dead, she is freed from *his* law, so that she is not an
adulteress by marrying another man.

<span id="xxi.vii-p6"></span>**4** And thus, my brethren, are ye also
dead to the law through the body of Christ, that hereafter ye should be
united to another, even to him who has been raised from the dead, that
ye might bring forth fruit to God.

<span id="xxi.vii-p7"></span>**5** For when ye were in the flesh, the
emotions of sin which are through the law wrought in your members to
bring forth fruit to death:

<span id="xxi.vii-p8"></span>**6** But now ye are loosed from the law,
having died to that by which we were held, that we might serve in
newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.

<span id="xxi.vii-p9"></span>**7** What then shall we say? Is the law
sin? By no means: yet sin I knew not except through the law; for
concupiscence I had not known, had not the law said, “Thou shalt not
lust.”

<span id="xxi.vii-p10"></span>**8** And the occasion being taken, sin
through the commandment wrought in me every concupiscence. Sin indeed
without the law is dead:

<span id="xxi.vii-p11"></span>**9** And I lived some time without the
law; but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died;

<span id="xxi.vii-p12"></span>**10** And the commandment, which was for
life, was found by me to be unto death:

<span id="xxi.vii-p13"></span>**11** For sin taking occasion through the
commandment, led me astray, and through it slew me.

<span id="xxi.vii-p14"></span>**12** So then the law indeed is holy, and
the commandment holy and just and good.

<span id="xxi.vii-p15"></span>**13** Did then what is good become death
to me? By no means: but sin, that it might appear to be sin, wrought
death in me through that which is good, in order that sin through the
commandment might become above measure sinful.

<span id="xxi.vii-p16"></span>**14** We indeed know that the law is
spiritual; but I am carnal, sold under sin:

<span id="xxi.vii-p17"></span>**15** For what I work I know not; since
what I would, this I do not, but what I hate, this I do.

<span id="xxi.vii-p18"></span>**16** If then, what I would not, this I
do, I consent to the law of God, that it is good:

<span id="xxi.vii-p19"></span>**17** And now, it is no longer I who do
it, but sin which dwells in me.  <span id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485.md)

<span id="xxi.vii-p21"></span>**18** I indeed know that no good dwells
in me, that is, in my flesh; for to will is present with me, but to
perform what is good I find not;

<span id="xxi.vii-p22"></span>**19** Since the good I would I do not;
but the evil I would not, that I do.

<span id="xxi.vii-p23"></span>**20** But if what I would not, that I do,
it is no longer I who do it, but sin which dwells in me.

<span id="xxi.vii-p24"></span>**21** I find then a law that while I am
willing to do good, evil lies in wait for me.

<span id="xxi.vii-p25"></span>**22** I consent then to the law of God
according to the inner-man:

<span id="xxi.vii-p26"></span>**23** But I see another law in my
members, resisting the law of my mind and making me captive to the law
of sin which is in my members.

<span id="xxi.vii-p27"></span>**24** Miserable man am I! who shall
rescue me from this body of death?

<span id="xxi.vii-p28"></span>25 I give thanks to God through Jesus
Christ our Lord: so then with the mind I serve myself the law of God,
but with the flesh the law of sin.

<span id="xxi.viii"></span>

<span id="xxi.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xxi.viii-p3"></span>**1** There is now then no condemnation to
those who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit.

<span id="xxi.viii-p4"></span>**2** For the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and of death:

<span id="xxi.viii-p5"></span>**3** For it being impossible for the law,
because it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, even by a sin-offering condemned sin in
the flesh;

<span id="xxi.viii-p6"></span>**4** That the justification of the law
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.

<span id="xxi.viii-p7"></span>**5** For they who are after the flesh,
think of the things of the flesh; but they who are after the Spirit, of
the things of the Spirit.

<span id="xxi.viii-p8"></span>**6** Doubtless the thinking of the flesh
is death; but the thinking of the Spirit is life and peace:

<span id="xxi.viii-p9"></span>**7** Because the thinking of the flesh is
enmity against God; for to the law of God it is not subject, nor can it
be;

<span id="xxi.viii-p10"></span>**8** They therefore who are in the
flesh, cannot please God.

<span id="xxi.viii-p11"></span>**9** But ye are not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you; but if any one
has not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his.

<span id="xxi.viii-p12"></span>**10** But if Christ is in you, the body
indeed is dead with respect to sin, but the spirit is life with regard
to righteousness.

<span id="xxi.viii-p13"></span>**11** If then the Spirit of him, who
raised Jesus from the dead, dwells in you, he who raised Christ from the
dead will quicken your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in
you.

<span id="xxi.viii-p14"></span>**12** So then, brethren, debtors we are,
not to the flesh, that we may live after the flesh;

<span id="xxi.viii-p15"></span>**13** For if ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die; but if by the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye
shall live:

<span id="xxi.viii-p16"></span>**14** For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, these are the sons of God.

<span id="xxi.viii-p17"></span>**15** Ye have not indeed received the
spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit of
adoption, through whom we cry, Abba, Father:

<span id="xxi.viii-p18"></span>**16** The very Spirit itself testifies
together with our spirit, that we are the sons of God:

<span id="xxi.viii-p19"></span>**17** And if sons, then heirs; the heirs
of God, and co-heirs with Christ; if indeed we suffer with him, that we
may also be glorified together.

<span id="xxi.viii-p20"></span>**18** I indeed judge, that the
afflictions of this time are not to be compared to the future glory
which shall be revealed to us.

<span id="xxi.viii-p21"></span>**19** For the intent expectation of the
creation waits for the revelation of the sons of God;

<span id="xxi.viii-p22"></span>**20** For to vanity has the creation
been subjected, not willingly, but on account of him who has subjected
it in hope;

<span id="xxi.viii-p23"></span>**21** Because the creation itself shall
also be reclaimed from the bondage of corruption into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God;

<span id="xxi.viii-p24"></span>**22** For we know that the whole
creation groans and labors in pain to this day:

<span id="xxi.viii-p25"></span>**23** And not only so, but we ourselves
also, who have the beginnings of the Spirit, even we ourselves do groan
in ourselves, waiting for *our* adoption, the redemption of our body;

<span id="xxi.viii-p26"></span>**24** For by hope are we saved but hope
that is seen is not hope; for what one sees, how can he hope for *it?*

<span id="xxi.viii-p27"></span>**25** If then for what we see not we
hope, we wait for it in patience.  <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486.md)

<span id="xxi.viii-p37"></span>**26** And in like manner the Spirit also
assists our infirmities; for what to pray for as we ought we know not;
but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with groanings unutterable:

<span id="xxi.viii-p38"></span>**27** And he who searches the hearts
knows the mind of the Spirit; because he intercedes according to God’s
*will* for the saints.

<span id="xxi.viii-p39"></span>**28** We further know, that to those who
love God all things co-operate for good, even to those who are called
according to *his* purpose:

<span id="xxi.viii-p40"></span>**29** For whom he has foreknown, he has
also predetermined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he
might be the first-born among many brethren;

<span id="xxi.viii-p41"></span>**30** And whom he has predetermined,
them has he also called; and whom he has called, them has he also
justified; and whom he has justified, them has he also glorified.

<span id="xxi.viii-p42"></span>**31** What then shall we say to these
things? If God be for us, who can be against us?

<span id="xxi.viii-p43"></span>**32** He who spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give
us all things?

<span id="xxi.viii-p44"></span>**33** Who shall bring an accusation
against the elect of God? God is he who justifies

<span id="xxi.viii-p45"></span>**34** Who is he who condemns? Christ is
he who died; nay, rather who has been raised, who also is at the right
hand of the Father, and who intercedes for us.

<span id="xxi.viii-p46"></span>**35** Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or danger, or sword?

<span id="xxi.viii-p47"></span>**36** As it is written, “For thee we die
daily, we are counted as sheep destined for the slaughter:”

<span id="xxi.viii-p48"></span>**37** But in all these things we do more
than overcome through him who has loved us.

<span id="xxi.viii-p49"></span>**38** For I am persuaded, that neither
death nor life, neither angels nor principalities nor powers, neither
things present nor things future,

<span id="xxi.viii-p50"></span>39 Neither height nor depth, nor any
other created thing, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="xxi.ix"></span>

<span id="xxi.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xxi.ix-p3"></span>**1** The truth I say in Christ, I lie not,
my conscience bearing me a testimony together with the Holy Spirit,

<span id="xxi.ix-p4"></span>**2** That I have a great grief and a
continual sorrow in my heart;

<span id="xxi.ix-p5"></span>**3** For I myself could wish to be an
anathema from Christ for my brethren, my kindred according to the flesh;

<span id="xxi.ix-p6"></span>**4** Who are Israelites, whose are the
adoption and the glory and the covenants and the lawgiving and the
worship and the promises;

<span id="xxi.ix-p7"></span>**5** Whose are the fathers, and from whom
is Christ according to the flesh, who is above all, God blessed for
ever. Amen.

<span id="xxi.ix-p8"></span>**6** Not however as though God’s word has
failed; for not all who are from Israel are Israelites;

<span id="xxi.ix-p9"></span>**7** Nor are they who are the seed of
Abraham, on this account all sons; but, “In Isaac shall thy seed be
called;”

<span id="xxi.ix-p10"></span>**8** That is, They who are the sons of the
flesh, are not the sons of God; but they who are the sons of the promise
shall be counted for a seed.

<span id="xxi.ix-p11"></span>**9** For the word of promise is this,
“According to this time shall I come, and there shall be a son to
Sarah.”

<span id="xxi.ix-p12"></span>**10** And not only *he,* but Rebecca also,
who had conceived by one, our father Isaac;

<span id="xxi.ix-p13"></span>**11** For when the *children* were not yet
born, and had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, not by works, but through him who
calls,

<span id="xxi.ix-p14"></span>**12** It was said to her, “The elder shall
serve the younger;”

<span id="xxi.ix-p15"></span>**13** According to what is written, “Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated.”

<span id="xxi.ix-p16"></span>**14** What then shall we say? Is there
unrighteousness with God? By no means:

<span id="xxi.ix-p17"></span>**15** For he says to Moses, “I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
will have compassion.”

<span id="xxi.ix-p18"></span>**16** It is not then of him who wills, nor
of him who runs; but of God who shows mercy.

<span id="xxi.ix-p19"></span>**17** For the Scripture saith to Pharaoh,
“For this have I raised thee, that I might show in thee my power, and
that my name might be proclaimed through the whole earth.”

<span id="xxi.ix-p20"></span>**18** So then on whom he wills he has
mercy, and whom he wills he hardens.

<span id="xxi.ix-p21"></span>**19** Thou wilt then say to me, Why does
he still blame? His will, who has resisted *it?*

<span id="xxi.ix-p22"></span>**20** But, O man, who art thou who
contendest in judgment with God? Does the earthen vessel say to the
potter, Why hast thou thus made me?

<span id="xxi.ix-p23"></span>**21** Has not the former of the clay
power, from the same mass, to make one vessel to honor, another to
dishonor?

<span id="xxi.ix-p24"></span>**22** And what if God, willing to show
*his* wrath and to make known his power, has endured with much patience
the vessels of wrath, prepared for destruction;

<span id="xxi.ix-p25"></span>**23** That he might also make known the
riches of his grace towards the vessels of mercy, which he has
foreprepared for glory?

<span id="xxi.ix-p26"></span>**24** Whom he has also called, even us,
not only from the Jews, but also from the Gentiles;

<span id="xxi.ix-p27"></span>**25** As he says in Hosea, “I will call
them my people, who is not a people, and her beloved, who is not
beloved:

<span id="xxi.ix-p28"></span>**26** And it shall be in the place where
it was said to them, ‘Not my people are ye;’ there shall they be called
the sons of the living God:”

<span id="xxi.ix-p29"></span>**27** And Isaiah exclaims respecting
Israel, “Though the number of the sons of Israel should be as the sand
of the sea, *yet only* a remnant shall be saved;

<span id="xxi.ix-p30"></span>**28** For the work *he will* finish and
shorten, because a shortened work will the Lord do on the earth;”

<span id="xxi.ix-p31"></span>**29** As Isaiah had also said before,
*“Except the* Lord of hosts had left us a seed, we should have been as
Sodom and made like to Gomorrha.”

<span id="xxi.ix-p32"></span>**30** What then shall we say? That the
Gentiles, who did not follow after righteousness, have obtained
righteousness, even the righteousness which is by faith:

<span id="xxi.ix-p33"></span>**31** But Israel, by following after the
law of righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness.

<span id="xxi.ix-p34"></span>**32** Why? Because \[they followed after
it\] not by faith, but as it were by works; for they have stumbled at
the stone of stumbling,

<span id="xxi.ix-p35"></span>33 According to what is written, “Behold, I
lay in Sion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense:” and, “Every one
who believes in him shall not be ashamed.”

<span id="xxi.x"></span>

<span id="xxi.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xxi.x-p3"></span>**1** Brethren, the kind desire of my heart,
and prayer to God for Israel, is for *their* salvation.

<span id="xxi.x-p4"></span>**2** For I bear to them a testimony, that
they have a zeal for God; but not according to knowledge,

<span id="xxi.x-p5"></span>**3** For being ignorant of the righteousness
of God, and seeking to establish their own righteousness, they have not
submitted to the righteousness of God;

<span id="xxi.x-p6"></span>**4** For the end of the law is Christ for
righteousness to every one who believes.

<span id="xxi.x-p7"></span>**5** For Moses describes the righteousness
which is by the law, “The man who shall do these things shall live by
them:”

<span id="xxi.x-p8"></span>**6** But the righteousness, which is by
faith, saith thus, “Say not in thine heart, ‘Who shall ascend into
heaven?’ this is to bring, down Christ;

<span id="xxi.x-p9"></span>**7** Or, ‘Who shall descend into the deep?’
that is to bring up Christ again from the dead:” but what does it say?

<span id="xxi.x-p10"></span>**8** “Nigh thee is the word, in thy mouth
and in thy heart:” this is the word of’ faith which we preach, —

<span id="xxi.x-p11"></span>**9** That if thou wilt confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God has raised him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved;

<span id="xxi.x-p12"></span>**10** For with the heart we believe to
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation; for
the Scripture says,

<span id="xxi.x-p13"></span>**11** “Every one who believes in him shall
not be ashamed:”

<span id="xxi.x-p14"></span>**12** For there is no difference between
the Jew and the Greek; for the same is the Lord of all, being rich to
all who call on him;

<span id="xxi.x-p15"></span>**13** For, “whosoever shall call on the
name of the Lord shall be saved.”

<span id="xxi.x-p16"></span>**14** How then shall they call on him in
whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?

<span id="xxi.x-p17"></span>**15** And how shall they preach except they
be sent? As it is written, “How beautiful are the feet of those who
proclaim peace, who proclaim good things!”

<span id="xxi.x-p18"></span>**16** But all have not obeyed the gospel;
for Isaiah says, “Who has believed our report?”

<span id="xxi.x-p19"></span>**17** Faith then is by hearing, and hearing
through the word of God.

<span id="xxi.x-p20"></span>**18** But I say, Have they not heard? Yes,
verily, “Into all the earth has gone forth their sound, and into the
ends of the world their words.”

<span id="xxi.x-p21"></span>**19** But I say, Has not Israel known?
First, Moses says, “I will provoke them to jealousy by them who are not
a people, and by a foolish nation will I irritate them:”

<span id="xxi.x-p22"></span>**20** Then Isaiah is bold and says, “I have
been found by those who sought me not, I have been made manifest to
those, who inquired not for me;

<span id="xxi.x-p23"></span>21 But of Israel he says, “Daily have I
stretched forth my hands to a people disobedient and gain saying.”

<span id="xxi.xi"></span>

<span id="xxi.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xxi.xi-p3"></span>**1** I say then, Hath God cast away his
people? By no means; for I also am an Israelite, from the seed of
Abraham, *from* the tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="xxi.xi-p4"></span>**2** God has not cast away his people whom
he has foreknown. Know ye not what the Scripture saith as to Elias? how
he appeals to God against Israel, saying,

<span id="xxi.xi-p5"></span>**3** “Lord, thy prophets have they killed,
and thy altars have they pulled down, and I am left alone, and they seek
my life?”

<span id="xxi.xi-p6"></span>**4** But what says the answer of God to
him? “I have reserved for myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed
the knee to the image of Baal.”

<span id="xxi.xi-p7"></span>**5** So now, even at this time, there is a
remnant according to the election of grace.

<span id="xxi.xi-p8"></span>**6** And if through grace, then no longer
by works, otherwise grace is no longer grace; but if by works, then no
longer by grace, otherwise work is no longer work.

<span id="xxi.xi-p9"></span>**7** What then? That which Israel seeks, he
has not obtained; but election has obtained it, and the rest have been
blinded,

<span id="xxi.xi-p10"></span>**8** As it is written, “God has given them
the spirit of compunction, eyes so as not to see, and ears so as not to
hear,” even to this day;

<span id="xxi.xi-p11"></span>**9** And David says, “Be their table for a
snare and for a trap, and for a stumbling, and for a recompense to them;

<span id="xxi.xi-p12"></span>**10** Darkened be their eyes so as not to
see, and their back ever bow thou down.”

<span id="xxi.xi-p13"></span>**11** I say then, Have they stumbled so as
wholly to fall? By no means; but by their fall salvation *is come* to
the Gentiles in order to provoke them to jealousy.

<span id="xxi.xi-p14"></span>**12** But if their fall be the riches of
the world, and their diminution the riches of the Gentiles, how much
more their fulness?

<span id="xxi.xi-p15"></span>**13** Even to you Gentiles do I speak, —
As far, doubtless, as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I make
illustrious my office,

<span id="xxi.xi-p16"></span>**14** If by any means I shall provoke to
emulation my flesh, and shall save some of them.

<span id="xxi.xi-p17"></span>**15** If indeed their rejection be the
reconciliation of the world, what *will be their* resumption but life
from the dead?

<span id="xxi.xi-p18"></span>**16** Now if the first-fruits be holy,
even so the lump; and if the root be holy, so also the branches.

<span id="xxi.xi-p19"></span>**17** If indeed some of the branches have
been broken off, and thou, a wild olive, hast been ingrafted instead of
them, and hast become a partaker of the root and fatness of the olive,

<span id="xxi.xi-p20"></span>**18** Glory not against the branches; but
if thou gloriest, it is not thou who bearest the root, but the root
thee.

<span id="xxi.xi-p21"></span>**19** Thou wilt then say, “Broken off have
been the branches, that I might be ingrafted.”

<span id="xxi.xi-p22"></span>**20** Be it so: for unbelief have they
been broken off, and thou by faith standest; be not high-minded, but
fear:

<span id="xxi.xi-p23"></span>**21** For if God spared not the natural
branches, *beware* lest he should not spare thee.

<span id="xxi.xi-p24"></span>**22** See then the kindness and the
severity of God; towards those indeed who have fallen, severity; but
towards thee kindness, if thou continuest in *his* kindness; otherwise
thou also shalt be cut off:

<span id="xxi.xi-p25"></span>**23** And they, if they remain not in
unbelief, shall be ingrafted; for God is able to ingraft them again.

<span id="xxi.xi-p26"></span>**24** For if thou hast been cut off from
the wild olive, which is so by nature, and hast contrary to nature been
ingrafted in the true olive, much more shall they, according to nature,
be ingrafted in their own olive.

<span id="xxi.xi-p27"></span>**25** I would not indeed, brethren, that
you should be ignorant of this mystery, lest you should be proud among
yourselves, that blindness has in part happened to Israel, until the
fulness of the Gentiles shall come in:

<span id="xxi.xi-p28"></span>**26** And so all Israel shall be saved, as
it is written, “Come from Sion shall the Deliverer, and shall turn away
impieties from Jacob;

<span id="xxi.xi-p29"></span>**27** And this *shall be* my covenant with
them, when I shall take away their sins.”

<span id="xxi.xi-p30"></span>**28** As to the gospel they are indeed
enemies on your account; but as to election they are beloved on account
of the fathers;

<span id="xxi.xi-p31"></span>**29** For without repentance are the gifts
and the calling of God.

<span id="xxi.xi-p32"></span>**30** As indeed ye also formerly believed
not God, but have now obtained mercy through their unbelief;

<span id="xxi.xi-p33"></span>**31** So also they have not now believed,
because ye have obtained mercy, that they may also obtain mercy:

<span id="xxi.xi-p34"></span>**32** For God has shut up all under
unbelief, that he might show mercy to all.

<span id="xxi.xi-p35"></span>**33** O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and of the knowledge of God! how incomprehensible are his
judgments and unsearchable his ways!

<span id="xxi.xi-p36"></span>**34** Who indeed has known the mind of the
Lord? or who has been to him a counselor?

<span id="xxi.xi-p37"></span>**35** Or, who has first given to him, and
it shall be rendered to him again?

<span id="xxi.xi-p38"></span>36 For from him and through him and for him
are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="xxi.xii"></span>

<span id="xxi.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xxi.xii-p3"></span>**1** I beseech you then, brethren, by the
mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, *as* your rational service.

<span id="xxi.xii-p4"></span>**2** And conform not yourselves to this
world, but be ye transformed by the renovation of your mind, that ye may
prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.

<span id="xxi.xii-p5"></span>**3** I indeed say, through the grace which
has been given to me, to every one of you, that he be not above measure
wise, beyond what he ought to be wise; but that he be wise unto
sobriety, as God has to each distributed the measure of faith.

<span id="xxi.xii-p6"></span>**4** For as in one body we have many
members, but all the members have not the same office;

<span id="xxi.xii-p7"></span>**5** So we, being many, are one body in
Christ, and severally members of one another.

<span id="xxi.xii-p8"></span>**6** Now having gifts differing according
to the grace given to us, whether prophecy, *let us use it* according to
the analogy of faith;

<span id="xxi.xii-p9"></span>**7** Or ministry, in ministering; or the
teacher, in teaching;

<span id="xxi.xii-p10"></span>**8** Or the exhorter, in exhortation; or
the giver, in simplicity; or the president, with care; or he who shows
mercy, with cheerfulness.

<span id="xxi.xii-p11"></span>**9** Let love be undissembled: turn away
from evil, cleave to what is good.

<span id="xxi.xii-p12"></span>**10** Be ready with brotherly love to
love one another, anticipating each other with honor.

<span id="xxi.xii-p13"></span>**11** In business be not slothful, in
spirit fervent, serving the time;

<span id="xxi.xii-p14"></span>**12** Rejoicing in hope, patient in
tribulation, persevering in prayer,

<span id="xxi.xii-p15"></span>**13** Distributing to the necessities of
the saints, following hospitality.

<span id="xxi.xii-p16"></span>**14** Bless those who persecute you;
bless and pray for no evil.

<span id="xxi.xii-p17"></span>**15** Rejoice with those who rejoice, and
weep with those who weep,

<span id="xxi.xii-p18"></span>**16** Having the same feeling towards one
another, not thinking arrogantly of yourselves, but accommodating
yourselves to humble things: be not wise in your own esteem.

<span id="xxi.xii-p19"></span>**17** To no man render evil for evil,
providing honest things before all men.

<span id="xxi.xii-p20"></span>**18** If it be possible, as far as you
can, cultivate peace with all men.

<span id="xxi.xii-p21"></span>**19** Avenge not yourselves, beloved; but
give place to wrath; for it is written, “Mine is vengeance, and I will
repay, saith the Lord.”

<span id="xxi.xii-p22"></span>**20** If then thine enemy hungers, feed
him; if he thirsts, give him drink: for by so doing, thou shalt heap
coals of fire on his head.

<span id="xxi.xii-p23"></span>21 Be not overcome by evil, but overcome
evil by good.

<span id="xxi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xxi.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xxi.xiii-p3"></span>**1** Let every soul be subject to the
supreme powers; for there is no power but from God; and the powers that
be have been ordained by God.

<span id="xxi.xiii-p4"></span>**2** He therefore who resists the power,
resists the ordination of God; and they who resist, shall for themselves
receive judgment.

<span id="xxi.xiii-p5"></span>**3** For princes are not for terror to
good but to evil works: wouldest thou then not fear the power? Do good,
and from it thou shalt have praise;

<span id="xxi.xiii-p6"></span>**4** For he is God’s minister to thee for
good: but if thou doest any evil, fear; for not in vain does he bear the
sword, since he is God’s minister, an avenger for wrath against those
who do evil.

<span id="xxi.xiii-p7"></span>**5** It is therefore necessary to be
subject, not only on account of wrath, but also on account of
conscience.

<span id="xxi.xiii-p8"></span>**6** For this reason also pay tributes,
since they are God’s ministers, constantly attending to this very thing.

<span id="xxi.xiii-p9"></span>**7** Render then to all what is due; to
whom tribute *is due,* tribute; to whom custom, custom; to whom fear,
fear; to whom honor, honor.

<span id="xxi.xiii-p10"></span>**8** To no one owe ye anything, except
to love one another; for he who loves another, has fulfilled the law;

<span id="xxi.xiii-p11"></span>**9** For this, “Thou shalt not commit
adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not bear false testimony, Thou
shalt not covet, and if there be any other precept, it is comprehended
in this saying, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.”

<span id="xxi.xiii-p12"></span>**10** Love works no evil to a neighbor;
the fulfilling then of the law is love.

<span id="xxi.xiii-p13"></span>**11** Moreover, as ye know the time,
that the hour is, when we ought to have awakened already from sleep,
(for nearer is now our salvation than when we believed,)

<span id="xxi.xiii-p14"></span>**12** The night is far advanced, and the
day has approached; let us then cast away the works of darkness, and let
us put on the armor of light:

<span id="xxi.xiii-p15"></span>**13** Let us walk decently as in the
day, not in reveling and drunkenness, not in chamberings and
lasciviousness, not in contention and envy;

<span id="xxi.xiii-p16"></span>14 But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and have no care for the flesh for the sake of *its* lusts.

<span id="xxi.xiv"></span>

<span id="xxi.xiv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="xxi.xiv-p3"></span>**1** Now him who is weak in faith receiver
not for the debatings of questions.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p4"></span>**2** Let him indeed who believes eat
everything; but he who is weak, eats herbs.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p5"></span>**3** Let not him who eats, despise him who
abstains; and let not him who abstains, condemn him who eats, since God
has received him.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p6"></span>**4** Who art thou who judgest the servant
of another? to his own Lord he stands or falls: he shall indeed stand,
for God is able to make him stand.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p7"></span>**5** One indeed esteems a day above a day;
but another esteems every day alike: let every one be fully persuaded in
his own mind.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p8"></span>**6** He who regards a day, regards it for
the Lord; and he who regards not a day, regards it not for the Lord: he
who eats, eats for the Lord, for he gives thanks to God; and he who
abstains, abstains for the Lord, and gives thanks to God;

<span id="xxi.xiv-p9"></span>**7** For no one of us lives to himself,
and no one dies to himself;

<span id="xxi.xiv-p10"></span>**8** For whether we live, we live to the
Lord, and whether we die, we die to the Lord; whether then we live or
die, we are the Lord’s.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p11"></span>**9** For to this end Christ both died,
and rose and lived again, that he might be the Lord both of the dead and
of the living.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p12"></span>**10** But thou,  <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487.md) why dost thou judge thy brother? or
also thou  <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488.md) why dost thou despise
thy brother? for we must all stand before the tribunal of Christ;

<span id="xxi.xiv-p15"></span>**11** For it is written, “Live do I,
saith the Lord; to me shall bow every knee, and every tongue shall
confess to God.”

<span id="xxi.xiv-p16"></span>**12** Every one of us then shall give an
account of himself to God.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p17"></span>**13** Let us therefore no more judge one
another; but rather judge this, that no occasion of falling or an
offense be given to a brother.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p18"></span>**14** I know and am persuaded, that in
the Lord Jesus nothing is in itself unclean: but he who regards anything
unclean, to him it is unclean.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p19"></span>**15** But if on account of meat thy
brother is grieved, thou no longer walkest consistently with love: by
thy meat destroy not him for whom Christ died.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p20"></span>**16** Let not then your good be subject
to the evil-speaking of men.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p21"></span>**17** For the kingdom of God is not meat
and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy through the Holy Spirit.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p22"></span>**18** For he who in these things serves
Christ, is acceptable to God and approved by men.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p23"></span>**19** Let us then follow the things of
peace and of mutual edification:

<span id="xxi.xiv-p24"></span>**20** On account of meat destroy not the
work of God. All things are indeed pure; but evil *it is* for man to eat
with offense.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p25"></span>**21** It is good not to eat flesh, nor to
drink wine, nor to do anything, by which thy brother may fall, or be
offended, or be weakened.

<span id="xxi.xiv-p26"></span>22 Hast thou faith? Have it for thyself
before God: happy is he who condemns not himself in that which he
examines

<span id="xxi.xiv-p27"></span>23 But he who is undecided, if he eat, is
condemned; for *he eats not* in faith: and whatsoever is not from faith
is sin.

<span id="xxi.xv"></span>

<span id="xxi.xv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 15

<span id="xxi.xv-p3"></span>**1** Now we who are able ought to bear the
infirmities of the unable, and not to please ourselves:

<span id="xxi.xv-p4"></span>**2** Let indeed each of us please *his*
neighbor for good, to *his* edification.

<span id="xxi.xv-p5"></span>**3** For even Christ did not please
himself; but, as it is written, “The reproaches of those who reproached
thee, fell upon me.”

<span id="xxi.xv-p6"></span>**4** For whatsoever things have been before
written, have been written for our instruction, that through the
patience and consolation of the Scriptures we might have hope:

<span id="xxi.xv-p7"></span>**5** And may the God of patience and of
consolation grant you to have the same mind towards one another,
according to Christ Jesus,

<span id="xxi.xv-p8"></span>**6** That ye may unanimously, with one
mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="xxi.xv-p9"></span>**7** Receive ye then one another, as Christ
has received us, to the glory of God.

<span id="xxi.xv-p10"></span>**8** Now I say, that Jesus Christ became
the minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises *made* to the fathers,

<span id="xxi.xv-p11"></span>**9** The Gentiles also ought to glorify
God for his mercy, as it is written, “On this account will I confess to
thee among the Gentiles, and to thy name will I sing”

<span id="xxi.xv-p12"></span>**10** And again he says, “Exult, ye
Gentiles, with his people;”

<span id="xxi.xv-p13"></span>**11** And further, “Praise the Lord, all
ye Gentiles, and praise him together, all ye nations:”

<span id="xxi.xv-p14"></span>**12** And again Isaiah says, “There shall
be the root; of Jesse, and he who shall rise up to reign over the

<span id="xxi.xv-p15"></span>**13** Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles
hope.” And may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, that ye may abound in hope through the power of the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="xxi.xv-p16"></span>**14** But I am persuaded, my brethren,
even I myself, concerning you, that ye are also yourselves full of’
goodness, having been filled with all knowledge, being able to admonish
one another.

<span id="xxi.xv-p17"></span>**15** The more boldly, however, have I
written to you, my brethren, in part, as putting you in mind, on account
of the grace given to me by God,

<span id="xxi.xv-p18"></span>**16** That I should be the minister of
Christ to the Gentiles, consecrating the gospel of Christ, that the
offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="xxi.xv-p19"></span>**17** I have therefore reason for
glorying, through Jesus Christ, in the things of God.

<span id="xxi.xv-p20"></span>**18** I will not indeed dare to speak
anything of those things which Christ has not done through me, as to the
obedience of the Gentiles, by word and work,

<span id="xxi.xv-p21"></span>**19** Through the power of signs and of
wonders, through the power of the Holy Spirit; so that from Jerusalem,
and round about to Illyricum,

<span id="xxi.xv-p22"></span>**20** I have spread more fully  <span
id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489.md) the gospel of Christ; thus endeavoring
to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named, that I might not build
on another’s foundation;

<span id="xxi.xv-p24"></span>**21** But, as it is written, “They to whom
it has not been declared concerning him, shall see; and they who have
not heard, shall understand.”

<span id="xxi.xv-p25"></span>**22** I have *on* this account also been
often hindered from coming to you,

<span id="xxi.xv-p26"></span>**23** But now, having a place no longer in
these regions, and having a desire for many years to come to you,

<span id="xxi.xv-p27"></span>**24** When I go to Spain, I shall come to
you. For I hope that when I go there I shall see you, and that I shall
be brought on my way thither by you, if however I shall first be in part
filled by a converse with you.

<span id="xxi.xv-p28"></span>**25** But I am now going to Jerusalem to
minister to the saints.

<span id="xxi.xv-p29"></span>**26** For it has pleased Macedonia and
Achaia to make a contribution to the saints who are at Jerusalem:

<span id="xxi.xv-p30"></span>**27** It has pleased them, I say, and
their debtors they are; for if the Gentiles have partaken of their
spiritual things, they ought also to minister to them in temporal
things.

<span id="xxi.xv-p31"></span>**28** When therefore I shall have
performed this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I shall go by you to
Spain:

<span id="xxi.xv-p32"></span>**29** And I know that when I come to you,
I shall come in the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.

<span id="xxi.xv-p33"></span>**30** Now I beseech you, brethren, by our
Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, that ye strive with me
in your prayers for me to God,

<span id="xxi.xv-p34"></span>**31** That I may be delivered from the
unbelieving in Judea, and that my service, undertaken for Jerusalem, may
be acceptable to the saints;

<span id="xxi.xv-p35"></span>32 That with joy I may come to you by the
will of God, and may, together with you, be refreshed.

<span id="xxi.xv-p36"></span>33 And the God of peace be with you all.
Amen.

<span id="xxi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xxi.xvi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xvi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="xxi.xvi-p3"></span>**1** Now I commend to you Phoebe, our
sister, who is a deaconess of the Cenchrean Church;

<span id="xxi.xvi-p4"></span>**2** That ye receive her in the Lord, as
it becomes saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever matter she may
have need of’ you; for she has been a helper to many, and to me also.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p5"></span>**3** Salute Prisca and Aquila, my
fellow-workers in Christ Jesus,

<span id="xxi.xvi-p6"></span>**4** Who for my life laid down their own
necks, to whom not I alone give thanks, but also all the Churches of the
Gentiles,

<span id="xxi.xvi-p7"></span>**5** And the Church in their house. Salute
Epenetus, my beloved, who is the first-fruit of Achaia in the Lord

<span id="xxi.xvi-p8"></span>**6** Salute Mary, who has labored much
with us.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p9"></span>**7** Salute Andronicus and Junia, my
kinsmen and my fellow-captives, who are celebrated among the Apostles,
and who were before me in Christ.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p10"></span>**8** Salute Amplias, my beloved in the
Lord.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p11"></span>**9** Salute Urban, our helper in Christ,
and Stachys, my beloved.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p12"></span>**10** Salute Apelles, approved in Christ.
Salute those who are of the family of Aristobulus.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p13"></span>**11** Salute Herodion, my kinsman. Salute
those of the family of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p14"></span>**12** Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who
have labored much in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, who has
labored much in the Lord.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p15"></span>**13** Salute Rufus, chosen in the Lord,
and his mother and mine.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p16"></span>**14** Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas,
Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren who are with them.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p17"></span>**15** Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus
and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p18"></span>**16** Salute one another with an holy
kiss. The Churches of Christ salute you.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p19"></span>**17** But I beseech you, brethren, to
observe those who stir up divisions and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learnt, and to avoid them:

<span id="xxi.xvi-p20"></span>**18** For they, who are such, serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ, *but,* their own belly; and by courteous language
and flattery deceive the hearts of the simple.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p21"></span>**19** Your obedience indeed has been
published to all: I am therefore glad on your account; but I wish you to
be wise for good,

<span id="xxi.xvi-p22"></span>**20** And simple for evil. And the God of
peace shall shortly bruise Satan under your feet,. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p23"></span>**21** Salute you do Timothy, my
fellow-worker, and Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my kinsmen.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p24"></span>**22** Salute you do I Terrius, who have
written this Epistle, in the Lord.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p25"></span>**23** Salute you does Gaius, my host and
of the whole Church. Salute you does Erastus, the treasurer of the city,
and Quartus a brother.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p26"></span>**24** The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
be with you all. Amen.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p27"></span>**25** Now to him who is able to confirm
you according to my gospel, even the preaching of Jesus Christ according
to the revelation of the mystery, which was hid in former ages,

<span id="xxi.xvi-p28"></span>**26** But has been now made known, and
through the prophetic Scriptures proclaimed, according to the
appointment of the eternal God, for the obedience of faith among all
nations

<span id="xxi.xvi-p29"></span>**27** To the only wise God, through Jesus
Christ,, be glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p30"></span>Sent to the Romans, from Corinth, by
Phoebe,  
a deaconess of the Cenchrean Church.

<span id="xxi.xvi-p31"></span>END OF THE NEW TRANSLATION

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_485"></span>[486](cc38020.htm#fr_485.md) <span
id="xxi.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.vii-p20"></span> Here is repeated in a different way what
had been before stated, only the reference before was to the weakness of
good, but here to the power of evil.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[487](cc38020.htm#fr_486.md) <span
id="xxi.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.viii-p28"></span> To exhibit the meaning of this passage
according to what is advanced in a note in pp. 306, 307, it shall be
presented here in lines, —

<span id="xxi.viii-p29"></span>**19.** Truly the intent expectation of
the creature  
Waits for the revelation of the sons of God;

<span id="xxi.viii-p30"></span>**20.** For to vanity has the creature
been subjected, not willingly,  
But on his account who has subjected it in hope;

<span id="xxi.viii-p31"></span>**21.** For even the creature itself
shall be freed from the bondage of corruption,  
Into the glorious liberty of the sons of God;

<span id="xxi.viii-p32"></span>**22.** For we know that every creature
groans together,  
And together travails in pain to this day:­

<span id="xxi.viii-p33"></span>**23.** And not only *they,* but we also
ourselves,  
Who possess the first-fruit of the Spirit,  
Even we ourselves groan within ourselves,  
Anxiously waiting for *our* adoption,  
The redemption of our body;

<span id="xxi.viii-p34"></span>**24.** For in hope are we saved,  
But hope seen is not hope;  
For what one sees, why does he yet hope for it?

<span id="xxi.viii-p35"></span>**25.** But if what we see not, we hope
for,  
We wait for *it* in patience.

<span id="xxi.viii-p36"></span>We *may* indeed consider “every creature”
in verse 22 as referring to every renewed creature then living, (except
the Apostles and those endowed with the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit,) and all such from the beginning of the world. In this case, “to
this day” has a striking import. All God’s servants from the beginning
had been groaning under the body of sin, and not only they, but even
those who had enjoyed the first outpouring of the Spirit, and had been
endued with extraordinary gifts. The gifts of the Spirit, however
abundant, did not free any from the bondage of corruption, from the body
of sin; but this was an object of hope, for which they were to wait. The
context, before and after, clearly shows that the present condition of
God’s people is the subject. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_487"></span>[488](cc38020.htm#fr_487.md) <span
id="xxi.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xiv-p13"></span> The Jewish convert.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[489](cc38020.htm#fr_488.md) <span
id="xxi.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xiv-p14"></span> The Gentile believer.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[490](cc38020.htm#fr_489.md) <span
id="xxi.xv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xv-p23"></span> “I have supplemented,” is what <span
id="xxi.xv-p23.1"></span>Calvin approves: the gospel had already been
partially preached, but Paul had filled up or supplied what was
deficient.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc38021.md)
