[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38004)  [Next](cc38006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou
condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Propterea inexcusabilis es, O homo,
quicunque judicas: in quo enim judicas alterum, teipsum condemnas; eadem
enim facis dum judicas.

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** But we are sure that the judgment of
God is according to truth against them which commit such things.

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Novimus autem quod judicium Dei est
secundum veritatem in eos qui talia agunt.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span><span id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**1.** *Therefore inexcusable art thou, O
man.* This reproof is directed against hypocrites, who dazzle the eyes
of men by displays of outward sanctity, and even think themselves to be
accepted before God, as though they had given him full satisfaction.
Hence Paul, after having stated the grosser vices, that he might prove
that none are just before God, now attacks saintlings (<span
id="vi.i-p7.2"></span>*sanctulos*) of this kind, who could not have been
included in the first catalogue. Now the inference is too simple and
plain for any one to wonder how the Apostle derived his argument; for he
makes them *inexcusable,* because they themselves knew the judgment of
God, and yet transgressed the law; as though he said, “Though thou
consented not to the vices of others, and seemest to be avowedly even an
enemy and a reprover of vices; yet as thou art not free from them, if
thou really examinest thyself, thou canst not bring forward any
defense.”

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>*For in what thou judgest another,* *etc.*
Besides the striking resemblance there is between the two Greek verbs,
<span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>κρίνειν and <span
id="vi.i-p8.2"></span>κατακρίνειν (to judge and to condemn,) the
enhancing of their sin ought to be noticed; for his mode of speaking is
the same, as though he said, “Thou art doubly deserving of condemnation;
for thou art guilty of the same vices which thou blamest and reprovest
in others.” It is, indeed, a well-known saying, — that they who
scrutinize the life of others lay claim themselves to innocence,
temperance, and all virtues; and that those are not worthy of any
indulgence who allow in themselves the same things which they undertake
to correct in others.

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>*For thou, judging, doest the same things*: so
it is literally; but the meaning is, “Though thou judgest, thou yet
doest the same things.” And he says that they *did* them, because they
were not in a right state of mind; for sin properly belongs to the mind.
They then condemned themselves on this account, — because, in reproving
a thief, or an adulterer, or a slanderer, they did not merely condemn
the persons, but those very vices which adhered to themselves.  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span><span id="vi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>**2.** *But we know that the judgment of
God,* *etc.* The design of Paul is to shake off from hypocrites their
self-complacencies, that they may not think that they can really gain
any thing, though they be applauded by the world, and though they regard
themselves guiltless; for a far different trial awaits them in heaven.
But as he charges them with inward impurity, which, being hid from the
eyes of men, cannot be proved and convicted by human testimonies, he
summons them to the tribunal of God, to whom darkness itself is not hid,
and by whose judgment the case of sinners, be they willing or unwilling,
must be determined.

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>Moreover, *the truth* of judgment will in two
ways appear, because God will punish sin without any respect of persons,
in whomsoever it will be found; and he will not heed outward
appearances, nor be satisfied with any outward work, except what has
proceeded from real sincerity of heart. It hence follows, that the mask
of feigned sanctity will not prevent him from visiting secret wickedness
with judgment. It is, no doubt, a Hebrew idiom; for *truth* in Hebrew
means often the inward integrity of the heart, and thus stands opposed
not only to gross falsehood, but also to the outward appearance of good
works. And then only are hypocrites awakened, when they are told that
God will take an account, not only of their disguised righteousness, but
also of their secret motives and feelings.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
2:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And thinkest thou this, O man, that
judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt
escape the judgment of God?

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Existimas autem, O homo, qui judicas
eos qui talia faciunt, et eadem facis, quod ipse effugies judicium Dei?

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span>**4.** Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance and long-suffering;  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) not knowing that the goodness of God
leadeth thee to repentance?

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>**4.** An divitias bonitatis ipsius
tolerantiæque, ac lenitatis contemnis; ignorans quod bonitas Dei te ad
pœnitentiam deducit?

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>**5.** But after thy hardness and impenitent
heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God;

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>**5.** Sed, juxta duritiam tuam, et cor
pœnitere nescium, thesaurizas tibi iram in diem irae et revelations
justi judicii Dei;

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>**6.** Who will render to every man according
to his deeds:

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span>**6.** Qui redditurus est unicuique secundam
ipsius opera:

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>**7.** To them who by patient continuance in
well-doing seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal life;

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>**7.** Iis quidem, qui per boni operis
perseverantiam, gloriam et honorem et immortalitatem quærunt, vitam
æternam;

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>**8.** But unto them that are contentious,
and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and
wrath,

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>**8.** Iis vero qui sunt contentiosi, ac
veritati immorigeri, injustitiæ autem obtemperant, excandescentia, ira,
tribulatio,

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span>**9.** Tribulation and anguish, upon every
soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile;

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span>**9.** Et anxietas in omnem animam hominis
perpetrantis malum, Iudæi primum simul et Græci:

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span>**10.** But glory, honour, and peace, to
every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile:

<span id="vi.ii-p18"></span>**10.** At gloria et honor et pax omni
operanti bonum, Iudæo primum simul et Græco.

<span id="vi.ii-p19"></span><span id="vi.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p20"></span>**3.** *And thinkest thou, O man,* *etc.* As
rhetoricians teach us, that we ought not to proceed to give strong
reproof before the crime be proved, Paul may seem to some to have acted
unwisely here for having passed so severe a censure, when he had not yet
proved the accusation which he had brought forward. But the fact is
otherwise; for he adduced not his accusation before men, but appealed to
the judgment of conscience; and thus he deemed that proved which he had
in view — that they could not deny their iniquity, if they examined
themselves and submitted to the scrutiny of God’s tribunal. And it was
not without urgent necessity, that he with so much sharpness and
severity rebuked their fictitious sanctity; for men of this class will
with astonishing security trust in themselves, except their vain
confidence be forcibly shaken from them. Let us then remember, that this
is the best mode of dealing with hypocrisy, in order to awaken it from
its inebriety, that is, to draw it forth to the light of God’s judgment.

<span id="vi.ii-p21"></span>*That thou shalt escape,* *etc.* This
argument is drawn from the less; for since our sins are subject to the
judgment of men, much more are they to that of God, who is the only true
Judge of all. Men are indeed led by a divine instinct to condemn evil
deeds; but this is only an obscure and faint resemblance of the divine
judgment. They are then extremely besotted, who think that they can
escape the judgment of God, though they allow not others to escape their
own judgment. It is not without an emphatical meaning that he repeats
the word *man*; it is for the purpose of presenting a comparison between
man and God.

<span id="vi.ii-p22"></span><span id="vi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p23"></span>**4.** *Dost thou despise the riches?*
*etc.* It does not seem to me, as some think, that there is here an
argument, conclusive on two grounds, (<span
id="vi.ii-p23.1"></span>*dilemma*,) but an anticipation of an objection:
for as hypocrites are commonly transported with prosperity, as though
they had merited the Lord’s kindness by their good deeds, and become
thus more hardened in their contempt of God, the Apostle anticipates
their arrogance, and proves, by an argument taken from a reason of an
opposite kind, that there is no ground for them to think that God, on
account of their outward prosperity, is propitious to them, since the
design of his benevolence is far different, and that is, to convert
sinners to himself. Where then the fear of God does not rule,
confidence, on account of prosperity, is a contempt and a mockery of his
great goodness. It hence follows, that a heavier punishment will be
inflicted on those whom God has in this life favored; because, in
addition to their other wickedness, they have rejected the fatherly
invitation of God. And though all the gifts of God are so many evidences
of his paternal goodness, yet as he often has a different object in
view, the ungodly absurdly congratulate themselves on their prosperity,
as though they were dear to him, while he kindly and bountifully
supports them.

<span id="vi.ii-p24"></span>*Not knowing that the goodness of God,*
*etc.* For the Lord by his kindness shows to us, that it is he to whom
we ought turn, if we desire to secure our wellbeing, and at the same
time he strengthens our confidence in expecting mercy. If we use not
God’s bounty for this end, we abuse it. But yet it is not to be viewed
always in the same light; for when the Lord deals favorably with his
servants and gives them earthly blessings, he makes known to them by
symbols of this kind his own benevolence, and trains them up at the same
time to seek the sum and substance of all good things in himself alone:
when he treats the transgressors of his law with the same indulgence,
his object is to soften by his kindness their perverseness; he yet does
not testify that he is already propitious to them, but, on the contrary,
invites them to repentance. But if any one brings this objection — that
the Lord sings to the deaf as long as he does not touch inwardly their
hearts; we must answer — that no fault can be found in this case except
with our own depravity. But I prefer rendering the word which Paul here
uses, *leads*, rather than *invites,* for it is more significant; I do
not, however, take it in the sense of driving, but of leading as it were
by the hand.

<span id="vi.ii-p25"></span><span id="vi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p26"></span>**5.** *But according to thy hardness,*
*etc.* When we become hardened against the admonitions of the Lord,
impenitence follows; and they who are not anxious about repentance
openly provoke the Lord.  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64)

<span id="vi.ii-p28"></span>This is a remarkable passage: we may hence
learn what I have already referred to — that the ungodly not only
accumulate for themselves daily a heavier weight of God’s judgments, as
long as they live here, but that the gifts of God also, which they
continually enjoy, shall increase their condemnation; for an account of
them all will be required: and it will then be found, that it will be
justly imputed to them as an extreme wickedness, that they had been made
worse through God’s bounty, by which they ought surely to have been
improved. Let us then take heed, lest by unlawful use of blessings we
lay up for ourselves this cursed treasure.

<span id="vi.ii-p29"></span>*For the day,* *etc.*; literally, *in the
day;* but it is put for <span id="vi.ii-p29.1"></span>εἰς ἡμέραν, for
the day. The ungodly gather now the indignation of God against
themselves, the stream of which shall then be poured on their heads:
they accumulate hidden destruction, which then shall be drawn out from
the treasures of God. The day of the last judgment is called the day of
wrath, when a reference is made to the ungodly; but it will be a day of
redemption to the faithful. And thus all other visitations of God are
ever described as dreadful and full of terror to the ungodly; and on the
contrary, as pleasant and joyful to the godly. Hence whenever the
Scripture mentions the approach of the Lord, it bids the godly to exult
with joy; but when it turns to the reprobate, it proclaims nothing but
dread and terror.

<span id="vi.ii-p30"></span>“A day of wrath,” saith Zephaniah, “shall be
that day, a day of tribulation and distress, a day of calamity and
wretchedness, a day of darkness and of thick darkness, a day of mist and
of whirlwind.” (<span id="vi.ii-p30.1"></span>[Zep
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015)<span id="vi.ii-p30.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p31"></span>You have a similar description in <span
id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>[Joe 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002)<span
id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>, etc. And Amos exclaims,

<span id="vi.ii-p32"></span>“Woe To You Who Desire The Day Of The Lord!
What Will It Be To You? The Day Of The Lord Will Be Darkness, And Not
Light.” (<span id="vi.ii-p32.1"></span>[Am
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018)<span id="vi.ii-p32.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p33"></span>Farther, by adding the word *revelation,*
Paul intimates what this day of wrath is to be, — that the Lord will
then manifest his judgment: though he gives daily some indications of
it, he yet suspends and holds back, till that day, the clear and full
manifestation of it; for the books shall then be opened; the sheep shall
then be separated the goats, and the wheat shall be cleansed from the
tares.

<span id="vi.ii-p34"></span><span id="vi.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p35"></span>**6.** *Who will render to every one,*
*etc.* As he had to do with blind saintlings, who thought that the
wickedness of their hearts was well covered, provided it was spread over
with some disguises, I know not what, of empty works, he pointed out the
true character of the righteousness of works, even that which is of
account before God; and he did this, lest they should feel confident
that it was enough to pacify him, if they brought words and trifles, or
leaves only. But there is not so much difficulty in this verse, as it is
commonly thought. For the Lord, by visiting the wickedness of the
reprobate with just vengeance, will recompense them with what they have
deserved: and as he sanctifies those whom he has previously resolved to
glorify, he will also crown their good works, but not on account of any
merit: nor can this be proved from this verse; for though it declares
what reward good works are to have, it does yet by no means show what
they are worth, or what price is due to them. And it is an absurd
inference, to deduce merit from reward.

<span id="vi.ii-p36"></span><span id="vi.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p37"></span>**7.** *To them indeed, who by
perseverance,* *etc.*; literally, *patience;* by which word something
more is expressed. For it is perseverance, when one is not wearied in
constantly doing good; but patience also is required in the saints, by
which they may continue firm, though oppressed with various trials. For
Satan suffers them not by a free course to come to the Lord; but he
strives by numberless hinderances to impede them, and to turn them aside
from the right way. And when he says, that the faithful, by continuing
in good works, *seek glory and honour,* he does not mean that they
aspire after any thing else but the favor of God, or that they strive to
attain any thing higher, or more excellent: but they can not seek him,
without striving, at the same time, for the blessedness of his kingdom,
the description of which is contained in the paraphrase given in these
words. The meaning then is, — that the Lord will give eternal life to
those who, by attention to good works, strive to attain immortality.
 <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

<span id="vi.ii-p42"></span><span id="vi.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p43"></span>**8.** *But to those who are contentious,*
*etc.* There is some irregularity in the passage; first, on account of
its tenor being interrupted, for the thread of the discourse required,
that the second clause of the contrast should be thus connected, — “The
Lord will render to them, who by perseverance in good works, seek glory,
and honor, and immortality, eternal life; but to the contentious and the
disobedient, eternal death.” Then the conclusion might be joined, —
“That for the former are prepared glory, and honor, and incorruption;
and that for the latter are laid up wrath and misery.” There is another
thing, — These words, *indignation, wrath, tribulation, and anguish,*
are joined to two clauses in the context. However, the meaning of the
passage is by no means obscure; and with this we must be satisfied in
the Apostolic writings. From other writings must eloquence be learnt:
here spiritual wisdom is to be sought, conveyed in a plain and simple
style.  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66)

<span id="vi.ii-p53"></span>Contention is mentioned here for rebellion
and stubbornness; for Paul was contending with hypocrites who, by their
gross and supine self-indulgence, trifled with God. By the word *truth,*
is simply meant the revealed will of God, which alone is the light of
truth: for it is what belongs to all the ungodly, that they ever prefer
to be in bondage to iniquity, rather than to receive the yoke of God;
and whatever obedience they may pretend, yet they never cease perversely
to clamor and struggle against God’s word. For as they who are openly
wicked scoff at the truth, so hypocrites fear not to set up in
opposition to it their artificial modes of worship. The Apostle further
adds, that such disobedient persons *obey* or serve iniquity; for there
is no middle course, which those who are unwilling to be in subjection
to the law of the Lord can take, so as to be kept from falling
immediately into the service of sin. And it is the just reward of
outrageous licentiousness, that those become the bondslaves of sin who
cannot endure the service of God. *Indignation and wrath,* so the
character of the words induces me to render them; for <span
id="vi.ii-p53.1"></span>θυμος in Greek means what the Latins call <span
id="vi.ii-p53.2"></span>*excandescentia* — indignation, as *Cicero*
teaches us, (Tusc. 4,) even a sudden burning of anger. As to the other
words I follow <span id="vi.ii-p53.3"></span>Erasmus. But observe, that
of the four which are mentioned, the two last are, as it were, the
effects of the two first; for they who perceive that God is displeased
and angry with them are immediately filled with confusion.

<span id="vi.ii-p54"></span>We may add, that though he might have
briefly described, even in two words, the blessedness of the godly and
also the misery of the reprobate, he yet enlarges on both subjects, and
for this end — that he might more effectually strike men with the fear
of God’s wrath, and sharpen their desire for obtaining grace through
Christ: for we never fear God’s judgment as we ought, except it be set
as it were by a lively description before our eyes; nor do we really
burn with desire for future life, except when roused by strong
incentives, (<span id="vi.ii-p54.1"></span>*multis flabellis incitati* —
incited by many fans.)

<span id="vi.ii-p55"></span><span id="vi.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p56"></span>**9.** *To the Jew first,* *etc.* He simply
places, I have no doubt, the Jew in opposition to the Gentile; for those
whom he calls Greeks he will presently call Gentiles. But the Jews take
the precedence in this case, for they had, in preference to others, both
the promises and the threatenings of the law; as though he had said,
“This is the universal rule of the divine judgment; it shall begin with
the Jews, and it shall include the whole world.”

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
2:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**11.** For there is no respect of persons
with God.

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Siquidem non est acceptio personarum
apud Deum.

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span>**12.** For as many as have sinned without
law shall also perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law
shall be judged by the law;

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Quicunque enim sine Lege peccaverunt
sine Lege etiam peribunt; quicunque vero in Lege peccaverunt per Legem
judicabuntur.

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span>**13.** (For not the hearers of the law
*are* just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified.

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Non enim Legis auditores justi sunt
apud Deum, sed qui Legem faciunt justificabuntur.

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span><span id="vi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span>**11.** *There is no respect of persons,*
*etc.* He has hitherto generally arraigned all mortals as guilty; but
now he begins to bring home his accusation to the Jews and to the
Gentiles separately: and at the same time he teaches us, that it is no
objection that there is a difference between them, but that they are
both without any distinction exposed to eternal death. The Gentiles
pretended ignorance as their defense; the Jews gloried in the honor of
having the law: from the former he takes away their subterfuge, and he
deprives the latter of their false and empty boasting.

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span>There is then a division of the whole human
race into two classes; for God had separated the Jews from all the rest,
but the condition of all the Gentiles was the same. He now teaches us,
that this difference is no reason why both should not be involved in the
same guilt. But the word *person* is taken in Scripture for all outward
things, which are wont to be regarded as possessing any value or esteem.
When therefore thou readest, that God is no respecter of persons,
understand that what he regards is purity of heart or inward integrity;
and that he hath no respect for those things which are wont to be highly
valued by men, such as kindred, country, dignity, wealth, and similar
things; so that respect of persons is to be here taken for the
distinction or the difference there is between one nation and another.
 <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) But if any hence objects and says,
“That then there is no such thing as the gratuitous election of God;” it
may be answered, That there is a twofold acceptation of men before God;
the first, when he chooses and calls us from nothing through gratuitous
goodness, as there is nothing in our nature which can be approved by
him; the second, when after having regenerated us, he confers on us his
gifts, and shows favor to the image of his Son which he recognizes in
us.

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span><span id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span>**12.** *Whosoever have sinned without
law,*  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) *etc.* In the former part of
this section he assails the Gentiles; though no Moses was given them to
publish and to ratify a law from the Lord, he yet denies this omission
to be a reason why they deserved not the just sentence of death for
their sins; as though he had said — that the knowledge of a written law
was not necessary for the just condemnation of a sinner. See then what
kind of advocacy they undertake, who through misplaced mercy, attempt,
on the ground of ignorance, to exempt the nations who have not the light
of the gospel from the judgment of God.

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span>*Whosoever have sinned under the law,*
*etc.* As the Gentiles, being led by the errors of their own reason, go
headlong into ruin, so the Jews possess a law by which they are
condemned;  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) for this sentence has
been long ago pronounced,

<span id="vi.iii-p18"></span>“Cursed are all they who continue not in
all its precepts.” (<span id="vi.iii-p18.1"></span>[De
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span id="vi.iii-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.iii-p19"></span>A worse condition then awaits the Jewish
sinners, since their condemnation is already pronounced in their own
law.

<span id="vi.iii-p20"></span><span id="vi.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p21"></span>13. *For the hearers of the law,* *etc.*
This anticipates an objection which the Jews might have adduced. As they
had heard that the law was the rule of righteousness, (<span
id="vi.iii-p21.1"></span>[De 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii-p21.1"></span>,) they gloried in the mere knowledge of it: to
obviate this mistake, he declares that the hearing of the law or any
knowledge of it is of no such consequence, that any one should on that
account lay claim to righteousness, but that works must be produced,
according to this saying, “He who will do these shall live in them.” The
import then of this verse is the following, — “That if righteousness be
sought from the law, the law must be fulfilled; for the righteousness of
the law consists in the perfection of works.” They who pervert this
passage for the purpose of building up justification by works, deserve
most fully to be laughed at even by children. It is therefore improper
and beyond what is needful, to introduce here a long discussion on the
subject, with the view of exposing so futile a sophistry: for the
Apostle only urges here on the Jews what he had mentioned, the decision
of the law, — That by the law they could not be justified, except they
fulfilled the law, that if they transgressed it, a curse was instantly
pronounced on them. Now we do not deny but that perfect righteousness is
prescribed in the law: but as all are convicted of transgression, we say
that another righteousness must be sought. Still more, we can prove from
this passage that no one is justified by works; for if they alone are
justified by the law who fulfill the law, it follows that no one is
justified; for no one can be found who can boast of having fulfilled the
law.  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70)

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014)<span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>**14.** For when the Gentiles, which have not
the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not
the law, are a law unto themselves:

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span>**14.** Quum enim Gentes, quæ Legem non
habent, natura quæ Legis sunt faciant, ipsæ, Legem non habentes, sibi
ipsæ sunt Lex:

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span>**15.** Which shew the work of the law
written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
*their* thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another;)

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Quæ ostendunt opus Legis scriptum in
cordibus suis, simul attestante ipsorum conscientia et cogitationibus
inter se accusantibus aut etiam excusantibus,

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span>**16.** In the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel.

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span>**16.** In die qua judicabit Deus occulta
hominum, secundum Evangelium meum, per Iesum Christum.

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span><span id="vi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span>**14.** *For when the Gentiles,* *etc.* He
now states what proves the former clause; for he did not think it enough
to condemn us by mere assertion, and only to pronounce on us the just
judgment of God; but he proceeds to prove this by reasons, in order to
excite us to a greater desire for Christ, and to a greater love towards
him. He indeed shows that ignorance is in vain pretended as an excuse by
the Gentiles, since they prove by their own deeds that they have some
rule of righteousness: for there is no nation so lost to every thing
human, that it does not keep within the limits of some laws. Since then
all nations, of themselves and without a monitor, are disposed to make
laws for themselves, it is beyond all question evident that they have
some notions of justice and rectitude, which the Greeks call
preconceptions <span id="vi.iv-p9.1"></span>προληψεις, and which are
implanted by nature in the hearts of men. They have then a law, though
they are without law: for though they have not a written law, they are
yet by no means wholly destitute of the knowledge of what is right and
just; as they could not otherwise distinguish between vice and virtue;
the first of which they restrain by punishment, and the latter they
commend, and manifest their approbation of it by honoring it with
rewards. He sets nature in opposition to a written law, meaning that the
Gentiles had the natural light of righteousness, which supplied the
place of that law by which the Jews were instructed, so that they were a
law to themselves.  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71)

<span id="vi.iv-p12"></span><span id="vi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p13"></span>**15.** *Who show the work of the law*
 <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) *written,* *etc.*; that is, they
prove that there is imprinted on their hearts a discrimination and
judgment by which they distinguish between what is just and unjust,
between what is honest and dishonest. He means not that it was so
engraven on their will, that they sought and diligently pursued it, but
that they were so mastered by the power of truth, that they could not
disapprove of it. For why did they institute religious rites, except
that they were convinced that God ought to be worshipped? Why were they
ashamed of adultery and theft, except that they deemed them evils?

<span id="vi.iv-p15"></span>Without reason then is the power of the will
deduced from this passage, as though Paul had said, that the keeping of
the law is within our power; for he speaks not of the power to fulfill
the law, but of the knowledge of it. Nor is the word *heart* to be taken
for the seat of the affections, but only for the understanding, as it is
found in <span id="vi.iv-p15.1"></span>[De
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv-p15.1"></span>,

<span id="vi.iv-p16"></span>“The Lord hath not given thee a heart to
understand;”

<span id="vi.iv-p17"></span>and in <span id="vi.iv-p17.1"></span>[Lu
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#025)<span id="vi.iv-p17.1"></span>,

<span id="vi.iv-p18"></span>“O foolish men, and slow in heart to
believe.”

<span id="vi.iv-p19"></span>Nor can we conclude from this passage, that
there is in men a *full* knowledge of the law, but that there are only
some seeds of what is right implanted in their nature, evidenced by such
acts as these — All the Gentiles alike instituted religious rites, they
made laws to punish adultery, and theft, and murder, they commended good
faith in bargains and contracts. They have thus indeed proved, that God
ought to be worshipped, that adultery, and theft, and murder are evils,
that honesty is commendable. It is not to our purpose to inquire what
sort of God they imagined him to be, or how many gods they devised; it
is enough to know, that they thought that there is a God, and that honor
and worship are due to him. It matters not whether they permitted the
coveting of another man’s wife, or of his possessions, or of any thing
which was his, — whether they connived at wrath and hatred; inasmuch as
it was not right for them to covet what they knew to be evil when done.

<span id="vi.iv-p20"></span>*Their conscience at the same time
attesting,* *etc.* He could not have more forcibly urged them than by
the testimony of their own conscience, which is equal to a thousand
witnesses. By the consciousness of having done good, men sustain and
comfort themselves; those who are conscious of having done evil, are
inwardly harassed and tormented. Hence came these sayings of the
heathens — “A good conscience is the widest sphere; but a bad one is the
cruelest executioner, and more fiercely torments the ungodly than any
furies can do.” There is then a certain knowledge of the law by nature,
which says, “This is good and worthy of being desired; that ought to be
abhorred.”

<span id="vi.iv-p21"></span>But observe how intelligently he defines
conscience: he says, that reasons come to our minds, by which we defend
what is rightly done, and that there are those which accuse and reprove
us for our vices;  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) and he refers
this process of accusation and defense to the day of the Lord; not that
it will then first commence, for it is now continually carried on, but
that it will then also be in operation; and he says this, that no one
should disregard this process, as though it were vain and evanescent.
And he has put, *in the day,* instead of, *at the day,* — a similar
instance to what we have already observed.

<span id="vi.iv-p25"></span><span id="vi.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p26"></span>**16.** *In which God shall judge the
secrets of men*  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) Most suitable to
the present occasion is this periphrastic definition of judgment: it
teaches those, who willfully hide themselves in the recesses of
insensibility, that the most secret thoughts and those now completely
hid in the depths of their hearts, shall then be brought forth to the
light. So he speaks in another place; in order to show to the
Corinthians what little value belongs to human judgment, which regards
only the outward action, he bids them to wait until the Lord came, who
would bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and reveal the
secrets of the heart. (<span id="vi.iv-p27.7"></span>[1Co
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="vi.iv-p27.7"></span>)
When we hear this, let it come to our minds, that we are warned that if
we wish to be really approved by our Judge, we must strive for sincerity
of heart.

<span id="vi.iv-p28"></span>He adds, *according to my gospel,*
intimating, that he announced a doctrine, to which the judgments of men,
naturally implanted in them, gave a response: and he calls it *his*
gospel, on account of the ministry; for the authority for setting forth
the gospel resides in the true God alone; and it was only the dispensing
of it that was committed to the Apostles. It is indeed no matter of
surprise, that the gospel is in part called the messenger and the
announcer of future judgment: for if the fulfillment and completion of
what it promises be deferred to the full revelation of the heavenly
kingdom, it must necessarily be connected with the last judgment: and
further, Christ cannot be preached without being a resurrection to some,
and a destruction to others; and both these things have a reference to
the day of judgment. The words, *through Jesus Christ,* I apply to the
day of judgment, though they are regarded otherwise by some; and the
meaning is, — that the Lord will execute judgment by Christ, for he is
appointed by the Father to be the Judge of the living and of the dead, —
which the Apostles always mention among the main articles of the gospel.
Thus the sentence will be full and complete, which would otherwise be
defective.

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
2:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>**17.** Behold, thou art called a Jew, and
restest in the law, and makest thy boast of God,

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span>**17.** Ecce, tu Iudæus cognominaris, et
acquiescis in Lege, et gloriaris in Deo,

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span>18. And knowest *his* will, and approvest the
things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the law;

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span>**18.** Et nosti voluntatem, et probas eximia,
institutus ex Lege;

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span>**19.** And art confident that thou thyself
art a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in darkness,

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span>**19.** Confidisque teipsum esse ducem
cæcorum, lumen eorum qui sunt in tenebris,

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span>**20.** An instructer of the foolish, a
teacher of babes, which hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in
the law.

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span>**20.** Eruditorem insipientium, doctorem
imperitorum, habentem formam cognitionis ac veritatis in Lege:

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span>**21.** Thou therefore which teachest
another, teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a man should not
steal, dost thou steal?

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span>**21.** Qui igitur doces alterum, teipsum non
doces; qui concionaris, non furandum, furaris;

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span>**22.** Thou that sayest a man should not
commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols,
dost thou commit sacrilege?

<span id="vi.v-p13"></span>**22.** Qui dicis, nom mœchandum, mœcharis;
qui detestaris idola, Sacrilegium perpetras;

<span id="vi.v-p14"></span>**23.** Thou that makest thy boast of the
law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God?

<span id="vi.v-p15"></span>**23.** Qui de Lege gloriaris, Deum per Legis
transgressionem dehonestas:

<span id="vi.v-p16"></span>**24.** For the name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles through you, as it is written.  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)

<span id="vi.v-p18"></span>**24.** Nomen enim Dei propter vos probro
afficitur inter gentes, quemadmodum scriptum est.

<span id="vi.v-p19"></span><span id="vi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p20"></span>**17.** *Behold, thou art named a Jew,*
*etc.* Some old copies read <span id="vi.v-p20.1"></span>εἰ δὲ, *though
indeed;* which, were it generally received, would meet my approbation;
but as the greater part of the manuscripts is opposed to it, and the
sense is not unsuitable, I retain the old reading, especially as it is
only a small difference of one letter.  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)

<span id="vi.v-p22"></span>Having now completed what he meant to say of
the Gentiles, he returns to the Jews; and that he might, with greater
force, beat down their great vanity, he allows them all those
privileges, by which they were beyond measure transported and inflated:
and then he shows how insufficient they were for the attainment of true
glory, yea, how they turned to their reproach. Under the name *Jew* he
includes all the privileges of the nation, which they vainly pretended
were derived from the law and the prophets; and so he comprehends all
the Israelites, all of whom were then, without any difference, called
Jews.

<span id="vi.v-p23"></span>But at what time this name first originated
it is uncertain, except that it arose, no doubt, after the dispersion.
 <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) <span
id="vi.v-p24.7"></span>Josephus*,* in the eleventh book of his
Antiquities, thinks that it was taken from Judas Maccabæus, under whose
auspices the liberty and honor of the people, after having for some time
fallen, and been almost buried, revived again. Though I allow this
opinion to be probable, yet, if there be some to whom it is not
satisfactory, I will offer them a conjecture of my own. It seems,
indeed, very likely, that after having been degraded and scattered
through so many disasters, they were not able to retain any certain
distinction as to their tribes; for a census could not have been made at
that time, nor did there exist a regular government, which was necessary
to preserve an order of this kind; and they dwelt scattered and in
disorder; and having been worn out by adversities, they were no doubt
less attentive to the records of their kindred. But though you may not
grant these things to me, yet it cannot be denied but that a danger of
this kind was connected with such disturbed state of things. Whether,
then, they meant to provide for the future, or to remedy an evil already
received, they all, I think assumed the name of that tribe, in which the
purity of religion remained the longest, and which, by a peculiar
privilege, excelled all the rest, as from it the Redeemer was expected
to come; for it was their refuge in all extremities, to console
themselves with the expectation of the Messiah. However this may be, by
the name of Jews they avowed themselves to be the heirs of the covenant
which the Lord had made with Abraham and his seed.

<span id="vi.v-p25"></span>*And restest in the law, and gloriest in
God,* *etc.* He means not that they rested in attending to the law, as
though they applied their minds to the keeping of it; but, on the
contrary, he reproves them for not observing the end for which the law
had been given; for they had no care for its observance, and were
inflated on this account only, — because they were persuaded that the
oracles of God belonged to them. In the same way they *gloried in God,*
not as the Lord commands by his Prophet, — to humble ourselves, and to
seek our glory in him alone, (<span id="vi.v-p25.1"></span>[Jer
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span id="vi.v-p25.1"></span>,) —
but being without any knowledge of God’s goodness, they made him, of
whom they were inwardly destitute, peculiarly their own, and assumed to
be his people, for the purpose of vain ostentation before men. This,
then, was not the glorying of the heart, but the boasting of the tongue.

<span id="vi.v-p26"></span><span id="vi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p27"></span>**18.** *And knowest his will, and approvest
things excellent, etc.* He now concedes to them the knowledge of the
divine will, and the approval of things useful; and this they had
attained from the doctrine of the law. But there is a twofold approval,
— one of choice, when we embrace the good we approve; the other of
judgment, by which indeed we distinguish good from evil, but by no means
strive or desire to follow it. Thus the Jews were so learned in the law
that they could pass judgment on the conduct of others, but were not
careful to regulate their life according to that judgment. But as Paul
reproves their hypocrisy, we may, on the other hand, conclude, that
excellent things are then only rightly approved (provided our judgment
proceeds from sincerity) when God is attended to; for his will, as it is
revealed in the law, is here appointed as the guide and teacher of what
is to be justly approved.  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78)

<span id="vi.v-p29"></span><span id="vi.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p30"></span>**19.** *And believest thyself,* *etc.* More
is still granted to them; as though they had not only what was
sufficient for themselves, but also that by which they could enrich
others. He grants, indeed, that they had such abundance of learning, as
that others might have been supplied.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)

<span id="vi.v-p32"></span><span id="vi.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p33"></span>**20.** I take what follows, *having the form
of knowledge*, as a reason for the preceding; and it may be thus
explained, — “because thou hast the form of knowledge.” For they
professed to be the teachers of others, because they seemed to carry in
their breasts all the secrets of the law. The word *form* is put for
model (<span id="vi.v-p33.1"></span>*exemplar* — pattern);  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) for Paul has adopted <span
id="vi.v-p34.3"></span>μόρφωσιν and not <span
id="vi.v-p34.4"></span>τύπον: but he intended, I think, to point out the
conspicuous pomp of their teaching, and what is commonly called display;
and it certainly appears that they were destitute of that knowledge
which they pretended. But Paul, by indirectly ridiculing the perverted
use of the law, intimates, on the other hand, that right knowledge must
be sought from the law, in order that the truth may have a solid basis.

<span id="vi.v-p35"></span><span id="vi.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p36"></span>**21.** *Thou, who then teachest another,
teachest not thyself,* *etc.*  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)
Though the excellencies (<span id="vi.v-p46.5"></span>*encomia* —
commendations) which he has hitherto stated respecting the Jews, were
such as might have justly adorned them, provided the higher ornaments
were not wanting; yet as they included qualifications of a neutral kind,
which may be possessed even by the ungodly and corrupted by abuse, they
are by no means sufficient to constitute true glory. And hence Paul, not
satisfied with merely reproving and taunting their arrogance in trusting
in these things alone, employs them for the purpose of enhancing their
disgraceful conduct; for he exposes himself to no ordinary measure of
reproach, who not only renders useless the gifts of God, which are
otherwise valuable and excellent, but by his wickedness vitiates and
contaminates them. And a strange counselor is he, who consults not for
his own good, and is wise only for the benefit of others. He shows then
that the praise which they appropriated to themselves, turned out to
their own disgrace.

<span id="vi.v-p47"></span>*Thou who preachest, steal not,* *etc.* He
seems to have alluded to a passage in <span id="vi.v-p47.1"></span>[Ps
50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)<span id="vi.v-p47.1"></span>,
where God says to the wicked,

<span id="vi.v-p48"></span>“Why dost thou declare my statutes, and
takest my covenant in thy mouth? And thou hatest reform, and hast cast
my words behind thee: when thou seest a thief, thou joinest him, and
with adulterers is thy portion.”

<span id="vi.v-p49"></span>And as this reproof was suitable to the Jews
in old time, who, relying on the mere knowledge of the law, lived in no
way better than if they had no law; so we must take heed, lest it should
be turned against us at this day: and indeed it may be well applied to
many, who, boasting of some extraordinary knowledge of the gospel,
abandon themselves to every kind of uncleanness, as though the gospel
were not a rule of life. That we may not then so heedlessly trifle with
the Lord, let us remember what sort of judgment impends over such
prattlers, (<span id="vi.v-p49.1"></span>*logodœdalis* —
word-artificers,) who make a show of God’s word by mere garrulity.

<span id="vi.v-p50"></span><span id="vi.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p51"></span>**22.** *Thou who abhorrest idols,* *etc.* He
fitly compares sacrilege to idolatry, as it is a thing of the same kind;
for sacrilege is simply a profanation of the Divine Majesty, a sin not
unknown to heathen poets. On this account *Ovid* (Metamor. 3,) calls
*Lycurgus* sacrilegious for despising the rites of Bacchus; and in his
*Fasti* he calls those sacrilegious hands which violated the majesty of
Venus. But as the Gentiles ascribed the majesty of their gods to idols,
they only thought it a sacrilege when any one plundered what was
dedicated to their temples, in which, as they believed, the whole of
religion centered. So at this day, where superstition reigns, and not
the word of God, they acknowledge no other kind of sacrilege than the
stealing of what belongs to churches, as there is no God but in idols,
no religion but in pomp and magnificence.  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82)

<span id="vi.v-p53"></span>Now we are here warned, first, not to flatter
ourselves and to despise others, when we have performed only some
portions of the law, — and, secondly, not to glory in having outward
idolatry removed, while we care not to drive away and to eradicate the
impiety that lieth hid in our hearts.

<span id="vi.v-p54"></span><span id="vi.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p55"></span>**23.** *Thou who gloriest in the law,*
*etc.* Though every transgressor dishonors God, (for we are all born for
this end — to serve him in righteousness and holiness;) yet he justly
imputes in this respect a special fault to the Jews; for as they avowed
God as their Lawgiver, and yet had no care to form their life according
to his rule, they clearly proved that the majesty of their God was not
so regarded by them, but that they easily despised him. In the same
manner do they at this day dishonor Christ, by transgressing the gospel,
who prattle idly about its doctrine, while yet they tread it under foot
by their unbridled and licentious mode of living.

<span id="vi.v-p56"></span><span id="vi.v-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p57"></span>**24.** *For the name of God, etc.* I think
this quotation is taken from <span id="vi.v-p57.1"></span>[Eze
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#020)<span id="vi.v-p57.1"></span>,
rather than from <span id="vi.v-p57.2"></span>[Isa
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005)<span id="vi.v-p57.2"></span>; for
in Isaiah there are no reproofs given to the people, but that chapter in
Ezekiel is full of reproofs. But some think that it is a proof from the
less to the greater, according to this import, “Since the Prophet
upbraided, not without cause, the Jews of his time, that on account of
their captivity, the glory and power of God were ridiculed among the
Gentiles, as though he could not have preserved the people, whom he had
taken under his protection, much more are ye a disgrace and dishonor to
God, whose religion, being judged of by your wicked life, is
blasphemed.” This view I do not reject, but I prefer a simpler one, such
as the following, — “We see that all the reproaches cast on the people
of Israel do fall on the name of God; for as they are counted, and are
said to be the people of God, his name is as it were engraven on their
foreheads: it must hence be, that God, whose name they assume, is in a
manner defamed by men, through their wicked conduct.” It was then a
monstrous thing, that they who derived their glory from God should have
disgraced his holy name; for it behoved them surely to requite him in a
different manner.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
2:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>**25.** For circumcision verily profiteth, if
thou keep the law: but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision
is made uncircumcision.

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span>**25.** Nam circumcisio quidem prodest, si
Legem observes; quod si transgressor Legis fueris, circumcisio tua in
præputium versa est.

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span>**26.** Therefore if the uncircumcision keep
the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted
for circumcision?

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span>**26.** Si ergo præputium justitias Legis
servaverit, nonne præputium ejus pro circumcisione consebitur?

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span>**27.** And shall not uncircumcision which is
by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee, who by the letter and
circumcision dost transgress the law?

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span>**27.** Et judicabit quod ex natura est
præputium (si Legem servaverit) te qui per literam et circumcisionem
transgressor es Legis?

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span>**28.** For he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly; neither *is that* circumcision which is outward in the flesh:

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span>**28.** Non enim qui est in aperto Iudæus
est; ne quæ in aperto est circumcisio in carne, ea est circumcisio:

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span>**29.** But he *is* a Jew, which is one
inwardly; and circumcision *is that* of the heart, in the spirit, *and*
not in the letter; whose praise *is* not of men, but of God.

<span id="vi.vi-p11"></span>**29.** Sed qui est in occulto Iudæus; et
circumcisio cordis in spiritu non litera; cujus laus non ex hominibus
est sed ex Deo.

<span id="vi.vi-p12"></span><span id="vi.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p13"></span>**25.** *For circumcision indeed profits,
etc.* He dissipates by anticipation what the Jews might have objected in
opposition to him in the defense of their own cause: for since
circumcision was a symbol of the Lord’s covenant, by which he had chosen
Abraham and his seed as his peculiar people, they seemed not to have
gloried in vain; but as they neglected what the sign signified, and
regarded only the outward form, he gives this answer — That they had no
reason to lay claim to any thing on account of the bare sign. The true
character of circumcision was a spiritual promise, which required faith:
the Jews neglected both, the promise as well as faith. Then foolish was
their confidence. Hence it is, that he omits to state here the main use
of circumcision, and proceeds to expose their gross error, as he does in
his Epistle to the Galatians. And this ought to be carefully noticed;
for if he were explaining the whole character and design of
circumcision, it would have been inconsistent in him not to have made
mention of grace and free promise: but in both instances he spoke
according to what the subject he had in hand required, and therefore he
only discussed that part which was controverted.

<span id="vi.vi-p14"></span>They thought that circumcision was of itself
sufficient for the purpose of obtaining righteousness. Hence, speaking
according to such an opinion, he gives this reply — That if this benefit
be expected from circumcision, it is on this condition, that he who is
circumcised, must serve God wholly and perfectly. Circumcision then
requires perfection. The same may be also said of our baptism: when any
one confidently relies on the water of baptism alone, and thinks that he
is justified, as though he had obtained holiness by that ordinance
itself, the end of baptism must be adduced as an objection; which is,
that the Lord thereby calls us to holiness of life: the grace and
promise, which baptism testifies (<span
id="vi.vi-p14.1"></span>*testificatur*) and seals, (<span
id="vi.vi-p14.2"></span>*obsignat,*) need not in this case to be
mentioned; for our business is with those who, being satisfied with the
empty shadow of baptism, care not for nor consider what is material
(<span id="vi.vi-p14.3"></span>*solidum* — substantial) in it. And this
very thing you may observe in Paul — that when he speaks to the faithful
of signs, apart from controversy, he connects them with the efficacy and
fulfillment of the promises which belong to them; but when he contends
with the absurd and unskillful interpreters of signs, he omits all
mention of the proper and true character of signs, and directs his whole
discourse against their perverted interpretation.

<span id="vi.vi-p15"></span>Now many, seeing that Paul brings forward
circumcision rather than any other part of the law, suppose that he
takes away justification only from ceremonies: but the matter is far
otherwise; for it always happens, that those who dare to set up their
own merits against the righteousness of God, glory more in outward
observances than in real goodness; for no one, who is seriously touched
and moved by the fear of God, will ever dare to raise up his eyes to
heaven, since the more he strives after true righteousness, the clearer
he sees how far he is from it. But as to the Pharisees, who were
satisfied with imitating holiness by an outward disguise, it is no
wonder that they so easily deluded themselves. Hence Paul, after having
left the Jews nothing, but this poor subterfuge of being justified by
circumcision, does now also take from them even this empty pretense.

<span id="vi.vi-p16"></span><span id="vi.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p17"></span>**26.** *If then the uncircumcision,* *etc.*
This is a very strong argument. Every thing is below its end and
subordinate to it. Circumcision looks to the law, and must therefore be
inferior to it: it is then a greater thing to keep the law than
circumcision, which was for its sake instituted. It hence follows, that
the uncircumcised, provided he keeps the law, far excels the Jew with
his barren and unprofitable circumcision, if he be a transgressor of the
law: and though he is by nature polluted, he shall yet be so sanctified
by keeping the law, that uncircumcision shall be imputed to him for
circumcision. The word *uncircumcision,* is to be taken in its proper
sense in the second clause; but in the first, figuratively, for the
Gentiles, the thing for the persons.

<span id="vi.vi-p18"></span>It must be added — that no one ought
anxiously to inquire what observers of the law are those of which Paul
speaks here, inasmuch no such can be found; for he simply intended to
lay down a supposed case — that if any Gentile could be found who kept
the law, his righteousness would be of more value without circumcision,
than the circumcision of the Jew without righteousness. And hence I
refer what follows, *And what is by nature uncircumcision shall judge
thee,* *etc.*, not to persons, but to the case that is supposed,
according to what is said of the Queen of the south, that she shall
come, etc., (<span id="vi.vi-p18.1"></span>[Mt
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)<span id="vi.vi-p18.1"></span>,)
and of the men of Nineveh, that they shall rise up in judgment, etc.,
(<span id="vi.vi-p18.2"></span>[Lu
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#032)<span id="vi.vi-p18.2"></span>)
For the very words of Paul lead us to this view — “The Gentile,” he
says, “being a keeper of the law, shall judge thee who art a
transgressor, though he is uncircumcised, and thou hast the literal
circumcision.”

<span id="vi.vi-p19"></span><span id="vi.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p20"></span>**27.** *By the letter and circumcision,*
*etc.* A construction  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) which means
a literal circumcision. He does not mean that they violated the law,
because they had the literal circumcision; but because they continued,
though they had the outward rite, to neglect the spiritual worship of
God, even piety, justice, judgment, and truth, which are the chief
matters of the law.  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)

<span id="vi.vi-p24"></span><span id="vi.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p25"></span>**28.** *For a Jew is not he,* *etc.* The
meaning is, that a real Jew is not to be ascertained, either by natural
descent, or by profession, or by an external symbol; that the
circumcision which constitutes a Jew, does not consist in an outward
sign only, but that both are inward. And what he subjoins with regard to
true circumcision, is taken from various passages of Scripture, and even
from its general teaching; for the people are everywhere commanded to
circumcise their hearts, and it is what the Lord promises to do. The
fore-skin was cut off, not indeed as the small corruption of one part,
but as that of the whole nature. Circumcision then signified the
mortification of the whole flesh.

<span id="vi.vi-p26"></span><span id="vi.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p27"></span>**29.** What he then adds, *in the spirit,
not in the letter,* understand thus: He calls the outward rite, without
piety, the *letter,* and the spiritual design of this rite, the
*spirit;* for the whole importance of signs and rites depends on what is
designed; when the end in view is not regarded, the letter alone
remains, which in itself is useless. And the reason for this mode of
speaking is this, — where the voice of God sounds, all that he commands,
except it be received by men in sincerity of heart, will remain in the
letter, that is, in the dead writing; but when it penetrates into the
heart, it is in a manner transformed into spirit. And there is an
allusion to the difference between the old and the new covenant, which
Jeremiah points out in <span id="vi.vi-p27.1"></span>[Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span id="vi.vi-p27.1"></span>;
where the Lord declares that his covenant would be firm and permanent
when engraven on the inward parts. Paul had also the same thing in view
in another place, (<span id="vi.vi-p27.2"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi-p27.2"></span>,)
where he compares the law with the gospel, and calls the former “the
letter,” which is not only dead but killeth; and the latter he
signalizes with the title of “spirit.” But extremly gross has been the
folly of those who have deduced a double meaning from the “letter,” and
allegories from the “spirit.”

<span id="vi.vi-p28"></span>*Whose praise is not from men,* *etc.* As
men fix their eyes only on those things which are visible, he denies
that we ought to be satisfied with what is commendable in the estimation
of men, who are often deceived by outward splendor; but that we ought to
be satisfied with the all-seeing eyes of God, from which the deepest
secrets of the heart are not hid. He thus again summons hypocrites, who
soothe themselves with false opinions, to the tribunal of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc38005.htm#fr_61) <span
id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span> It is confessed by most that the illative,
διὸ, at the beginning of the verse can hardly be accounted for. The
inference from the preceding is not very evident. It is, in my view, an
instance of Hebraism; and the reference is not to what has preceded, but
to what is to come. It is not properly an illative, but it anticipates a
reason afterwards given, conveyed by *for,* or, *because.* Its meaning
will be seen in the following version: —

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>On this account, inexcusable art thou, O man,
whosoever thou be who condemnest another, because, in what thou
condemnest another thou condemnest thyself; for thou who condemnest
doest the same things.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>The verb, κρίνω, has here the idea of
condemning, or of passing judgments; to *judge* is not sufficiently
distinct. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc38005.htm#fr_62) <span
id="vi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span> “According to truth” — κατὰ ἀλήθειαν, means,
according to the true state of the case, without any partiality, or
according to what is just and equitable; so <span
id="vi.i-p16.1"></span>Grotius takes it. Its corresponding word in
Hebrew, <span id="vi.i-p16.2"></span>אמת, is sometimes rendered
δικαιοσύνμ, It is found opposed to ἀδικία in <span
id="vi.i-p16.3"></span>[1Co 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#006)<span
id="vi.i-p16.3"></span>. The expression here may be deemed to be the
same in meaning with δικαιοκρισία — righteous judgment, in verse 5. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc38005.htm#fr_63) <span
id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span> <span id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>*Lenitatis* —
μακροθυμίας, <span id="vi.ii-p5.2"></span>tarditatis ad iram.
“Long-suffering” expresses the meaning very exactly. There is here a
gradation — “goodness” — χρηστότης, benevolence, kindness, bounty; —
“forbearance” — ἀνοχὴ, withholding, *i.e.,* of wrath; — then
“long-suffering,” that is, bearing long with the sins of men. “Riches”
mean abundance; the same as though the expression was, “the abounding
goodness,” etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc38005.htm#fr_64) <span
id="vi.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p27"></span> What follows in the text, according to
<span id="vi.ii-p27.1"></span>Calvin, is this, “<span
id="vi.ii-p27.2"></span>et Corinthians pœni tere nescium — and a heart
that knoweth not to repent;” καὶ ἀμετανοητον καρδίαν, which <span
id="vi.ii-p27.3"></span>Schleusner renders thus, “<span
id="vi.ii-p27.4"></span>animus, qui omnem emendationem respuit — a mind
which rejects every improvement.” It is an impenitable rather than “an
impenitent heart,” that is, a heart incapable of repenting. See <span
id="vi.ii-p27.5"></span>[Eph 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)<span
id="vi.ii-p27.5"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc38005.htm#fr_65) <span
id="vi.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p38"></span> It has appeared to some difficult to
reconcile this language with the free salvation which the gospel offers,
and to obviate the conclusion which many are disposed to draw from this
passage — that salvation is by works as well as by faith.

<span id="vi.ii-p39"></span>To this objection <span
id="vi.ii-p39.1"></span>Pareus answers, that the Apostle speaks here of
salvation by the works of the law, not indeed as a thing possible, which
he subsequently denies, but as a declaration of what it is, that he
might thereby show the necessity of a gratuitous salvation which is by
faith only. And this is the view which Mr. <span
id="vi.ii-p39.2"></span>Haldane takes.

<span id="vi.ii-p40"></span>But there is no need of having recourse to
this hypothesis: for whenever *judgment* is spoken of even in the New
Testament, it is ever represented in the same way, as being regulated in
righteousness, according to the works of every individual. See <span
id="vi.ii-p40.1"></span>[Ac 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span
id="vi.ii-p40.1"></span>; <span id="vi.ii-p40.2"></span>[2Co
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii-p40.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.ii-p40.3"></span>[Col.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025)<span id="vi.ii-p40.3"></span>;
<span id="vi.ii-p40.4"></span>[Re
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012)<span id="vi.ii-p40.4"></span>;
<span id="vi.ii-p40.5"></span>[Re
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012)<span id="vi.ii-p40.5"></span>.

<span id="vi.ii-p41"></span>It will be a *judgment*, conducted according
to the perfect rule of justice, with no respect of persons, with no
regard to individuals as such, whether high or low, much or little
favored as to outward privileges, but according to what their conduct
has been, under the circumstances of their case. The rule, if heathens,
will be the law of nature; if Jews, the law which had been given them.
Judgment, as to its character, will be still the same to those under the
gospel; it will be according to what the gospel requires. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc38005.htm#fr_66) <span
id="vi.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p44"></span> With regard to the construction of this
passage, 6-10, it may be observed, that it is formed according to the
mode of Hebrew parallelism, many instances of which we meet with even in
the prose writings of the New Testament. None of the ancients, nor any
of the moderns, before the time of <span id="vi.ii-p44.1"></span>Bishop
Lowth*,* understood much of the peculiar character of the Hebrew style.
All the anomalies, noticed by <span id="vi.ii-p44.2"></span>Calvin*,*
instantly vanish, when the passage is so arranged, as to exhibit the
correspondence of its different parts. It consists of two general
portions; the first includes three verses, <span
id="vi.ii-p44.3"></span>[Ro 2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006)<span
id="vi.ii-p44.3"></span>; the other, the remaining three <span
id="vi.ii-p44.4"></span>[Ro
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii-p44.4"></span>.
The same things are mainly included in both portions, only in the latter
there are some things additional, and explanatory, and the order is
reversed, so that the passage ends with what corresponds with its
beginning. To see the whole in a connected form, it is necessary to set
it down in lines, in the following manner —

<span id="vi.ii-p45"></span>**6.** Who will render to each according to
his works, —

<span id="vi.ii-p46"></span>**7.** To those indeed, who, by perseverance
in well — doing, Seek glory and honor and immortality, — Eternal life

<span id="vi.ii-p47"></span>**8.** But *there shall be* to them who are
contentious And obey not the truth, but obey iniquity, —Indignation and
wrath:

<span id="vi.ii-p48"></span> Then follow the same things, the order
being reversed —

<span id="vi.ii-p49"></span>**9.** Distress and anguish *shall be* on
every soul of man that worketh evil, — On the Jew first, and then on the
Greek;

<span id="vi.ii-p50"></span>**10.** But glory and honor and peace, To
every one who worketh good, — To the Jew first and then to the Greek;

<span id="vi.ii-p51"></span>**11.** For there is no respect of persons
with God.

<span id="vi.ii-p52"></span>The idea in the last and the first line is
essentially the same. This repetition is for the sake of producing an
impression. The character of the righteous, in the first part, is, that
by persevering in doing good they seek glory, honor, and immortality,
and their reward is to be eternal life: the character of the wicked is
that of being contentious, disobedient to the truth, and obedient to
unrighteousness, and their reward is to be indignation and wrath. The
character of the first, in the second part, is, that they work good; and
of the other, that they work evil: and the reward of the first is glory,
honor, and peace, and the reward of the other, distress and anguish;
which are the effects of indignation and wrath, as glory honor, and
peace are the fruits or the constituent parts of eternal life. It is to
be observed that priority in happiness, as well as priority in misery,
is ascribed to the Jew. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc38005.htm#fr_67) <span
id="vi.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span> The word προσωποληψία, respect of persons,
is found in three other places, <span id="vi.iii-p11.1"></span>[Eph
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)<span id="vi.iii-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.iii-p11.2"></span>[Col
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025)<span id="vi.iii-p11.2"></span>;
and <span id="vi.iii-p11.3"></span>[Jas
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001)<span id="vi.iii-p11.3"></span>;
and in these the reference is to conditions in life. In <span
id="vi.iii-p11.4"></span>[Ac
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034)<span id="vi.iii-p11.4"></span>,
the word is in another form προσωπολήπτης, a respecter of persons, and
as a verb in <span id="vi.iii-p11.5"></span>[Jas
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#009)<span id="vi.iii-p11.5"></span>.
The full phrase is πρόσωπον λαμβάνω, as found in <span
id="vi.iii-p11.6"></span>[Lu
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#021)<span id="vi.iii-p11.6"></span>,
and <span id="vi.iii-p11.7"></span>[Ga
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)<span id="vi.iii-p11.7"></span>. It
is a phrase peculiar to the Hebrew language, and means literally, *to
lift up or regard faces,* that is, *persons,* <span
id="vi.iii-p11.8"></span>נשא פנים. See <span
id="vi.iii-p11.9"></span>[Le
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015)<span id="vi.iii-p11.9"></span>;
<span id="vi.iii-p11.10"></span>[De
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017)<span id="vi.iii-p11.10"></span>;
<span id="vi.iii-p11.11"></span>[2Ch
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#007)<span id="vi.iii-p11.11"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span>An argument has been hence taken to oppose
the doctrine of election; but this is to apply to a particular thing
what belongs entirely and exclusively to another. This belongs to the
administration of justice, but election is the exercise of mercy. Even
<span id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>Grotius admits, that God manifests a
difference in bestowing benefits, but not in exercising Judgment.
Indeed, in the present instance, with regard to the subject handled by
the Apostle, there was a manifest difference; the Gentile had only the
law of nature, but the Jew had a revealed law. Yet when brought to
judgment there was to be no respect of persons, each was to be judged
impartially according to the circumstances of his condition. And
further, election does not proceed on the principle of showing respect
of persons, that is, of regarding men according to their privileges or
outward circumstances, or kindred or relation in life, or any thing in
man; but its sole and exclusive ground or reason is the good pleasure of
God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc38005.htm#fr_68) <span
id="vi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span> Ανόμως commonly means *unlawfully,
wickedly, lawlessly;* but here, as it is evident from the context, it
signifies *to be without law.* The adjective ἀνόμος is also used once in
this sense in <span id="vi.iii-p15.1"></span>[1Co
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021)<span id="vi.iii-p15.1"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc38005.htm#fr_69) <span
id="vi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p17"></span> The word “condemned” would be better in
the text than “judged;” it would then more plainly correspond with the
former part, where the word “perished” is used: and that it means
“condemned” is evident, for those who have “sinned” are the persons
referred to. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc38005.htm#fr_70) <span
id="vi.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p22"></span> On the expression “hearers of the law,”
<span id="vi.iii-p22.1"></span>Stuart has these remarks — “The Apostle
here speaks of οἱ ἀκροαταὶ τοῦ νόμου, because the Jews were accustomed
to hear the Scriptures read in public; but many of them did not
individually possess copies of the sacred volume which they could read.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc38005.htm#fr_71) <span
id="vi.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span> As to the phrase, “these are a law unto
themselves,” <span id="vi.iv-p10.1"></span>Venema adduces classical
examples — πᾶν τὸ βέλτιστον φαινόμενον ἔστω σοι νόμος ἀπαράβατος
“Whatever seems best, let it be to thee a perpetual law.” — *Epict. in
Ench*., c. 75. “τὸ μὲν ορθὸν νόμος ἐστὶ βασιληκός What is indeed right,
is a royal law.” — <span id="vi.iv-p10.2"></span>Plato *in Min.,* page
317.

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span>The heathens themselves acknowledged a law
of nature. <span id="vi.iv-p11.1"></span>Turrettin quotes a passage from
a lost work of <span id="vi.iv-p11.2"></span>Cicero, retained by <span
id="vi.iv-p11.3"></span>Lactantius*,* which remarkably coincides with
the language of Paul here — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc38005.htm#fr_72) <span
id="vi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p14"></span> By the work of the law, τὸ ἔργον τοῦ νόμου,
is to be understood what the law requires. The “work of God,” in <span
id="vi.iv-p14.1"></span>[Joh 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029)<span
id="vi.iv-p14.1"></span>, is of the same import, that is, the work which
God requires or demands; and the same word is plural in the former
verse, τὰ ἔργα — “the works of God.” So here, in the former verse, it is
τὰ τοῦ νόμου — “the things of the law,” where we may suppose ἔργαto be
understood. The common expression, “the works of the law,” has the same
meaning, that is, such works as the law prescribes and requires. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc38005.htm#fr_73) <span
id="vi.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p22"></span> <span id="vi.iv-p22.1"></span>Calvin seems
to consider that the latter part of the verse is only a expansion or an
exposition of the preceding clause respecting “conscience:” but it seems
to contain a distinct idea. The testimony of conscience is one thing,
which is instantaneous, without reflection: and the thoughts or the
reasonings — λογισμῶν, which alternately or mutually accuse or excuse,
seem to refer to a process carried on by the mind, by which the innate
voice of conscience is confirmed. This is the view taken by <span
id="vi.iv-p22.2"></span>Stuart and <span id="vi.iv-p22.3"></span>Barnes,
and to which <span id="vi.iv-p22.4"></span>Hodge is inclined.

<span id="vi.iv-p23"></span>Another view of the latter clause is given
by <span id="vi.iv-p23.1"></span>Doddridge*,* <span
id="vi.iv-p23.2"></span>Macknight*,* <span
id="vi.iv-p23.3"></span>Haldane*,* and <span
id="vi.iv-p23.4"></span>Chalmers The last gives this paraphrase of the
whole verse, — “For they show that the matter of the law is written in
their hearts — both from their conscience testifying what is right and
wrong in their own conduct, and from their reasonings in which they
either accuse or vindicate one another.”

<span id="vi.iv-p24"></span>But to regard the two clauses as referring
to conscience and the inward workings of the mind, appears more
consistent with the context. The Gentiles are those spoken of: God gave
them no outward law, but the law of nature which is inward. Hence in the
following verse he speaks of God as judging “the secrets of men,” as the
inward law will be the rule of judgment to the Gentiles — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc38005.htm#fr_74) <span
id="vi.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p27"></span> In accordance with some of the fathers,
<span id="vi.iv-p27.1"></span>Jerome*,* <span
id="vi.iv-p27.2"></span>Chrysostom*,* <span
id="vi.iv-p27.3"></span>Theophylact*,* and others, <span
id="vi.iv-p27.4"></span>Calvin connects this with the immediately
preceding verse: but almost all modern critics connect it with the 12th
verse, and consider what intervenes as parenthetic. This is according to
our version. In the <span id="vi.iv-p27.5"></span>[Ro
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="vi.iv-p27.5"></span>,
both the Gentile and the Jew are spoken of, and that with reference to
judgment. In this verse the time and the character of that judgment are
referred to, and its character especially as to the Gentile, as his case
is particularly delineated in the parenthesis. The Apostle then, in what
follows, turns to the Jew. “According to my gospel” must be understood,
not as though the gospel is to be the rule of judgment to the Gentile,
but as to the fact, that Christ is appointed to be the Judge of all. See
<span id="vi.iv-p27.6"></span>[Ac
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span id="vi.iv-p27.6"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc38005.htm#fr_75) <span
id="vi.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p17"></span> These texts are referred to, <span
id="vi.v-p17.1"></span>[Isa 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#006)<span
id="vi.v-p17.1"></span>; <span id="vi.v-p17.2"></span>[Eze
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#020)<span id="vi.v-p17.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc38005.htm#fr_76) <span
id="vi.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p21"></span> <span id="vi.v-p21.1"></span>Griesbach has
since found a majority of MSS. in favor of this reading, and has adopted
it. But the difficulty is to find a corresponding clause. There is none,
except what begins in <span id="vi.v-p21.2"></span>[Ro
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)<span id="vi.v-p21.2"></span>; εἰ
δὲ and οὖν do not well respond, except we render the first, though
indeed, and the other, yes or nevertheless somewhat in the sense of an
adversative. It will admit this meaning in some passages. See <span
id="vi.v-p21.3"></span>[Mt 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#012)<span
id="vi.v-p21.3"></span>; <span id="vi.v-p21.4"></span>[Mt
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)<span id="vi.v-p21.4"></span>;
<span id="vi.v-p21.5"></span>[Ro
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="vi.v-p21.5"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc38005.htm#fr_77) <span
id="vi.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p24"></span> This is not quite correct. They were called
*Jews* even before the captivity, and during the captivity, but most
commonly and regularly after it. The words Jews, first occurs in <span
id="vi.v-p24.1"></span>[2Ki 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#006)<span
id="vi.v-p24.1"></span>. See <span id="vi.v-p24.2"></span>[Es
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003)<span id="vi.v-p24.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.v-p24.3"></span>[Jer
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#019)<span id="vi.v-p24.3"></span>;
<span id="vi.v-p24.4"></span>[Da
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#008)<span id="vi.v-p24.4"></span>;
<span id="vi.v-p24.5"></span>[Ezr
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012)<span id="vi.v-p24.5"></span>;
<span id="vi.v-p24.6"></span>[Ne
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#016)<span id="vi.v-p24.6"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc38005.htm#fr_78) <span
id="vi.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p28"></span> There are two expositions of the words,
δοκιμάζεις τὰ διαφερόντα, which may be sustained according to what the
words signify in other places. The first word means to prove, or test,
or examine, and also to approve; and the second signifies things which
differ, or things which are excellent. “Thou provest, or, distinguishest
things which differ,” is the rendering of <span
id="vi.v-p28.1"></span>Beza*,* <span id="vi.v-p28.2"></span>Pareus*,*
<span id="vi.v-p28.3"></span>Doddridge*,* and <span
id="vi.v-p28.4"></span>Stuart: “Thou approvest things excellent or
useful,” is the rendering of <span id="vi.v-p28.5"></span>Erasmus*,*
<span id="vi.v-p28.6"></span>Macknight*,* and others. The first is the
most suitable to the context, as knowledge, and not approval, is
evidently intended, as proved by the explanatory clause which follows, —
“being instructed out of the law.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc38005.htm#fr_79) <span
id="vi.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p31"></span> Calvin has passed over here several clauses:
they are so plain as to require no remarks, except the two last. “The
instructor of the unwise — <span id="vi.v-p31.1"></span>insipientium,”
ἀφρόνων, of such as were foolish from not understanding things rightly.
“The teacher of the ignorant — <span
id="vi.v-p31.2"></span>imperitorum,” νηπίων, babes, that is, of such as
were ignorant like babes. But these and the foregoing titles, “the guide
of the blind,” and, “light to those in darkness,” were such as the
Jewish doctors assumed, and are not to be considered as having any great
difference in their real meaning. There seems to be no reason to
suppose, with <span id="vi.v-p31.3"></span>Doddridge and some others,
that “the blind, foolish, ignorant” were the Gentiles, for the Jews did
not assume the office of teaching them. It is to be observed that Paul
here takes the case, not of the common people, but of the learned — the
teachers.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc38005.htm#fr_80) <span
id="vi.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p34"></span> The same word occurs only in <span
id="vi.v-p34.1"></span>[2Ti 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005)<span
id="vi.v-p34.1"></span>, “μόρφωσιν εὐσεβείας — the form of godliness.”
It is taken here in a good sense, as meaning a sketch, a delineation, an
outline, a representation, or a summary. <span
id="vi.v-p34.2"></span>Chalmers renders the words thus, — “The whole
summary of knowledge and truth which is in the law.” Some understand by
*knowledge* what refers to morals or outward conduct, and by *truth*
what is to be believed. Others regard them as an instance of Hebrewism,
two substantives being put, instead of a substantive and an adjective;
the phrase would then be, “true knowledge.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc38005.htm#fr_81) <span
id="vi.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p37"></span> This clause, and those which follow, are
commonly put in an interrogatory form, that is, as questions: but some,
as <span id="vi.v-p37.1"></span>Theophylact*,* <span
id="vi.v-p37.2"></span>Erasmus and <span
id="vi.v-p37.3"></span>Luther*,* have rendered the clauses in the form
here adopted. There is no difference in the meaning.

<span id="vi.v-p38"></span>It is worthy of notice, that the Apostle,
after the Hebrew manner, reverses the order as to the points he
mentions; he, as it were, retrogrades, and begins to do so at <span
id="vi.v-p38.1"></span>[Ro 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)<span
id="vi.v-p38.1"></span>. The passage may be thus rendered, —

<span id="vi.v-p39"></span>**17.** Seeing then, thou art named a Jew,
And reliest on the law, and gloriest in God,

<span id="vi.v-p40"></span>**18.** And knowest his will, And decernest
things which differ, being taught by the law,

<span id="vi.v-p41"></span>**19.** And art confident that thou art A
leader to the blind, a light to those in darkness,

<span id="vi.v-p42"></span>**20.** An instructor to the foolish, a
teacher to babes, Having the form of knowledge and of truth according to
the law:

<span id="vi.v-p43"></span>**21.** Yet thou, who teachest another,
teachest not thyself, Thou, who preachest, “Steal not,” stealest,

<span id="vi.v-p44"></span>**22.** Thou, who sayest, “Commit no
adultery,” committest adultery, Thou who detestest idols, committest
sacrilege,

<span id="vi.v-p45"></span>**23.** Thou who gloriest in the law, by
transgressing the law dishonorest God; For the name of God, as it is
written, is through you blasphemed by the Gentiles.

<span id="vi.v-p46"></span><span id="vi.v-p46.1"></span>[Romans
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)<span id="vi.v-p46.1"></span>, and
part of the 22nd, refer to what is contained in <span
id="vi.v-p46.2"></span>Romans 19<span id="vi.v-p46.2"></span> and the
20th; and the latter part of the 22nd to the 18th verse; and 23rd to the
17th. The latter part of the 22nd helps us to fix the meaning of the
latter part of the 18th; the man who hated idols and committed sacrilege
proved that he did not exercise his boasted power of making a proper
distinction between right and wrong. Then the man who is said, in <span
id="vi.v-p46.3"></span>[Ro 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017)<span
id="vi.v-p46.3"></span>, to rely on the law and glory in God, is
charged, in <span id="vi.v-p46.4"></span>[Ro
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023)<span id="vi.v-p46.4"></span>,
with the sin of dishonoring God by transgressing the law — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc38005.htm#fr_82) <span
id="vi.v-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p52"></span> “Sacrilege,” mentioned here, is by some
taken literally as meaning the robbing of God as to the sacrifices he
required, and the profanation of sacred rites; “many examples of which,”
says <span id="vi.v-p52.1"></span>Turrettin, “are recorded by the
Prophets, and also by <span id="vi.v-p52.2"></span>Josephus, both before
and during the last war.” But some extend its meaning to acts of
hypocrisy and ungodliness, by which God’s honor was profaned, and the
glory due to him was denied. The highest sacrilege, no doubt, is to
deprive God of that sincere service and obedience which he justly
requires. “They caused,” says <span id="vi.v-p52.3"></span>Pareus*,*
“the name and honor of God to be in various ways blasphemed by their
wicked hypocrisy; and hence they were justly said by the Apostle to be
guilty of sacrilege.” He then adds, “we must notice, that idolatry is
not opposed to sacrilege, but mentioned as a thing closely allied to it.
Indeed all idolatry is sacrilegious. How then can the Monks, Priests,
and Jesuits clear themselves from the charge of sacrilege? for they not
only do not detest idolatry, being in this respect much worse than these
hypocrites, but also greedily seek, like them, sacred offerings, and
under the pretense of sanctity devour widows’ houses, pillage the
coffers of kings, and, what is most heinous, sacrilegiously rob God of
his due worship and honor and transfer them to saints.” Yet the world is
so blind as not to see the real character of such men! — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc38005.htm#fr_83) <span
id="vi.v-p57.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p58"></span> On this remarkable passage <span
id="vi.v-p58.1"></span>Haldane has these very appropriate, just, and
striking observations, —

<span id="vi.v-p59"></span>“The Apostle, in these verses, exhibits the
most lively image of hypocrisy. Was there ever a more beautiful veil
than that under which the Jew presents himself? He is a man of
confession, of praise, of thanksgiving — a man, whose trust is in the
Law, whose boast is of God, who knows his will, who approves of things
that are excellent, a man who calls himself a conductor of the blind, a
light of those who are in darkness, an instructor of the ignorant, a
teacher of babes; a man who directs others, who preaches against theft,
against adultery, against idolatry, and to sum up the whole, a man who
glories in the commandments of the Lord. Who would not say that this is
an angel arrayed in human form — a star detached from the firmament, and
brought nearer to enlighten the earth? But observe what is concealed
under this mask. It is a man who is himself untaught; it is a thief, an
adulterer, a sacrilegious person; in one word, a wicked man, who
continually dishonors God by the transgression of his law. Is it
possible to imagine a contrast more monstrous than between these fair
appearances and this awful reality?”

<span id="vi.v-p60"></span>No, certainly; but it is a contrast which
still exists, with various modifications, in many instances. — It ought
to be observed, that when the author calls the Jew “a man of confession,
of praise, of thanksgiving,” he alludes to the import of the word, Jew,
in Hebrew, which is derived from a verb, which includes these ideas: and
it is supposed by some, that there is an allusion in the last words of
this chapter, “whose praise,” etc., to what the name signifies. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc38005.htm#fr_84) <span
id="vi.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p21"></span> *Hypallage,* substitution, a figure of
speech, by which a noun or an adjective is put in a form different from
its obvious import. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc38005.htm#fr_85) <span
id="vi.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p22"></span> The rendering of this clause is rather
obscure, “who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law.”
The preposition, διὰ, has no doubt the meaning of ἐν or σύν, as in some
other passages, as in <span id="vi.vi-p22.1"></span>[Ro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span id="vi.vi-p22.1"></span>, δἰ
ἀκροβυστίας — in uncircumcision, and in <span
id="vi.vi-p22.2"></span>[Ro 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span
id="vi.vi-p22.2"></span>, δἰ ῦπομονὢς — in or with patience. Then the
version should be, “who, *being* with, or having, the letter and
circumcision, dost transgress the law.” The “letter” means the written
law. That this is the meaning is evident from the context. Both <span
id="vi.vi-p22.3"></span>Grotius and <span
id="vi.vi-p22.4"></span>Macknight give the same construction. It is
better to take “letter,” *i.e*., the law, and “circumcision” separate,
than to amalgamate them by a rhetorical figure, as is done by <span
id="vi.vi-p22.5"></span>Calvin and others. <span
id="vi.vi-p22.6"></span>Hodge justly says, that this is “more suited to
the context, as nothing is said here of spiritual circumcision.”

<span id="vi.vi-p23"></span>The word γράμμα, letter, has various
meanings — 1. What is commonly called letter, the character, <span
id="vi.vi-p23.1"></span>[Lu 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#038)<span
id="vi.vi-p23.1"></span>, — 2. What is written, a bond or contract,
<span id="vi.vi-p23.2"></span>[Lu
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi-p23.2"></span>; —
3. In the plural, letters, epistles, <span id="vi.vi-p23.3"></span>[Ac
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#021)<span id="vi.vi-p23.3"></span>; —
4. The written law, as here, and in the plural, the Old Testament
Scriptures, <span id="vi.vi-p23.4"></span>[2Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)<span id="vi.vi-p23.4"></span>; —
5. What is conveyed by writing, learning, <span
id="vi.vi-p23.5"></span>[Joh 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#015)<span
id="vi.vi-p23.5"></span>; <span id="vi.vi-p23.6"></span>[Ac
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024)<span id="vi.vi-p23.6"></span>; —
and, 6. The outward performance of the law, it being written, as opposed
to what is spiritual or inward, as in the last verse of this chapter,
and in <span id="vi.vi-p23.7"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi-p23.7"></span>. —
*Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc38006)
