[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc38010)  [Next](cc38012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** *There is* therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit.  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md)

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**1.** Nulla igitur condemnatio est iis qui
sunt in Christo Iesu, qui non secumdum carnem ambulant, sed secundum
Spiritum.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** For the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**2.** Lex enim Spiritus vitæ in Christo
Iesu, liberum me reddidit a lege peccati et mortis.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3.** For what the law could not do, in that
it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh:

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Quod enim impossibile erat Legi,eo
quod infirmabatur per carnem,misso Deus Filio suo in similitudine carnis
peccati, etiam de peccato damnavit peccatum in carne;

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4.** That the righteousness of the law
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**4.** Ut justificatio Legis impleretur in
nobis qui non secumdum carnem ambulamus, sed secundum Spiritum.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span><span id="xii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>**1.** *There is then,* *etc.* After having
described the contest which the godly have perpetually with their own
flesh, he returns to the consolation, which was very needful for them,
and which he had before mentioned; and it was this, — That though they
were still beset by sin, they were yet exempt fiom the power of death,
and from every curse, provided they lived not in the flesh but in the
Spirit: for he joins together these three things, — the imperfection
under which the faithful always labor, — the mercy of God in pardoning
and forgiving it, —and the regeneration of the Spirit; and this indeed
in the last place, that no one should flatter himself with a vain
notion, as though he were freed from the curse, while securely indulging
in the meantime his own flesh. As then the carnal man flatters himself
in vain, when in no way solicitous to reform his life, he promises to
himself impunity under the pretense of having this grace; so the
trembling consciences of the godly have an invincible fortress, for they
know that while they abide in Christ they are beyond every danger of
condemnation. We shall now examine the words.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>*After the Spirit.* Those who walk after the
Spirit are not such as have wholly put off all the emotions of the
flesh, so that their whole life is redolent with nothing but celestial
perfection; but they are those who sedulously labor to subdue and
mortify the flesh, so that the love of true religion seems to reign in
them. He declares that such walk not after the flesh; for wherever the
real fear of God is vigorous, it takes away from the flesh its
sovereignty, though it does not abolish all its corruptions.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span><span id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**2.** *For the law of the Spirit of life,*
*etc.* This is a confirmation of the former sentence; and that it may be
understood, the meaning of the words must be noticed. Using a language
not strictly correct, by the *law of the Spirit* he designates the
Spirit of God, who sprinkles our souls with the blood of Christ, not
only to cleanse us from the stain of sin with respect to its guilt, but
also to sanctify us that we may be really purified. He adds that it is
life-giving, (for the genitive case, after the manner of the Hebrew, is
to be taken as an adjective,) it hence follows, that they who detain man
in the letter of the law, expose him to death. On the other hand, he
gives the name of the *law of sin* and *death* to the dominion of the
flesh and to the tyranny of death, which thence follows: the law of God
is set as it were in the middle, which by teaching righteousness cannot
confer it, but on the contrary binds us with the strongest chains in
bondage to sin and to death.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>The meaning then is, — that the law of God
condemns men, and that this happens, because as long as they remain
under the bond of the law, they are oppressed with the bondage of sin,
and are thus exposed to death; but that the Spirit of Christ, while it
abolishes the law of sin in us by destroying the prevailing desires of
the flesh, does at the same time deliver us from the peril of death. If
any one objects and says, that then pardon, by which our transgressions
are buried, depends on regeneration; to this it may be easily answered,
that the reason is not here assigned by Paul, but that the manner only
is specified, in which we are delivered from guilt; and Paul denies that
we obtain deliverance by the external teaching of the law, but intimates
that when we are renewed by the Spirit of God, we are at the same time
justified by a gratuitous pardon, that the curse of sin may no longer
abide on us. The sentence then has the same meaning, as though Paul had
said, that the grace of regeneration is never disjoined from the
imputation of righteousness.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>I dare not, with some, take *the law of sin
and death* for the law of God, because it seems a harsh expression. For
though by increasing sin it generates death, yet Paul before turned
aside designedly from this invidious language. At the same time I no
more agree in opinion with those who explain the law of sin as being the
lust of the flesh, as though Paul had said, that he had become the
conqueror of it. But it will appear very evident shortly, as I think,
that he speaks of a gratuitous absolution, which brings to us
tranquillizing peace with God. I prefer retaining the word *law*, rather
than with <span id="xii.i-p17.1"></span>Erasmus to render it *right* or
*power:* for Paul did not without reason allude to the law of God.
 <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md)

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span><span id="xii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**3.** *For what was impossible for the
law*, *etc.* Now follows the polishing or the adorning of his proof,
that the Lord has by his gratuitous mercy justified us in Christ; the
very thing which it was impossible for the law to do. But as this is a
very remarkable sentence, let us examine every part of it.

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>That he treats here of free justification or
of the pardon by which God reconciles us to himself, we may infer from
the last clause, when he adds, *who walk not according to the flesh, but
according to the Spirit* For if Paul intended to teach us, that we are
prepared by the spirit of regeneration to overcome sin, why was this
addition made? But it was very proper for him, after having promised
gratuitous remission to the faithful, to confine this doctrine to those
who join penitence to faith, and turn not the mercy of God so as to
promote the licentiousness of the flesh. And then the state of the case
must be noticed; for the Apostle teaches us here how the grace of Christ
absolves us from guilt.

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>Now as to the expression, <span
id="xii.i-p22.1"></span>τὸ ἀδύνατον, the impossibility of the law, it is
no doubt to be taken for defect or impotency; as though it had been
said, that a remedy had been found by God, by which that which was an
impossibility to the law is removed. The particle, <span
id="xii.i-p22.2"></span>ἐν ᾧ, <span id="xii.i-p22.3"></span>Erasmus has
rendered “<span id="xii.i-p22.4"></span>ea parte qua — in that part in
which;” but as I think it to be causal, I prefer rendering it, “<span
id="xii.i-p22.5"></span>eo quod — because:” and though perhaps such a
phrase does not occur among good authors in the Greek language, yet as
the Apostles everywhere adopt Hebrew modes of expression, this
interpretation ought not to be deemed improper.  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md) No doubt intelligent readers will
allow, that the cause of defect is what is here expressed, as we shall
shortly prove again. Now though <span id="xii.i-p23.11"></span>Erasmus
supplies the principal verb, yet the text seems to me to flow better
without it. The copulative <span id="xii.i-p23.12"></span>καὶ, *and*,
has led <span id="xii.i-p23.13"></span>Erasmus astray, so as to insert
the verb <span id="xii.i-p23.14"></span>*prœstitit* — hath performed;
but I think that it is used for the sake of emphasis; except it may be,
that some will approve of the conjecture of a Grecian scholiast, who
connects the clause thus with the preceding words, “God sent his own Son
in the likeness of the flesh of sin and on account of sin,” etc. I have
however followed what I have thought to be the real meaning of Paul. I
come now to the subject itself.  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md)

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>Paul clearly declares that our sins were
expiated by the death of Christ, because it was impossible for the law
to confer righteousness upon us. It hence follows, that more is required
by the law than what we can perform; for if we were capable of
fulfilling the law there would have been no need to seek a remedy
elsewhere. It is therefore absurd to measure human strength by the
precepts of the law; as though God in requiring what is justly due, had
regarded what and how much we are able to do.

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>*Because it was weak* *etc.* That no one
might think that the law was irreverently charged with weakness, or
confine it to ceremonies, Paul has distinctly expressed that this defect
was not owing to any fault in the law, but to the corruption of our
flesh; for it must be allowed that if any one really satisfies the
divine law, he will be deemed just before God. He does not then deny
that the law is sufficient to justify us as to doctrine, inasmuch as it
contains a perfect rule of righteousness: but as our flesh does not
attain that righteousness, the whole power of the law fails and vanishes
away. Thus condemned is the error or rather the delirious notion of
those who imagine that the power of justifying is only taken away from
ceremonies; for Paul, by laying the blame expressly on us, clearly shows
that he found no fault with the doctrine of the law.

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span>But further, understand the weakness of the
law according to the sense in which the Apostle usually takes the word
<span id="xii.i-p29.1"></span>ασθενεια, weakness, not only as meaning a
small imbecility but impotency; for he means that the law has no power
whatever to justify.  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) You then
see that we are wholly excluded from the righteousness of works, and
must therefore flee to Christ for righteousness, for in us there can be
none, and to know this is especially necessary; for we shall never be
clothed with the righteousness of Christ except we first know assuredly
that we have no righteousness of our own. The word *flesh* is to be
taken still in the same sense, as meaning ourselves. The corruption then
of our nature renders the law of God in this respect useless to us; for
while it shows the way of life, it does not bring us back who are
running headlong into death.

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>*God having sent his own Son,* *etc.* He now
points out the way in which our heavenly Father has restored
righteousness to us by his Son, even by condemning sin in the very flesh
of Christ; who by cancelling as it were the handwriting, abolished sin,
which held us bound before God; for the condemnation of sin made us free
and brought us righteousness, for sin being blotted out we are absolved,
so that God counts us as just. But he declares first that Christ was
*sent*, in order to remind us that righteousness by no means dwells in
us, for it is to be sought from him, and that men in vain confide in
their own merits, who become not just but at the pleasure of another, or
who borrow righteousness from that expiation which Christ accomplished
in his own flesh. But he says, that he came in *the likeness of the
flesh of sin;* for though the flesh of Christ was polluted by no stains,
yet it seemed apparently to be sinful, inasmuch as it sustained the
punishment due to our sins, and doubtless death exercised all its power
over it as though it was subject to itself. And as it behoved our
High-priest to learn by his own experience how to aid the weak, Christ
underwent our infirmities, that he might be more inclined to sympathy,
and in this respect also there appeared some resemblance of a sinful
nature.

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span>*Even for sin*, *etc.* I have already said
that this is explained by some as the cause or the end for which God
sent his own Son, that is, to give satisfaction for sin. <span
id="xii.i-p32.1"></span>Chrysostom and many after him understood it in a
still harsher sense, even that sin was condemned for sin, and for this
reason, because it assailed Christ unjustly and beyond what was right. I
indeed allow that though he was just and innocent, he yet underwent
punishment for sinners, and that the price of redemption was thus paid;
but I cannot be brought to think that the word *sin* is put here in any
other sense than that of an expiatory sacrifice, which is called <span
id="xii.i-p32.2"></span>אשם, *ashem*, in Hebrew,  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241.md) and so the Greeks call a sacrifice to
which a curse is annexed <span id="xii.i-p36.5"></span>κάθαρμα,
*catharma.* The same thing is declared by Paul in <span
id="xii.i-p36.6"></span>[2Co 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021.md)<span
id="xii.i-p36.6"></span>, when he says, that

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>“Christ, who knew no sin, was made sin for
us, that we might become the righteousness of God in him.”

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span>But the preposition <span
id="xii.i-p38.1"></span>περὶ *peri*, is to be taken here in a causative
sense, as though he had said, “On account of that sacrifice, or through
the burden of sin being laid on Christ, sin was cast down from its
power, so that it does not hold us now subject to itself.” For using a
metaphor, he says that it was *condemned*, like those who fail in their
cause; for God no longer deals with those as guilty who have obtained
absolution through the sacrifice of Christ. If we say that the kingdom
of sin, in which it held us, was demolished, the meaning would be the
same. And thus what was ours Christ took as his own, that he might
transfer his own to us; for he took our curse, and has freely granted us
his blessing.

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span>Paul adds here, *In the flesh*, and for this
end, — that by seeing sin conquered and abolished in our very nature,
our confidence might be more certain: for it thus follows, that our
nature is really become a partaker of his victory; and this is what he
presently declares.

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span><span id="xii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span>**4.** *That the justification of the law
might be fulfilled*, *etc.* They who understand that the renewed, by the
Spirit of Christ, fulfil the law, introduce a gloss wholly alien to the
meaning of Paul; for the faithful, while they sojourn in this world,
never make such a proficiency, as that the justification of the law
becomes in them full or complete. This then must be applied to
forgiveness; for when the obedience of Christ is accepted for us, the
law is satisfied, so that we are counted just. For the perfection which
the law demands was exhibited in our flesh, and for this reason — that
its rigor should no longer have the power to condemn us. But as Christ
communicates his righteousness to none but to those whom he joins to
himself by the bond of his Spirit, the work of renewal is again
mentioned, lest Christ should be thought to be the minister of sin: for
it is the inclination of many so to apply whatever is taught respecting
the paternal kindness of God, as to encourage the lasciviousness of the
flesh; and some malignantly slander this doctrine, as though it
extinquished the desire to live uprightly.  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md)

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For they that are after the flesh do
mind the things of the flesh; but that are after the Spirit the things
of the Spirit.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Qui enim secundum carnem sunt, ea quæ
carnis sunt cogitant; qui vero secundum Spiritum, ea quæ sunt Spiritus.

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span>**6.** For to be carnally minded *is* death;
but to be spiritually minded *is* life and peace.

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Cogitatio certe carnis, mors est;
cogitatio autem Spiritus, vita et pax:

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>**7.** Because the carnal mind *is* enmity
against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can
be.

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>**7.** Quandoquidem cogitatio carnis,
inimicitia est adversus Deum; nam Legi Dei non subjicitur, nec enim
potest.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>**8.** So then they that are in the flesh
cannot please God.

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Qui ergo in carne sunt, Deo placere
non possunt.

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>**5.** *For they who are after the flesh,*
*etc.* He introduces this difference between the flesh and the Spirit,
not only to confirm, by an argument derived from what is of an opposite
character, what he has before mentioned, — that the grace of Christ
belongs to none but to those who, having been regenerated by the Spirit,
strive after purity; but also to relieve the faithful with a seasonable
consolation, lest being conscious of many infirmities, they should
despair: for as he had exempted none from the curse, but those who lead
a spiritual life, he might seem to cut off from all mortals the hope of
salvation; for who in this world can be found adorned with so much
angelic purity so as to be wholly freed from the flesh? It was therefore
necessary to define what it is to *be in the flesh*, and to *walk after
the flesh*. At first, indeed, Paul does not define the distinction so
very precisely; but yet we shall see as we proceed, that his object is
to afford good hope to the faithful, though they are bound to their
flesh; only let them not give loose reins to its lusts, but give
themselves up to be guided by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>By saying that *carnal* men care for, or
think upon, the things of the flesh, he shows that he did not count
those as carnal who aspire after celestial righteousness, but those who
wholly devote themselves to the world. I have rendered <span
id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>φρονουσιν by a word of larger meaning, <span
id="xii.ii-p12.2"></span>*cogitant* — think, that readers may understand
that those only are excluded from being the children of God who, being
given to the allurements of the flesh, apply their minds and study to
depraved lusts.  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md) Now, in the
second clause he encourages the faithful to entertain good hope,
provided they find that they are raised up by the Spirit to the
meditation of righteousness: for wherever the Spirit reigns, it is an
evidence of the saving grace of God; as the grace of God does not exist
where the Spirit being extinguished the reign of the flesh prevails. But
I will briefly repeat here what I have reminded you of before, — That to
be *in the flesh*, or, *after the flesh,* is the same thing as to be
without the gift of regeneration:  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md) and such are all they who continue, as
they commonly say, <span id="xii.ii-p15.2"></span>in pure naturals,
(<span id="xii.ii-p15.3"></span>*Puris naturalibus*.)

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span><span id="xii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span>**6.** *The minding of the flesh*, *etc.*
<span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>Erasmus has rendered it “affection,”
(<span id="xii.ii-p17.2"></span>*affectum;*) the old translator,
“prudence,” (<span id="xii.ii-p17.3"></span>*prudentiam*.) But as it is
certain that the <span id="xii.ii-p17.4"></span>το φρονημα of Paul is
the same with what Moses calls the imagination (<span
id="xii.ii-p17.5"></span>*figmentum* — devising) of the heart, (<span
id="xii.ii-p17.6"></span>[Ge 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005.md)<span
id="xii.ii-p17.6"></span>;) and that under this word are included all
the faculties of the soul — reason, understanding, and affections, it
seems to me that minding (<span id="xii.ii-p17.7"></span>*cogitatio* —
thinking, imagining, caring) is a more suitable word  <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245.md) And though Paul uses the particle
<span id="xii.ii-p19.2"></span>γὰρ — for, yet I doubt not but that is
only a simple confirmative, for there is here a kind of concession; for
after having briefly defined what it is to be in the flesh, he now
subjoins the end that awaits all who are slaves to the flesh. Thus by
stating the contrary effect, he proves, that they cannot be partakers of
the favor of Christ, who abide in the flesh, for through the whole
course of their life they proceed and hasten unto death.

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span>This passage deserves special notice; for
we hence learn, that we, while following the course of nature, rush
headlong into death; for we, of ourselves, contrive nothing but what
ends in ruin. But he immediately adds another clause, to teach us, that
if anything in us tends to life, it is what the Spirit produces; for no
spark of life proceeds from our flesh.

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span>The minding of the Spirit he calls *life*,
for it is life-giving, or leads to life; and by *peace* he designates,
after the manner of the Hebrews, every kind of happiness; for whatever
the Spirit of God works in us tends to our felicity. There is, however,
no reason why any one should on this account attribute salvation to
works; for though God begins our salvation, and at length completes it
by renewing us after his own image; yet the only cause is his good
pleasure, whereby he makes us partakers of Christ.

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span><span id="xii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span>**7.** *Because the minding of the flesh,*
 <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246.md) *etc.* He subjoins a proof of
what he had stated, — that nothing proceeds from the efforts of our
flesh but death, because it contends as an enemy against the will of
God. Now the will of God is the rule of righteousness; it hence follows,
that whatever is unjust is contrary to it; and what is unjust at the
same time brings death. But while God is adverse, and is offended, in
vain does any one expect life; for his wrath must be necessarily
followed by death, which is the avenging of his wrath. But let us
observe here, that the will of man is in all things opposed to the
divine will; for, as much as what is crooked differs from what is
straight, so much must be the difference between us and God.

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span>*For to the law of God*, *etc.* This is an
explanation of the former sentence; and it shows how all the thinkings
(<span id="xii.ii-p25.1"></span>*meditationes*) of the flesh carry on
war against the will of God; for his will cannot be assailed but where
he has revealed it. In the law God shows what pleases him: hence they
who wish really to find out how far they agree with God must test all
their purposes and practices by this rule. For though nothing is done in
this world, except by the secret governing providence of God; yet to
say, under this pretext, that nothing is done but what he approves,
(<span id="xii.ii-p25.2"></span>*nihil nisi eo approbante fieri,)* is
intolerable blasphemy; and on this subject some fanatics are wrangling
at this day. The law has set the difference between right and wrong
plainly and distinctly before our eyes, and to seek it in a deep
labyrinth, what sottishness is it! The Lord has indeed, as I have said,
his hidden counsel, by which he regulates all things as he pleases; but
as it is incomprehensible to us, let us know that we are to refrain from
too curious an investigation of it. Let this in the mean time remain as
a fixed principle, — that nothing pleases him but righteousness, and
also, that no right estimate can be made of our works but by the law, in
which he has faithfully testified what he approves and disapproves.

<span id="xii.ii-p26"></span>*Nor can be*. Behold the power of
free-will! which the Sophists cannot carry high enough. Doubtless, Paul
affirms here, in express words, what they openly detest, — that it is
impossible for us to render our powers subject to the law. They boast
that the heart can turn to either side, provide it be aided by the
influence of the Spirit, and that a free choice of good or evil is in
our power, when the Spirit only brings help; but it is ours to choose or
refuse. They also imagine some good emotions, by which we become of
ourselves prepared. Paul, on the contrary, declares, that the heart is
full of hardness and indomitable contumacy, so that it is never moved
naturally to undertake the yoke of God; nor does he speak of this or of
that faculty, but speaking indefinitely, he throws into one bundle all
the emotions which arise within us.  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247.md) Far, then, from a Christian heart be
this heathen philosophy respecting the liberty of the will. Let every
one acknowledge himself to be the servant of sin, as he is in reality,
that he may be made free, being set at liberty by the grace of Christ:
to glory in any other liberty is the highest folly.

<span id="xii.ii-p28"></span><span id="xii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p29"></span>**8.** *They then who are in the flesh,*
*etc.* It is not without reason that I have rendered the adversative
<span id="xii.ii-p29.1"></span>δὲ as an illative: for the Apostle infers
from what had been said, that those who give themselves up to be guided
by the lusts of the flesh, are all of them abominable before God; and he
has thus far confirmed this truth, — that all who walk not after the
Spirit are alienated from Christ, for they are without any spiritual
life.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** But ye are not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>**9.** Vos autem non estis in carne, sed in
Spiritu, siquidem Spiritus Dei habitat in vobis: si quis vero Spiritum
Christi non habet, hic non est ejus.

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span>**10.** And if Christ *be* in you, the body
*is* dead because of sin; but the Spirit *is* life because of
righteousness.

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>**10.** Si vero Christus in vobis
est,corpus quidem mortuum est propter peccatum, Spiritus autem vita est
propter justitiam.

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span>**11.** But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that
dwelleth in you.

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>**11.** Si inquam Spiritus ejus qui
suscitavit Iesum ex mortuis, habitat in vobis, qui suscitavit Christum
ex mortuis, vivificabit et mortalia corpora propter Spiritum suum in
vobis habitantem.

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span><span id="xii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>**9.** *But ye*, *etc.* He applies
hypothetically a general truth to those to whom he was writing; not only
that by directing his discourse to them particularly he might more
powerfully affect them, but also that they might with certainty gather
from the description already given, that they were of the number of
those, from whom Christ had taken away the curse of the law. Yet, at the
same time, by explaining what the Spirit of God works in the elect, and
what fruit he brings forth, he encourages them to strive after newness
of life.

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span>*If indeed the Spirit of God*, *etc.* This
qualifying sentence is fitly subjoined, by which they were stirred up to
examine themselves more closely, lest they should profess the name of
Christ in vain. And it is the surest mark by which the children of God
are distinguished from the children of the world, when by the Spirit of
God they are renewed unto purity and holiness. It seems at the same time
to have been his purpose, not so much to detect hypocrisy, as to suggest
reasons for glorying against the absurd zealots of the law, who esteem
the dead letter of more importance than the inward power of the Spirit,
who gives life to the law.

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span>But this passage shows, that what Paul has
hitherto meant by the Spirit, is not the mind or understanding (which is
called the superior part of the soul by the advocates of freewill) but a
celestial gift; for he shows that those are spiritual, not such as obey
reason through their own will, but such as God rules by his Spirit. Nor
are they yet said to be according to the Spirit, because they are filled
with God’s Spirit, (which is now the case with none,) but because they
have the Spirit dwelling in them, though they find some remains of the
flesh still remaining in them: at the same time it cannot dwell in them
without having the superiority; for it must be observed that man’s state
is known by the power that bears rule in him.

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>*But if any have not the Spirit of
Christ*, *etc.* He subjoins this to show how necessary in Christians is
the denial of the flesh. The reign of the Spirit is the abolition of the
flesh. Those in whom the Spirit reigns not, belong not to Christ; then
they are not Christians who serve the flesh; for they who separate
Christ from his own Spirit make him like a dead image or a carcase. And
we must always bear in mind what the Apostle has intimated, that
gratuitous remission of sins can never be separated from the Spirit of
regeneration; for this would be as it were to rend Christ asunder.

<span id="xii.iii-p13"></span>If this be true, it is strange that we are
accused of arrogance by the adversaries of the gospel, because we dare
to avow that the Spirit of Christ dwells in us: for we must either deny
Christ, or confess that we become Christians through his Spirit. It is
indeed dreadful to hear that men have so departed from the word of the
Lord, that they not only vaunt that they are Christians without God’s
Spirit, but also ridicule the faith of others: but such is the
philosophy of the Papists.

<span id="xii.iii-p14"></span>But let readers observe here, that the
Spirit is, without any distinction, called sometimes the Spirit of God
the Father, and sometimes the Spirit of Christ; and thus called, not
only because his whole fulness was poured on Christ as our Mediator and
head, so that from him a portion might descend on each of us, but also
because he is equally the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, who have
one essence, and the same eternal divinity. As, however, we have no
intercourse with God except through Christ, the Apostle wisely descends
to Christ from the Father, who seems to be far off:

<span id="xii.iii-p15"></span><span id="xii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p16"></span>**10.** *But if Christ be in us*, *etc.*
What he had before said of the Spirit he says now of Christ, in order
that the mode of Christ’s dwelling in us might be intimated; for as by
the Spirit he consecrates us as temples to himself, so by the same he
dwells in us. But what we have before referred to, he now explains more
fully — that the children of God are counted spiritual, not on the
ground of a full and complete perfection, but only on account of the
newness of life that is begun in them. And he anticipates here an
occasion of doubt, which might have otherwise disturbed us; for though
the Spirit possesses a part of us, we yet see another part still under
the power of death. He then gives this answer — that the power of
quickening is in the Spirit of Christ, which will be effectual in
swallowing up our mortality. He hence concludes that we must patiently
wait until the relics of sin be entirely abolished.

<span id="xii.iii-p17"></span>Readers have been already reminded, that
by the word Spirit they are not to understand the soul, but the Spirit
of regeneration; and Paul calls the Spirit life, not only because he
lives and reigns in us, but also because he quickens us by his power,
until at length, having destroyed the mortal fesh, he perfectly renews
us. So, on the other hand, the word *body* signifies that gross mass
which is not yet purified by the Spirit of God from earthly dregs, which
delight in nothing but what is gross; for it would be otherwise absurd
to ascribe to the body the fault of sin: besides the soul is so far from
being life that it does not of itself live. The meaning of Paul then is
— that although sin adjudges us to death as far as the corruption of our
first nature remains in us, yet that the Spirit of God is its conqueror:
nor is it any hindrance, that we are only favored with the first-fruits,
for even one spark of the Spirit is the seed of life.  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248.md)

<span id="xii.iii-p21"></span><span id="xii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p22"></span>**11.** *If the Spirit*, *etc.* This is a
confirmation of the last verse, derived from the efficient cause, and
according to this sense, — “Since by the power of God’s Spirit Christ
was raised, and since the Spirit possesses eternal power, he will also
exert the same with regard to us.” And he takes it as granted, that in
the person of Christ was exhibited a specimen of the power which belongs
to the whole body of the Church: and as he makes God the author of the
resurrection, he assigns to him a life-giving Spirit.

<span id="xii.iii-p23"></span>*Who raised*, *etc.* By this periphrasis
he describes God; which harmonizes better with his present object, than
if he had called him simply by his own name. For the same reason he
assigns to the Father the glory of raising Christ; for it more clearly
proved what he had in view, than if he had ascribed the act to Christ
himself. For it might have been objected, “That Christ was able by his
own power to raise up himself, and this is what no man can do.” But when
he says, that God raised up Christ by his Spirit, and that he also
communicated his Spirit to us, there is nothing that can be alleged to
the contrary; so that he thus makes sure to us the hope of resurrection.
Nor is there anything here that derogates from that declaration in John,

<span id="xii.iii-p24"></span>“I have power to lay down my life, and to
take it up again.”  
(<span id="xii.iii-p24.2"></span>[Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md)<span
id="xii.iii-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.iii-p25"></span>No doubt Christ arose through his own
power; but as he is wont to attribute to the Father whatever Divine
power he possesses, so the Apostle has not improperly transferred to the
Father what was especially done by Christ, as the peculiar work of
divinity.

<span id="xii.iii-p26"></span>By *mortal bodies* he understands all
those things which still remain in us, that are subject to death; for
his usual practice is to give this name to the grosser part of us. We
hence conclude, that he speaks not of the last resurrection, which shall
be in a moment, but of the continued working of the Spirit, by which he
gradually mortifies the relics of the flesh and renews in us a celestial
life.

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#012.md)<span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**12.** Therefore, brethren, we are debtors,
not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span>**12.** Itaque fratres, debitores sumus, non
carni, ut secundum carnem vivamus.

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span>**13.** For if ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live.

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span>**13.** Si enim secundum carnem vixeritis,
moriemini: si vero Spiritu facta carnis  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249.md) mortificaveritis, vivetis.

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span>**14.** For as many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they are the sons of God.

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span>**14.** Quicunque enim Spiritu Dei aguntur,
ii filii Dei sunt.

<span id="xii.iv-p9"></span><span id="xii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p10"></span>**12.** *So then, brethren*, *etc.* This is
the conclusion of what has been previously said; for if we are to
renounce the flesh, we ought not to consent to it; and if the Spirit
ought to reign in us, it is inconsistent not to attend to his bidding.
Paul’s sentence is here defective, for he omits the other part of the
contrast, — that we are debtors to the Spirit; but the meaning is in no
way obscure.  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250.md) This conclusion
has the force of an exhortation; for he is ever wont to draw
exhortations from his doctrine. So in another place, <span
id="xii.iv-p11.2"></span>[Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md)<span id="xii.iv-p11.2"></span>,
he exhorts us

<span id="xii.iv-p12"></span>“not to grieve the Spirit of God, by whom
we have been sealed to the day of redemption:”

<span id="xii.iv-p13"></span>he does the same in <span
id="xii.iv-p13.1"></span>[Ga 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025.md)<span
id="xii.iv-p13.1"></span>,

<span id="xii.iv-p14"></span>“If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk
in the Spirit.”

<span id="xii.iv-p15"></span>And this is the case, when we renounce
carnal lusts, so as to devote ourselves, as those who are bound, to the
righteousness of God. Thus indeed we ought to reason, not as some
blasphemers are wont to do, who talk idly, and say, — that we must do
nothing, because we have no power. But it is as it were to fight against
God, when we extinguish the grace offered to us, by contempt and
negligence.

<span id="xii.iv-p16"></span><span id="xii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p17"></span>**13.** *For if ye will live after the
flesh,* *etc.* He adds a threatening, in order more effectually to shake
off their torpor; by which also they are fully confuted who boast of
justification by faith without the Spirit of Christ, though they are
more than sufficiently convicted by their own conscience; for there is
no confidence in God, where there is no love of righteousness. It is
indeed true, that we are justified in Christ through the mercy of God
alone; but it is equally true and certain, that all who are justified
are called by the Lord, that they may live worthy of their vocation. Let
then the faithful learn to embrace him, not only for justification, but
also for sanctification, as he has been given to us for both these
purposes, lest they rend him asunder by their mutilated faith.

<span id="xii.iv-p18"></span>*But if ye by the Spirit,* *etc.* He thus
moderates his address, that he might not deject the minds of the godly,
who are still conscious of much infirmity; for however we may as yet be
exposed to sins, he nevertheless promises life to us, provided we strive
to mortify the flesh: for he does not strictly require the destruction
of the flesh, but only bids us to make every exertion to subdue its
lusts.

<span id="xii.iv-p19"></span><span id="xii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p20"></span>**14.** *For whosoever are led by the
Spirit of God*, *etc.* This is a confirmation of what has immediately
preceded; for he teaches us, that those only are deemed the sons of God
who are ruled by his Spirit; for by this mark God acknowledges them as
his own people. Thus the empty boasting of hypocrites is taken away, who
without any reason assume the title; and the faithful are thus
encouraged with unhesitating confidence to expect salvation. The import
of the whole is this — “all those are the sons of God who are led  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251.md) by God’s Spirit; all the sons of God
are heirs of eternal life: then all who are led by God’s Spirit ought to
feel assured of eternal life. But the middle term or assumption is
omitted, for it was indubitable.

<span id="xii.iv-p22"></span>But it is right to observe, that the
working of the Spirit is various: for there is that which is universal,
by which all creatures are sustained and preserved; there is that also
which is peculiar to men, and varying in its character: but what he
means here is sanctification, with which the Lord favors none but his
own elect, and by which he separates them for sons to himself.

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span><span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>**15.** For ye have not received the spirit
of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span>**15.** Et enim non accepistis spiritum
servitutis iterum in terrorem: sed accepistis Spiritum adoptionis, per
quem clamamus, Abba, Pater.

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span>**16.** The Spirit itself beareth witness
with our spirit, that we are the children of God:

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span>**16.** Ipse enim Spiritus simul testificatur
spiritui nostro quod sumus filii Dei:

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span>**17.** And if children, then heirs; heirs of
God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with *him*,
that we may be also glorified together.

<span id="xii.v-p7"></span>**17.** Si vero filii, etiam hæredes; hæredes
quidem Dei, cohæredes autem Christi: siquidem compatimur, ut et una
glorificemur.

<span id="xii.v-p8"></span>**18.** For I reckon that the sufferings of
this present time *are* not worthy *to be compared* with the glory which
shall be revealed in us.

<span id="xii.v-p9"></span>**18.** Existimo certe non esse pares
afflictiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam quæ revelabitur erga nos.

<span id="xii.v-p10"></span><span id="xii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p11"></span> **15.** He now confirms the certainty of
that confidence, in which he has already bidden the faithful to rest
secure; and he does this by mentioning the special effect produced by
the Spirit; for he has not been given for the purpose of harassing us
with trembling or of tormenting us with anxiety; but on the contrary,
for this end — that having calmed every perturbation, and restoring our
minds to a tranquil state, he may stir us up to call on God with
confidence and freedom. He does not then pursue only the argument which
he had before stated, but dwells more on another clause, which he had
connected with it, even the paternal mercy of God, by which he forgives
his people the infirmities of the flesh and the sins which still remain
in them. He teaches us that our confidence in this respect is made
certain by the Spirit of adoption, who could not inspire us with
confidence in prayer without sealing to us a gratuitous pardon: and that
he might make this more evident, he mentions a twofold spirit; he calls
one *the spirit of bondage*, which we receive from the law; and the
other, *the spirit of adoption*, which proceeds from the gospel. The
first, he says, was given formerly to produce fear; the other is given
now to afford assurance. By such a comparison of contrary things the
certainty of our salvation, which he intended to confirm, is, as you
see, made more evident.  <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252.md) The
same comparison is used by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
where he says, that we have not come to Mount Sinai, where all thing
were so terrible, that the people, being alarmed as it were by an
immediate apprehension of death, implored that the word should be no
more spoken to them, and Moses himself confessed that he was terrified;

<span id="xii.v-p13"></span>“but to Sion, the mount of the Lord, and to
his city, the heavenly Jerusalem, where Jesus is, the Mediator of the
New Testament,” etc. (<span id="xii.v-p13.1"></span>[Heb.
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022.md), Heb. 24:0<span
id="xii.v-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.v-p14"></span>By the adverb again, we learn, that the law
is here compared with the gospel: for the Son of God by his coming has
brought to us this invaluable benefit, — that we are no longer bound by
the servile condition of the law. You are not however to infer from
this, either that no one before the coming of Christ was endued with the
spirit of adoption, or that all who received the law were servants and
not sons: for he compares the ministration of the law with the
dispensation of the gospel rather than persons with persons. I indeed
allow that the faithful are here reminded how much more bountifully God
now deals with them than he did formerly with the fathers under the Old
Testament; he yet regards the outward dispensation, in respect of which
only we excel them: for though the faith of Abraham, of Moses, and of
David, was superior to ours, yet as God kept them apparently under a
schoolmaster, they had not advanced into that liberty which has been
revealed to us.

<span id="xii.v-p15"></span>But it must at the same time be noticed,
that it was designedly, on account of false apostles, that a contrast
was made between the literal disciples of the law, and the faithful whom
Christ, the heavenly Teacher, not only addresses by words, but also
teaches inwardly and effectually by his Spirit.

<span id="xii.v-p16"></span>And though the covenant of grace is included
under the law, it is yet far different from it; for in setting up the
gospel in opposition to it, he regards nothing but what was peculiar to
the law itself, as it commands and forbids, and restrains transgressors
by the denunciation of death: and thus he gives the law its own
character, in which it differs from the gospel; or this statement may be
preferred by some, — “He sets forth the law only, as that by which God
covenants with us on the ground of works.” So then persons only must be
regarded as to the Jewish people; for when the law was published, and
also after it was published, the godly were illuminated by the same
Spirit of faith; and thus the hope of eternal life, of which the Spirit
is the earnest and seal, was sealed on their hearts. The only difference
is, that the Spirit is more largely and abundantly poured forth in the
kingdom of Christ. But if you regard only the dispensation of the law,
it will then appear, that salvation was first clearly revealed at that
time, when Christ was manifested in the flesh. All things under the Old
Testament were involved in great obscurity, when compared with the clear
light of the gospel.

<span id="xii.v-p17"></span>And then, if the law be viewed in itself, it
can do nothing but restrain those, devoted to its miserable bondage, by
the horror of death; for it promises no good except under condition, and
denounces death on all transgressors. Hence, as there is the spirit of
bondage under the law, which oppresses the conscience with fear; so
under the gospel there is the spirit of adoption, which exhilarates our
souls by bearing a testimony as to our salvation. But observe, that
*fear* is connected with bondage, as it cannot be otherwise, but that
the law will harass and torment souls with miserable disquietness, as
long as it exercises its dominion. There is then no other remedy for
quieting them, except God forgives us our sin and deals kindly with us
as a father with his children.

<span id="xii.v-p18"></span>*Through whom we cry,* *etc.* He has changed
the person, that he might describe the common privilege of all the
saints; as though he had said, — “Ye have the spirit, through whom you
and all we, the rest of the faithful, cry,” etc. The imitation of their
language is very significant; when he introduces the word Father, in the
person of the faithful. The repetition of the name is for the sake of
amplification; for Paul intimates, that God’s mercy was so published
through the whole world, that he was invoked, as <span
id="xii.v-p18.1"></span>Augustine observes, indiscriminately in all
languages.  <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253.md) His object then was
to express the consent which existed among all nations. It hence
follows, that there is now no difference between the Jew and the Greek,
as they are united together. Isaiah speaks differently when he declares,
that the language of Canaan would be common to all, (<span
id="xii.v-p19.10"></span>[Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)<span id="xii.v-p19.10"></span>;.md)
yet the meaning is the same; for he had no respect to the external
idiom, but to the harmony of heart in serving God, and to the same
undisguised zeal in professing his true and pure worship. The word *cry*
is set down for the purpose of expressing confidence; as though he said,
“We pray not doubtingly, but we confidently raise up a loud voice to
heaven.”

<span id="xii.v-p20"></span>The faithful also under the law did indeed
call God their Father, but not with such full confidence, as the vail
kept them at a distance from the sanctuary: but now, since an entrance
has been opened to us by the blood of Christ, we may rejoice fully and
openly that we are the children of God; hence arises this crying. In
short, thus is fulfilled the prophecy of Hosea,

<span id="xii.v-p21"></span>“I will say to them, My people are ye: they
in their turn will answer, Thou art our God.” (<span
id="xii.v-p21.1"></span>[Ho 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023.md)<span
id="xii.v-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.v-p22"></span>For the more evident the promise is, the
greater the freedom in prayer.

<span id="xii.v-p23"></span><span id="xii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p24"></span>**16.** *The Spirit himself*, *etc.* He does
not simply say, that God’s Spirit is a witness to our spirit, but he
adopts a compound verb, which might be rendered “contest,” (<span
id="xii.v-p24.1"></span>*contestatur*,) were it not that contestation
(<span id="xii.v-p24.2"></span>*contestatio*) has a different meaning in
Latin. But Paul means, that the Spirit of God gives us such a testimony,
that when he is our guide and teacher, our spirit is made assured of the
adoption of God: for our mind of its own self, without the preceding
testimony of the Spirit, could not convey to us this assurance. There is
also here an explanation of the former verse; for when the Spirit
testifies to us, that we are the children of God, he at the same time
pours into our hearts such confidence, that we venture to call God our
Father. And doubtless, since the confidence of the heart alone opens our
mouth, except the Spirit testifies to our heart respecting the paternal
love of God, our tongues would be dumb, so that they could utter no
prayers. For we must ever hold fast this principle, — that we do not
rightly pray to God, unless we are surely persuaded in our hearts, that
he is our Father, when we so call him with our lips. To this there is a
corresponding part, — that our faith has no true evidence, except we
call upon God. It is not then without reason that Paul, bringing us to
this test, shows that it then only appears how truly any one believes,
when they who have embraced the promise of grace, exercise themselves in
prayers.  <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254.md)

<span id="xii.v-p28"></span>But there is here a striking refutation of
the vain notions of the Sophists respecting moral conjecture, which is
nothing else but uncertainty and anxiety of mind; nay, rather
vacillation and delusion.  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md) There
is also an answer given here to their objection, for they ask, “How can
a man fully know the will of God?” This certainly is not within the
reach of man, but it is the testimony of God’s Spirit; and this subject
he treats more at large in <span id="xii.v-p30.1"></span>[1Co
2:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.v-p30.1"></span>,
from which we may derive a fuller explanation of a passage. Let this
truth then stand sure, — that no one can be called a son of God, who
does not know himself to be such; and this is called knowledge by John,
in order to set forth its certainty. (<span id="xii.v-p30.2"></span>[1
John 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)<span id="xii.v-p30.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.v-p31"></span><span id="xii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p32"></span>**17.** *And if children*, *etc.* By an
argument, taken from what is annexed or what follows, he proves that our
salvation consists in having God as our Father. It is for children that
inheritance is appointed: since God then has adopted us as his children,
he has at the same time ordained an inheritance for us. He then
intimates what sort of inheritance it is — that it is heavenly, and
therefore incorruptible and eternal, such as Christ possesses; and his
possession of it takes away all uncertainty: and it is a commendation of
the exellency of this inheritance, that we shall partake of it in common
with the only-begotten Son of God. It is however the design of Paul, as
it will presently appear more fully, highly to extol this inheritance
promised to us, that we may be contented with it, and manfully despise
the allurements of the world, and patiently bear whatever troubles may
press on us in this life.

<span id="xii.v-p33"></span>*If so be that we suffer together*, *etc.*
Various are the interpretations of this passage, but I approve of the
following in preference to any other, “We are co-heirs with Christ,
provided, in entering on our inheritance, we follow him in the same way
in which he has gone before.” And he thus made mention of Christ,
because he designed to pass over by these steps to an encouraging
strain, — “God’s inheritance is ours, because we have by his grace been
adopted as his children; and that it may not be doubtful, its possession
as been already conferred on Christ, whose partners we are become: but
Christ came to it by the cross; then we must come to it in the same
manner.”  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md) Nor is that to be
dreaded which some fear, that Paul thus ascribes the cause of our
eternal glory to our labours; for this mode of speaking is not unusual
in Scripture. He denotes the order, which the Lord follows in dispensing
salvation to us, rather than the cause; for he has already sufficiently
defended the gratuitous mercy of God against the merits of works. When
now exhorting us to patience, he does not show whence salvation
proceeds, but how God governs his people.

<span id="xii.v-p35"></span><span id="xii.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p36"></span>**18.** *I indeed judge*,  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257.md) *etc.* Though they take not altogether
an unsuitable view who understand this as a kind of modification; yet I
prefer to regard it in the light of an encouragement, for the purpose of
anticipating an objection, according to this import, — “It ought not
indeed to be grievous to us, if we must pass through various afflictions
into celestial glory, since these, when compared with the greatness of
that glory, are of the least moment.” He has mentioned *future* for
eternal glory, intimating that the afflictions of the world are such as
pass away quickly.

<span id="xii.v-p38"></span>It is hence evident how ill understood has
this passage been by the Schoolmen; for they have drawn from it their
frivolous distinction between congruity and condignity. The Apostle
indeed compares not the worthiness of the one with that of the other,
but only lightens the heaviness of the cross by a comparison with the
greatness of glory, in order to confirm the minds of the faithful in
patience.

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p2"></span>**19.** For the earnest expectation of the
creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God.

<span id="xii.vi-p3"></span>**19.** Siquidem intenta expectatio
creature, revelationem filiorum Dei expectat:

<span id="xii.vi-p4"></span>**20.** For the creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected *the
same* in hope,

<span id="xii.vi-p5"></span>**20.** Vanitati enim creatura subjecta est
non volens, sed propter eum qui subjecit ipsam in spe;

<span id="xii.vi-p6"></span>**21.** Because the creature itself also
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious
liberty of the children of God.

<span id="xii.vi-p7"></span>**21.** Quoniam ipsa quoque creatura
asseretur a servitute corruptionis in libertatem gloriæ filiorum Dei.

<span id="xii.vi-p8"></span>**22.** For we know that the whole creation
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.

<span id="xii.vi-p9"></span>**22.** Novimus enim quod creatura universa
congemiscit, et ad hunc diem parturit.

<span id="xii.vi-p10"></span><span id="xii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p11"></span>**19** *For the intent expectation of the
creation*, *etc.* He teaches us that there is an example of the
patience, to which he had exhorted us, even in mute creatures. For, to
omit various interpretations, I understand the passage to have this
meaning — that there is no element and no part of the world which, being
touched, as it were, with a sense of its present misery, does not
intensely hope for a resurrection. He indeed lays down two things, —
that all are creatures in distress, — and yet that they are sustained by
hope. And it hence also appears how immense is the value of eternal
glory, that it can excite and draw all things to desire it.

<span id="xii.vi-p12"></span>Further, the expression, *expectation
expects*, or waits for, though somewhat unusual, yet has a most suitable
meaning; for he meant to intimate, that all creatures, seized with great
anxiety and held in suspense with great desire, look for that day which
shall openly exhibit the glory of the children of God. *The revelation
of God’s children* shall be, when we shall be like God, according to
what John says,

<span id="xii.vi-p13"></span>“For though we know that we are now his
sons, yet it appears not yet what we shall be.” (<span
id="xii.vi-p13.1"></span>[1Jo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span
id="xii.vi-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.vi-p14"></span>But I have retained the words of Paul; for
bolder than what is meet is the version of <span
id="xii.vi-p14.1"></span>Erasmus, “Until the sons of God shall be
manifest;” nor does it sufficiently express the meaning of the Apostle;
for he means not, that the sons of God shall be manifested in the last
day, but that it shall be then made known how desirable and blessed
their condition will be, when they shall put off corruption and put on
celestial glory. But he ascribes hope to creatures void of reason for
this end, — that the faithful may open their eyes to behold the
invisible life, though as yet it lies hid under a mean garb.

<span id="xii.vi-p15"></span><span id="xii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p16"></span>**20.** *For to vanity has the creation,
etc.* He shows the object of expectation from what is of an opposite
character; for as creatures, being now subject to corruption, cannot be
restored until the sons of God shall be wholly restore; hence they,
longing for their renewal, look forward to the manifestation of the
celestial kingdom. He says, that they have been *subjected to vanity*,
and for this reason, because they abide not in a constant and durable
state, but being as it were evanescent and unstable, they pass away
swiftly; for no doubt he sets vanity in opposition to a perfect state.

<span id="xii.vi-p17"></span>*Not willingly*, *etc.* Since there is no
reason in such creatures, their will is to be taken no doubt for their
natural inclination, according to which the whole nature of things tends
to its own preservation and perfection: whatever then is detained under
corruption suffers violence, nature being unwilling and repugnant. But
he introduces all parts of the world, by a sort of personification, as
being endued with reason; and he does this in order to shame our
stupidity, when the uncertain fluctuation of this world, which we see,
does not raise our minds to higher things.

<span id="xii.vi-p18"></span>*But on account of him,* *etc.* He sets
before us an example of obedience in all created things, and adds, that
it springs from hope; for hence comes the alacrity of the sun and moon,
and of all the stars in their constant courses, hence is the sedulity of
the earth’s obedience in bringing forth fruits, hence is the unwearied
motion of the air, hence is the prompt tendency to flow in water. God
has given to everything its charge; and he has not only by a distinct
order commanded what he would to be done, but also implanted inwardly
the hope of renovation. For in the sad disorder which followed the fall
of Adam, the whole machinery of the world would have instantly become
deranged, and all its parts would have failed had not some hidden
strength supported them. It would have been then wholly inconsistent
that the earnest of the Spirit should be less efficacious in the
children of God than hidden instinct in the lifeless parts of creation.
How much soever then created things do naturally incline another way;
yet as it has pleased God to bring them under vanity, they obey his
order; and as he has given them a hope of a better condition, with this
they sustain themselves, deferring their desire, until the incorruption
promised to them shall be revealed. He now, by a kind of
personification, ascribes *hope* to them, as he did *will* before.

<span id="xii.vi-p19"></span><span id="xii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p20"></span>**21.** *Because the creation itself*,
*etc.* He shows how the creation has in hope been made subject to
vanity; that is, inasmuch as it shall some time be made free, according
to what Isaiah testifies, and what Peter confirms still more clearly. It
is then indeed meet for us to consider what a dreadful curse we have
deserved, since all created things in themselves blameless, both on
earth and in the visible heaven, undergo punishment for our sins; for it
has not happened through their own fault, that they are liable to
corruption. Thus the condemnation of mankind is imprinted on the
heavens, and on the earth, and on all creatures. It hence also appears
to what excelling glory the sons of God shall be exalted; for all
creatures shall be renewed in order to amplify it, and to render it
illustrious.

<span id="xii.vi-p21"></span>But he means not that all creatures shall
be partakers of the same glory with the sons of God; but that they,
according to their nature, shall be participators of a better condition;
for God will restore to a perfect state the world, now fallen, together
with mankind. But what that perfection will be, as to beasts as well as
plants and metals, it is not meet nor right in us to inquire more
curiously; for the chief effect of corruption is decay. Some subtle men,
but hardly sober-minded, inquire whether all kinds of animals will be
immortal; but if reins be given to speculations where will they at
length lead us? Let us then be content with this simple doctrine, — that
such will be the constitution and the complete order of things, that
nothing will be deformed or fading.

<span id="xii.vi-p22"></span><span id="xii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p23"></span>**22.** *For we know*, *etc.* He repeats
the same sentiment, that he might pass over to us, though what is now
said has the effect and the form of a conclusion; for as creatures are
subject to corruption, not through their natural desire, but through the
appointment of God, and then, as they have a hope of being hereafter
freed from corruption, it hence follows, that they groan like a woman in
travail until they shall be delivered. But it is a most suitable
similitude; it shows that the groaning of which he speaks will not be in
vain and without effect; for it will at length bring forth a joyful and
blessed fruit. The meaning is, that creatures are not content in their
present state, and yet that they are not so distressed that they pine
away without a prospect of a remedy, but that they are as it were in
travail; for a restoration to a better state awaits them. By saying that
they *groan together*, he does not mean that they are united together by
mutual anxiety, but he joins them as companions to us. The particle
*hitherto*, or, to this day, serves to alleviate the weariness of daily
languor; for if creatures have continued for so many ages in their
groaning, how inexcusable will our softness or sloth be if we faint
during the short course of a shadowy life.  <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258.md)

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>**23.** And not only *they*, but ourselves
also, which have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan
within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, *to wit,* the redemption of
our body.

<span id="xii.vii-p3"></span>**23.** Non solum autem, sed ipsi quoque
qui primordia Spiritus habemus; nos inquam ipsi in nobis ipsis gemimus,
adoptionem expectantes, redemptionem corporis nostri.

<span id="xii.vii-p4"></span>**24.** For we are saved by hope: but hope
that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope
for?

<span id="xii.vii-p5"></span>**24.** Spe enim salvi facti sumus, spes
vero quæ conspicitur, non est spes; quod enim conspicit quis, quomodo
etiam speret?

<span id="xii.vii-p6"></span>**25.** But if we hope for that we see not,
*then* do we with patience wait for *it*

<span id="xii.vii-p7"></span>**25.** Si ergo non quod non conspicimus,
speramus, per patientiam expectamus.

<span id="xii.vii-p8"></span><span id="xii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p9"></span>**23.** *And not only so*, *etc.* There are
those who think that the Apostle intended here to exalt the dignity of
our future blessedness, and by this proof, because all things look for
it with ardent desire; not only the irrational parts of creation, but we
also who have been regenerated by the Spirit of God. This view is indeed
capable of being defended, but there seems to me to be a comparison here
between the greater and the less; as though he said, “The excellency of
our glory is of such importance even to the very elements, which are
destitute of mind and reason, that they burn with a certain kind of
desire for it; how much more it behoves us, who have been illuminated by
the Spirit of God, to aspire and strive with firmness of hope and with
ardour of desire, after the attainment of so great a benefit.” And he
requires that there should be a feeling of two kinds in the faithful:
that being burdened with the sense of their present misery, they are to
*groan;* and that notwithstanding they are to *wait* patiently for their
deliverance; for he would have them to be raised up with the expectation
of their future blessedness, and by an elevation of mind to overcome all
their present miseries, while they consider not what they are now, but
what they are to be.

<span id="xii.vii-p10"></span>*Who have the beginnings,* *etc.* Some
render the word first-fruits, (<span
id="xii.vii-p10.1"></span>*primitias*,) and as meaning a rare and
uncommon excellency; but of this view I by no means approve. To avoid,
therefore, any ambiguity, I have rendered the word *beginnings*, (<span
id="xii.vii-p10.2"></span>*primordia*, the elements,) for I do not apply
the expression, as they do, to the Apostles only, but to all the
faithful who in this world are besprinkled only with a few drops by the
Spirit; and indeed when they make the greatest proficiency, being endued
with a considerable measure of it, they are still far off from
perfection. These, then, in the view of the Apostle, are beginnings or
first-fruits, to which is opposed the complete ingathering; for as we
are not yet endued with fullness, it is no wonder that we feel
disquietude. By repeating *ourselves* and adding *in ourselves*, he
renders the sentence more emphatical, and expresses a more ardent
desire, nor does he call it only a desire, but groaning: for in groaning
there is a deep feeling of misery.

<span id="xii.vii-p11"></span>*Waiting for the adoption,* *etc.*
Improperly indeed, but not without the best reason, is adoption employed
here to designate the fruition of the inheritance to which we are
adopted; for Paul means this, that the eternal decree of God, by which
he has chosen us to himself as sons before the foundation of the world,
of which he testifies to us in the gospel, the assurance of which he
seals on our hearts by his Spirit, would be void, except the promised
resurrection were certain, which is its consummation.  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259.md) For to what end is God our Father,
except he receives us after we have finished our earthly pilgrimage into
his celestial inheritance? To the same purpose is what he immediately
subjoins, *the redemption of the body*. For the price of our redemption
was in such a way paid by Christ, that death should notwithstanding hold
us tied by its chains, yea, that we should carry it within us; it hence
follows, that the sacrifice of the death of Christ would be in vain and
fruitless, except its fruit appeared in our heavenly renovation.

<span id="xii.vii-p13"></span><span id="xii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p14"></span>**24.** *For by hope*, *etc.* Paul
strengthens his exhortation by another argument; for our salvation
cannot be separated from some kind of death, and this he proves by the
nature of hope. Since hope extends to things not yet obtained, and
represents to our minds the form of things hidden and far remote,
whatever is either openly seen or really possessed, is not an object of
hope. But Paul takes it as granted, and what cannot be denied, that as
long as we are in the world, salvation is what is hoped for; it hence
follows, that it is laid up with God far beyond what we can see. By
saying, that hope is not what is seen, he uses a concise expression, but
the meaning is not obscure; for he means simply to teach us, that since
hope regards some future and not present good, it can never be connected
with what we have in possession. If then it be grievous to any to groan,
they necessarily subvert the order laid down by God, who does not call
his people to victory before he exercises them in the warfare of
patience. But since it has pleased God to lay up our salvation, as it
were, in his closed bosom, it is expedient for us to toil on earth, to
be oppressed, to mourn, to be afflicted, yea, to lie down as half-dead
and to be like the dead; for they who seek a visible salvation reject
it, as they renounce hope which has been appointed by God as its
guardian.  <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260.md)

<span id="xii.vii-p16"></span><span id="xii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p17"></span>**25.** *If then what we see not*, *etc.*
This is an argument derived from what the antecedent implies; for
patience necessarily follows hope. For when it is grievous to be without
the good you may desire, unless you sustain and comfort yourselves with
patience, you must necessarily faint through despair. Hope then ever
draws patience with it. Thus it is a most apt conclusion — that whatever
the gospel promises respecting the glory of the resurrection, vanishes
away, except we spend our present life in patiently bearing the cross
and tribulations. For if life be invisible, we must have death before
our eyes: if glory be invisible, then our present state is that of
degradation. And hence if you wish to include in a few words the meaning
of the whole passage, arrange Paul’s arguments in this way, “To all the
godly there is salvation laid up in hope; it is the character of hope to
look forward to future and absent benefits: then the salvation of the
faithful is not visible. Now hope is not otherwise sustained than by
patience; then the salvation of the faithful is not to be consummated
except by patience.”

<span id="xii.vii-p18"></span>It may be added, that we have here a
remarkable passage, which shows, that patience is an inseparable
companion of faith; and the reason of this is evident, for when we
console ourselves with the hope of a better condition, the feeling of
our present miseries is softened and mitigated, so that they are borne
with less difficulty.  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261.md)

<span id="xii.viii"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md)<span
id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p2"></span>**26.** Likewise  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262.md) the Spirit also helpeth our
infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but
the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot
be uttered.

<span id="xii.viii-p4"></span>**26.** Similiter vero Spiritus etiam
coopitulatur infirmitatibus nostris; non enim quid oraturi sumus
quemadmodum oportet, novimus; verum Spiritus ipse intercedit pro nobis
gemitibus innarrabilibus.

<span id="xii.viii-p5"></span>**27.** And he that searcheth the hearts
knoweth what *is* the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession
for the saints according to *the will of* God.

<span id="xii.viii-p6"></span>**27.** Qui vero scrutatur corda, novit
cogitationem Spiritus, quod secundum Deum intercedit pro sanctis.

<span id="xii.viii-p7"></span><span id="xii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p8"></span>**26.** *And likewise the Spirit*, *etc.*
That the faithful may not make this objection — that they are so weak as
not to be able to bear so many and so heavy burdens, he brings before
them the aid of the Spirit, which is abundantly sufficient to overcome
all difficulties. There is then no reason for any one to complain, that
the bearing of the cross is beyond their own strength, since we are
sustained by a celestial power. And there is great force in the Greek
word <span id="xii.viii-p8.1"></span>συναντιλαμβάνεται, which means that
the Spirit takes on himself a part of the burden, by which our weakness
is oppressed; so that he not only helps and succours us, but lifts us
up; as though he went under the burden with us.  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263.md) The word *infirmities*, being in the
plural number, is expressive of extremity. For as experience shows, that
except we are supported by God’s hands, we are soon overwhelmed by
innumerable evils, Paul reminds us, that though we are in every respect
weak, and various infirmities threaten our fall, there is yet sufficient
protection in God’s Spirit to preserve us from falling, and to keep us
from being overwhelmed by any mass of evils. At the same time these
supplies of the Spirt more clearly prove to us, that it is by God’s
appointment that we strive, by groanings and sighings, for our
redemption.

<span id="xii.viii-p11"></span>*For what we should pray for*, *etc.* He
had before spoken of the testimony of the Spirit, by which we know that
God is our Father, and on which relying, we dare to call on him as our
Father. He now again refers to the second part, invocation, and says,
that we are taught by the same Spirit how to pray, and what to ask in
our prayers. And appropriately has he annexed prayers to the anxious
desires of the faithful; for God does not afflict them with miseries,
that they may inwardly feed on hidden grief, but that they may disburden
themselves by prayer, and thus exercise their faith.

<span id="xii.viii-p12"></span>At the same time I know, that there are
various expositions of this passage;  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264.md) but Paul seems to me to have simply
meant this, — That we are blind in our addresses to God; for though we
feel our evils, yet our minds are more disturbed and confused than that
they can rightly choose what is meet and expedient. If any one makes
this objection — that a rule is prescribed to us in God’s word; to this
I answer, that our thoughts nevertheless continue oppressed with
darkness, until the Spirit guides them by his light.

<span id="xii.viii-p14"></span>*But the Spirit himself intercedes*,
 <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265.md) *etc.* Though really or by the
event it does not appear that our prayers have been heard by God, yet
Paul concludes, that the presence of the celestial favor does already
shine forth in the desire for prayer; for no one can of himself give
birth to devout and godly aspirations. The unbelieving do indeed blab
out their prayers, but they only trifle with God; for there is in them
nothing sincere, or serious, or rightly formed. Hence the manner of
praying aright must be suggested by the Spirit: and he calls those
groanings *unutterable*, into which we break forth by the impulse of the
Spirit, for this reason — because they far exceed the capability of our
own minds.  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266.md) And the Spirit is
said to *intercede*, not because he really humbles himself to pray or to
groan, but because he stirs up in our hearts those desires which we
ought to entertain; and he also affects our hearts in such a way that
these desires by their fervency penetrate into heaven itself. And Paul
has thus spoken, that he might more significantly ascribe the whole to
the grace of the Spirit. We are indeed bidden to knock; but no one can
of himself premeditate even one syllable, except God by the secret
impulse of his Spirit knocks at our door, and thus opens for himself our
hearts.

<span id="xii.viii-p17"></span><span id="xii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p18"></span>**27.** *But he who searches hearts*,
*etc.* This is a remarkable reason for strengthening our confidence,
that we are heard by God when we pray through his Spirit, for he
thoroughly knows our desires, even as the thoughts of his own Spirit.
And here must be noticed the suitableness of the word to *know;* for it
intimates that God regards not these emotions of the Spirit as new and
strange, or that he rejects them as unreasonable, but that he allows
them, and at the same time kindly accepts them, as allowed and approved
by him. As then Paul had before testified, that God then aids us when he
draws us as it were into his own bosom, so now he adds another
consolation, that our prayers, of which he is the director, shall by no
means be disappointed. The reason also is immediately added, because he
thus conforms us to his own will. It hence follows, that in vain can
never be what is agreeable to his will, by which all things are ruled.
Let us also hence learn, that what holds the first place in prayer is
consent with the will of the Lord, whom our wishes do by no means hold
under obligation. If then we would have our prayers to be acceptable to
God, we must pray that he may regulate them according to his will.

<span id="xii.ix"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md)<span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p2"></span>**28.** And we know that all things work
together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to *his* purpose.

<span id="xii.ix-p3"></span>**28.** Novimus autem quod iis qui diligunt
Deum omnia cooperantur in bonum, iis scilicet qui secundum propositum
vocati sunt sancti.

<span id="xii.ix-p4"></span>**29.** For whom he did foreknow, he also
did predestinate *to be* conformed to the image of his Son, that he
might be the firstborn among many brethren.

<span id="xii.ix-p5"></span>**29.** Quoniam quos præcognovit etiam
præfinivit conformes imaginis Filii sui, ut sit ipse primogenitus inter
multos fratres:

<span id="xii.ix-p6"></span>**30.** Moreover whom he did predestinate,
them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and
whom he justified, them he also glorified.

<span id="xii.ix-p7"></span>**30.** Quos vero præfinivit, eos et
vocavit; et quos vocavit, eos etiam justificavit; et quos justificavit,
eos etiam glorificavit.

<span id="xii.ix-p8"></span><span id="xii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p9"></span>**28.** *And we know*, *etc.* He now draws
this conclusion from what had been said, that so far are the troubles of
this life from hindering our salvation, that, on the contrary, they are
helps to it. It is no objection that he sets down an illative particle,
for it is no new thing with him to make somewhat an indiscriminate use
of adverbs, and yet this conclusion includes what anticipates an
objection. For the judgment of the flesh in this case exclaims, that it
by no means appears that God hears our prayers, since our afflictions
continue the same. Hence the Apostle anticipates this and says, that
though God does not immediately succour his people, he yet does not
forsake them, for by a wonderful contrivance he turns those things which
seem to be evils in such a way as to promote their salvation. If any one
prefers to read this verse by itself, as though Paul proceeded to a new
argument in order to show that adversities which assist our salvation,
ought not to be borne as hard and grievous things, I do not object. At
the same time, the design of Paul is not doubtful: “Though the elect and
the reprobate are indiscriminately exposed to similar evils, there is
yet a great, difference; for God trains up the faithful by afflictions,
and thereby promotes their salvation.”

<span id="xii.ix-p10"></span>But we must remember that Paul speaks here
only of adversities, as though he had said, “All things which happen to
the saints are so overruled by God, that what the world regards as evil,
the issue shows to be good.” For though what <span
id="xii.ix-p10.1"></span>Augustine says is true, that even the sins of
the saints are, through the guiding providence of God, so far from doing
harm to them, that, on the contrary, they serve to advance their
salvation; yet this belongs not to this passage, the subject of which is
the cross.

<span id="xii.ix-p11"></span>It must also be observed, that he includes
the whole of true religion in the love of God, as on it depends the
whole practice of righteousness.

<span id="xii.ix-p12"></span>*Even to them who according to his
purpose,* *etc.* This clause seems to have been added as a modification,
lest any one should think that the faithful, because they love God,
obtain by their own merit the advantage of deriving such fruit from
their adversities. We indeed know that when salvation is the subject,
men are disposed to begin with themselves, and to imagine certain
preparations by which they would anticipate the favor of God. Hence Paul
teaches us, that those whom he had spoken of as loving God, had been
previously chosen by him. For it is certain that the order is thus
pointed out, that we may know that it proceeds from the gratuitous
adoption of God, as from the first cause, that all things happen to the
saints for their salvation. Nay, Paul shows that the faithful do not
love God before they are called by him, as in another place he reminds
us that the Galatians were known of God before they knew him. (<span
id="xii.ix-p12.1"></span>[Ga 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009.md)<span
id="xii.ix-p12.1"></span>.) It is indeed true what Paul intimates, that
afflictions avail not to advance the salvation of any but of those who
love God; but that saying of John is equally true, that then only he is
begun to be loved by us, when he anticipates us by his gratuitous love.

<span id="xii.ix-p13"></span>But the calling of which Paul speaks here,
has a wide meaning, for it is not to be confined to the manifestation of
election, of which mention is presently made, but is to be set simply in
opposition to the course pursued by men; as though Paul had said, — “The
faithful attain not religion by their own efforts, but are, on the
contrary led by the hand of God, inasmuch as he has chosen them to be a
peculiar people to himself.” The word *purpose* distinctly excludes
whatever is imagined to be adduced mutually by men; as though Paul had
denied, that the causes of our election are to be sought anywhere else,
except in the secret good pleasure of God; which subject is more fully
handled in the first chapter to the Ephesians, and in the first of the
Second Epistle to Timothy; where also the contrast between this purpose
and human righteousness is more distinctly set forth.  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267.md) Paul, however, no doubt made here this
express declaration, — that our salvation is based on the election of
God, in order that he might make a transition to that which he
immediately subjoined, namely, that by the same celestial decree, the
afflictions, which conform us to Christ, have been appointed; and he did
this for the purpose of connecting, as by a kind of necessary chain, our
salvation with the bearing of the cross.

<span id="xii.ix-p16"></span><span id="xii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p17"></span>**29.** *For whom he has foreknown*, *etc.*
He then shows, by the very order of election, that the afflictions of
the faithful are nothing else than the manner by which they are
conformed to the image of Christ; and that this was necessary, he had
before declared. There is therefore no reason for us to be grieved, or
to think it hard and grievous, that we are afflicted, unless we
disapprove of the Lord’s election, by which we have been foreordained to
life, and unless we are unwilling to bear the image of the Son of God,
by which we are to be prepared for celestial glory.

<span id="xii.ix-p18"></span>But the foreknowledge of God, which Paul
mentions, is not a bare prescience, as some unwise persons absurdly
imagine, but the adoption by which he had always distinguished his
children from the reprobate.  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268.md) In
the same sense Peter says, that the faithful had been elected to the
sanctification of the Spirit according to the foreknowledge of God.
Hence those, to whom I have alluded, foolishly draw this inference, —
That God has elected none but those whom he foresaw would be worthy of
his grace. Peter does not in deed flatter the faithful, as though every
one had been elected on account of his merit; but by reminding them of
the eternal counsel of God, he wholly deprives them of all worthiness.
So Paul does in this passage, who repeats by another word what he had
said before of God’s purpose. It hence follows, that this knowledge is
connected with God’s good pleasure; for he foreknew nothing out of
himself, in adopting those whom he was pleased to adopt; but only marked
out those whom he had purposed to elect.

<span id="xii.ix-p23"></span>The verb <span
id="xii.ix-p23.1"></span>προορίζειν, which some translate, to
*predestinate*, is to be understood according to what this passage
requires; for Paul only meant, that God had so determined that all whom
he has adopted should bear the image of Christ; nor has he simply said,
that they were to be conformed to Christ, but to *the image of Christ*,
that he might teach us that there is in Christ a living and conspicuous
exemplar, which is exhibited to God’s children for imitation. The
meaning then is, that gratuitous adoption, in which our salvation
consists, is inseparable from the other decree, which determines that we
are to bear the cross; for no one can be an heir of heaven without being
conformed to the image of the only-begotten Son of God.

<span id="xii.ix-p24"></span>*That he may be,* or, *that he might be,
the first-born*, *etc.*; for the Greek infinitive, <span
id="xii.ix-p24.1"></span>εἶναι, may be rendered in these two ways; but I
prefer the first rendering. But in mentioning Christ’s primogeniture,
Paul meant only to express this, — that since Christ possesses a
pre-eminence among the children of God, he is rightly given to us as a
pattern, so that we ought to refuse nothing which he has been pleased to
undergo. Hence, that the celestial Father may in every way bear
testimony to the authority and honor which he has conferred on his own
Son, he will have all those whom he adopts to be the heirs of his
kingdom, to be conformed to his example. Though indeed the condition of
the godly is apparently various, as there is a difference between the
members of the same body, there is yet a connection between every one
and his own head. As then the first-born sustains the name of the
family, so Christ is placed in a state of pre-eminence not only that he
might excel in honor among the faithful, but also that he might include
all under him himself under the common name of brotherhood.

<span id="xii.ix-p25"></span><span id="xii.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p26"></span>**30.** *And whom he has foredetermined*,
(<span id="xii.ix-p26.1"></span><span
id="xii.ix-p26.2"></span>præfinivit,) *them has he also called*, *etc.*
That he might now by a clearer proof show how true it is that a
conformity with the humiliating state of Christ is for our good, he
adopts a graduating process, by which he teaches us, that a
participation of the cross is so connected with our vocation,
justification, and, in short, with our future glory, that they can by no
means be separated.

<span id="xii.ix-p27"></span>But that readers may better understand the
Apostle’s meaning, it may be well to repeat what I have already said, —
that the word *foredetermine* does not refer to election, but to that
purpose or decree of God by which he has ordained that the cross is to
be borne by his people; and by declaring that they are now called, he
intimates, that God had not kept concealed what he had determined
respecting them, but had made it known, that they might resignedly and
humbly submit to the condition allotted to them; for calling here is to
be distinguished from secret election, as being posterior to it. That
none then may make this objection — that it appears to no one what lot
God has appointed for him, the Apostle says, that God by his calling
bears an evident testimony respecting his hidden purpose. But this
testimony is not only found in the outward preaching of the gospel, but
it has also the power of the Spirit connected with it; for the elect are
there spoken of, whom God not only addresses by the outward word, but
whom he also inwardly draws.

<span id="xii.ix-p28"></span>*Justification* may fitly be extended to
the unremitted continuance of God’s favor, from the time of our calling
to the hour of death; but as Paul uses this word throughout the Epistle,
for gratuitous imputation of righteousness, there is no necessity for us
to deviate from this meaning. What Paul indeed had in view was to show
that a more precious compensation is offered to us, than what ought to
allow us to shun afflictions; for what is more desirable than to be
reconciled to God, so that our miseries may no longer be tokens of a
curse, nor lead us to ruin?

<span id="xii.ix-p29"></span>He then immediately adds, that those who
are now pressed down by the cross shall be *glorified;* so that their
sorrows and reproaches shall bring them no loss. Though glorification is
not yet exhibited except in our Head, yet as we in a manner behold in
him our inheritance of eternal life, his glory brings to us such
assurance respecting our own glory, that our hope may be justly compared
to a present possession.

<span id="xii.ix-p30"></span>We may add, that Paul, imitating the style
of the Hebrew language, adopts in these verbs the past instead of the
present tense.  <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md) A continued act
is no doubt what is meant, according to this import, “Those whom God
now, consistently with his purpose, exercises under the cross, are
called and justified, that they may have a hope of salvation, so that
nothing of their glory decays during their humiliation; for though their
present miseries deform it before the world, yet before God and angels
it always shines forth as perfect.” What Paul then means by this
gradation is, That the afflictions of the faithful, by which they are
now humbled, are intended for this end — that the faithful, having
obtained the glory of the celestial kingdom, may reach the glory of
Christ’s resurrection, with whom they are now crucified.

<span id="xii.x"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p1"></span><span id="xii.x-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031.md)<span id="xii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p2"></span>**31.** What shall we then say to these
things? If God *be* for us, who *can be* against us?

<span id="xii.x-p3"></span>**31.** Quid ergo dicemus ad hæc?  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md) Si Deus pro nobis, quis contra nos?

<span id="xii.x-p5"></span>**32.** He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give
us all things?

<span id="xii.x-p6"></span>**32.** Qui propno Filio non pepercit, sed
pro nobis omnibus tradidit, quomodo non etiam cum eo donaret nobis
omnia?

<span id="xii.x-p7"></span>**33.** Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of God’s elect? *It is* God that justifieth.

<span id="xii.x-p8"></span>**33.** Quis intentabit crimina  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md) adversus electos Dei? Deus est qui
justificat.

<span id="xii.x-p14"></span>**34.** Who *is* he that condemneth? *It is*
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.

<span id="xii.x-p15"></span>**34.** Quis ille qui condemnet? Christus
est qui mortuus est, quin potius etiam suscitatus, qui et in dextera
Patris est, qui et intercedit pro nobis.

<span id="xii.x-p16"></span><span id="xii.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p17"></span>**31.** *What then*, *etc.* The subject
discussed having been sufficiently proved, he now breaks out into
exclamations, by which he sets forth the magnanimity with which the
faithful ought to be furnished when adversities urge them to despond.
And he teaches us in these words that with the paternal favor of God is
connected that invincible courage which overcomes all temptations. We
indeed know, that judgment is usually formed of the love or of the
hatred of God, in no other way than by a view of our present state;
hence when things fall out untowardly, sorrow takes possession of our
minds, and drives away all confidence and consolation. But Paul loudly
exclaims, that a deeper principle ought to be inquired after, and that
they reason absurdly who confine themselves to the sad spectacle of our
present warfare. I indeed allow, that the scourges of God are in
themselves justly deemed to be tokens of God’s wrath; but as they are
consecrated in Christ, Paul bids the saints to lay hold, above all
things, on the paternal love of God, that relying on this shield they
may boldly triumph over all evils; for this is a brazen wall to us, so
that while God is propitious to us we shall be safe against all dangers.
He does not, however, mean, that nothing shall oppose us; but he
promises a victory over all kinds of enemies.

<span id="xii.x-p18"></span>*If God be for us*, *etc.* This is the chief
and the only support which can sustain us in every temptation. For
except we have God propitious to us, though all things should smile on
us, yet no sure confidence can be attained: but, on the other hand, his
favor alone is a sufficient solace in every sorrow, a protection
sufficiently strong against all the storms of adversities. And on this
subject there are many testimonies of Scripture, which show that when
the saints rely on the power of God alone, they dare to despise whatever
is opposed to them in the world.

<span id="xii.x-p19"></span>“When I walk in the midst of the shadow of
death, I shall not fear evils, for thou art with me.” (<span
id="xii.x-p19.1"></span>[Ps 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004.md)<span
id="xii.x-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.x-p20"></span>“In the Lord I trust: what shall flesh do to
me.”  
(<span id="xii.x-p20.2"></span>[Ps
56:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#011)<span id="xii.x-p20.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.x-p21"></span>“I shall not fear the thousands of the
people who beset me.”  
(<span id="xii.x-p21.2"></span>[Ps
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006)<span id="xii.x-p21.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.x-p22"></span>For there is no power either under or above
the heavens, which can resist the arm of God. Having him then as our
defender, we need fear no harm whatever. Hence he alone shows real
confidence in God, who being content with his protection, dreads nothing
in such a way as to despond; the faithful are doubtless often shaken but
are never utterly cast down. In short, the Apostle’s object was to show,
that the godly soul ought to rely on the inward testimony of the Holy
Spirit, and not to depend on outward things.

<span id="xii.x-p23"></span><span id="xii.x-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p24"></span>**32.** *He who has not spared his own son,*
*etc.* As it greatly concerns us to be so thoroughly persuaded of the
paternal love of God, as to be able to retain our rejoicing on its
account, Paul brings forward the price of our redemption in order to
prove that God favors us: and doubtless it is a remarkable and clear
evidence of inappreciable love, that the Father refused not to bestow
his Son for our salvation. And so Paul draws an argument from the
greater to the less, that as he had nothing dearer, or more precious, or
more excellent than his Son, he will neglect nothing of what he foresees
will be profitable to us.  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md)

<span id="xii.x-p26"></span>This passage ought to remind us of what
Christ brings to us, and to awaken us to contemplate his riches; for as
he is a pledge of God’s infinite love towards us, so he has not been
sent to us void of blessings or empty, but filled with all celestial
treasures, so that they who possess him may not want anything necessary
for their perfect felicity. To *deliver up* means here to expose to
death.

<span id="xii.x-p27"></span><span id="xii.x-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p28"></span>**33.** *Who shall bring an accusation,*
*etc.* The first and the chief consolation of the godly in adversities,
is to be fully persuaded of the paternal kindness of God; for hence
arises the certainty of their salvation, and that calm quietness of the
soul through which it comes that adversities are sweetened, or at least
the bitterness of sorrow mitigated. Hardly then a more suitable
encouragement to patience could be adduced than this, a conviction that
God is propitious to us; and hence Paul makes this confidence the main
ground of that consolation, by which it behoves the faithful to be
strengthened against all evils. And as the salvation of man is first
assailed by accusation, and then subverted by condemnation, he in the
first place averts the danger of accusation. There is indeed but one
God, at whose tribunal we must stand; then there is no room for
accusation when he justifies us. The antithetic clauses seem not indeed
to be exactly arranged; for the two parts which ought rather to have
been set in opposition to each other are these: “Who shall accuse?
Christ is he who intercedes:” and then these two might have been
connected, “Who shall condemn? God is he who justifies;” for God’s
absolution answers to condemnation, and Christ’s intercession to
accusation. But Paul has not without reason made another arrangement, as
he was anxious to arm the children of God, as they say, from head to
foot, with that confidence which banishes all anxieties and fears. He
then more emphatically concludes, that the children of God are not
subject to an accusation, because God justifies, than if he had said
that Christ is our advocate; for he more fully expresses that the way to
a trial is more completely closed up when the judge himself pronounces
him wholly exempt from guilt, whom the accuser would bring in as
deserving of punishment. There is also a similar reason for the second
clause; for he shows that the faithful are very far from being involved
in the danger of condemnation, since Christ by expiating their sins has
anticipated the judgment of God, and by his intercession not only
abolishes death, but also covers our sins in oblivion, so that they come
not to an account.

<span id="xii.x-p29"></span>The drift of the whole is, that we are not
only freed from terror by present remedies, but that God comes to our
aid beforehand, that he may better provide for our confidence.

<span id="xii.x-p30"></span>But it must be here observed, as we have
before reminded you, that to be justified, according to Paul, is to be
absolved by the sentence of God, and to be counted just; and it is not
difficult to prove this from the present passage, in which he reasons by
affirming one thing which nullifies its opposite; for to absolve and to
regard persons as guilty, are contrary things. Hence God will allow no
accusation against us, because he has absolved us from all sins. The
devil no doubt is an accuser of all the godly: the very law of God and
their own conscience convict them; but all these prevail nothing with
the judge, who justifies them. Therefore no adversary can shake or
endanger our salvation.

<span id="xii.x-p31"></span>Further, he so mentions the elect, as one
who doubted not but that he was of their number; and he knew this, not
by special revelation, (as some sophists falsely imagine,) but by a
perception (<span id="xii.x-p31.1"></span>*sensu* - feeling) common to
all the godly. What then is here said of the elect, every one of the
godly, according to the example of Paul, may apply to himself; for this
doctrine would have been not only frigid, but wholly lifeless had he
buried election in the secret purpose of God. But when we know, that
there is here designedly set before us what every one of the godly ought
to appropriate to himself, there is no doubt but that we are all
encouraged to examine our calling, so that we may become assured that we
are the children of God.

<span id="xii.x-p32"></span><span id="xii.x-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p33"></span>**34.** *Who is he that condemns?* *etc.* As
no one by accusing can prevail, when the judge absolves; so there
remains no condemnation, when satisfaction is given to the laws, and the
penalty is already paid. Now Christ is he, who, having once for all
suffered the punishment due to us, thereby declared that he undertook
our cause, in order to deliver us: he then who seeks hereafter to
condemn us, must bring back Christ himself to death again. But he has
not only died, but also came forth, by a resurrection, as the conqueror
of death and triumphed over all its power.

<span id="xii.x-p34"></span>He adds still more, — that he now *sits at
the right hand* of the Father; by which is meant, that he possesses
dominion over heaven and earth, and full power and rule over all things,
according to what is said in <span id="xii.x-p34.1"></span>[Eph
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.x-p34.1"></span>. He
teaches us also, that he thus sits, that he may be a perpetual advocate
and intercessor in securing our salvation. It hence follows, that when
any one seeks to condemn us, he not only seeks to render void the death
of Christ, but also contends with that unequalled power with which the
Father has honored him, and who with that power conferred on him supreme
authority. This so great an assurance; which dares to triumph over the
devil, death, sin, and the gates of hell, ought to lodge deep in the
hearts of all the godly; for our faith is nothing, except we feel
assured that Christ is ours, and that the Father is in him propitious to
us. Nothing then can be devised more pestilent and ruinous, than the
scholastic dogma respecting the uncertainty of salvation.

<span id="xii.x-p35"></span>*Who intercedes*, *etc.* It was necessary
expressly to add this, lest the Divine majesty of Christ should terrify
us. Though, then, from his elevated throne he holds all things in
subjection under his feet, yet Paul represents him as a Mediator; whose
presence it would be strange for us to dread, since he not only kindly
invites us to himself, but also appears an intercessor for us before the
Father. But we must not measure this intercession by our carnal
judgment; for we must not suppose that he humbly supplicates the Father
with bended knees and expanded hands; but as he appears continually, as
one who died and rose again, and as his death and resurrection stand in
the place of eternal intercession, and have the efficacy of a powerful
prayer for reconciling and rendering the Father propitious to us, he is
justly said to intercede for us.

<span id="xii.xi"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035.md)<span id="xii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p2"></span>**35.** Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? *shall* tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril, or sword?

<span id="xii.xi-p3"></span>**35.** Quis nos dirimet  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273.md) a dilectione Christi? tribulatio, an
angustia, an persequutio, an fames, an nuditas, an periculum, an
gladius?

<span id="xii.xi-p5"></span>**36.** As it is written, For thy sake we
are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter.

<span id="xii.xi-p6"></span>**36.** Quemadmodum scriptum est, Quod
propter te morimur quotidie, reputati sumus tanquam oves mactationi
destinatæ:

<span id="xii.xi-p7"></span>**37.** Nay, in all these things we are more
than conquerors through him that loved us.

<span id="xii.xi-p8"></span>**37.** Sed in iis omnibus supervincimus per
eum qui dilexit nos.

<span id="xii.xi-p9"></span><span id="xii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p10"></span>**35.** *Who shall separate us*, *etc.* The
conviction of safety is now more widely extended, even to lower things;
for he who is persuaded of God’s kindness towards him, is able to stand
firm in the heaviest afflictions. These usually harass men in no small
degree, and for various reasons, — because they interpret them as tokens
of God’s wrath, or think themselves to be forsaken by God, or see no end
to them, or neglect to meditate on a better life, or for other similar
reasons; but when the mind is purged from such mistakes, it becomes
calm, and quietly rests. But the import of the words is, — That whatever
happens, we ought to stand firm in this faith, — that God, who once in
his love embraced us, never ceases to care for us. For he does not
simply say that there is nothing which can tear God away from his love
to us; but he means, that the knowledge and lively sense of the love
which he testifies to us is so vigorous in our hearts, that it always
shines in the darkness of afflictions: for as clouds, though they
obscure the clear brightness of the sun, do not yet wholly deprive us of
its light; so God, in adversities, sends forth through the darkness the
rays of his favor, lest temptations should overwhelm us with despair;
nay, our faith, supported by God’s promises as by wings, makes its way
upward to heaven through all the intervening obstacles. It is indeed
true, that adversities are tokens of God’s wrath, when viewed in
themselves; but when pardon and reconciliation precede, we ought to be
assured that God, though he chastises us, yet never forgets his mercy:
he indeed thus reminds us of what we have deserved; but he no less
testifies, that our salvation is an object of his care, while he leads
us to repentance.

<span id="xii.xi-p11"></span>But he calls it *the love of Christ*, and
for this reason, — because the Father has in a manner opened his
compassions to us in him. As then the love of God is not to be sought
out of Christ, Paul rightly directs to him our attention, so that our
faith may behold, in the rays of Christ’s favor, the serene countenance
of the Father. The meaning is, — that in no adversities ought our
confidence to be shaken as to this truth — that when God is propitious,
nothing can be adverse to us. Some take this love in a passive sense,
for that by which he is loved by us, as though Paul would have us armed
with invincible courage  <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274.md) but
this comment may be easily disproved by the whole tenor of Paul’s
reasoning; and Paul himself will presently remove all doubt by defining
more clearly what this love is.

<span id="xii.xi-p13"></span>*Tribulation, or distress*, *or
persecution?* *etc.* The pronoun masculine which he used at the
beginning of the verse, contains a hidden power: for when he might have
adopted the neuter gender and said — “What shall separate us?” etc., he
preferred ascribing personality to things without life, and for this
end, — that he might send forth with us into the contest as many
champions as there are of temptations to try our faith.

<span id="xii.xi-p14"></span>But these three things have this
difference: *tribulation* includes every kind of trouble or evil;
*distress* is an inward feeling, when difficulties reduce us to such an
extremity, so that we know not what course to pursue. Such was the
anxiety of Abraham and of Lot, when one was constrained to expose his
wife to the danger of prostitution, and the other, his daughters; for
being brought to straits and being perplexed, they found no way of
escape. *Persecution* properly denotes the tyrannical violence by which
the children of God were undeservedly harassed by the ungodly. Now
though Paul denies in <span id="xii.xi-p14.1"></span>[2Co
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.xi-p14.1"></span>,
that the children of God are reduced to straits, <span
id="xii.xi-p14.2"></span>στενοχωρεῖσθαι, he does not yet disagree with
himself; for he does not simply make them to be exempt from anxious
solicitude, but he means that they are delivered from it, as also the
examples of Abraham and Lot testify.

<span id="xii.xi-p15"></span><span id="xii.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p16"></span>**36.** *As it is written*, *etc.* This
testimony adds no small weight to the subject; for he intimates, that
the dread of death is so far from being a reason to us for falling away,
that it has been almost ever the lot of God’s servants to have death as
it were present before their eyes. It is indeed probable, that in that
Psalm the miserable oppression of the people under the tyranny of
Antiochus is described; for it is expressly said, that the worshippers
of God were cruelly treated, for no other reason but through hatred to
true religion. There is also added a remarkable protestation, that they
had not departed from the covenant of God; which Paul, I think, had
especially in view. It is no objection that the saints there complain of
a calamity which then unusually pressed on them; for since they show,
that they were oppressed with so many evils, having before testified
their innocence, an argument is hence fitly drawn, that it is no new
thing for the Lord to permit his saints to be undeservedly exposed to
the cruelty of the ungodly. But this is not done except for their good;
for the Scripture teaches us, that it is alien to the righteousness of
God to destroy the just with the wicked, (<span
id="xii.xi-p16.1"></span>[Ge
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023)<span id="xii.xi-p16.1"></span>.md);
but that, on the contrary, it is meet for him to requite affliction to
those who afflict, and rest to those who are afflicted. (<span
id="xii.xi-p16.2"></span>[2 Thess.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009)<span id="xii.xi-p16.2"></span>..md)
And then they affirm that they suffer for the Lord; and Christ
pronounces them blessed who suffer for the sake of righteousness. (<span
id="xii.xi-p16.3"></span>[Mt 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010.md)<span
id="xii.xi-p16.3"></span>.) By saying that they *died daily*, they
intimated that death was so suspended over them, that their life
differed but little from death.

<span id="xii.xi-p17"></span><span id="xii.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p18"></span>**37.** *We do more than conquer*, *etc.*;
that is, we always struggle and emerge. I have retained the word used by
Paul,  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275.md) though not commonly used
by the Latins. It indeed sometimes happens that the faithful seem to
succumb and to lie forlorn; and thus the Lord not only tries, but also
humbles them. This issue is however given to them, — that they obtain
the victory.

<span id="xii.xi-p21"></span>That they might at the same time remember
whence this invincible power proceeds, he again repeats what he had said
before: for he not only teaches us that God, because he loves us,
supports us by his hand; but he also confirms the same truth by
mentioning the love of Christ.  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276.md)
And this one sentence sufficiently proves, that the Apostle speaks not
here of the fervency of that love which we have towards God, but of the
paternal kindness of God and of Christ towards us, the assurance of
which, being thoroughly fixed in our hearts, will always draw us from
the gates of hell into the light of life, and will sufficiently avail
for our support.

<span id="xii.xii"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
8:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038.md)<span id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p2"></span>**38.** For I am persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come,

<span id="xii.xii-p3"></span>**38.** Persuasus enim sum, quod neque
mors, neque vita,  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277.md) neque angeli
neque principatus, neque virtutes, neque principatus, neque virtutes,
neque præasentia, neque futura,

<span id="xii.xii-p5"></span>**39.** Nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="xii.xii-p6"></span>**39.** Neque altitudo, neque profunditas,
neque ulla alia creatura, poterit nos dirimere a charitate Dei, Quæ est
in Christo Iesu.

<span id="xii.xii-p7"></span><span id="xii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p8"></span>**38.** He is now carried away into
hyperbolic expressions, that he might confirm us more fully in those
things which are to be experienced. Whatever, he says, there is in life
or in death, which seems capable of tearing us away from God, shall
effect nothing; nay, the very angels, were they to attempt to overturn
this foundation, shall do us no harm. It is no objection, that angels
are ministering spirits, appointed for the salvation of the elect,
(<span id="xii.xii-p8.1"></span>[Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span id="xii.xii-p8.1"></span>:.md)
for Paul reasons here on what is impossible, as he does in <span
id="xii.xii-p8.2"></span>[Ga 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008.md)<span
id="xii.xii-p8.2"></span>; and we may hence observe, that all things
ought to be deemed of no worth, compared with the glory of God, since it
is lawful to dishonor even angels in vindicating his truth.  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278.md) Angels are also meant by
*principalities and powers*,  <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md)
and they are so called, because they are the primary instruments of the
Divine power: and these two words were added, that if the word angels
sounded too insignificant, something more might be expressed. But you
would, perhaps, prefer this meaning, “Nor angels, and whatever powers
there may be;” which is a mode of speaking that is used, when we refer
to things unknown to us, and exceeding our capacities.

<span id="xii.xii-p11"></span>*Nor present things, nor future things,*
*etc.* Though he speaks hyperbolically, yet he declares, that by no
length of time can it be effected, that we should be separated from the
Lord’s favor: and it was needful to add this; for we have not only to
struggle with the sorrow which we feel from present evils, but also with
the fear and the anxiety with which impending dangers may harass us.
 <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) The meaning then is, — that we
ought not to fear, lest the continuance of evils, however long, should
obliterate the faith of adoption.

<span id="xii.xii-p13"></span>This declaration is clearly against the
schoolmen, who idly talk and say, that no one is certain of final
perseverance, except through the gift of special revelation, which they
make to be very rare. By such a dogma the whole faith is destroyed,
which is certainly nothing, except it extends to death and beyond death.
But we, on the contrary, ought to feel confident, that he who has begun
in us a good work, will carry it on until the day of the Lord Jesus.
 <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281.md)

<span id="xii.xii-p17"></span><span id="xii.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p18"></span>**39.** *Which is in Christ*, *etc.* That
is, of which Christ is the bond; for he is the beloved Son, in whom the
Father is well pleased. If, then, we are through him united to God, we
may be assured of the immutable and unfailing kindness of God towards
us. He now speaks here more distinctly than before, as he declares that
the fountain of love is in the Father, and affirms that it flows to us
from Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc38011.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="xii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span> This clause, “who walk not,” etc., is
regarded as spurious by <span id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>Griesbach*:* a vast
preponderance of authority as to MSS. is against it; and its proper
place seems to be at the end of the fourth verse. It being placed here
does not, however, interfere with the meaning. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc38011.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="xii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span> *Ca1vin* has, in his exposition of this
verse, followed <span id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>Chrysostom, and the same
view has been taken by <span id="xii.i-p18.2"></span>Beza, <span
id="xii.i-p18.3"></span>Grotius, <span id="xii.i-p18.4"></span>Vitringa,
<span id="xii.i-p18.5"></span>Doddridge, <span
id="xii.i-p18.6"></span>Scott, and <span
id="xii.i-p18.7"></span>Chalmers. But <span
id="xii.i-p18.8"></span>Pareus, following <span
id="xii.i-p18.9"></span>Ambrose, has taken another view, which <span
id="xii.i-p18.10"></span>Haldane has strongly advocated, and with
considerable power of reasoning, though, as some may perhaps think,
unsuccessfully. The exposition is this, — “The law of the spirit of
life” is the law of faith, or the gospel, which is the ministration of
the Spirit; and “the spirit of life” means either the life-giving
spirit, or the spirit which conveys the life which is in Christ Jesus.
Then “the law of sin and death” is the moral law, so called because it
discloses sin and denounces death. It is said that this view corresponds
with the “no condemnation” in the first verse, and with the word “law”
in the verse which follows, which is no doubt the moral law, and with
the truth which the verse exhibits. It is also added that freedom or
deliverance from the law of sin, viewed as the power of sin, is
inconsistent with the latter part of the former chapter; and that the
law of faith, which through the Spirit conveys life, makes us free from
the moral law as the condition of life, is the uniform teaching of Paul.
“This freedom,” says <span id="xii.i-p18.11"></span>Pareus, “is ascribed
to God, to Christ, and to the Gospel, — to God as the author, <span
id="xii.i-p18.12"></span>[Ro 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span
id="xii.i-p18.12"></span>, — to Christ as the mediator, — and to the
Gospel as the instrument: and the manner of this deliverance is more
clearly explained in the verse which follows.”

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc38011.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="xii.i-p22.6"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span> <span id="xii.i-p23.1"></span>Calvin is not
singular in this rendering. <span id="xii.i-p23.2"></span>Pareus and
<span id="xii.i-p23.3"></span>Grotius give “<span
id="xii.i-p23.4"></span>quia *vel* quandoquidem — because or since;” and
the latter says, that ἐν ᾧ is an Hebraism for ἐφ ᾧ; see <span
id="xii.i-p23.5"></span>[Ro 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012.md)<span
id="xii.i-p23.5"></span> <span id="xii.i-p23.6"></span>Beza refers to
<span id="xii.i-p23.7"></span>[Mr
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.i-p23.7"></span>,
and <span id="xii.i-p23.8"></span>[Lu
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#034.md)<span id="xii.i-p23.8"></span>, as
instances where it means *when* or *while*, and says that it is used in
Greek to designate not only a certain time, but also a certain state or
condition. <span id="xii.i-p23.9"></span>Piscator*’s* rendering is
“<span id="xii.i-p23.10"></span>co quod — because.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc38011.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="xii.i-p23.15"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span> The beginning of this verse, though the
general import of it is evident, does yet present some difficulties as
to its construction. The clause, as given by <span
id="xii.i-p24.1"></span>Calvin, is, “<span id="xii.i-p24.2"></span>Quod
enim impossibile erat legi,” — τὸ γὰρ ἀδύνατον τον νόμου <span
id="xii.i-p24.3"></span>Pareus supposes δἰα understood, “For on account
of the impotency of the law,” etc. <span id="xii.i-p24.4"></span>Stuart
agrees with <span id="xii.i-p24.5"></span>Erasmus and <span
id="xii.i-p24.6"></span>Luther and supplies the verb “did,” or
accomplish, — “For what the law could not accomplish,... God...
accomplished,” etc. But the simpler construction is, “For this,” (that
is, freedom from the power of sin and death, mentioned in the former
verse,) “*being* impossible for the law,” etc. It is instance of the
nominative case absolute, which sometimes occurs in Hebrew. The
possessive case, as <span id="xii.i-p24.7"></span>Grotius says, has
often the meaning of a dative after adjectives, as “<span
id="xii.i-p24.8"></span>malum hominis“ is “<span
id="xii.i-p24.9"></span>*malum homini* — evil to man.” The τὸ has
sometimes the meaning of τουτο; it is separated by γὰρ from the
adjective. Some say that it is for ὅτι γὰρ, “Because it was impossible
for the law,” etc. But changes of this kind are never satisfactory. The
rendering of the whole verse may be made thus, —

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**3.** For this *being* impossible for the
law, because it was weak through the flesh, God having sent his own Son
in the likeness of sinful a flesh and on account of sin, has condemned
sin in the flesh.

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>God sent his Son in that flesh which was
polluted by sin, though his Son’s flesh, *i.e.* human nature, was
sinless; and he sent him on account of that sin which reigned in human
nature or flesh; and for this end — to condemn, *i.e*., to doom to ruin,
to adjudge to destruction, the sin which ruled in the flesh, *i.e*. in
human nature as fallen and corrupted. This seems to be the meaning. Then
in the following verse the design of this condemnation of sin is stated
— that the righteousness of the law, or what the law requires, might be
done by us. Without freedom from the power of sin, no service can be
done to God. It is the destruction of the power of sin, and not the
removal of guilt, that is contemplated here throughout; the text of the
whole passage is walking after the flesh and walking after the Spirit. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc38011.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="xii.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span> The adjective τὸ ἀσθενὲς is applied to the
commandment in <span id="xii.i-p30.1"></span>[Heb
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.i-p30.1"></span>.
“Impotent, inefficacious,” are the terms used by <span
id="xii.i-p30.2"></span>Grotius*;* “destitute of strength,” by <span
id="xii.i-p30.3"></span>Beza*;* and “weak,” by <span
id="xii.i-p30.4"></span>Erasmus — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc38011.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="xii.i-p32.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span> The reference had better been made to <span
id="xii.i-p33.1"></span>חטאת, a sin-offering, so called because <span
id="xii.i-p33.2"></span>חטא, sin, was imputed to what was offered, and
it was accepted as an atonement. See <span id="xii.i-p33.3"></span>[Le
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.i-p33.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p33.4"></span>[Lev.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.i-p33.4"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p33.5"></span>[Le
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.i-p33.5"></span>.
See also <span id="xii.i-p33.6"></span>[Ex
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.i-p33.6"></span>.
The *Septuagint* adopted the same manner, and rendered sin-offering in
many instances by ἁμαρτία, sin; and Paul has done the same in <span
id="xii.i-p33.7"></span>[2Co 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021.md)<span
id="xii.i-p33.7"></span>; <span id="xii.i-p33.8"></span>[Heb
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028.md)<span id="xii.i-p33.8"></span>.
That “sin” should have two different meanings in the same verse or in
the same clause, is what is perfectly consonant to the Apostle’s manner
of writing; he seems to delight in this kind of contrast in meaning
while using the same words, depending on the context as to the
explanation. He uses the word *hope* both in <span
id="xii.i-p33.9"></span>[Ro 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021.md)<span
id="xii.i-p33.9"></span>, and in <span id="xii.i-p33.10"></span>[Ro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.i-p33.10"></span>,
in this way. And this is not peculiar to Paul; it is what we observe in
all parts of Scripture, both in the New and in the Old Testament. A
striking instance of this, as to the word “life,” ψυχή is found in <span
id="xii.i-p33.11"></span>[Matt. 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026.md)<span id="xii.i-p33.11"></span>, in
the last verse it is rendered improperly “soul.”

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span>Fully admitting all this, I still think that
“sin” here is to be taken in its common meaning, only personified. <span
id="xii.i-p34.1"></span>Beza connects περὶ ἁμαρτίας with the preceding
clause, “God having sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and that for or on account of sin, (<span id="xii.i-p34.2"></span>idque
pro peccato,)” etc., that is, as he explains, for expiating or taking
away sin. “A sin-offering” may indeed be its meaning, for the same
expression is often used in this sense in the *Septuagint*. See <span
id="xii.i-p34.3"></span>[Lev. 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#007.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#009.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.i-p34.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p34.4"></span>[Ps
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.i-p34.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>The sense of taking away strength, or
depriving of power or authority, or of destroying, or of abolishing,
does not belong, says <span id="xii.i-p35.1"></span>Schleusner, to the
verb κατακρίνειν, to condemn; he renders it here “punished — <span
id="xii.i-p35.2"></span>punivit,” that is, God adjudged to sin the
punishment due to it. The meaning is made to be the same as when it is
said, that God “laid on him the iniquities of us all.”

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span>By taking a view of the whole passage, from
<span id="xii.i-p36.1"></span>[Ro
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md)<span id="xii.i-p36.1"></span> to
<span id="xii.i-p36.2"></span>[Ro
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.i-p36.2"></span>, for
the whole of this is connected, and by noticing the phraseology, we
shall probably conclude that the *power* of sin and not its *guilt* is
the subject treated of. “Law” here is used for a ruling power, for that
which exercises authority and ensures obedience. “The law of sin,” is
the ruling power of sin; “the law of the spirit of life,” is the power
of the Spirit the author of life; “the law of death” is the power which
death exercises. Then “walking after the flesh” is to live in subjection
to the flesh; as “walking after the Spirit” is to live in subjection to
him. All these things have a reference to the *power* and not to the
*guilt* of sin. The same subject is continued from <span
id="xii.i-p36.3"></span>[Ro 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005.md)<span
id="xii.i-p36.3"></span> to <span id="xii.i-p36.4"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.i-p36.4"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc38011.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="xii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span> Commentators are divided as to the meaning
of this verse. This and the second verse seem to bear a relation in
sense to one another; so that if the second verse refers to
justification, this also refers to it; but if freedom from the *power*
of sin and death be what is taught in the former verse, the actual or
personal fulfillment of the law must be what is intended here. Some,
such as <span id="xii.i-p42.1"></span>Pareus and <span
id="xii.i-p42.2"></span>Venema, consider justification to be the subject
of both verses; and others, such as <span id="xii.i-p42.3"></span>Scott
and <span id="xii.i-p42.4"></span>Doddridge, consider it to be
sanctification. But <span id="xii.i-p42.5"></span>Beza, <span
id="xii.i-p42.6"></span>Chalmers, as well as <span
id="xii.i-p42.7"></span>Calvin, somewhat inconsistently, regard the
second verse as speaking of freedom from the power or dominion of sin,
and not from its guilt or condemnation, and this verse as speaking of
the imputed righteousness of Christ, and not of that righteousness which
believers are enabled to perform by the Spirit’s aid and influence. The
verses seem so connected in the argument, that one of these two ideas
must be held throughout.

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span>There is nothing *decisive* in the wording
of this verse, though the cast of the expressions seem more favorable to
the idea entertained by <span id="xii.i-p43.1"></span>Doddridge and
<span id="xii.i-p43.2"></span>Scott, and especially what follows in the
context, where the work of the Spirit is exclusively spoken of. The word
δικαιωμα, is better rendered “righteousness” than “justification;” for
“the righteousness to the law” means the righteousness which the law
requires; and the words “might be fulfilled in us,” may, with equal
propriety as to the <span id="xii.i-p43.3"></span>*uses loquendi*, be
rendered, “might be performed by us.” The verb πληρόω has this meaning
in <span id="xii.i-p43.4"></span>[Ro
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.i-p43.4"></span>,
and in other places.

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span>Viewed in this light the verse contains the
same truth with what is expressed by “serving the law of God,” in <span
id="xii.i-p44.1"></span>[Ro 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span
id="xii.i-p44.1"></span>, and the same with yielding our members as
“instruments of righteousness unto God,” in <span
id="xii.i-p44.2"></span>[Ro 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013.md)<span
id="xii.i-p44.2"></span>. That this is to establish a justification by
the law, is obviated by the consideration, that this righteousness is
performed through the efficacy of Christ’s death, and through the
reviving power of the Spirit, and not through the law, and that it is
not a justifying righteousness before God, for it is imperfect, and the
law can acknowledge nothing as righteousness but what is perfect. The
sanctification now begun will be finally completed; but it is all
through grace: and the completion of this work will be a complete
conformity with the immutable law of God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc38011.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span> The verb <span
id="xii.ii-p13.1"></span>φρονέω as <span id="xii.ii-p13.2"></span>Leigh
justly says, includes the action of the mind, will, and affections, but
mostly in Scripture it expresses the action of the will and affections.
It means to understand, to desire, and to relish or delight in a thing.
It is rendered here by <span id="xii.ii-p13.3"></span>Erasmus and <span
id="xii.ii-p13.4"></span>Vatablus, “<span
id="xii.ii-p13.5"></span>curant — care for;” by <span
id="xii.ii-p13.6"></span>Beza, <span id="xii.ii-p13.7"></span>Pareus,
and the *Vulgate*, “<span id="xii.ii-p13.8"></span>sapiunt — relish or
savour;” by <span id="xii.ii-p13.9"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="xii.ii-p13.10"></span>Macknight, “mind,” as in our version; and by
<span id="xii.ii-p13.11"></span>Stuart, “concern themselves with.” It
evidently means attention, regard, pursuit and delight, — the act of the
will and affections, rather than that of the mind.

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span>“The verb,” says <span
id="xii.ii-p14.1"></span>Turrettin, “means not only to think of, to
understand, to attend to a thing; but also to mind it,to value it, and
to take great delight in it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc38011.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span> <span id="xii.ii-p15.1"></span>Jerome
says, that to be *in the flesh* is to be in a married state! How
superstition perverts the mind! and then the perverted mind perverts the
word of God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc38011.htm#fr_245.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p17.8"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span> It is difficult to find a word to express
the idea here intended. It is evident that τὸ φρόνημα τὢς σαρκὸς is the
abstract of “minding the things of the flesh,” in the preceding verse.
The mindedness, rather than the minding of the flesh, would be most
correct. But the phrase is no doubt Hebraistic, the adjective is put as
a noun in the genitive case, so that its right version is, “The carnal
mind;” and “mind” is to be taken in the wide sense of the verb, as
including the whole soul, understanding, will, and affections. The
phrase is thus given in the next verse in our version; and it is the
most correct rendering. The mind of the flesh is its thoughts, desires,
likings, and delight. This carnal mind is death, *i.e*., spiritual death
now, leading to that which is eternal; or death, as being under
condemnation, and producing wretchedness and misery; it is also enmity
towards God, including in its very spirit hatred and antipathy to God.
On the other hand, “the spiritual mind” is “life,” *i.e*., a divine
life, a living principle of holiness, accompanied with “peace,” which is
true happiness; or life by justification, and “peace” with God as the
fruit of it.

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span>The word φρόνημα is only found in one other
place, in <span id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ro
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027.md)<span id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>, —
“the mind,” wish, or desire “of the Spirit.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc38011.htm#fr_246.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span> The *order* which the Apostle observes
ought to be noticed. He begins in <span id="xii.ii-p24.1"></span>[Ro
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.ii-p24.1"></span>, or
at the end of <span id="xii.ii-p24.2"></span>[Ro
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.ii-p24.2"></span>,
with two characters — the *carnal* and, the *spiritual*. He takes the
*carnal* first, because it is the first as to us in order of time. And
here he does not reverse the order, as he sometimes does, when the case
admits it, but goes on first with the carnal man, and then, in <span
id="xii.ii-p24.3"></span>[Ro
8:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.ii-p24.3"></span>,
he describes the spiritual. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc38011.htm#fr_247.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p27"></span> <span id="xii.ii-p27.1"></span>Stuart
attempts to evade this conclusion, but rather in an odd way. The whole
amount, as he seems to say, of what the Apostle declares, is that this
φρόνημα σαρκός *itself* is not subject, and cannot be, to the law of
God; but whether the sinner who cherishes it “is actuated by other
principles and motives,” the expression, he says, does not seem
satisfactorily to determine. Hence he stigmatizes with the name of
“metaphysical reasoning” the doctrine of man’s moral inability, without
divine grace, to turn to God — a doctrine which <span
id="xii.ii-p27.2"></span>Luther, <span id="xii.ii-p27.3"></span>Calvin,
and our own Reformers equally maintained. The Apostle does not only
speak abstractedly, but he applies what he advances to individuals, and
concludes by saying, So then they that are in the flesh cannot please
God.” Who and what can bring them out of this state? The influence of
“other principles and motives,” or the grace of God? This is no
metaphysical question, and the answer to it determines the point. Our
other American brother, <span id="xii.ii-p27.4"></span>Barnes, seems
also to deprecate this doctrine of moral inability, and makes
distinctions to no purpose, attempting to separate the carnal mind from
him in whom it exists, as though man could be in a neutral state,
neither in the flesh nor in the Spirit. “It is an expression,” as our
third American brother, <span id="xii.ii-p27.5"></span>Hodge, justly
observes, “applied to *all* unrenewed persons, as those who are not in
the flesh are in the Spirit.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc38011.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p18"></span> There are mainly two explanations of this
verse and the following, with some shades of difference. The one is
given here; according to which “the body,” and “bodies,” are taken
figuratively for nature corrupted by sin; the “body,” as it is flesh, or
corrupted, is “dead,” is crucified, or doomed to die “on account of
sin;” and this “body,” or these “bodies,” which are mortal, and
especially so as to their corruption, are to be quickened, revived, and
made subservient to the will of God. It appears that this is essentially
the view taken by <span id="xii.iii-p18.1"></span>Chrysostom, and also
by <span id="xii.iii-p18.2"></span>Erasmus, <span
id="xii.iii-p18.3"></span>Locke, <span
id="xii.iii-p18.4"></span>Marckius, and by <span
id="xii.iii-p18.5"></span>Stuart and <span
id="xii.iii-p18.6"></span>Barnes. It is said that νέκρον and θνητα have
the same meaning with “crucified” and “destroyed,” in <span
id="xii.iii-p18.7"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md)<span
id="xii.iii-p18.7"></span>, and “dead,” in <span
id="xii.iii-p18.8"></span>[Rom. 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.iii-p18.8"></span>,
and “dead,” in <span id="xii.iii-p18.9"></span>[Ro
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.iii-p18.9"></span>,
and “mortal,” in <span id="xii.iii-p18.10"></span>[Ro
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012.md)<span id="xii.iii-p18.10"></span>.
And as to the meaning of ζωοποίησει, is “shall quicken,” reference is
made to <span id="xii.iii-p18.11"></span>[Col.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013.md)<span id="xii.iii-p18.11"></span>;
<span id="xii.iii-p18.12"></span>[Eph.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.iii-p18.12"></span>;
<span id="xii.iii-p18.13"></span>[Eph.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.iii-p18.13"></span>.
It is also added, that the words “mortify the deeds of the body,” in
<span id="xii.iii-p18.14"></span>[Ro
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013.md)<span id="xii.iii-p18.14"></span>,
confirm this view.

<span id="xii.iii-p19"></span>The other explanation, adopted by <span
id="xii.iii-p19.1"></span>Augustine, and also by <span
id="xii.iii-p19.2"></span>Pareus, <span
id="xii.iii-p19.3"></span>Vitringa, <span
id="xii.iii-p19.4"></span>Turrettin, <span
id="xii.iii-p19.5"></span>Doddridge, <span
id="xii.iii-p19.6"></span>Scott, <span
id="xii.iii-p19.7"></span>Chalmers, <span
id="xii.iii-p19.8"></span>Haldane, and <span
id="xii.iii-p19.9"></span>Hodge, is the following, — The “body,” and
“bodies,” are to be taken literally, and the spirit, in the 10th verse,
is the renewed man, or the renewed soul, which has or possesses “life”
through the righteousness of Christ, or is made to enjoy life through
the righteousness implanted by the Spirit. The meaning then is this,
“The body is dead through sin, is doomed to die because of sin; but the
spirit is life through righteousness, the soul renewed has life through
Christ’s righteousness: but the dying body, now tabernacled by the
Spirit, shall also be quickened and made immortal through the mighty
power of the divine Spirit.” Thus salvation shall be complete when the
“redemption of the body” shall come. See <span
id="xii.iii-p19.10"></span>[Ro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.iii-p19.10"></span>.

<span id="xii.iii-p20"></span>While the two views are theologically
correct, the latter is that which is the most consonant with the usual
phraseology of Scripture, though the former seems the most suitable to
the context. The subject evidently is the work of the Spirit in
mortifying sin, and in bestowing and sustaining spiritual life. The
inference in the next verse seems favorable to this view. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc38011.htm#fr_249.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span> “Deeds of the *body*” is our version, and
the preponderance of authority, according to <span
id="xii.iv-p6.1"></span>Griesbach, is in its favor, though he admits
that the other reading, τἠ σαρκὀ, is nearly equal to it, and deserves
farther inquiry. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc38011.htm#fr_250.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p11"></span> He did not mention the other part, says
<span id="xii.iv-p11.1"></span>Pareus, “because it was so evident.”
Besides, what he had already stated, and what he proceeds to state, are
so many evidences of our obligations to live after the Spirit, that it
was unnecessary to make such an addition. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc38011.htm#fr_251.md) <span
id="xii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p21"></span> Αγονται — are led or conducted: “A
metaphor taken from the blind or those in darkness, who know not how to
proceed without a conductor. So we have need to be led by the Spirit in
the way of truth, for we are blind and see no light. Or it is a metaphor
taken from infants, who can hardly walk without a guide; for the
regenerated are like little children lately born. Thus we are reminded
of our misery and weakness; and we ought not to ascribe to ourselves
either knowledge or strength apart from the Spirit of God.” — <span
id="xii.iv-p21.1"></span>Pareus

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc38011.htm#fr_252.md) <span
id="xii.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p12"></span> By the Spirit, πνεῦμα, (without the
article,) some, as <span id="xii.v-p12.1"></span>Augustine, <span
id="xii.v-p12.2"></span>Beza, and others, understand the Holy Spirit,
and so <span id="xii.v-p12.3"></span>Calvin, for the most part, seems to
do. Then “the Spirit of bondage” means the Spirit the effect of whose
administration was bondage; and “the Spirit of adoption” must signify
the Spirit, the bestower of adoption. But we may take spirit here, in
both instances, as it is often taken, in the sense of disposition or
feeling; according to the expression, “the spirit of meekness” —
πνεύματι πρᾴοτητος, <span id="xii.v-p12.4"></span>[1Co
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.v-p12.4"></span>,
and “the spirit of fear” — πνεῦμα δειλίας <span
id="xii.v-p12.5"></span>[2Ti 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007.md)<span
id="xii.v-p12.5"></span>. The word for adoption, υἱοθεσία, may be
rendered sonship, or affiliation, or filiation, as <span
id="xii.v-p12.6"></span>Luther sometimes renders it: and as the Spirit
of meekness means a meek spirit, so we may translate the two clauses
here, “a servile spirit” and “a filial spirit.” At the same time it may
be better to take the “spirit” throughout as the divine Spirit, as in
several instances it must evidently be so taken. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc38011.htm#fr_253.md) <span
id="xii.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p19"></span> <span id="xii.v-p19.1"></span>Wolfius gives
a quotation from the Talmud, by which it appears that “servants” or
slaves, and “maids” or bondmaids, were not allowed among the Jews to
call their master *Abba* (<span id="xii.v-p19.2"></span>אבא), nor their
mistress *Aima* (<span id="xii.v-p19.3"></span>אימא), these being names
which children alone were permitted to use. And <span
id="xii.v-p19.4"></span>Selden says, that there is an evident allusion
in this passage to that custom among the Jews. Under the law the people
of God were servants, but under the gospel they are made children; and
hence the privilege of calling God *Abba.* <span
id="xii.v-p19.5"></span>Haldane, quoting <span
id="xii.v-p19.6"></span>Claude, gives the same explanation. The
repetition of the word is for the sake of emphasis, and is given as an
expression of warm, ardent, and intense feeling.. See an example of this
in our Savior’s prayer in the garden, <span id="xii.v-p19.7"></span>[Mr
14:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#036.md)<span id="xii.v-p19.7"></span>,
and in what he said on the cross, <span id="xii.v-p19.8"></span>[Mt
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046.md)<span id="xii.v-p19.8"></span>.
The idea mentioned by <span id="xii.v-p19.9"></span>Calvin*,* derived
from the Fathers, seems not to be well founded. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc38011.htm#fr_254.md) <span
id="xii.v-p24.3"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p25"></span> The words αὐτὸ τὸ πνεῦμα, seem to mean the
divine Spirit. The reference is to “the Spirit of God” in <span
id="xii.v-p25.1"></span>[Ro 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014.md)<span
id="xii.v-p25.1"></span>; “This self-same Spirit,” or, “He the Spirit,”
for so αὐτὀ τὸ πνεῦμα, may be rendered, especially when the article
intervenes between it and its noun. See <span
id="xii.v-p25.2"></span>[Lu 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#015.md)<span
id="xii.v-p25.2"></span>; <span id="xii.v-p25.3"></span>[Joh
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#027.md)<span id="xii.v-p25.3"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p26"></span><span id="xii.v-p26.1"></span>Beza renders
συμμαρτυρεῖ τῶ πνεύματι ἡμῶν, “testifies together with our spirit —
<span id="xii.v-p26.2"></span>una cum nostro spiritu,” and the *Vulqate*
“testifies to our spirit,” as though the verb had not its compound; and
it is said to have only the simpler meaning of testifying, though
compounded, in <span id="xii.v-p26.3"></span>[Ro
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.v-p26.3"></span>; and
in <span id="xii.v-p26.4"></span>[Re
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.v-p26.4"></span>,
where it has a dative case after it as here, “I testify to every man,”
etc. The soul appears to be here called “spirit,” because the renewed
soul is intended, or the soul having the spirit of adoption; or it may
be an instance of the Apostle’s mode of writing, who often puts the same
word twice in a sentence, but in a different meaning. The Holy Spirit
testifies to our spirit, say <span id="xii.v-p26.5"></span>Origen and
<span id="xii.v-p26.6"></span>Theodoret, by producing obedience, love,
and imitation of God, which are evidences of our adoption; but <span
id="xii.v-p26.7"></span>Chrysostom and <span
id="xii.v-p26.8"></span>Ambrose say, by enabling us to cry Abba, Father,
according to to former verse. The latter seems to be the meaning adopted
by <span id="xii.v-p26.9"></span>Calvin It is said by <span
id="xii.v-p26.10"></span>Estius, according to <span
id="xii.v-p26.11"></span>Poole, that the compound verb is never used
without the idea of a joint-testimony being implied, and that in <span
id="xii.v-p26.12"></span>[Re
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.v-p26.12"></span>,
it is a testimony in conjunction with Christ. Then the import of this
text would be, that the Holy Spirit testifies, together with the spirit
of adoption, to our spirit, to our soul or renewed mind, that we are the
children of God. Thus a direct influence of the Spirit, in addition to
that which is sanctifying and filial, seems to have been intended. See
<span id="xii.v-p26.13"></span>[2 Cor.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022.md), [Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md), [1 John
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md)<span id="xii.v-p26.13"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p27"></span>Professor <span
id="xii.v-p27.1"></span>Hodge gives this paraphrase, — “Not only does
our filial spirit towards God prove that we are his children, but the
Holy Spirit itself conveys to our souls the assurance of this delightful
fact.” This seems to be the full and precise import of the passage. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc38011.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="xii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p29"></span> “The \[Roman\] Catholic Church, with which
all sects that proceed from Pelagian principles agree, deters from the
certainty of the state of grace, and desires uncertainty towards God.
Such uncertainty of *hearts* is then a convenient means to keep men in
the leading-strings of the priesthood or ambitious founders of sects;
for since they are not allowed to have any certainty themselves
respecting their relation to God, they can only rest upon the judgments
of their leaders about it, who thus rule souls with absolute dominion;
the true evangelic doctrine makes free from such slavery to man. — <span
id="xii.v-p29.1"></span>Olshausen

<span id="xii.v-p30"></span>There is no doubt much truth in these
remarks; but another reason may be added: Those who know not themselves
what assurance is, cannot consistently teach the doctrine; and real,
genuine assurance, is an elevated state, to which man, attached to
merely natural principles, can never ascend. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc38011.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="xii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p34"></span> The particle εἴπερ is rendered the same as
here by <span id="xii.v-p34.1"></span>Ambrose and <span
id="xii.v-p34.2"></span>Beza, “<span id="xii.v-p34.3"></span>si modo —
if in case that;” but by <span id="xii.v-p34.4"></span>Chrysostom and
<span id="xii.v-p34.5"></span>Peter Martyr, in the sense of ἐπειδὰν,
“<span id="xii.v-p34.6"></span>quandoquidem — since,” “since we suffer
together, in order that we may also be together glorified.” The
*Vulgate* has, “<span id="xii.v-p34.7"></span>si tamen — if however.” It
may be suitably rendered “provided.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc38011.htm#fr_257.md) <span
id="xii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p37"></span> The particle γὰρ cannot be causal here. It
has its primary meaning *truly*, *indeed*, or *verily*, though it has
commonly its secondary meaning *for*, *because*, *therefore.* The
context is our guide; when there is nothing previously said, for which a
reason is given, then it has only an affirmative sense: or as some
think, it is to be viewed as a particle of transition, or as signifying
an addition, and may be rendered *besides*, *further*, *moreover*,
perhaps this latter meaning would be suitable here. In the preceded
verse the Apostle says, for the encouragement of Christians, that their
conformity to Christ in suffering would terminate in conformity to him
in glory: and then, as an additional consideration, he states his full
conviction, that present sufferings are as nothing to the glory which
they would have to enjoy. The connection can hardly be otherwise seen,
except indeed we consider something understood, as, “Not only so;” and
then it may be rendered *for*, as giving a reason for the qualifying
negative. An ellipsis of this kind is not without examples in Greek
authors, as well as in the New Testament. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc38011.htm#fr_258.md) <span
id="xii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p24"></span> The various opinions which have been given
on these verses are referred to at some length by *Stuart;* and he
enumerates not less than *eleven*, but considers only *two* as entitled
to special attention — the material creation, animate and inanimate, as
held here by Calvin, and the *rational creation*, including mankind,
with the exception of Christians, which he himself maintains. In favor
of the first he names <span id="xii.vi-p24.2"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="xii.vi-p24.3"></span>Theodoret, <span
id="xii.vi-p24.4"></span>Theophylact, <span
id="xii.vi-p24.5"></span>Œcumenius, <span
id="xii.vi-p24.6"></span>Jerome, <span id="xii.vi-p24.7"></span>Ambrose,
<span id="xii.vi-p24.8"></span>Luther, <span
id="xii.vi-p24.9"></span>Koppe, <span
id="xii.vi-p24.10"></span>Doddridge, (this is not correct,) <span
id="xii.vi-p24.11"></span>Flatt, and <span
id="xii.vi-p24.12"></span>Tholuck*;* to whom may be added <span
id="xii.vi-p24.13"></span>Scott, <span
id="xii.vi-p24.14"></span>Haldane, and <span
id="xii.vi-p24.15"></span>Chalmers, though <span
id="xii.vi-p24.16"></span>Scott, rather inconsistently with the words of
the text, if the material creation including animals be meant, regards
as a reverie their resurrection; see <span id="xii.vi-p24.17"></span>[Ro
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.vi-p24.17"></span>.

<span id="xii.vi-p25"></span>After a minute discussion of various
points, <span id="xii.vi-p25.1"></span>Stuart avows his preference to
the opinion, that the creature” means *mankind in general*, as being the
least liable to objections; and he mentions as its advocates <span
id="xii.vi-p25.2"></span>Lightfoot, <span
id="xii.vi-p25.3"></span>Locke, <span
id="xii.vi-p25.4"></span>Turrettin, <span
id="xii.vi-p25.5"></span>Semler, <span
id="xii.vi-p25.6"></span>Rosenmüller, and others. He might have added
<span id="xii.vi-p25.7"></span>Augustine. Reference is made for the
meaning of the word “creature” to <span id="xii.vi-p25.8"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.vi-p25.8"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p25.9"></span>[Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.vi-p25.9"></span>;
and <span id="xii.vi-p25.10"></span>[1Pe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md)<span id="xii.vi-p25.10"></span>.

<span id="xii.vi-p26"></span>It appears from <span
id="xii.vi-p26.1"></span>Wolfius, that the greater part of the Lutheran
and Reformed Divines have entertained the first opinion, that the
“creature” means the world, rational and animal; to which he himself
mainly accedes; and what he considers next to this, as the most tenable,
is the notion, that the “creature” means the faithful, that “the sons of
God” are the blessed in heaven, and that the Apostles and apostolic men
were those who enjoyed “the first-fruits of the Spirit.”

<span id="xii.vi-p27"></span>This last opinion relieves us from
difficulties which press on all other expositions; and it may be
extricated from objections which have been made to it; only the last
sentence needs not be introduced. The whole passage, from <span
id="xii.vi-p27.1"></span>[Ro 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018.md)<span
id="xii.vi-p27.1"></span> to the end of <span
id="xii.vi-p27.2"></span>[Ro 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span
id="xii.vi-p27.2"></span>, is in character with the usual style of the
Apostle. He finishes the first part with <span
id="xii.vi-p27.3"></span>[Ro 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022.md)<span
id="xii.vi-p27.3"></span>; and then in the second part he announces the
same thing in a different form, in more explicit terms, and with some
additions. The “waiting” in <span id="xii.vi-p27.4"></span>[Ro
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.vi-p27.4"></span>,
has a correspondent “waiting” in <span id="xii.vi-p27.5"></span>[Ro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.vi-p27.5"></span>;
and “the hope” in <span id="xii.vi-p27.6"></span>[Ro
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.vi-p27.6"></span>,
has another “hope” to correspond with it in <span
id="xii.vi-p27.7"></span>[Ro 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)<span
id="xii.vi-p27.7"></span>; and correspondent too is “the manifestation
of the sons of God” in <span id="xii.vi-p27.8"></span>[Ro
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.vi-p27.8"></span>,
and “the redemption of our body” in <span id="xii.vi-p27.9"></span>[Ro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.vi-p27.9"></span>.
To reiterate the same truth in a different way was to make a deeper
impression, and accordant with the Apostles manner of writing. He begins
the second time, after <span id="xii.vi-p27.10"></span>[Ro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022.md)<span id="xii.vi-p27.10"></span>,
in which is stated the condition of the *whole world;* and it is in
contrast with *that alone* that <span id="xii.vi-p27.11"></span>[Ro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.vi-p27.11"></span>
is to be viewed, which restates and explains what had been previously
said, so that “the creature” are the “we ourselves;” and the Apostle
proceeds with the subject to end of the 25th verse. Instances of the
same sort of arrangement are to be found in <span
id="xii.vi-p27.12"></span>[Ro
2:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017.md)<span
id="xii.vi-p27.12"></span>; <span id="xii.vi-p27.13"></span>[Ro
11:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033.md)<span
id="xii.vi-p27.13"></span>.

<span id="xii.vi-p28"></span><span id="xii.vi-p28.1"></span>[Ro
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.vi-p28.1"></span>
may be considered as an explanation only of the “hope,” at the end of
<span id="xii.vi-p28.2"></span>[Ro
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.vi-p28.2"></span>;
“For even it, the creature,” though subjected to vanity, “shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption;” which means the same as “this
body of death,” in <span id="xii.vi-p28.3"></span>[Ro
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md)<span id="xii.vi-p28.3"></span>.

<span id="xii.vi-p29"></span>The word κτίσις, means, 1. creation, the
world, <span id="xii.vi-p29.1"></span>[Mr
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p29.2"></span>[Mr
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p29.3"></span>[Ro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p29.4"></span>[2Pe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.4"></span>: —
2, what is created — creature, what is formed — a building, what is
instituted — an ordinance, <span id="xii.vi-p29.5"></span>[Rom.
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025.md), [Rom.
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.5"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p29.6"></span>[Heb
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.6"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p29.7"></span>[Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.7"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p29.8"></span>[1Pe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.8"></span>: —
3, mankind, the world of men, <span id="xii.vi-p29.9"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.9"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p29.10"></span>[Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.10"></span>:
— 4, the renewed man, or renewed nature — Christians, <span
id="xii.vi-p29.11"></span>[2Co
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.11"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p29.12"></span>[Ga
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.12"></span>.
There are only two other places where it is found, and is rendered in
our version “creation,” <span id="xii.vi-p29.13"></span>[Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.13"></span>,
and <span id="xii.vi-p29.14"></span>[Re
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014.md)<span id="xii.vi-p29.14"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p30"></span>It is objected to its application here to
Christians, because where it has this meaning, it is preceded by καινὴ,
new. The same objection stands against applying it to mankind in
general, for in these instances push precedes it. Its meaning must be
gathered from the whole passage, and we must not stop at the end of
verse 23, but include the two following verses. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc38011.htm#fr_259.md) <span
id="xii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p12"></span> The impropriety, which <span
id="xii.vii-p12.1"></span>Calvin notices, is according to the usual
phraseology of Scripture. What commences in this world and is completed
the next is called by the same name. The word salvation is used in this
way as designating its commencement and its progress as well as its
completion. Besides, adoption here has a particular regard to the
*body*, as it is explained the words which follow — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc38011.htm#fr_260.md) <span
id="xii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p15"></span> When we are said to be saved by hope, the
meaning is that we are not fully or perfectly saved now, and that this
is what we hope for. “Eternal salvation,” says <span
id="xii.vii-p15.1"></span>Grotius, “we have not yet, but we hope for
it.” There is present salvation, but that which is perfect is future.
The Scripture speaks of salvation now, see <span
id="xii.vii-p15.2"></span>Ephesians 2:8; Titus 3:4, 5; and of salvation
as future, see <span id="xii.vii-p15.3"></span>[Mark
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#013.md), [John
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.vii-p15.3"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc38011.htm#fr_261.md) <span
id="xii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p19"></span> “Patience,” says <span
id="xii.vii-p19.1"></span>Pareus, “is needful for three reasons, — the
good expected is absent, — there is delay, — and many difficulties
intervene.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc38011.htm#fr_262.md) <span
id="xii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p3"></span> The connection here is not very evident
Ωσαύτως — “<span id="xii.viii-p3.1"></span>similiter — in like manner,”
by <span id="xii.viii-p3.2"></span>Calvin*;* “<span
id="xii.viii-p3.3"></span>itidem — likewise,” by <span
id="xii.viii-p3.4"></span>Pareus and <span
id="xii.viii-p3.5"></span>Beza*;* “<span
id="xii.viii-p3.6"></span>præterea — besides,” by <span
id="xii.viii-p3.7"></span>Grotius*;* “moreover,” by <span
id="xii.viii-p3.8"></span>Doddridge The word usually means, in the same,
or, the like manner: but the two last seem to render it suitably to this
place; for what follows is mentioned in addition to what had been stated
respecting hope and patience. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc38011.htm#fr_263.md) <span
id="xii.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p9"></span> <span id="xii.viii-p9.1"></span>Pareus
says, that this verb is taken metaphorically from assistance afforded to
infants not able to support themselves, or to the sick, tottering and
hardly able to walk.

<span id="xii.viii-p10"></span>“<span
id="xii.viii-p10.1"></span>Coopitulatur“ is <span
id="xii.viii-p10.2"></span>Calvin*’* Latin — co-assist,” <span
id="xii.viii-p10.3"></span>Beza*’s* “<span
id="xii.viii-p10.4"></span>una sublevat — lifts up together,” that is,
together with those who labor under infirmities. The *Vulgate* has
“<span id="xii.viii-p10.5"></span>adjuvat — helps,” like our version.
<span id="xii.viii-p10.6"></span>Schleusner says, that it means to
succor those whose strength is unequal to carry their burden alone. It
is found in one other place, <span id="xii.viii-p10.7"></span>[Lu
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040.md)<span
id="xii.viii-p10.7"></span>. It is given by the *Septuagint* in <span
id="xii.viii-p10.8"></span>[Ps
89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021.md)<span
id="xii.viii-p10.8"></span>, for <span id="xii.viii-p10.9"></span>אמף —
“to strengthen, to invigorate,” and in <span
id="xii.viii-p10.10"></span>[Ex
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#022.md)<span
id="xii.viii-p10.10"></span>, for <span id="xii.viii-p10.11"></span>נשא
אתך — “to bear with,” that is, “a burden with thee,” — the very idea
that it seems to have here — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc38011.htm#fr_264.md) <span
id="xii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p13"></span> The opinions of <span
id="xii.viii-p13.1"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="xii.viii-p13.2"></span>Ambrose, and <span
id="xii.viii-p13.3"></span>Origen, are given by <span
id="xii.viii-p13.4"></span>Pareus*;* and they are all different, and not
much to the purpose. The view which <span
id="xii.viii-p13.5"></span>Augustine gives is materially what is stated
here. He gives a causative sense to the verb in the next clause, “<span
id="xii.viii-p13.6"></span>Interpellare nos facit — he causes us to
ask.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc38011.htm#fr_265.md) <span
id="xii.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xii.viii-p15.1"></span>Intercedit — ὑπερεντυγχάνει — abundantly
intercedes,” for so ὑπερ, prefixed to verbs, is commonly rendered. This
is the proper action of an advocate, a name given to the Spirit by our
Savior, ἄλλον παράκλητον — “another advocate,” not “comforter,” as in
our version, and Christ is called by the same name in <span
id="xii.viii-p15.2"></span>[1Jo
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.viii-p15.2"></span>,
and the same work, “interceding,” is ascribed to him, <span
id="xii.viii-p15.3"></span>[Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025.md)<span id="xii.viii-p15.3"></span>.
But we learn in <span id="xii.viii-p15.4"></span>[Joh
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016.md)<span
id="xii.viii-p15.4"></span>, that the Spirit is an advocate with us —
“that he may *abide with you* for ever;” and in <span
id="xii.viii-p15.5"></span>[1Jo
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.viii-p15.5"></span>,
that Christ is an advocate in heaven — “with the Father.” The same name
and a similar kind of work are ascribed to both. Some, as <span
id="xii.viii-p15.6"></span>Doddridge, to avoid the blending the offices
of the two, have rendered the verb here by a different term, but not
wisely. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc38011.htm#fr_266.md) <span
id="xii.viii-p15.7"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p16"></span> Or, “the comprehension of our mind —
<span id="xii.viii-p16.1"></span>ingenii nostri captum.” <span
id="xii.viii-p16.2"></span>Schleusner says, that the word ἀλάητος, has
been improperly rendered ineffable or unutterable, and that the word to
express such an idea is ἀνεκλάλητος, (<span
id="xii.viii-p16.3"></span>[1Pe
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008)<span id="xii.viii-p16.3"></span>,.md)
and that from the analogy of the Greek language it must mean, “what is
not uttered or spoken by the mouth;” and he gives ἀκίνητον, “what is not
moved,” as an instance <span id="xii.viii-p16.4"></span>Bos and <span
id="xii.viii-p16.5"></span>Grotius give the same meaning, “<span
id="xii.viii-p16.6"></span>sine voce — without voice;” and the latter
says, that this was expressly said, because the Jews entertained a
notion that there could be no prayer except it was expressed by the
lips. It is however considered by most to have the meaning given here,
“inutterable,” or ineffable or inexpressible. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc38011.htm#fr_267.md) <span
id="xii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p14"></span> <span id="xii.ix-p14.1"></span>Hammond has
a long note on the expression, κατὰ πρόθεσιν and quotes <span
id="xii.ix-p14.2"></span>Cyril of Jerusalem, <span
id="xii.ix-p14.3"></span>Clemens of Alexandria, and <span
id="xii.ix-p14.4"></span>Theophylact, as rendering the words, “according
to *their* purpose,” that is, those who love God, — a construction of
itself strange, and wholly alien to the whole tenor of the passage, and
to the use of the word in most other instances. Paul has never used the
word, except in one instance, (<span id="xii.ix-p14.5"></span>[2Ti
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010)<span id="xii.ix-p14.5"></span>,.md)
but with reference to God’s purpose or decree, — see <span
id="xii.ix-p14.6"></span>[Ro 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011.md)<span
id="xii.ix-p14.6"></span>; <span id="xii.ix-p14.7"></span>[Eph
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.ix-p14.7"></span>;
<span id="xii.ix-p14.8"></span>[Eph
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.ix-p14.8"></span>;
<span id="xii.ix-p14.9"></span>[2Ti
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.ix-p14.9"></span>. It
seems that <span id="xii.ix-p14.10"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="xii.ix-p14.11"></span>Origen, <span
id="xii.ix-p14.12"></span>Theodoret, and other Fathers, have given the
same singularly strange explanation. But in opposition to these, <span
id="xii.ix-p14.13"></span>Poole mentions <span
id="xii.ix-p14.14"></span>Ambrose, <span
id="xii.ix-p14.15"></span>Augustine, and even <span
id="xii.ix-p14.16"></span>Jerome, as regarding “the purpose” here as
that of God: in which opinion almost all modern Divines agree.

<span id="xii.ix-p15"></span><span id="xii.ix-p15.1"></span>Grotius very
justly observes, that κλητοὶ, the called, according to the language of
Paul, mean those who obey the call, (<span id="xii.ix-p15.2"></span>*qui
vocanti obediunt*) and refers to <span id="xii.ix-p15.3"></span>[Ro
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.ix-p15.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.ix-p15.4"></span>[1Co
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md)<span id="xii.ix-p15.4"></span>;
<span id="xii.ix-p15.5"></span>[Re
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014.md)<span id="xii.ix-p15.5"></span>.
And <span id="xii.ix-p15.6"></span>Stuart says that the word has this
meaning throughout the New Testament, except in two instances, <span
id="xii.ix-p15.7"></span>[Mt
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016.md)<span id="xii.ix-p15.7"></span>.
and <span id="xii.ix-p15.8"></span>[Mt
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014.md)<span id="xii.ix-p15.8"></span>,
where it means, invited. He therefore considers it as equivalent to
ἔκλεκτοι, chosen, elected, or true Christians. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc38011.htm#fr_268.md) <span
id="xii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p19"></span> Much controversy has been about the
meaning of the verb προέγνω, in this place. Many of the Fathers, such as
<span id="xii.ix-p19.1"></span>Jerome, <span
id="xii.ix-p19.2"></span>Chrysostom, and <span
id="xii.ix-p19.3"></span>Theodoret, regarded it in the sense of simple
prescience, as having reference to those who would believe and obey the
gospel. The verb is found only in this place, and in the following
passages, <span id="xii.ix-p19.4"></span>[Ro
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002.md)<span id="xii.ix-p19.4"></span>;
<span id="xii.ix-p19.5"></span>[Ac
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.ix-p19.5"></span>;
<span id="xii.ix-p19.6"></span>[1Pe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.ix-p19.6"></span>;
<span id="xii.ix-p19.7"></span>[2Pe
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#017.md)<span id="xii.ix-p19.7"></span>.
In the second, and in the last passage, it signifies merely a previous
knowledge or acquaintance, and refers to men. In <span
id="xii.ix-p19.8"></span>[1Pe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.ix-p19.8"></span>,
it is applied to Christ as having been “foreordained,” according to our
version, “before the foundation of the world.” In this Epistle, <span
id="xii.ix-p19.9"></span>[Ro 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002.md)<span
id="xii.ix-p19.9"></span>, it refers to God, — “God hath not cast away
his people whom he foreknew;” and according to the context, it means the
same as elected; for the Apostle speaks of what God did “according to
the election of grace,” and not according to foreseen faith.

<span id="xii.ix-p20"></span>The noun derived from it is found in two
places, <span id="xii.ix-p20.1"></span>[Ac
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.ix-p20.1"></span>,
and <span id="xii.ix-p20.2"></span>[1Pe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002.md)<span id="xii.ix-p20.2"></span>. In
the first it evidently means decree, foreordination, and in the second,
the same; where it is said, that those addressed by the Apostle were
elected, “according to the foreknowledge of God, κατὰ πρόγνωσιν Θεοῦ,
through the sanctification of the Spirit, *unto* obedience;” they were
not then elected, according to God’s foreknowledge or foreordination,
*because* of their obedience. This entirely subverts the gloss put on
the verb in this passage.

<span id="xii.ix-p21"></span>The usual meaning given to the verb here is
fore-approved, or chosen. <span id="xii.ix-p21.1"></span>Grotius, <span
id="xii.ix-p21.2"></span>Turrettin, and others, consider that γινώσκω
has the same meaning with the verb <span id="xii.ix-p21.3"></span>ידע,
in Hebrew, which is sometimes that of approving or favoring, or
regarding with love and approbation. So the compound verb may be
rendered here, “whom he fore-approved, or foreknew,” as the objects of
his choice: and this idea is what alone comports with the rest of the
passage.

<span id="xii.ix-p22"></span><span id="xii.ix-p22.1"></span>Stuart
prefers another meaning, and that which it seems to have in <span
id="xii.ix-p22.2"></span>[1Pe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.ix-p22.2"></span>,
“foreordained.” He says that γινώσκω means sometimes to will, to
determine, to ordain, to decree, and brings examples from <span
id="xii.ix-p22.3"></span>Josephus, <span
id="xii.ix-p22.4"></span>Plutarch, and <span
id="xii.ix-p22.5"></span>Polybius. Then the compound verb would be here,
“whom he foreordained,” or foredetermined. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc38011.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="xii.ix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p31"></span> <span id="xii.ix-p31.1"></span>Turrettin
gives somewhat a different reason: “Paul speaks of these things as past,
because they are as already done in God’s decree, and in order to show
the certainty of their accomplishment.”

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc38011.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="xii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p4"></span> “<span id="xii.x-p4.1"></span>Ad hæc,” —
πρὸς ταῦτα <span id="xii.x-p4.2"></span>Wolfius says, that it should be
“<span id="xii.x-p4.3"></span>de his — of these things;” and <span
id="xii.x-p4.4"></span>[Heb 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013.md)<span
id="xii.x-p4.4"></span>, is quoted as an instance, “πρὸς ὅν ἡμῖν ὁ λόγος
— of whom we speak.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc38011.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="xii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p9"></span> “<span id="xii.x-p9.1"></span>Quis
intentabit crimina — who shall chapter crimes τίς ἐγκαλέσει κατὰ
ἐκλεκτῶν Θεοῦ — who shall implead, or bring a charge against the elect
of God.?” See <span id="xii.x-p9.2"></span>[Ac
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#038.md)<span id="xii.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p10"></span>Many, such as <span
id="xii.x-p10.1"></span>Augustine, <span
id="xii.x-p10.2"></span>Grotius, <span id="xii.x-p10.3"></span>Locke,
<span id="xii.x-p10.4"></span>Doddridge, and <span
id="xii.x-p10.5"></span>Griesbach, have made the next clause also a
question; and also the clauses in the next verse. There is not much
difference in the sense, but the passage will thus appear more striking,
—

<span id="xii.x-p11"></span>**33.** Who will lay a charge against God’s
elect? God the justifier?

<span id="xii.x-p12"></span>**34.** Who is he who condemns? Christ who
died, or rather who rose again, who is also at God’s right hand, and who
intercedes for us?

<span id="xii.x-p13"></span>What favors this construction is, that the
Apostle proceeds in the same strain. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc38011.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="xii.x-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p25"></span> <span id="xii.x-p25.1"></span>Calvin
renders χαρίσεται by “<span id="xii.x-p25.2"></span>donaret;” <span
id="xii.x-p25.3"></span>Capellus more fully, “<span
id="xii.x-p25.4"></span>gratis donabit — will gratuitously give.” Christ
himself, and everything that comes with or through him, is a favor
freely bestowed, and not what we merit. This shuts out, as <span
id="xii.x-p25.5"></span>Pareus observes, everything as meritorious on
the part of man. All is grace. The “all things” include every thing
necessary for salvation — every grace now and eternal glory hereafter. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc38011.htm#fr_273.md) <span
id="xii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p4"></span> “<span id="xii.xi-p4.1"></span>Dirimet —
break us off,” divide or part us; χωρίσει — set apart, sever, separate:
τίς, “who,” may be rendered, “what,” as <span id="xii.xi-p4.2"></span>מי
in Hebrew. It is not put, it may be, in the neuter gender, because of
the gender of the nouns which follow. As the Hebrews use often the
future for the potential mood, so the case may be here — “What can
separate us from the love of Christ? tribulation, or distress?” etc. It
ought also to be added, that the verb “separate,” is used to designate
divorce or separation between man and his wife. See <span
id="xii.xi-p4.3"></span>[Matt. 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006.md),
[1 Cor. 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010.md), [1 Cor.
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#000.md), [1 Cor.
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000.md)<span id="xii.xi-p4.3"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc38011.htm#fr_274.md) <span
id="xii.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p12"></span> According to <span
id="xii.xi-p12.1"></span>Poole, several of the Fathers entertained this
opinion, such as <span id="xii.xi-p12.2"></span>Origen, <span
id="xii.xi-p12.3"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="xii.xi-p12.4"></span>Theodoret, and <span
id="xii.xi-p12.5"></span>Ambrose*:* but even <span
id="xii.xi-p12.6"></span>Hammond and <span
id="xii.xi-p12.7"></span>Grotius, great admirers of the Fathers, regard
this love as that of God or of Christ to us. <span
id="xii.xi-p12.8"></span>Wolfius says, that all the Lutheran divines
give this exposition. It is indeed impossible rightly to view the whole
passage without seeing that this explanation is the true one. In verse
32, it is incontestably evident that God’s love to us is what is spoken
of: then in verse 37, it is expressly said, “through him who loved us;”
and the last verse seems sufficient to remove every possible doubt. The
difficulty of <span id="xii.xi-p12.9"></span>Barnes, in thinking it “not
conceivable how afflictions should have any tendency to alienate
Christ’s love *from us*,” arises from a misconception: for when we speak
of not being separated from the love of Christ, the obvious meaning is,
that nothing can separate us from participating in the effects of his
love, that He, on account of his love, will sustain us under the
greatest trials, and make “us more than conquerors.” The substance of
what is here said, is contained in the last clause of <span
id="xii.xi-p12.10"></span>[Ro
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032.md)<span id="xii.xi-p12.10"></span>,
— “How shall he not with him also freely give us all things?” It was the
assurance of this truth that the Apostle obviously intended to convey. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc38011.htm#fr_275.md) <span
id="xii.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p19"></span> “<span
id="xii.xi-p19.1"></span>Supervincimus“ — ὑπερνικῶμεν; <span
id="xii.xi-p19.2"></span>Beza*’s* version is, <span
id="xii.xi-p19.3"></span>amplius quam victores sumus;” <span
id="xii.xi-p19.4"></span>Macknight*’s*, “we do more than overcome;”
<span id="xii.xi-p19.5"></span>Schleusner gives this as one of his
explanations, “<span id="xii.xi-p19.6"></span>plenissime vincimus — we
most fully overcome.” Paul commonly uses ὑπὲρ in an enhansive sense; so
the version may be, “we abundantly overcome,” as though he said, “We
have strength given us which far exceeds the power of evils.” Some say
that the faithful abundantly overcome, because they sustain no real
loss, but like silver in the furnace, they lose only their dross; and
not only so, but they also carry, as it were from the field of battle,
chapter spoils — the fruits of holiness and righteousness. <span
id="xii.xi-p19.7"></span>[Heb. 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.xi-p19.7"></span>. It
is further said, that the victory will be this, — that Christ, who has
loved them, will raise them from death and adorn them with that glory,
with which all the evils of this life are not worthy to be compared.

<span id="xii.xi-p20"></span><span id="xii.xi-p20.1"></span>Beza says,
“Not only we are not broken down by so many evils nor despond, but we
even glory in the cross.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc38011.htm#fr_276.md) <span
id="xii.xi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p22"></span> “<span id="xii.xi-p22.1"></span>Per eum
qui dilexit nos — διὰ του ἀγαπήσαντος ἡμᾶς — through him who has loved
us.” The aorist participle, says <span id="xii.xi-p22.2"></span>Wolfius,
extends to every time, “who has loved and loves and will love us.” From
the fact that believers are overcome by no calamities, he draws the
inference, that God’s love is constant and most effectual, so that he is
present with the distressed to give them courage, to strengthen their
patience, and to moderate their calamities. See <span
id="xii.xi-p22.3"></span>[1Pe
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.xi-p22.3"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc38011.htm#fr_277.md) <span
id="xii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p4"></span> Neither *death* threatened by persecutors,
nor *life* promised on recantation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc38011.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="xii.xii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p9"></span> *Some of the Fathers,* <span
id="xii.xii-p9.1"></span>Jerome*,* <span
id="xii.xii-p9.2"></span>Chrysostom, etc., have taken the same view,
regarding the Apostle as speaking of good angels, as it were,
hypothetically, as in <span id="xii.xii-p9.3"></span>[Ga
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.xii-p9.3"></span>.
But <span id="xii.xii-p9.4"></span>Grotius, and many others, consider
*evil* angels to be meant. Probably, angels, without any regard to what
they are, are intended. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc38011.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="xii.xii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p10"></span> <span id="xii.xii-p10.1"></span>Grotius
considers the words as being the abstract for the concrete, Princes and
Potentates; being called ἀρχαὶ, as some think, as being the first, the
chief in authority, and δυνάμεις, as having power. “By these words,”
says <span id="xii.xii-p10.2"></span>Beza, “Paul is wont to designate
the character of spirits, — of the good in <span
id="xii.xii-p10.3"></span>[Eph
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.xii-p10.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.xii-p10.4"></span>[Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md)<span id="xii.xii-p10.4"></span>,
— and of the bad in <span id="xii.xii-p10.5"></span>[Eph.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md), [Col.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.xii-p10.5"></span>.”
Hence the probability is, that the words designate different ranks among
angelic powers, without any reference to their character, whether good
or evil. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc38011.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="xii.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p12"></span> “Neither the evils we now feel, nor those
which may await us,” — <span id="xii.xii-p12.1"></span>Grotius*;*
rather, “Neither things which now exist, nor things which shall be.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc38011.htm#fr_281.md) <span
id="xii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p14"></span> The words, “neither height nor depth,”
are left unnoticed ὕψωμα. The first, says <span
id="xii.xii-p14.1"></span>Mede, means prosperity, and the latter,
adversity. <span id="xii.xii-p14.2"></span>Grotius regards what is meant
as the *height* of honor, and the *depth* of disgrace. “Neither heaven
nor hell,” say others; “neither heaven nor earth,” according to <span
id="xii.xii-p14.3"></span>Schleusner. “Things in heaven and things on
earth,” is the explanation of <span id="xii.xii-p14.4"></span>Chrysostom
The first, ὕψωμα, is only found here and in <span
id="xii.xii-p14.5"></span>[2Co
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.xii-p14.5"></span>.
Like <span id="xii.xii-p14.6"></span>מרום in Hebrew, it means what is
high and elevated, and may, like that, sometimes signify heaven: and
βάθος is not earth, but what is deeper; it means a deep soil, <span
id="xii.xii-p14.7"></span>[Mt
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.xii-p14.7"></span>,
— the deep sea, <span id="xii.xii-p14.8"></span>[Lu
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.xii-p14.8"></span>, —
and in the plural, things deep and inscrutable, <span
id="xii.xii-p14.9"></span>[1Co
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.xii-p14.9"></span>;
it may therefore be very properly taken here for hell.

<span id="xii.xii-p15"></span>That the words are to be thus taken seems
probable from the gradation evident in the passage. In the first
catalogue in <span id="xii.xii-p15.1"></span>[Ro
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035.md)<span id="xii.xii-p15.1"></span>,
he mentions the evils arising from this world, its trials and its
persecutions, and those ending in death. In the second, after repeating
the utmost length to which worldly persecutors can go, “death or life,”
he ascends the invisible world, and mentions angels, then their combined
powers, then the powers which do and may exist, then both heaven and
hell, and, that he might include everything, except the uncreated God
himself, he finishes with the words, “nor any created thing.”

<span id="xii.xii-p16"></span>The whole passage is sublime in an
extraordinary degree. The contrast is the grandest that can be
conceived. Here is the Christian, all weakness in himself, despised and
trampled under foot by the world, triumphing over all existing, and all
possible, and even impossible evils and opposition, having only this as
his stay and support — that the God who has loved him, will never cease
to love, keep, and defend him; yea, were everything created, everything
except God himself, leagued against him and attempting his ruin. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc38012.md)
