[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38018)  [Next](cc38020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
16:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** I commend unto you Phoebe our sister,
which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea:

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1.** Commendo antera vobis Phoeben sororem
nostram, quae est ministra ecclesiae Cenchreensis;

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2.** That ye receive her in the Lord, as
becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath
need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also.

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ut eam suscipiatis in Domino, ut dignum
est sanctis, et adsitis ei in quocunque vobis eguerit negotio; etenim
ipsa cum multis affuit, tum etiam mihi ipsi.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**3.** Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers
in Christ Jesus:

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**3.** Salutate Priscam et Acylam, cooperarios
meos in Christo Iesu;

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**4.** Who have for my life laid down their
own necks: unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the churches
of the Gentiles.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**4.** Qui pro anima mea suam ipsorum cervicem
posuerunt, quibus non ego solus gratias ago, sed etiam omnes ecclesiae
Gentium;

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**5.** Likewise *greet* the church that is in
their house. Salute my wellbeloved Epaenetus, who is the firstfruits of
Achaia unto Christ.

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et domesticam eorum ecclesiam.
Salutate Epaenetum mihi dilectum qui est primitiae Achaiae in Domino.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**6.** Greet Mary, who bestowed much labour
on us.

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**6.** Salutate Mariam, quae multum laboravit
erga vos.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**7.** Salute Andronicus and Junia, my
kinsmen, and my fellowprisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who
also were in Christ before me.

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>**7.** Salutate Andronicum et Juniam,
cognatos meos et cocaptivos meos, qui sunt insignes inter Apostolos, qui
etiam ante me fuerunt in Christo.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**8.** Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord.

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**8.** Salutate Ampliam, dilectum meum in
Domino.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**9.** Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ,
and Stachys my beloved.

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**9.** Salutate Urbanurn, adjutorem nostrum
in Christo et Stachyn dilectum meum.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>**10.** Salute Apelles approved in Christ.
Salute them which are of Aristobulus’ *household*

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**10.** Salutate Apellen, probatum in
Christo. Salutate eos qui sunt ex Aristobuli familiaribns.

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span>**11.** Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet
them that be of the *household* of Narcissus, which are in the Lord.

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>**11.** Salutate Herodionem, cognatum meum.
Salutate eos qui sunt ex Narcissi familiaribus, hos qui sunt in Domino.

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>**12.** Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who
labour in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which laboured much in
the Lord.

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span>**12.** Salutate Tryphsenam et Tryphosam,
quae laborant in Domino. Salutate Persidem dilectam, quae multum
laboravit in Domino.

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>**13.** Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and
his mother and mine.

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span>**13.** Salutate Rufum electum in Domino et
matrem illius ac meam.

<span id="xx.i-p28"></span>**14.** Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas,
Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.

<span id="xx.i-p29"></span>**14.** Salutate Asynchritum, Phlegontem,
Hermam, Patrobam, Mercurium, et qui cum his sunt fratres.

<span id="xx.i-p30"></span>**15.** Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus,
and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are with them.

<span id="xx.i-p31"></span>**15.** Salutate Philologum et Iuluiam,
Nereum et sororem ejus, et Olympam, et qui cum his sunt omnes sanctos.

<span id="xx.i-p32"></span>**16.** Salute one another with an holy kiss.
The churches of Christ salute you.

<span id="xx.i-p33"></span>**16.** Salutate vos invicem in osculo
sancto. Salutant vos ecelesiae Christi.

<span id="xx.i-p34"></span><span id="xx.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p35"></span>**1.** *I commend to you, etc.* The greater
part of this chapter is taken up with salutations; and as they contain
no difficulties, it would be useless to dwell long on them. I shall only
touch on those things which require some light by an explanation.

<span id="xx.i-p36"></span>He first commends to them Phoebe, to whom he
gave this Epistle to be brought to them; and, in the first place, he
commends her on account of her office, for she performed a most
honorable and a most holy function in the Church; and then he adduces
another reason why they ought to receive her and to show her every
kindness, for she had always been a helper to all the godly. As then she
was an assistant  <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) of the
Cenchrean Church, he bids that on that account she should be received in
the Lord; and by adding *as it is meet for saints,* he intimates that it
would be unbecoming the servants of Christ not to show her honor and
kindness. And since it behooves us to embrace in love all the members of
Christ, we ought surely to regard and especially to love and honor those
who perform a public office in the Church. And besides, as she had
always been full of kindness to all, so he bids that help and assistance
should now be given to her in all her concerns; for it is what courtesy
requires, that he who is naturally disposed to kindness should not be
forsaken when in need of aid, and to incline their minds the more, he
numbers himself among those whom she had assisted.

<span id="xx.i-p38"></span>But this service, of which he speaks as to
what it was, he teaches us in another place, in <span
id="xx.i-p38.1"></span>[1Ti 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009)<span
id="xx.i-p38.1"></span>, for as the poor were supported from the public
treasury of the Church, so they were taken care of by those in public
offices, and for this charge widows were chosen, who being free from
domestic concerns, and cumbered by no children, wished to consecrate
themselves wholly to God by religious duties, they were therefore
received into this office as those who had wholly given up themselves,
and became bound to their charge in a manner like him, who having hired
out his own labors, ceases to be free and to be his own master. Hence
the Apostle accuses them of having violated their faith, who renounced
the office which they had once undertaken, and as it behooved them to
live in widowhood, he forbade them to be chosen under sixty years of
age, (<span id="xx.i-p38.2"></span>[1 Tim.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011)<span id="xx.i-p38.2"></span>,)
because he foresaw that under that age the vow of perpetual celibacy was
dangerous, yea, liable to prove ruinous. This most sacred function, and
very useful to the Church, when the state of things had become worse,
degenerated into the idle order of Nuns; which, though corrupt at its
beginning, and contrary to the word of God, has yet so fallen away from
what it was at its commencement, that there is no difference between
some of the sanctuaries of chastity and a common brothel.

<span id="xx.i-p39"></span><span id="xx.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p40"></span>**3.** *Salute Prisca*  <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) *and Aquila* The testimonies which he
brings here in favor of some individuals, were partly intended for this
end, that by honoring those who were faithful and worthy, faithfulness
itself might be honored, and that they who could and would do more good
than others, might have authority; and partly that they themselves might
study to act in a manner corresponding to their past life, and not fail
in their religious course, nor ever grow languid in their pious ardor.

<span id="xx.i-p42"></span>It is a singular honor which he ascribes here
to Prisca and Aquila, especially with regard to a woman. The modesty of
the holy man does on this account more clearly shine forth; for he
disdained not to have a woman as his associate in the work of the Lord;
nor was he ashamed to confess this. She was the wife of Aquila, and
*Luke* calls her Priscilla. (<span id="xx.i-p42.1"></span>[Ac
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002)<span id="xx.i-p42.1"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470)

<span id="xx.i-p44"></span><span id="xx.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p45"></span>**4.** *To whom not only I, etc.* As Prisca
and Aquila had not spared their life for preserving the life of Paul, he
testifies that he himself was individually thankful to them: he however
adds, that thanks were given them by all the Churches of Christ; and he
added this that he might, by such an example, influence the Romans. And
deservedly dear and precious to all the Gentiles was the life of such a
man, as it was an incomparable treasure: it was therefore no wonder that
all the Churches of the Gentiles thought themselves to be under
obligations to his preservers.  <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471)

<span id="xx.i-p47"></span>What he adds respecting the Church in their
house is worthy of being observed; for he could not have more splendidly
adorned their household than by giving it the title of a Church. The
word *congregation,* which <span id="xx.i-p47.1"></span>Erasmus has
adopted, I do not approve; for it is plainly evident, that Paul, by way
of honor, had used the sacred name of Church.  <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472)

<span id="xx.i-p49"></span><span id="xx.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p50"></span>**5.** *Who is the first-fruit, etc.* This is
an allusion to the rites of the law; for as men are sanctified to God by
faith, they who first offer themselves are fitly called the first-fruit.
Whosoever then is called first in time to the faith, Paul allows him the
prerogative of honor: yet he retains this eminence only when the end
corresponds with the beginning. And doubtless it is no common honor when
God chooses some for first-fruits: and there is in addition a greater
and an ampler trial of faith, through a longer space of time, provided
they who have first begun are not wearied in their course.  <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473)

<span id="xx.i-p52"></span><span id="xx.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p53"></span>**6.** He again testifies his gratitude, in
recording the kindness of Mary to him. Nor is there any doubt but that
he commemorates these praises, in order to recommend those whom he
praised to the Romans.  <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474)

<span id="xx.i-p55"></span><span id="xx.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p56"></span>**7.** *Salute Andronicus* Though Paul is not
wont to make much of kindred, and of other things belonging to the
flesh, yet as the relationship which Junia and Andronicus bore to him,
might avail somewhat to make them more fully known, he neglected not
this commendation. There is more weight in the second eulogy, when he
calls them his *fellow-prisoners;*  <span
id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) for among the honors belonging to the
warfare of Christ, bonds are not to be counted the least. In the third
place, he calls them *Apostles:* he uses not this word in its proper and
common meaning, but extends it wider, even to all those who not only
teach in one Church, but also spend their labor in promulgating the
gospel everywhere. He then, in a general way, calls those in this place
Apostles, who planted Churches by carrying here and there the doctrine
of salvation; for elsewhere he confines this title to that first order
which Christ at the beginning established, when he appointed the twelve
disciples. It would have been otherwise strange, that this dignity
should be only ascribed to them, and to a few others. But as they had
embraced the gospel by faith before Paul, he hesitates not to set them
on this account before himself.  <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476)

<span id="xx.i-p59"></span><span id="xx.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p60"></span>**11.** *Who are of the family of Narcissus*
It would have been unbecoming to have passed by Peter in so long a
catalogue, if he was then at Rome: yet he must have been there, if we
believe the Romanists. But since in doubtful things nothing is better
than to follow probable conjecture, no one, who judges impartially, will
be persuaded that what they affirm is true; for he could not surely have
been omitted by Paul.

<span id="xx.i-p61"></span>It is further to be noticed, that we hear
nothing here of splendid and magnificent titles, by which we might
conclude that men high in rank were Christians; for all those whom Paul
mentions were the obscure and the ignoble at Rome. *Narcissus,* whom he
here names, was, I think, the freeman of Claudius, a man notorious for
many crimes and vices. The more wonderful was the goodness of God, which
penetrated into that impure house, abounding in all kinds of wickedness;
not that Narcissus himself had been converted to Christ, but it was a
great thing that a house, which was like hell, should be visited by the
grace of Christ. And as they, who lived under a foul pander, the most
voracious robber, and the most corrupt of men, worshipped Christ in
purity, there is no reason that servants should wait for their masters,
but every one ought to follow Christ for himself. Yea, the exception
added by Paul shows that the family was divided, so that the faithful
were only a few.

<span id="xx.i-p62"></span><span id="xx.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p63"></span>**16.** *Salute one another with a holy kiss*
It is clear from many parts of Scripture, that a kiss was a usual and
common symbol of friendship among the Jews; it was perhaps less used by
the Romans, though not unfrequent, only it was not lawful to kiss women,
except those only who were relatives. It became however a custom among
the ancients for Christians to kiss one another before partaking of the
Supper, to testify by that sign their friendship; and then they bestowed
their alms, that they might in reality and by the effect confirm what
they had represented by the kiss: all this appears evident from one of
the homilies of <span id="xx.i-p63.1"></span>Chrysostom  <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) Hence has arisen that practice among
the Papists at this day, of kissing the paten, and of bestowing an
offering: the former of which is nothing but superstition without any
benefit, the other serves no other purpose but to satisfy the
avariciousness of the priests, if indeed it can be satisfied.

<span id="xx.i-p65"></span>Paul however seems not here positively to
have enjoined a ceremony, but only exhorts them to cherish brotherly
love; and he distinguishes it from the profane friendships of the world,
which, for the most part, are either disguised or attained by vices, or
retained by wicked arts, and never tend to any good. By sending
salutations from the Churches,  <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478)
he was endeavoring, as much as he could, to bind all the members of
Christ by the mutual bond of love.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
16:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**17.** Now I beseech you, brethren, mark
them which cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine which
ye have learned; and avoid them.

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span>**17.** Obsecro autem vos fratres, ut
observetis eos qui dissidia et offensiones contra doctrinam, quam vos
didicistis, excitant; et ut declinetis ab illis.

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span>**18.** For they that are such serve not our
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**18.** Qui enim tales sunt, Christo Domino
non serviunt, sed suo ventri; ac per blandiloquentiam et assentationem
decipiunt corda simplicium.

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>**19.** For your obedience is come abroad
unto all *men*. I am glad therefore on your behalf: but yet I would have
you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil.

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>**19.** Vestra quidem obedientia ad omnes
permanavit: gaudeo igitur de vobis; sed volo vos sapientes esse ad
bonum, simplices verb ad malum.

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span>**20.** And the God of peace shall bruise
Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ *be*
with you. Amen.

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>**20.** Deus autem pacis conteret brevi
Satanam sub pedibus vestris. Gratia Domini nostri Iesu Christi sit
vobiscum. Amen.

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span><span id="xx.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span>**17.** *And I beseech you, etc.* He now
adds an exhortation, by which all Churches have often need of being
stirred up; for the ministers of Satan are ever ready to take occasion
to disturb the kingdom of Christ: and they attempt to make disturbances
in two ways; for they either sow discord, by which the minds of men are
drawn away from the unity of truth, or they occasion offenses, by which
men are alienated from the love of the gospel.  <span
id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) The former evil is done when the truth
of God is mixed with new dogmas devised by men; and the latter takes
place, when by various arts it is made odious and contemptible. He
therefore bids all, who did either of these two things, to be observed,
lest they should deceive and catch the unwary; and also to be shunned,
for they were injurious. Nor was it without reason that he required this
attention from the faithful; for it often happens through our neglect or
want of care, that such wicked men do great harm to the Church, before
they are opposed; and they also creep in, with astonishing subtlety, for
the purpose of doing mischief, except they be carefully watched.

<span id="xx.ii-p13"></span>But observe, that he speaks of those who had
been taught the pure truth of God. It is indeed an impious and
sacrilegious attempt to divide those who agree in the truth of Christ:
but yet it is a shameful sophistry to defend, under the pretext of peace
and unity, a union in lies and impious doctrines. There is therefore no
ground for the Papists to seek countenance from this passage, in order
to raise ill-will against us; for we do not impugn and tear asunder the
gospel of Christ, but the falsehoods of the devil, by which it has been
hitherto obscured: nay, Paul clearly shows, that he did not condemn all
kinds of discords, but those which destroyed consent in the orthodox
faith; for the force of the passage is in the words, *which ye have
learnt;* for it was the duty of the Romans, before they were rightly
taught, to depart from the habits of their fathers and the institutions
of their ancestors.

<span id="xx.ii-p14"></span><span id="xx.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p15"></span>**18.** *For they who are such, etc.* He
mentions an unvarying mark, by which false prophets are to be
distinguished from the servants of Christ; for they have no care for the
glory of Christ, but seek the benefit of their stomach. As, however,
they deceitfully crept in, and by assuming another character, concealed
their own wickedness, he at the same time pointed out, in order that no
one might be deceived, the arts which they adopted — that they
ingratiated themselves by a bland address. The preachers of the gospel
have also their courtesy and their pleasing manner, but joined with
honesty, so that they neither soothe men with vain praises, nor flatter
their vices: but impostors allure men by flattery, and spare and indulge
their vices, that they may keep them attached to themselves. He calls
those *simple* who are not cautious enough to avoid deceptions.

<span id="xx.ii-p16"></span><span id="xx.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p17"></span>**19.** *Your obedience,*  <span
id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) *etc.* This is said to anticipate an
objection; for he shows that he did not warn them, as though he thought
unfavorably of them, but because a fall in their case was such as might
have easily happened; as if he had said, — “Your obedience is indeed
commended everywhere, and for this reason I rejoice on your account: yet
since it often happens, that a fall occurs through simplicity, I would
have you to be harmless and simple as to the doing of evil; but in doing
good, to be most prudent, whenever it may be necessary, so that you may
preserve your integrity.”

<span id="xx.ii-p19"></span>We here see what that simplicity is which is
commended in Christians; so that they have no reason to claim this
distinction, who at this day count as a high virtue their stupid
ignorance of the word of God. For though he approves in the Romans, that
they were obedient and teachable, yet he would have them to exercise
wisdom and judgment, lest their readiness to believe exposed them to
impositions. So then he congratulates them, because they were free from
a wicked disposition; he yet wished them to be wise, so as to exercise
caution.  <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481)

<span id="xx.ii-p21"></span><span id="xx.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p22"></span>**20.** What follows, *God shall bruise
Satan, etc.*, is a promise to confirm them, rather than a prayer. He
indeed exhorts them to fight manfully against Satan, and promises that
they should shortly be victorious. He was indeed once conquered by
Christ, but not in such a way but that he renews the war continually. He
then promises ultimate defeat, which does not appear in the midst of the
contest. At the same time he does not speak only of the last day, when
Satan shall be completely bruised; but as Satan was then confounding all
things, raging, as it were, with loose or broken reins, he promises that
the Lord would shortly subdue him, and cause him to be trodden, as it
were, under foot. Immediately a prayer follows, — that the grace of
Christ would be with them, that is, that they might enjoy all the
blessings which had been procured for them by Christ.

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span><span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
16:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021)<span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>**21.** Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius,
and Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you.

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span>**21.** Salutant vos Timotheus, cooperarins
meus, et Lucius et lason et Sosipater, cognati mei.

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span>**22.** I Tertius, who wrote *this* epistle,
salute you in the Lord.

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span>**22.** Saluto ego vos Tertius, qui scripsi
epistolam, in Domino.

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span>**23.** Gaius mine host, and of the whole
church, saluteth you. Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you,
and Quartus a brother.

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span>**23.** Salutat vos Gaius, hospes meus et
Ecclesiae totius. Salutat vos Erastus, quaestor aerarius urbis, et
Quartus frater.

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span>**24.** The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
*be* with you all. Amen.

<span id="xx.iii-p9"></span>**24.** Gratia Domini nostri Iesu Christi
sit cure omnibus vobis. Amen.

<span id="xx.iii-p10"></span>**25.** Now to him that is of power to
stablish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since
the world began,

<span id="xx.iii-p11"></span>**25.** Ei vero qui potens est vos
confirmare secundum evangelium meum, et praeconium scilicet Iesu
Christi, secundum revelationem mysterii, quod temporibus secularibus
taciturn,

<span id="xx.iii-p12"></span>**26.** But now is made manifest, and by
the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the
everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith:

<span id="xx.iii-p13"></span>**26.** Manifestatum nunc fuit, et per
scripturas propheticas, secundum aeterni Dei ordinationem, in
obedientiam fidel ad omnes gentes promulgatum, —

<span id="xx.iii-p14"></span>**27.** To God only wise, *be* glory
through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

<span id="xx.iii-p15"></span>*Written to the Romans from Corinthus, and
sent* by Phebe servant of the church at Cenchrea.

<span id="xx.iii-p16"></span>**27.** Soli sapienti Deo per Iesum
Christum gloria in secula. Amen.

<span id="xx.iii-p17"></span>Ad Romanos missa fuit a Corinthe per
Phoeben, ministram Cenchreensis ecclesiae.

<span id="xx.iii-p18"></span><span id="xx.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p19"></span>**21.** *Timothy, etc.* The salutations
which he records, served in part to foster union between those who were
far asunder, and in part to make the Romans know that their brethren
subscribed to the Epistle; not that Paul had need of the testimony of
others, but because the consent of the godly is not of small importance.

<span id="xx.iii-p20"></span>The Epistle closes, as we see, with praise
and thanksgiving to God. It indeed records the remarkable kindness of
God in favoring the Gentiles with the light of the gospel, by which his
infinite and unspeakable goodness has been made evident. The conclusion
has, at the same time, this to recommend it, — that it serves to raise
up and strengthen the confidence of the godly, so that with hearts
lifted up to God they may fully expect all those things which are here
ascribed to him, and may also confirm their hope as to what is to come
by considering his former benefits.  <span
id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) But as he has made a long period, by
collecting many things into one passage, the different clauses,
implicated by being transposed, must be considered apart.

<span id="xx.iii-p22"></span>He ascribes first all the glory to God
alone; and then, in order to show that it is rightly due to him, he by
the way mentions some of his attributes; whence it appears that he alone
is worthy of all praise. He says that he *only is wise;* which praise,
being claimed for him alone, is taken away from all creatures. Paul, at
the same time, after having spoken of the secret counsel of God, seems
to have designedly annexed this eulogy, in order that he might draw all
men to reverence and adore the wisdom of God: for we know how inclined
men are to raise a clamor, when they can find out no reason for the
works of God.

<span id="xx.iii-p23"></span>By adding, that God was *able* to confirm
the Romans, he made them more certain of their final perseverance. And
that they might acquiesce more fully in his power, he adds, that a
testimony is borne to it in the gospel. Here you see, that the gospel
not only promises to us present grace, but also brings to us an
assurance of that grace which is to endure for ever; for God declares in
it that he is our Father, not only at present, but that he will be so to
the end: nay, his adoption extends beyond death, for it will conduct us
to an eternal inheritance.

<span id="xx.iii-p24"></span>The other things are mentioned to commend
the power and dignity of the gospel. He calls the gospel *the preaching
of Jesus Christ;* inasmuch as the whole sum and substance of it is no
doubt included in the knowledge of Christ. Its doctrine is *the
revelation of the mystery;* and this its character ought not only to
make us more attentive to hear it, but also to impress on our minds the
highest veneration for it: and he intimates how sublime a secret it is,
by adding that it was hid for many ages, from the beginning of the
world.  <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483)

<span id="xx.iii-p26"></span>It does not indeed contain a turgid and
proud wisdom, such as the children of this world seek; and by whom it is
held on this account in contempt: but it unfolds the ineffable treasures
of celestial wisdom, much higher than all human learning; and since the
very angels regard them with wonder, surely none of us can sufficiently
admire them. But this wisdom ought not to be less esteemed, because it
is conveyed in an humble, plain, and simple style; for thus it has
pleased the Lord to bring down the arrogance of the flesh.

<span id="xx.iii-p27"></span>And as it might have created some doubt how
this mystery, concealed for so many ages, could have so suddenly
emerged, he teaches us, that this has not happened through the hasty
doings of men, or through chance, but through the eternal ordination of
God. Here, also, he closes up the door against all those curious
questions which the waywardness of the human mind is wont to raise; for
whatever happens suddenly and unexpectedly, they think, happens at
random; and hence they absurdly conclude, that the works of God are
unreasonable; or at least they entangle themselves in many perplexing
doubts. Paul therefore reminds us, that what appeared then suddenly had
been decreed by God before the foundation of the world.

<span id="xx.iii-p28"></span>But that no one might raise a dispute on
the subject, and charge the gospel with being a new thing, and thus
defame it, he refers to the prophetic Scriptures, in which we now see,
that what is fulfilled had been foretold; for all the Prophets have
rendered to the gospel so clear a testimony, that it can in no other way
be so fully confirmed. And God thus duly prepared the minds of his
people, lest the novelty of what they were not accustomed to should too
much astonish them.  <span id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484)

<span id="xx.iii-p34"></span>If any one objects and says, that there is
an inconsistency in the words of Paul, because he says that the mystery,
of which God had testified by his Prophets, was hid throughout all the
ages; — the solution of this knot is plainly given by Peter, — that the
Prophets, when they sedulously inquired of the salvation made known to
us, ministered, not to themselves, but to us. (<span
id="xx.iii-p34.1"></span>[1Pe
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)<span id="xx.iii-p34.1"></span>.)
God then was at that time silent, though he spoke; for he held in
suspense the revelation of those things concerning which he designed
that his servants should prophesy.

<span id="xx.iii-p35"></span>Though it is not agreed among the learned
in what sense he calls the gospel a hidden mystery in this place, and in
<span id="xx.iii-p35.1"></span>[Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009)<span id="xx.iii-p35.1"></span>,
and in <span id="xx.iii-p35.2"></span>[Col
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026)<span id="xx.iii-p35.2"></span>;
yet their opinion has most in its favor, who apply it to the calling of
the Gentiles, to which Paul himself expressly refers in his Epistle to
the Colossians. Now, though I allow this to be one reason, I yet cannot
be brought to believe that it is the only reason. It seems to me more
probable that Paul had also a regard to some other differences between
the Old and the New Testament. For though the Prophets formerly taught
all those things which have been explained by Christ and his Apostles,
yet they taught them with so much obscurity, that in comparison with the
clear brightness of gospel light, it is no wonder that those things are
said to have been hidden which are now made manifest. Nor was it indeed
to no purpose that Malachi declared that the Sun of righteousness would
arise, (<span id="xx.iii-p35.3"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="xx.iii-p35.3"></span>;)
or that Isaiah had beforehand so highly eulogized the embassy of the
Messiah. And lastly, it is not without reason that the gospel is called
the kingdom of God: but we may conclude from the event itself, that then
only were opened the treasures of celestial wisdom, when God appeared to
his ancient people through his only-begotten Son, as it were face to
face, all shadows having been done away. He again refers to the end,
mentioned at the beginning of the first chapter, for which the gospel is
to be preached, — that God may lead all nations to *the obedience of
faith*

<span id="xx.iii-p36"></span>PRAISE FOR EVER TO

<span id="xx.iii-p37"></span>THE ONLY WISE GOD:

<span id="xx.iii-p38"></span>AMEN.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_468"></span>[469](cc38019.htm#fr_468) <span
id="xx.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p37"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p37.1"></span>Ministra,”
διάκονος — minister, or servant, or deaconess, one who ministers. <span
id="xx.i-p37.2"></span>Origen and <span
id="xx.i-p37.3"></span>Chrysostom considered her to be a deaconess, but
the word does not necessarily prove this; for it is used often to
designate generally one who does service and contributes to the help and
assistance of others. She was evidently a person of wealth and
influence, and was no doubt a great support and help to the Cenchrean
Church. Those spoken of by Paul in <span id="xx.i-p37.4"></span>[1Ti
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010)<span id="xx.i-p37.4"></span>, and
<span id="xx.i-p37.5"></span>Titus 2:3, were *widows* and *aged*, and
they are not called αἱ διὰκονοι, deaconesses. There arose, as it
appears, an order of this kind in the early Church, and <span
id="xx.i-p37.6"></span>Grotius says that they were ordained by
imposition of hands before the Laodicean Council, which forbade the
practice. Their office was, according to *Bingham* and *Suicer*,
referred to by <span id="xx.i-p37.7"></span>Schleusner, to baptize
women, to teach female catechumens, to visit the sick, and to perform
other inferior offices in the Church. But this was the state of things
after the apostolic times, and there is no reason to believe that Phoebe
was of this order. She was evidently a great helper of the Christian
cause, as some other women also are mentioned in this chapter, and she
had been the helper of many, (<span id="xx.i-p37.8"></span>[Ro
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002)<span id="xx.i-p37.8"></span>,)
and not of one Church, and also of Paul himself; and from what is said
in <span id="xx.i-p37.9"></span>[Ro
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002)<span id="xx.i-p37.9"></span>, it
appears probable that she was a woman carrying on some business or
traffic, and that she went to Rome partly at least on this account. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_469"></span>[470](cc38019.htm#fr_469) <span
id="xx.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p41"></span> So reads <span
id="xx.i-p41.1"></span>Griesbach; it is the same with Priscilla. See
<span id="xx.i-p41.2"></span>[Acts
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026)<span id="xx.i-p41.2"></span>, and
<span id="xx.i-p41.3"></span>[2Ti
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019)<span id="xx.i-p41.3"></span>,
where she is also called Prisca. Names in former times, as well as now,
were sometimes used in a abbreviated form. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_470"></span>[471](cc38019.htm#fr_470) <span
id="xx.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p43"></span> Whether Aquila was a laymen or not, the
Apostle connects his wife with him in the work of cooperation with him
in his ministerial work; and we see by <span id="xx.i-p43.1"></span>[Ac
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026)<span id="xx.i-p43.1"></span>,
that they both taught Apollos. It is somewhat singular, that the wife,
not only here but in several other instances, though not in all, is
mentioned before the husband. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_471"></span>[472](cc38019.htm#fr_471) <span
id="xx.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p46"></span> The occasion is not mentioned. It was
probably at Corinth, according to the account given in <span
id="xx.i-p46.1"></span>[Ac 18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#000)<span
id="xx.i-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[473](cc38019.htm#fr_472) <span
id="xx.i-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p48"></span> Some of the Fathers considered that the
family, being all religious, was the Church; but this is wholly
inconsistent with the mode of expression that is used, and with the
state of things at that time. They had no churches or temples to meet
in; private houses were their churches. Superstitious ideas as to places
of worship no doubt led men to seek such following, if he meant only the
family, — “Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with (σὺν —
together with) the Church that is in their house,” <span
id="xx.i-p48.1"></span>[1Co 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019)<span
id="xx.i-p48.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_473"></span>[474](cc38019.htm#fr_473) <span
id="xx.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p51"></span> Epaenetus, who is here called the
first-fruit of Achaia, may have been off the family of Stephanas, who is
said to have been the first-fruit in <span id="xx.i-p51.1"></span>[1Co
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015)<span id="xx.i-p51.1"></span>.
But the majority of copies has Asia, Ασίας, here, instead of Achaia,
Αχαίας. By Asia is often meant Asia Minor, and so here, no doubt, if it
be the right reading. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_474"></span>[475](cc38019.htm#fr_474) <span
id="xx.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p54"></span> It is said of Mary, that she “labored much,”
εἰς ἡμᾶς, towards us, or among us; “<span id="xx.i-p54.1"></span>inter
nos — among us,” <span id="xx.i-p54.2"></span>Beza; “<span
id="xx.i-p54.3"></span>pro nobis — for us,” <span
id="xx.i-p54.4"></span>Grotius. The reading εἰς ὑμᾶς, towards you, has
many MSS. in its favor, and also ἐν ὑμῖν, among you. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_475"></span>[476](cc38019.htm#fr_475) <span
id="xx.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p57"></span> It is not certain to what the Apostle
refers; for we have no particular account of him hitherto as a prisoner,
except for a short time at Philippi, <span id="xx.i-p57.1"></span>[Ac
16:23-40](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023)<span id="xx.i-p57.1"></span>;
and it is probable, that it was on that occasion that they had been his
fellow-prisoners; for it appears from the narrative, that there were
more prisoners than Paul and Silas, as it is said that the “prisoners”
heard them singing, <span id="xx.i-p57.2"></span>[Ac
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025)<span id="xx.i-p57.2"></span>;
and Paul’s saying to the jailer, in <span id="xx.i-p57.3"></span>[Ac
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#028)<span id="xx.i-p57.3"></span>,
“we are *all* here,” clearly implies that he had some with him besides
Silas. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_476"></span>[477](cc38019.htm#fr_476) <span
id="xx.i-p57.4"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p58"></span> The words ἐπίσημοι ἐν τοῖς ἀποστόλοις, noted
among the Apostles, can hardly admit of a meaning different from what is
here given, though some have explained the sense to be, that they were
much esteemed by Apostles, or that they were “distinguished in the
Apostles’ judgment,” or that they were well known to the Apostles. But
as “Apostles” in some other instances mean teachers, as Barnabas was,
(<span id="xx.i-p58.1"></span>[Ac
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)<span id="xx.i-p58.1"></span>,)
the explanation here given is most to be approved. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_477"></span>[478](cc38019.htm#fr_477) <span
id="xx.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p64"></span> It appears from <span
id="xx.i-p64.2"></span>Justin Martyr and <span
id="xx.i-p64.3"></span>Tertullian, that the early Christians kissed one
another always after prayers, or at the end of the service. They did so,
says <span id="xx.i-p64.4"></span>Grotius, to “show that they were all
equal; for the Persians and the orientals kissed the mouth of those only
of the same rank, and gave their hands to be kissed by their inferiors.”
It was evidently a custom among the Jews. See <span
id="xx.i-p64.5"></span>[2Sa 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#009)<span
id="xx.i-p64.5"></span>; <span id="xx.i-p64.6"></span>[Lu
7:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#045)<span id="xx.i-p64.6"></span>;
<span id="xx.i-p64.7"></span>[Mt
26:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#049)<span id="xx.i-p64.7"></span>.
This “holy kiss” is mentioned in <span id="xx.i-p64.8"></span>[1Co
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020)<span id="xx.i-p64.8"></span>;
<span id="xx.i-p64.9"></span>[2Co
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#012)<span id="xx.i-p64.9"></span>;
<span id="xx.i-p64.10"></span>[1Th
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#026)<span id="xx.i-p64.10"></span>. It
is called the kiss of love, or charity, by Peter, <span
id="xx.i-p64.11"></span>[1Pe 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#014)<span
id="xx.i-p64.11"></span>. It was one of those things which arose from
peculiar habits, and is not be considered as binding on all nations, any
more than the washing of feet. The Apostle’s object seems to have been,
not to enjoin a rite, but to regulate a practice, already existing, and
to preserve it from abuse: it was to be a *holy* kiss. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_478"></span>[479](cc38019.htm#fr_478) <span
id="xx.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p66"></span> <span id="xx.i-p66.1"></span>Griesbach
approves of τάσαι, “all,” after Churches: then it would be “all the
Churches;” that is, of Greece, says <span
id="xx.i-p66.2"></span>Grotius, but of Corinth, says <span
id="xx.i-p66.3"></span>Wolfius, even those which assembled at different
private houses: and this is a more likely supposition, than that Paul,
according to <span id="xx.i-p66.4"></span>Origen and others, took it as
granted that all the Churches which he had founded wished well to the
Church of Rome. That they wished well to it there can be no doubt; but
it is not probable that Paul acted on such a supposition. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_479"></span>[480](cc38019.htm#fr_479) <span
id="xx.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span> The two words are διχοστασίαι and σκάνδαλα,
divisions and offenses, or hindrances. He had, no doubt, in view, what
he noticed in chapter 14, about eating and observing of days; and
according to his usual manner he mentions first the effect —
“divisions,” and then the cause — “offenses.” The Gentile Christians, by
eating, gave offense to the believing Jews, and this offense led to a
division or separation. The evils which he had previously attempted to
correct were doubtless those referred to here. “Serving their own
belly,” in the next verse, has in this respect an emphatic meaning.
Instead of denying themselves in the use of meats for the sake of
Christ, and for the peace of his Church, they preferred to gratify their
own appetites. And being led away by their lust, they covered their real
motive by kindly or plausibly addressing (χρηστολογία) and eulogizing
(εὐλογία) those who joined them, imitating in this respect the arts of
all false professors and zealots, whatever be the false principle by
which they may be guided. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_480"></span>[481](cc38019.htm#fr_480) <span
id="xx.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p18"></span> This he calls “faith” in <span
id="xx.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ro 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span
id="xx.ii-p18.1"></span>: so that obedience to the gospel is faith in
what it declares. To believe is the special command of the gospel: hence
to believe is the special act of obedience that is required; and he who
believes is he who shall be saved. But this faith is that of the heart,
and not of the lips; and a faith which works by love and overcomes the
world, the mighty power of which we learn from <span
id="xx.ii-p18.2"></span>[Heb 11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#000)<span
id="xx.ii-p18.2"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_481"></span>[482](cc38019.htm#fr_481) <span
id="xx.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p20"></span> “Good” and “evil” in this clause, is
beneficence and mischief. To be wise as to good, is to be wise in acts
of kindness, in promoting good, as <span id="xx.ii-p20.1"></span>Beza
seems to take it; and to be harmless or guileless, or simple as to evil,
is to exercise no arts, by plausible speeches and flatteries, as was
done by those referred to in <span id="xx.ii-p20.2"></span>[Ro
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017)<span id="xx.ii-p20.2"></span>,
in order to do mischief, to create divisions. The Apostle’s object
throughout seems to have been to produce unanimity between the Jews and
Gentiles. Hence in the next verse he speaks of God as “the God of
peace,” the author of peace among his people; and he says that this God
of peace would soon tread down Satan, the author of discord, the
promoter of divisions and offenses; or, as most consider the passage, he
prays that God would do this; for the future, after the manner of the
Hebrew, is sometimes used by the Apostle as an optative. And indeed the
verb is found in some copies in this mood (συντρίψαι) and in the Syriac,
Ethiopic, and Vulgate versions. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_482"></span>[483](cc38019.htm#fr_482) <span
id="xx.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p21"></span> This conclusion bears an evident reference
to the point the Apostle had especially in view — the reconciling of the
Jews and Gentiles. He connects the gospel with the ancient Scriptures,
and mentions the gospel as being in unison with them. Then the Jews had
no reason to complain. As in <span id="xx.iii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017)<span id="xx.iii-p21.1"></span>
to 20 inclusive, he reproved the Gentiles who caused divisions; so in
these verses his special object is to put an end to the objections of
the Jews. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_483"></span>[484](cc38019.htm#fr_483) <span
id="xx.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p25"></span> The words are χρόνοις αἰωνίοις*,* rendered
improperly by <span id="xx.iii-p25.1"></span>Hammond and others, from
the eternal ages, or eternity. We find them preceded by πρὸ *before*, in
<span id="xx.iii-p25.2"></span>[2Ti
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009)<span id="xx.iii-p25.2"></span>,
and in <span id="xx.iii-p25.3"></span>Titus 1:2: “before the eternal
ages,” could not be right rendering; nor is *“before* the world began,”
as in our version, correct; for a reference in Titus is made to God’s
promise. “In the times of the ages” is the rendering of *Deza* and of
<span id="xx.iii-p25.4"></span>Macknight*;* and, in “ancient times,” is
that of <span id="xx.iii-p25.5"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="xx.iii-p25.6"></span>Stuart The same subject is handled in two other
places, <span id="xx.iii-p25.7"></span>[Eph
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005)<span id="xx.iii-p25.7"></span>,
and <span id="xx.iii-p25.8"></span>[Col
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026)<span id="xx.iii-p25.8"></span>:
and the words used by him are “in other ages,” ἑτεραις γενεαῖς, and,
“from ages and generations,” ἀπὸ τῶν αἰώνων καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν γενεῶν <span
id="xx.iii-p25.9"></span>Theodoret explained the terms by ἄνωθεν —-in
past times; and <span id="xx.iii-p25.10"></span>Theophylact by
πάλαι—formerly; and <span id="xx.iii-p25.11"></span>Schleusner by a
similar word, *olim.*—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_484"></span>[485](cc38019.htm#fr_484) <span
id="xx.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p29"></span> This clause is differently construed: some
connect *“prophetic* Scriptures” with “manifested,” or made manifest. So
Doddridqe and <span id="xx.iii-p29.1"></span>Stuart*;* but <span
id="xx.iii-p29.2"></span>Beza*,* <span
id="xx.iii-p29.3"></span>Pareus*,* and <span
id="xx.iii-p29.4"></span>Macknight agree with <span
id="xx.iii-p29.5"></span>Calvin*,* and connect the words with “made
known” or proclaimed. The conjunetive τε after διὰ favors this
construction; and διὰ means here “by the means,” or by the aid and
sanction, “of the prophetic Scriptures.” Then the meaning is—”that the
mystery, hid for ages, is now manifest, that is, by the gospel, and by
means of the prophetic Scriptures, and consistently with the decree
(ἐπιταγὴν) or ordination of the eternal God, is made known to all
nations for the obedience of faith.” According to this view is the
exposition of <span id="xx.iii-p29.6"></span>Calvin*,* which is no doubt
correct.

<span id="xx.iii-p30"></span>But it is more consistent with the tenor of
the latter part of this epistle, and with the other passages, such as
<span id="xx.iii-p30.1"></span>[Eph
3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#004)<span id="xx.iii-p30.1"></span>,
and <span id="xx.iii-p30.2"></span>[Col.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#027)<span id="xx.iii-p30.2"></span>,
where he mentions the same mystery, to consider the reference here to be
exclusively to the union of Jews and Gentiles, and not generally to the
gospel, as <span id="xx.iii-p30.3"></span>Calvin and others have
thought.

<span id="xx.iii-p31"></span>There is a grammatical difficulty in the
last verse: the relative ᾦ is found before *“glory.”* <span
id="xx.iii-p31.1"></span>Beza and others considered it redundant. The
verse is literally as follows,—

<span id="xx.iii-p32"></span>**27.** To the only wise God, through Jesus
Christ, to whom *be* the glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="xx.iii-p33"></span>It is omitted in a few copies; several
copies have αὐτῷ, which would read better: but its genuineness is
rejected by <span id="xx.iii-p33.1"></span>Griesbach and others. The
ascription of praise is evidently given to God, as one who has contrived
and arranged his dispensation of grace and mercy: and his wisdom here
refers to the same thing, as in <span id="xx.iii-p33.2"></span>[Ro
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span id="xx.iii-p33.2"></span>.
However mysterious may his dispensation appear to us with regard to the
Jews and Gentiles, in leaving the latter for so long a time in
ignorance, in favoring the former only in the first instance with a
revelation of himself, and then in showing favor to the Gentiles, and in
rejecting the Jews for a time, and afterwards restoring them — however
mysterious all these things may appear, the Apostle assures us that they
are the arrangements of the only wise God. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Romans](cc38020)
