[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38011)  [Next](cc38013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** I say the truth in Christ, I lie not,
my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost,

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Veritatem dico in Christo, non
mentior, testimonium simul mihi reddente mea conscientia eum Spiri-tu
sancto,

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** That I have great heaviness and
continual sorrow in my heart.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quod dolor sit mihi magnus, et
assiduus cruciatus cordi meo:

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** For I could wish that myself were
accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh:

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Optarim enim ego ipse anathema esse a
Christo pro fratribus meis, cognatis inquam meis secundum car-nem;

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Who are Israelites; to whom
*pertaineth* the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the
giving of the law, and the service *of God*, and the promises;

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Qui sunt Israelitae, quorum est
adoptio, et gloria, et testamenta, et legislatio, et cultus, et
promissiones;

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Whose *are* the fathers, and of whom
as concerning the flesh Christ *came*, who is over all, God blessed for
ever. Amen.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quorum sunt Patres, et ex quibus est
Christus secundum car-nem, qui est super omnia Deus bene-dictus in
secula. Amen.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span><span id="xiii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>In this chapter he begins to remove the
offences which might have diverted the minds of men from Christ: for the
Jews, for whom he was appointed according to the covenant of the law,
not only rejected him, but regarded him with contempt, and for the most
part bated him. Hence one of two things seemed to follow, — either that
there was no truth in the Divine promise, — or that Jesus, whom Paul
preached, was not the Lord’s anointed, who had been especially promised
to the Jews. This twofold knot Paul fully unties in what follows. He,
however, so handles this subject, as to abstain from all bitterness
against the Jews, that he might not exasperate their minds; and yet he
concedes to them nothing to the injury of the gospel; for he allows to
them their privileges in such a way, as not to detract anything from
Christ. But he passes, as it were abruptly, to the mention of this
subject, so that there appears to be no connection in the discourse.
 <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) He, however, so enters on this
new subject, as though he had before referred to it. It so happened in
this way, — Having finished the doctrine he discussed, he turned his
attention to the Jews, and being astonished at their unbelief as at
something monstrous, he burst forth into this sudden protestation, in
the same way as though it was a subject which he had previously handled;
for there was no one to whom this thought would not of itself
immediately *occur,* — “If this be the doctrine of the law and the
Prophets, how comes it that the Jews so pertinaciously reject it?” And
further, it was everywhere known, that all that he had hitherto spoken
of the law of Moses, and of the grace of Christ, was more disliked by
the Jews, than that the faith of the Gentiles should be assisted by
their consent. It was therefore necessary to remove this obstacle, lest
it should impede the course of the gospel.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**1.** *The truth I say in Christ, etc.* As
it was an opinion entertained by most that Paul was, as it were, a sworn
enemy to his own nation, and as it was suspected somewhat even by the
household of faith, as though he had taught them to forsake Moses, he
adopts a preface to prepare the minds of his readers, before he proceeds
to his subject, and in this preface he frees himself from the false
suspicion of evil will towards the Jews. And as the matter was not
unworthy of an oath, and as he perceived that his affirmation would
hardly be otherwise believed against a prejudice already entertained, he
declares by an oath that he speaks the truth. By this example and the
like, (as I reminded you in the first chapter,) we ought to learn that
oaths are lawful, that is, when they render that truth credible which is
necessary to be known, and which would not be otherwise believed.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>The expression, *In Christ,* means
“according to Christ.”  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) By
adding *I lie not,* he signifies that he speaks without fiction or
disguise. *My conscience testifying to me*, *etc.* By these words he
calls his own conscience before the tribunal of God, for he brings in
the Spirit as a witness to his feeling. He adduced the Spirit for this
end, that he might more fully testify that he was free and pure from an
evil disposition, and that he pleaded the cause of Christ under the
guidance and direction of the Spirit of God. It often happens that a
person, blinded by the passions of the flesh, (though not purposing to
deceive,) knowingly and wilfully obscures the light of truth. But to
swear by the name of God, in a proper sense of the word, is to call him
as a witness for the purpose of confirming what is doubtful, and at the
same time to bind ourselves over to his judgment, in case we say what is
false.

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span><span id="xiii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>**2.** *That I have great sorrow, etc.* He
dexterously manages so to cut short his sentence as not yet to express
what he was going to say; for it was not as yet seasonable openly to
mention the destruction of the Jewish nation. It may be added, that he
thus intimates a greater measure of sorrow, as imperfect sentences are
for the most part full of pathos. But he will presently express the
cause of his sorrow, after having more fully testified his sincerity.

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>But the perdition of the Jews caused very
great anguish to Paul, though he knew that it happened through the will
and providence of God. We hence learn that the obedience we render to
God’s providence does not prevent us from grieving at the destruction of
lost men, though we know that they are thus doomed by the just judgment
of God; for the same mind is capable of being influenced by these two
feelings: that when it looks to God it can willingly bear the ruin of
those whom he has decreed to destroy; and that when it turns its
thoughts to men, it condoles with their evils. They are then much
deceived, who say that godly men ought: to have apathy and
insensibility, (<span id="xiii.i-p20.1"></span>ἀπάθειαν καὶ ἀναλγησίαν)
lest they should resist the decree of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span><span id="xiii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>**3.** *For I could wish, etc.* He could
not have expressed a greater ardour of love than by what he testifies
here; for that is surely perfect love which refuses not to die for the
salvation of a friend. But there is another word added, <span
id="xiii.i-p22.2"></span>*anathema,* which proves that he speaks not
only of temporal but of eternal death; and he explains its meaning when
he says, *from Christ,* for it signifies a separation. And what is to be
separated from Christ, but to be excluded from the hope of salvation? It
was then a proof of the most ardent love, that Paul hesitated not to
wish for himself that condemnation which he saw impending over the Jews,
in order that he might deliver them. It is no objection that he knew
that his salvation was based on the election of God, which could by no
means fail; for as those ardent feelings hurry us on impetuously, so
they see and regard nothing but the object in view. So Paul did not
connect God’s election with his wish, but the remembrance of that being
passed by, he was wholly intent on the salvation of the Jews.

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span>Many indeed doubt whether this was a lawful
desire; but this doubt may be thus removed: the settled boundary of love
is, that it proceeds as far as conscience permits;  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) if then we love in God and not without
God’s authority, our love can never be too much. And such was the love
of Paul; for seeing his own nation endued with so many of God’s
benefits, he loved God’s gifts in them, and them on account of God’s
gifts; and he deemed it a great evil that those gifts should perish,
hence it was that his mind being overwhelmed, he burst forth into this
extreme wish.  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285)

<span id="xiii.i-p30"></span>Thus I consent not to the opinion of those
who think that Paul spoke these words from regard to God only, and not
to men; nor do I agree with others, who say, that without any thought of
God, he was influenced only by love to men: but I connect the love of
men with a zeal for God’s glory.

<span id="xiii.i-p31"></span>I have not, however, as yet explained that
which is the chief thing, — that the Jews are here regarded as they were
adorned with those singular tokens, by which they were distinguished
from the rest of mankind. For God had by his covenant so highly exalted
them, that by their fall, the faithfulness and truth of God himself
seemed also to fail in the world: for that covenant would have thus
become void, the stability of which was promised to be perpetual, as
long as the sun and moon should shine in heaven. (<span
id="xiii.i-p31.1"></span>[Ps 72:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007)<span
id="xiii.i-p31.1"></span>.) So that the abolition of this would have
been more strange, than the sad and ruinous confusion of the whole
world. It was not therefore a simple and exclusive regard for men: for
though it is better that one member should perish than the whole body;
it was yet for this reason that Paul had such a high regard for the
Jews, because he viewed them as bearing the character, and, as they
commonly say, the quality of an elect people; and this will appear more
evident, as we shall soon see, from what follows.

<span id="xiii.i-p32"></span>The words, *my kinsmen according to the
flesh,* though they contain nothing new, do yet serve much for
amplification. For first, lest any one should think that he willingly,
or of his own accord, sought cause of quarrel with the *Jews,* he
intimates, that he had not put off the feeling of kindred, so as not to
be affected with the destruction of his own flesh. And secondly, since
it was necessary that the gospel, of which he was the preacher, should
go forth from Sion, he does not in vain pronounce an eulogy in so many
words on his own kindred. For the qualifying expression, *according to
the flesh,* is not in my view added for the sake of extenuation, as in
other places, but, on the contrary, for the sake of expressing his
faith: for though the Jews had disowned Paul, he yet concealed not the
fact, that he had sprung from that nation, the election of whom was
still strong in the root, though the branches had withered. What
*Budoeus* says of the word <span id="xiii.i-p32.1"></span>*anathema,* is
inconsistent with the opinion of <span
id="xiii.i-p32.2"></span>Chrysostom*,* who makes <span
id="xiii.i-p32.3"></span>ἀνάθεμα and <span
id="xiii.i-p32.4"></span>ἀνάθημα*,* to be the same.

<span id="xiii.i-p33"></span><span id="xiii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p34"></span>**4.** *Who are Israelites, etc.* Here the
reason is now more plainly given, why the destruction of that people
caused him so much anguish, that he was prepared to redeem them by his
own death, namely because they were Israelites; for the relative pronoun
is put here instead of a causative adverb. In like manner this anxiety
took hold on Moses, when he desired that he should be blotted out of the
book of life, rather than that the holy and chosen race of Abraham
should be reduced to nothing. (<span id="xiii.i-p34.1"></span>[Ex
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span id="xiii.i-p34.1"></span>.)
Then in addition to his kind feeling, he mentions also other reasons,
and those of a higher kind, which made him to favor the Jews, even
because the Lord had, as it were, by a kind of privilege, so raised
them, that they were separated from the common order of men: and these
titles of dignity were testimonies of love; for we are not wont to speak
thus favorably, but of those whom we love. And though by their
ingratitude they rendered themselves unworthy to be esteemed on account
of these gifts of God, yet Paul continued justly to respect them, that
he might teach us that the ungodly cannot so contaminate the good
endowments of God, but that they always deserve to be praised and
admired: at the same time, those who abuse them acquire thereby nothing
but a greater obloquy. But as we are not to act in such a manner as to
contemn, through a detestation of the ungodly, the gifts of God in them;
so, on the other hand, we must use prudence, lest by our kind esteem and
regard for them we make them proud, and especially lest our praises bear
the appearance of flattery. But let us imitate Paul, who conceded to the
Jews their privileges in such a manner, that he afterwards declared that
they were all of no worth without Christ. But it was not in vain that he
mentioned this as one of their praises, — that they were *Israelites;*
for Jacob prayed for this as a great favor, that they should be called
by his name. (<span id="xiii.i-p34.2"></span>[Ge
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)<span id="xiii.i-p34.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.i-p35"></span>*Whose are the adoption, etc.* The whole
drift of Paul’s discourse is to this purpose, — that though the Jews by
their defection had produced an ungodly divorce between God and
themselves, yet the light of God’s favor was not wholly extinguished,
according to what he had also said in <span id="xiii.i-p35.1"></span>[Ro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003)<span id="xiii.i-p35.1"></span>.
They had indeed become unbelievers and had broken his covenant; but
still their perfidy had not rendered void the faithfulness of God; for
he had not only reserved for himself some remnant seed from the whole
multitude, but had as yet continued, according to their hereditary
right, the mime of a Church among them.

<span id="xiii.i-p36"></span>But though they had already stripped
themselves of these ornaments, so that it availed them nothing to be
called the children of Abraham, yet as there was a danger, lest through
their fault the majesty of the gospel should be depreciated among the
Gentiles, Paul does not regard what they deserved, but covers their
baseness and disgraceful conduct by throwing vails over them, until the
Gentiles were fully persuaded, that the gospel had flowed to them from
the celestial fountain, from the sanctuary of God, from an elect nation.
For the Lord, passing by other nations, had selected them as a people
peculiar to himself, and had adopted them as his children, as he often
testifies by Moses and the prophets; and not content simply to give them
the name of children, he calls them sometimes his first-begotten, and
sometimes his beloved. So the Lord says in <span
id="xiii.i-p36.1"></span>[Ex 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span
id="xiii.i-p36.1"></span>, —

<span id="xiii.i-p37"></span>“My first-begotten son is Israel; let my
son go,  
that he may serve me.”

<span id="xiii.i-p38"></span>In <span id="xiii.i-p38.1"></span>[Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)<span id="xiii.i-p38.1"></span>,
it is said,

<span id="xiii.i-p39"></span>“I am become a Father to Israel, and
Ephraim is my first-begotten:”

<span id="xiii.i-p40"></span>and again, “Is not my son Ephraim precious
to me? Is he not a delightful child? Hence troubled for him are my
bowels, and I will yet pity him.” By these words he means, not only to
set forth his kindness towards the people of Israel, but rather to
exhibit the *efficacy* of adoption, through which the promise of the
celestial inheritance is conveyed.

<span id="xiii.i-p41"></span>*Glory* means the excellency into which the
Lord had raised up that people above all other nations, and that in many
and various ways, and especially by dwelling in the midst of them; for
besides many other tokens of his presence, he exhibited a singular proof
of it in the ark, where he gave responses, and also heard his people,
that he might show forth his power in helping them: and for this reason
it was called “the glory of God.” (<span id="xiii.i-p41.1"></span>[1Sa
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#022)<span id="xiii.i-p41.1"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286)

<span id="xiii.i-p43"></span>As he has distinguished here between
*covenants*  <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) and *promises,* we
may observe this difference, — that a covenant is that which is
expressed in distinct and accustomed words, and contains a mutual
stipulation, as that which was made with Abraham; but promises are what
we meet with everywhere in Scripture; for when God had once made a
covenant with his ancient people, he continued to offer, often by new
promises, his favor to them. It hence follows, that promises are to be
traced up to the covenant as to their true source; in the same manner as
the special helps of God, by which he testifies his love towards the
faithful, may be said to flow from the true fountain of election. And as
the law was nothing more than a renewal of the covenant, and more fully
sanctioned the remembrance of it, *legislation,* or the giving of the
law, seems to be here peculiarly applied to the things which the law
decreed: for it was no common honor conferred on the Jewish people, that
they had God as their lawgiver. For if some gloried in their Solons and
Lycurguses, how much more reason was there to glory in the Lord? of this
you have an account in <span id="xiii.i-p44.3"></span>[De
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032)<span id="xiii.i-p44.3"></span>.
By *worship* he understands that part of the law in which the legitimate
manner of worshipping God is prescribed, such as rites and ceremonies.
These ought to have been deemed lawful on account of God’s appointment;
without which, whatever men devise is nothing but a profanation of
religion.

<span id="xiii.i-p45"></span><span id="xiii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p46"></span>**5.** *Whose are the fathers, etc.* It is
indeed of some importance to be descended from saints and men beloved of
God, since God promised to the godly fathers mercy with regard to their
children, even to thousand generations, and especially in the words
addressed to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as we find in <span
id="xiii.i-p46.1"></span>[Ge 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#004)<span
id="xiii.i-p46.1"></span>, and in other passages. It matters not, that
this by itself, when separated from the fear of God and holiness of
life, is vain and useless: for we find the same to have been the case as
to *worship* and *glory,* as it is evident everywhere in the prophets,
especially in <span id="xiii.i-p46.2"></span>[Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)<span id="xiii.i-p46.2"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p46.3"></span>[Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p46.3"></span>;
and also in <span id="xiii.i-p46.4"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="xiii.i-p46.4"></span>.
But, as God dignified these things, when joined with attention to
godliness, with some degree of honor, he justly enumerated them among
the privileges of the Jews. They are indeed said to be the heirs of the
promises for this very reason, — because they descended from the
fathers. (<span id="xiii.i-p46.5"></span>[Ac
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)<span id="xiii.i-p46.5"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.i-p47"></span>*From whom, is Christ, etc.* They who apply
this to the fathers, as though Paul meant only to say that Christ had
*descended* from the fathers, have no reason to allege: for his object
was to close his account of the pre-eminence of the Jews by this
encomium, — that Christ proceeded from them; for it was not a thing to
be lightly esteemed, to have been united by a natural relationship with
the Redeemer of the world; for if he had honored the whole human race,
in joining himself to us by a community of nature, much more did he
honor them, with whom he had a closer bond of union. It must at the same
time be always maintained, that when this favor of being allied by
kindred is unconnected with godliness, it is so far from being an
advantage, that on the contrary it leads to a greater condemnation.

<span id="xiii.i-p48"></span>But we have here a remarkable passage, —
that in Christ two natures are in such a manner distinguished, that they
are at the same time united in the very person of Christ: for by saying
that Christ had descended from the Jews, he declared his real humanity.
The words *according to the flesh,* which are added, imply that he had
something superior to flesh; and here seems to be an evident distinction
made between humanity and divinity. But he at last connects both
together, where he *says,* that the Christ, who had descended from the
Jew’s according to the flesh, is God blessed for ever.

<span id="xiii.i-p49"></span>We must further observe, that this
ascription of praise belongs to none but only to the true and eternal
God; for he declares in another place, (<span
id="xiii.i-p49.1"></span>[1Ti
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span id="xiii.i-p49.1"></span>,)
that it is the true God alone to whom honor and glory are due. They who
break off this clause from the previous context, that they may take away
from Christ so clear a testimony to his divinity, most presumptuously
attempt, to introduce darkness in the midst of the clearest light; for
the words most evidently mean this, — *Christ, who is from the Jews
according to the flesh, is God blessed for ever*  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) And I doubt not, but that Paul, who
had to contend hard with a reproach urged against him, did designedly
raise up his own mind to the contemplation of the eternal glory of
Christ; nor did he do this so much for his own sake individually, as for
the purpose of encouraging others by his example to raise up their
thoughts.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
9:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Not as though the word of God hath
taken none effect. For they *are* not all Israel, which are of Israel:

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Neque tamen, quasi exciderit verbum
Dei: non emro omnes qui sunt ex Israele sunt Israelitae:

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>**7.** Neither, because they are the seed
of Abraham, *are they* all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be
called.

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Nec qui sunt semen Abrabae, ideo
omnes filii; sed in Isaac voca-bitur tibi semen:

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>**8.** That is, They which are the children
of the flesh, these *are* not the children of God: but the children of
the promise are counted for the seed.

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Hoc est, non qui sunt filii car-nis,
ii filii sunt Dei; sed qui sunt filii promissionis, censebuntur in
semen:

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>**9.** For this *is* the word of promise,
At this time will I come, and Sara shall have a son.

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Promissionis enim verbum hoc est,
Secundum hoc tempus veniam, et erit Sarae filius.

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>**6.** *Not however, etc.* Paul had been
carried away by the ardour of his wish, as it were, into an excess of
feeling, *(*<span id="xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>*in ecstasin,)* but now,
returning to discharge his office as a teacher, he adds what may be
viewed as somewhat qualifying what he had said, as though he would
restrain immoderate grief. And inasmuch as by deploring the ruin of his
own nation, this inconsistency seems to follow, that the covenant made
by God with the seed of Abraham had failed, (for the favor of God could
not have been wanting to the Israelites without the covenant being
abolished,) he reasonably anticipates this inconsistency, and shows,
that notwithstanding the great blindness of the Jews, the favor of God
continued still to that people, so that the truth of the covenant
remained firm.

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>Some read, “But it is not possible,” etc.,
as though it were in Greek <span id="xiii.ii-p12.1"></span>οἷον τε
 <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) but as I find this reading in
no copy, I adopt the common reading, *Not however that it had failed,*
etc., and according to this sense, “That I deplore the destruction of my
nation is not because I think the promise, given formerly by God to
Abraham, is now void or abolished.”

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span>*For not all, etc.* The statement is, —
that the promise was so given to Abraham and to his seed, that the
inheritance did not belong to every seed without distinction; it hence
follows that the defection of some does not prove that the covenant does
not remain firm and valid.

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span>But that it may be more evident on what
condition the Lord adopted the posterity of Abraham as a peculiar people
to himself, two things are to be here considered. The first is, That the
promise of salvation given to Abraham belongs to all who can trace their
natural descent to him; for it is offered to all without exception, and
for this reason they are rightly called the heirs of the covenant made
with Abraham; and in this respect they are his successors, or, as
Scripture calls them, the children of the promise. For since it was the
Lord’s will that his covenant should be sealed, no less in Ishmael and
Esau, than in Isaac and Jacob, it appears that they were not wholly
alienated from him; except, it may be, you make no account of the
circumcision, which was conferred on them by God’s command; but it
cannot be so regarded without dishonor to God. But this belonged to
them, according to what the Apostle had said before, “whose are the
covenants,” though they were unbelieving; and in <span
id="xiii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Ac
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)<span id="xiii.ii-p15.1"></span>,
they are called by Peter, the children of the covenants, because they
were the descendants of the Prophets. The second point to be considered
is, That the children of the promise are strictly those in whom its
power and effect are found. On this account Paul denies here that all
the children of Abraham were the children of God, though a covenant had
been made with them by the Lord, for few continued in the faith of the
covenant; and yet God himself testifies, in <span
id="xiii.ii-p15.2"></span>[Ezek. 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#009),
[Ezek. 10:0](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#000)<span
id="xiii.ii-p15.2"></span>, that they were all regarded by him as
children. In short, when a whole people are called the heritage and the
peculiar people of God, what is meant is, that they have been chosen by
the Lord, the promise of salvation having been offered them and
confirmed by the symbol of circumcision; but as many by their
ingratitude reject this adoption, and thus enjoy in no degree its
benefits, there arises among them another difference with regard to the
fulfilment of the promise. That it might not then appear strange to any
one, that this fulfilment of the promise was not evident in many of the
Jews, Paul denies that they were included in the true election of God.

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span>Some may prefer such a statement as this,
— “The general election of the people of Israel is no hinderance, that
God should not from them choose by his hidden counsel those whom he
pleases.” It is indeed an illustrious example of gratuitous mercy, when
God deigns to make a covenant of life with a nation: but his hidden
favor appears more evident in that second election, which is confined to
a part only.

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span>But when he says, that *all who are of
Israel are not Israelites,* and that *all who are of the seed of Abraham
are not children,* it is a kind of change in the meaning of words,
(<span id="xiii.ii-p17.1"></span>παρονομασία); for in the first clause
he includes the whole race, in the second he refers only to true sons,
who were not become degenerated.

<span id="xiii.ii-p18"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p19"></span>**7.** *But, “In Isaac shall thy seed be
called.”* Paul mentions this, to show that the hidden election of God
overrules the outward calling, and that it is yet by no means
inconsistent with it, but, on the contrary, that it tends to its
confirmation and completion. That he might then in due order prove both,
he in the first place assumes, that the election of God is not tied to
the natural descendants of Abraham, and that it is not a thing that is
included in the conditions of the covenant: and this is what he now
confirms by a most suitable example. For if there ought to have been any
natural progeny, which fell not away from the covenant; this ought to
have been especially the case with those who obtained the privilege at
first: but when we find, that of the first sons of Abraham, while he was
yet alive, and the promise new, one of them was separated as the seed,
how much more might the same thing have taken place in his distant
posterity? Now this testimony is taken from <span
id="xiii.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ge
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020)<span id="xiii.ii-p19.1"></span>,
where the Lord gives an answer to Abraham, that he had heard his prayer
for Ishmael, but that there would be another on whom the promised
blessing would rest. It hence follows, that some men are by special
privilege elected out of the chosen people, in whom the common adoption
becomes efficacious and valid.

<span id="xiii.ii-p20"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p21"></span>**8.** *That is, They are not, etc*. He
now gathers from God’s answer a proposition, which includes the whole of
what he had in view. For if Isaac, and not Ishmael, was the seed, though
the one as well as the other was Abraham’s son, it must be that all
natural sons are not to be regarded as the seed, but that the promise is
specially fulfilled only in some, and that it does not belong commonly
and equally to all. He calls those *the children of the flesh,* who have
nothing superior to a natural descent; as they are the *children of the
promise,* who are peculiarly selected by the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii-p22"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p23"></span>**9.** *For the word of promise is this,
etc.* He adds another divine testimony; and we see, by the application
made of it, with what care and skill he explains Scripture. When he
says, the Lord said that he would come, and that a son would be born to
Abraham of Sarah, he intimated that his blessing was not yet
*conferred,* but that it was as yet suspended.  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) But Ishmael was already born when this
was said: then God’s blessing had no regard to Ishmael. We may also
observe, by the way, the great caution with which he proceeds here, lest
he should exasperate the Jews. The cause being passed over, he first
simply states the fact; he will hereafter open the fountain.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
9:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)<span
id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** And not only *this*; but when
Rebecca also had conceived by one, *even* by our father Isaac;

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Non solum autem hic, sed et
Rebecca, quae ex uno conceperat, patre nostro Isaac:

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span>**11.** (For *the children* being not yet
born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that
calleth;)

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Qunm enim nondum nati es-sent
pueri, nec quidpiam boni aut mali egissent, ut secundum electio-nem
propositum Dei maneret,

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>**12.** It was said unto her, The elder
shall serve the younger.

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Non ex operibus, sed ex vo-cante,
dictum est ei, Major serviet minori;

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>**13.** As it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated.

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Quemadmodum scriptum est, Jacob
dilexi, Esau autem odio habui.

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>**10.** *And not only, etc.* There are in
this chapter some broken *sentences,* such as this is, — *But Rebecca
also, who had conceived by one, our father Isaac;* for he leaves off in
the middle, before he comes to the principal verb. The meaning, however,
is, that the difference as to the possession of the promise may not only
be seen in the children of Abraham, but that there is a much more
evident example in Jacob and Esau: for in the former instance some might
allege that their condition was unequal, the one being the son of an
handmaid; but these were of the same mother, and were even twins: yet
one was rejected, and the other was chosen by the Lord. It is hence
clear, that the fulfilment of the promise does not take place in all the
children of the flesh indiscriminately.

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span>And as Paul refers to the persons to whom
God made known his purpose, I prefer to regard a masculine pronoun to be
understood, rather than a neuter, as <span
id="xiii.iii-p12.1"></span>Erasmus has done: for the meaning is, that
God’s special election had not been revealed only to Abraham, but also
to *Rebecca,* when she brought forth her twins.  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291)

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span>**11.** *For when the children, etc.* He
now begins to ascend higher, even to show the cause of this difference,
which he teaches us is nowhere else to be found except in the election
of God. He had indeed before briefly noticed, that there was a
difference between the natural children of Abraham, that though all were
adopted by circumcision into a participation of the covenant, yet the
grace of God was not effectual in them all; and hence that they, who
enjoy the favor of God, are the children of the promise. But how it thus
happened, he has been either silent or has obscurely hinted. Now indeed
he openly ascribes the whole cause to the election of God, and that
gratuitous, and in no way depending on men; so that in the salvation of
the godly nothing higher *(*<span id="xiii.iii-p19.1"></span>*nihil
superius)* must be sought than the goodness of God, and nothing higher
in the perdition of the reprobate than his just severity.

<span id="xiii.iii-p20"></span>Then the first proposition is, — “As the
blessing of the covenant separates the Israelitic nation from all other
people, so the election of God makes a distinction between men in that
nation, while he predestinates some to salvation, and others to eternal
condemnation.” The second proposition is, — “There is no other basis for
this election than the goodness of God alone, and also since the fall of
Adam, his mercy; which embraces whom he pleases, without any regard
whatever to their works.” The third is, — “The Lord in his gratuitous
election is free and exempt from the necessity of imparting equally the
same grace to all; but, on the contrary, he passes by whom he wills, and
whom he wills he chooses.” All these things Paul briefly includes in one
sentence: he then goes on to other things.

<span id="xiii.iii-p21"></span>Moreover, by these words, *When the
children had not yet been born, nor had done any good or evil,* he
shows, that God in making a difference could not have had any regard to
works, for they were not yet done. Now they who argue on the other side,
and say, that this is no reason why the election of God should not make
a difference between men according to the merits of works, for God
foresees who those are who by future works would be worthy or unworthy
of his grace, are not more clear-sighted than Paul, but stumble at a
principle in theology, which ought to be well known to all Christians,
namely, that God can see nothing in the corrupt nature of man, such as
was in Esau and Jacob, to induce him to manifest his favor. When
therefore he says, that neither of them had then done any good or evil,
what he took as granted must also be added, — that they were both the
children of Adam, by nature sinful, and endued with no particle of
righteousness.

<span id="xiii.iii-p22"></span>I do not dwell thus long on explaining
these things, because the meaning of the Apostle is obscure; but as the
Sophists, being not content with his plain sense, endeavour to evade it
by frivolous distinctions, I wished to show, that Paul was by no means
ignorant of those things which they allege.

<span id="xiii.iii-p23"></span>It may further be said, that though that
corruption alone, which is diffused through the whole race of man, is
sufficient, before it breaks out, as they say, into action, for
condemnation, and hence it follows, that Esau was justly rejected, for
he was naturally a child of wrath, it was yet necessary, lest any doubt
should remain, as though his condition became worse through any vice or
fault, that sins no less than virtues should be excluded. It is indeed
true, that the proximate cause of reprobation is the curse we all
inherit from Adam; yet, that we may learn to acquiesce in the bare and
simple good pleasure of God, Paul withdraws us from this view, until he
has established this doctrine, — That God has a sufficiently just reason
for electing and for reprobating, in his own will.  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292)

<span id="xiii.iii-p25"></span>*That the purpose of God according to
election, etc.* He speaks of the gratuitous election of God almost in
every instance. If works had any place, he ought to have said, — “That
his reward might stand through works;” but he mentions the purpose of
God, which is included, so to speak, in his own good pleasure alone. And
that no ground of dispute might remain on the subject, he has removed
all doubt by adding another clause*, according to election,* and then a
third, *not through works, but through him who calls.* Let us now then
apply our minds more closely to this passage: Since the purpose of God
according to election is established in this way, — that before the
brothers were born, and had done either good or evil, one was rejected
and the other chosen; it hence follows, that when any one ascribes the
cause of the difference to their works, he thereby subverts the purpose
of God. Now, by adding, *not through works, but through him who calls,*
he means, not on account of works, but of the calling only; for he
wishes to exclude works altogether. We have then the whole stability of
our election inclosed in the purpose of God alone: here merits avail
nothing, as they issue in nothing but death; no worthiness is regarded,
for there is none; but the goodness of God reigns alone. False then is
the dogma, and contrary to God’s word, — that God elects or rejects, as
he foresees each to be worthy or unworthy of his favor.  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293)

<span id="xiii.iii-p29"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p30"></span>**12.** *The elder shall serve the
younger* See how the Lord makes a difference between the sons of Isaac,
while they were as yet in their mother’s womb; for this was the heavenly
answer, by which it appeared that God designed to show to the younger
peculiar favor, which he denied to the elder. Though this indeed had
reference to the right of primogeniture, yet in this, as the symbol of
something greater, was manifested the will of God: and that this was the
case we may easily perceive, when we consider what little benefit,
according to the flesh, Jacob derived from his primogeniture. For he
was, on its account, exposed to great danger; and to avoid this danger,
he was obliged to quit his home and his country, and was unkindly
treated in his exile: when he returned, he tremblingly, and in doubt of
his life, prostrated himself at the feet of his brother, humbly asked
forgiveness for his offence, and lived through the indulgence shown to
him. Where was his dominion over his brother, from whom he was
constrained to seek by entreaty his life? There was then something
greater than the primogeniture promised in the answer given by the Lord.

<span id="xiii.iii-p31"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p32"></span>**13.** *As it is written, Jacob I loved,
etc.* He confirms, by a still stronger testimony, how much the heavenly
answer, given to Rebecca, availed to his present purpose, that is, that
the spiritual condition of both was intimated by the dominion of Jacob
and servitude of Esau, and also that Jacob obtained this favor through
the kindness of God, and not through his own merit. Then this testimony
of the prophet shows the reason why the Lord conferred on Jacob the
primogeniture: and it is taken from the first chapter of Malachi, where
the Lord, reproaching the Jews for their ingratitude, mentions his
former kindness to them, — “I have loved you,” he says; and then he
refers to the origin of his love, — “Was not Esau the brother of Jacob?”
as though he said, — “What privilege had he, that I should prefer him to
his brother? None whatever. It was indeed an equal right, except that by
the law of nature the younger ought to have served the elder; I yet
chose the one, and rejected the other; and I was thus led by my mercy
alone, and by no worthiness as to works. I therefore chose you for my
people, that I might show the same kindness to the seed of Jacob; but I
rejected the Edomites, the progeny of Esau. Ye are then so much the
worse, inasmuch as the remembrance of so great a favor cannot stimulate
you to adore my majesty.”  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) Now,
though earthly blessings are there recorded, which God had conferred on
the Israelites, it is not yet right to view them but as symbols of his
benevolence: for where the wrath of God is, there death follows; but
where his love is, there is life.

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
9:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)<span id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** What shall we say then? *Is there*
unrighteousness with God? God forbid.

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span>**14.** Quid ergo dicemus? num in-justitia
est apud Deum? Absit:

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span>**15.** For he saith to Moses, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
will have compassion.

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Moses enim dicit, Miserebor cujus
miserebor, et miserebor quem miseratus fuero.

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span>**16.** So then *it is* not of him that
willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.

<span id="xiii.iv-p7"></span>**16.** Ergo non volentis neque cur-rentis,
sed miserentis est Dei.

<span id="xiii.iv-p8"></span>**17.** For the scripture saith unto
Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might
shew my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all
the earth.

<span id="xiii.iv-p9"></span>**17.** Dieit enim Scriptura Phara-oni, In
hoc ipsum excitavi te, ut os-tendam in te potentiam meam, et ut
praedicetur nomen meum in universa terra.

<span id="xiii.iv-p10"></span>**18.** Therefore hath he mercy on whom he
will *have mercy*, and whom he will he hardeneth.

<span id="xiii.iv-p11"></span>**18.** Ergo cujus vult miseretur, et quem
vult indurat.

<span id="xiii.iv-p12"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p13"></span>**14.** *What then shall we say?* *etc.*
The flesh cannot hear of this wisdom of God without being instantly
disturbed by numberless questions, and without attempting in a manner to
call God to an account. We hence find that the Apostle, whenever he
treats of some high mystery, obviates the many absurdities by which he
knew the minds of men would be otherwise possessed; for when men hear
anything of what Scripture teaches respecting predestination, they are
especially entangled with very many impediments.

<span id="xiii.iv-p14"></span>The predestination of God is indeed in
reality a labyrinth, from which the mind of man can by no means
extricate itself: but so unreasonable is the curiosity of man, that the
more perilous the examination of a subject is, the more boldly he
proceeds; so that when predestination is discussed, as he cannot
restrain himself within due limits, he immediately, through his
rashness, plunges himself, as it were, into the depth of the sea. What
remedy then is there for the godly? Must they avoid every thought of
predestination? By no means: for as the Holy Spirit has taught us
nothing but what it behoves us to know, the knowledge of this would no
doubt be useful, provided it be confined to the word of God. Let this
then be our sacred rule, to seek to know nothing concerning it, except
what Scripture teaches us: when the Lord closes his holy mouth, let us
also stop the way, that we may not go farther. But as we are men, to
whom foolish questions naturally occur, let us hear from Paul how they
are to be met.

<span id="xiii.iv-p15"></span>*Is there unrighteousness with God?*
Monstrous surely is the madness of the human mind, that it is more
disposed to charge God with unrighteousness than to blame itself for
blindness. Paul indeed had no wish to go out of his way to find out
things by which he might confound his readers; but he took up as it were
from what was common the wicked suggestion, which immediately enters the
minds of many, when they hear that God determines respecting every
individual according to his own will. It is indeed, as the flesh
imagines, a kind of injustice, that God should pass by one and show
regard to another.

<span id="xiii.iv-p16"></span>In order to remove this difficulty, Paul
divides his subject into two parts; in the, former of which he speaks of
the elect, and in the latter of the reprobate; and in the one he would
have us to contemplate the mercy of God, and in the other to acknowledge
his righteous judgment. His first reply is, that the thought that there
is injustice with God deserves to be abhorred, and then he shows that
with regard to the two parties, there can be none.

<span id="xiii.iv-p17"></span>But before we proceed further, we may
observe that this very objection clearly proves, that inasmuch as God
elects some and passes by others, the cause is not to be found in
anything else but in his own purpose; for if the difference had been
based on works, Paul would have to no purpose mentioned this question
respecting the unrighteousness of God, no suspicion could have been
entertained concerning it if God dealt with every one according to his
merit. It may also, in the second place, be noticed, that though he saw
that this doctrine could not be touched without exciting instant
clamours and dreadful blasphemies, he yet freely and openly brought it
forward; nay, he does not conceal how much occasion for murmuring and
clamour is given to us, when we hear that before men are born their lot
is assigned to each by the secret will of God; and yet, notwithstanding
all this, he proceeds, and without any subterfuges, declares what he had
learned from the Holy Spirit. It hence follows, that their fancies are
by no means to be endured, who aim to appear wiser than the Holy Spirit,
in removing and pacifying offences. That they may not criminate God,
they ought honestly to confess that the salvation or the perdition of
men depends on his free election. Were they to restrain their minds from
unholy curiosity, and to bridle their tongues from immoderate liberty,
their modesty and sobriety would be deserving of approbation; but to put
a restraint on the Holy Spirit and on Paul, what audacity it is! Let
then such magnanimity ever prevail in the Church of God, as that godly
teachers may not be ashamed to make an honest profession of the true
doctrine, however hated it may be, and also to refute whatever calumnies
the ungodly may bring forward.

<span id="xiii.iv-p18"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p19"></span>**15.** *For he saith to Moses, etc.*
 <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) With regard to the elect, God
cannot be charged with any unrighteousness; for according to his good
pleasure he favors them with mercy: and yet even in this case the flesh
finds reasons for murmuring, for it cannot concede to God the right of
showing favor to one and not to another, except the cause be made
evident. As then it seems unreasonable that some should without merit be
preferred to others, the petulancy of men quarrels with God, as though
he deferred to persons more than what is right. Let us now see how Paul
defends the righteousness of God.

<span id="xiii.iv-p21"></span>In the first place, he does by no means
conceal or hide what he saw would be disliked, but proceeds to maintain
it with inflexible firmness. And in the second place, he labours not to
seek out reasons to soften its asperity, but considers it enough to
check vile barkings by the testimonies of Scripture.

<span id="xiii.iv-p22"></span>It may indeed appear a frigid defence that
God is not unjust, because he is merciful to whom he pleases; but as God
regards his own authority alone as abundantly sufficient, so that he
needs the defence of none, Paul thought it enough to appoint him the
vindicator of his own right. Now Paul brings forward here the answer
which Moses received from the Lord, when he prayed for the salvation of
the whole people, “I will show mercy,” was God’s answer, “on whom I will
show mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.”
By this oracle the Lord declared that he is a debtor to none of mankind,
and that whatever he gives is a gratuitous benefit, and then that his
kindness is free, so that he can confer it on whom he pleases; and
lastly, that no cause higher than his own will can be thought of, why he
does good and shows favor to some men but not to all. The words indeed
mean as much as though he had said, “From him to whom I have once
purposed to show mercy, I will never take it away; and with perpetual
kindness will I follow him to whom I have determined to be kind.” And
thus he assigns the highest reason for imparting grace, even his own
voluntary purpose, and also intimates that he has designed his mercy
peculiarly for some; for it is a way of speaking which excludes all
outward causes, as when we claim to ourselves the free power of acting,
we say, “I will do what I mean to do.” The relative pronoun also
expressly intimates, that mercy is not to all indiscriminately. His
freedom is taken away from God, when his election is bound to external
causes.

<span id="xiii.iv-p23"></span>The only true cause of salvation is
expressed in the two words used by Moses. The first is <span
id="xiii.iv-p23.1"></span>חנן, *chenen,* which means to favor or to show
kindness freely and bountifully; the other is <span
id="xiii.iv-p23.2"></span>רחם, *rechem,* which is to be treated with
mercy. Thus is confirmed what Paul intended, that the mercy of God,
being gratuitous, is under no restraint, but turns wherever it pleases.
 <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296)

<span id="xiii.iv-p25"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p26"></span>**16.** *It is not then of him who wills,
etc.* From the testimony adduced he draws this inference, that beyond
all controversy our election is not to be ascribed to our diligence, nor
to our striving, nor to our efforts, but that it is wholly to be
referred to the counsel of God. That none of you may think that they who
are elected are elected because they are deserving, or because they had
in any way procured for themselves the favor of God, or, in short,
because they had in them a particle of worthiness by which God might be
moved, take simply this view of the matter, that it is neither by our
will nor efforts, (for he has put *running* for striving or endeavour,)
that we are counted among the elect, but that it wholly depends on the
divine goodness, which of itself chooses those who neither will, nor
strive, nor even think of such a thing. And they who reason from this
passage, that there is in us some power to strive, but that it effects
nothing of itself unless assisted by God’s mercy, maintain what is
absurd; for the Apostle shows not what is in us, but excludes all our
efforts. It is therefore a mere sophistry to say that we will and run,
because Paul denies that it is of him who wills or runs, since he meant
nothing else than that neither willing nor running can do anything.

<span id="xiii.iv-p27"></span>They are, however, to be condemned who
remain secure and idle on the pretence of giving place to the grace of
God; for though nothing is done by their own striving, yet that effort
which is influenced by God is not ineffectual. These things, then, are
not said that we may quench the Spirit of God, while kindling sparks
within us, by our waywardness and sloth; but that we may understand that
everything we have is from him, and that we may hence learn to ask all
things of him, to hope for all things from him, and to ascribe all
things to him, while we are prosecuting the work of our salvation with
fear and trembling.

<span id="xiii.iv-p28"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p28.1"></span>Pelagius
has attempted by another sophistical and worthless cavil to evade this
declaration of Paul, that it is not only of him who wills and runs,
because the mercy of God assists. But <span
id="xiii.iv-p28.2"></span>Augustine*,* not less solidly than acutely,
thus refuted him, “If the will of man is denied to be the cause of
election, because it is not the sole cause, but only in part; so also we
may say that it is not of mercy but of him who wills and runs, for where
there is a mutual cooperation, there ought to be a reciprocal
commendation: but unquestionably the latter sentiment falls through its
own absurdity.” Let us then feel assured that the salvation of those
whom God is pleased to save, is thus ascribed to his mercy, that nothing
may remain to the contrivance of man.  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297)

<span id="xiii.iv-p31"></span>Nor is there much more colour for what
some advance, who think that these things are said in the person of the
ungodly; for how can it be right to turn passages of Scripture in which
the justice of God is asserted, for the purpose of reproaching him with
tyranny? and then is it probable that Paul, when the refutation was at
hand and easy, would have suffered the Scripture to be treated with
gross mockery? But such subterfuges have they laid hold on, who absurdly
measured this incomparable mystery of God by their own judgment. To
their delicate and tender ears this doctrine was more grating than that
they could think it worthy of an Apostle. But they ought rather to have
bent their own stubbornness to the obedience of the Spirit, that they
might not surrender themselves up to their gross inventions.

<span id="xiii.iv-p32"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p33"></span>**17.** *For the Scripture saith, etc.* He
comes now to the second part, the rejection of the ungodly, and as there
seems to be something more unreasonable in this, he endeavours to make
it more fully evident, how God, in rejecting whom he wills, is not only
irreprehensible, but also wonderful in his wisdom and justice. He then
takes his proof from <span id="xiii.iv-p33.1"></span>[Ex
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016)<span id="xiii.iv-p33.1"></span>,
where the Lord declares that it was he who raised up Pharaoh for this
end, that while he obstinately strove to resist the power of God, he
might, by being overcome and subdued, afford a proof how invincible the
arm of God is; to bear which, much less to resist it, no human power is
able. See then the example which the Lord designed to exhibit in
Pharaoh!  <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298)

<span id="xiii.iv-p35"></span>There are here two things to be
considered, — the predestination of Pharaoh to ruin, which is to be
referred to the past and yet the hidden counsel of God, — and then, the
design of this, which was to make known the name of God; and on this
does Paul primarily dwell: for if this hardening was of such a kind,
that on its account the name of God deserved to be made known, it is an
impious thing, according to evidence derived from the contrary effect,
to charge him with any unrighteousness.

<span id="xiii.iv-p36"></span>But as many interpreters, striving to
modify this passage, pervert it, we must first observe, that for the
word, “I have raised,” or stirred up, *(*<span
id="xiii.iv-p36.2"></span>*excitavi,)* the Hebrew is, “I have
appointed,” *(*<span id="xiii.iv-p36.3"></span>*constitui,)* by which it
appears, that God, designing to show, that the contumacy of Pharaoh
would not prevent him to deliver his people, not only affirms, that his
fury had been foreseen by him, and that he had prepared means for
restraining it, but that he had also thus designedly ordained it, and
indeed for this end, — that he might exhibit a more illustrious evidence
of his own power.  <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) Absurdly then
do some render this passage, — that Pharaoh was *preserved* for a time;
for his beginning is what is spoken of here. For, seeing many things
from various quarters happen to men, which retard their purposes and
impede the course of their actions, God says, that Pharaoh proceeded
from him, and that his condition was by himself assigned to him: and
with this view agrees the verb, *I have raised up.* But that no one may
imagine, that Pharaoh was moved from above by some kind of common and
indiscriminate impulse, to rush headlong into that madness, the special
cause, or end, is mentioned; as though it had been said, — that God not
only knew what Pharaoh would do, but also designedly ordained him for
this purpose. It hence follows, that it is in vain to contend with him,
as though he were bound to give a reason; for he of himself comes forth
before us, and anticipates the objection, by declaring, that the
reprobate, through whom he designs his name to be made known, proceed
from the hidden fountain of his providence.

<span id="xiii.iv-p40"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p41"></span>**18.** *To whom he wills then he showeth
mercy, etc.* Here follows the conclusion of both parts; which can by no
means be understood as being the language of any other but of the
Apostle; for he immediately addresses an opponent, and adduces what
might have been objected by an opposite party. There is therefore no
doubt but that Paul, as we have already reminded you, speaks these
things in his own person, namely, that God, according to his own will,
favors with mercy them whom he pleases, and unsheathes the severity of
his judgment against whomsoever it seemeth him good. That our mind may
be satisfied with the difference which exists between the elect and the
reprobate, and may not inquire for any cause higher than the divine
will, his purpose was to convince us of this — that it seems good to God
to illuminate some that they may be saved, and to blind others that they
may perish: for we ought particularly to notice these words, *to whom he
wills,* and, *whom he wills:* beyond this he allows us not to proceed.

<span id="xiii.iv-p42"></span>But the word *hardens,* when applied to
God in Scripture, means not only permission, (as some washy moderators
would have it,) but also the operation of the wrath of God: for all
those external things, which lead to the blinding of the reprobate, are
the instruments of his wrath; and Satan himself, who works inwardly with
great power, is so far his minister, that he acts not, but by his
command.  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) Then that frivolous
evasion, which the schoolmen have recourse to respecting foreknowledge,
falls to the ground: for Paul teaches us, that the ruin of the wicked is
not only foreseen by the Lord, but also ordained by his counsel and his
will; and Solomon teaches as the same thing, — that not only the
destruction of the wicked is foreknown, but that the wicked themselves
have been created for this very end — that they may perish. (<span
id="xiii.iv-p46.2"></span>[Pr
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004)<span id="xiii.iv-p46.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span><span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
9:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)<span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p2"></span>**19.** Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth
he yet find fault? For who hath resisted his will?

<span id="xiii.v-p3"></span>**19.** Dices itaque mihi, Quid adhuc
conqueritur? voluntati ejus quis re-stitit?

<span id="xiii.v-p4"></span>**20.** Nay but, O man, who art thou that
repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed
*it*, Why hast thou made me thus?

<span id="xiii.v-p5"></span>**20.** Atqui, O homo, tu quis es qui
contendis judicio cum Deo! hum dicit fictile figulo, cur me sic fecisti?

<span id="xiii.v-p6"></span>**21.** Hath not the potter power over the
clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto
dishonour?

<span id="xiii.v-p7"></span>**21.** An non habet potestatem fi-gulus
luti ex eadem massa, faciendi, aliud quidem vas in honorem, aliud in
contumeliam?

<span id="xiii.v-p8"></span><span id="xiii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p9"></span>**19.** *Thou wilt then say, etc.* Here
indeed the flesh especially storms, that is, when it hears that they who
perish have been destined by the will of God to destruction. Hence the
Apostle adopts again the words of an opponent; for he saw that the
mouths of the ungodly could not be restrained from boldly clamouring
against the righteousness of God: and he very fitly expresses their
mind; for being not content with defending themselves, they make God
guilty instead of themselves; and then, after having devolved on him the
blame of their own condemnation, they become indignant against his great
power.  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) They are indeed
constrained to yield; but they storm, because they cannot resist; and
ascribing dominion to him, they in a manner charge him with tyranny. In
the same manner the Sophists in their schools foolishly dispute on what
they call his absolute justice, as though forgetful of his own
righteousness, he would try the power of his authority by throwing all
things into confusion. Thus then speak the ungodly in this passage, —
“What cause has he to be angry with us? Since he has formed us such as
we are, since he leads us at his will where he pleases, what else does
he in destroying us but punish his own work in us? For it is not in our
power to contend with him; how much soever we may resist, he will yet
have the upper hand. Then unjust will be his judgment, if he condemns
us; and unrestrainable is the power which he now employs towards us.”
What does Paul say to these things?

<span id="xiii.v-p11"></span><span id="xiii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p12"></span>**20.** *But, O man! who art thou? etc.*
 <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) As it is a participle in Greek,
we may read what follows in the present tense, *who disputest,* or
contendest, or strivest in opposition to God; for it is expressed in
Greek according to this meaning, — “Who art thou who enterest into a
dispute with God?” But there is not much difference in the sense.  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) In this first answer, he does nothing
else but beat down impious blasphemy by an argument taken from the
condition of man: he will presently subjoin another, by which he will
clear the righteousness of God from all blame.

<span id="xiii.v-p15"></span>It is indeed evident that no cause is
adduced higher than the will of God. Since there was a ready answer,
that the difference depends on just reasons, why did not Paul adopt such
a brief reply? But he placed the will of God in the highest rank for
this reason, — that it alone may suffice us for all other causes. No
doubt, if the objection had been false, that God according to his own
will rejects those whom he honors not with his favor, and chooses those
whom he gratuitously loves, a refutation would not have been neglected
by Paul. The ungodly object and say, that men are exempted from blame,
if the will of God holds the first place in their salvation, or in their
perdition. Does Paul deny this? Nay, by his answer he confirms it, that
is, that God determines concerning men, as it seems good to him, and
that, men in vain and madly rise up to contend with God; for he assigns,
by his own right, whatever lot he pleases to what he forms.

<span id="xiii.v-p16"></span>But they who say that Paul, wanting reason,
had recourse to reproof, cast a grievous calumny on the Holy Spirit: for
the things calculated to vindicate God’s justice, and ready at hand, he
was at first unwilling to adduce, for they could not have been
comprehended; yea, he so modifies his second reason, that he does not
undertake a full defence, but in such a manner as to give a sufficient
demonstration of God’s justice, if it be considered by us with devout
humility and reverence.

<span id="xiii.v-p17"></span>He reminds man of what is especially meet
for him to remember, that is, of his own condition; as though he had
said, — “Since thou art man, thou ownest thyself to be dust and ashes;
why then doest thou contend with the Lord about that which thou art not
able to understand?” In a word, the Apostle did not bring forward what
might have been said, but what is suitable to our ignorance. Proud men
clamour, because Paul, admitting that men are rejected or chosen by the
secret counsel of God, alleges no cause; as though the Spirit of God
were silent for want of reason, and not rather, that by his silence he
reminds us, that a mystery which our minds cannot comprehend ought to be
reverently adored, and that he thus checks the wantonness of human
curiosity. Let us then know, that God does for no other reason refrain
from speaking, but that he sees that we cannot contain his immense
wisdom in our small measure; and thus regarding our weakness, he leads
us to moderation and sobriety.

<span id="xiii.v-p18"></span>*Does what is formed? etc.* We see that
Paul dwells continually on this, — that the will of God, though its
reason is hid from us, is to be counted just; for he shows that he is
deprived of his right, if he is not at liberty to determine what he sees
meet concerning his creatures. This seems unpleasant to the ears of
many. There are also those who pretend that God is exposed to great
reproach were such a power ascribed to him, as though they in their
fastidiousness were better divines than Paul, who has laid down this as
the rule of humility to the faithful, that they are to admire the
sovereignty of God, and not to estimate it by their own judgment.

<span id="xiii.v-p19"></span>But he represses this arrogance of
contending with God by a most apt similitude, in which he seems to have
alluded to <span id="xiii.v-p19.1"></span>[Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009)<span id="xiii.v-p19.1"></span>,
rather than to <span id="xiii.v-p19.2"></span>[Jer
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#006)<span id="xiii.v-p19.2"></span>;
for nothing else is taught us by Jeremiah, than that Israel was in the
hand of the Lord, so that he could for his sins wholly break him in
pieces, as a potter the earthen vessel. But Isaiah ascends higher, “Woe
to him,” he says, “who speaks against his maker;” that is, the pot that
contends with the former of the clay; “shall the clay say to its former,
what doest thou?” etc. And surely there is no reason for a mortal man to
think himself better than earthen vessel, when he compares himself with
God. We are not however to be over-particular in applying this testimony
to our present subject, since Paul only meant to allude to the words of
the Prophet, in order that the similitude might have more weight.  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304)

<span id="xiii.v-p22"></span><span id="xiii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p23"></span>**21.** *Has not the worker of the clay?
etc.* The reason why what is formed ought not to contend with its
former, is, that the former does nothing but what he has a right to do.
By the word *power,* he means not that the maker has strength to do
according to his will, but that this privilege rightly and justly
belongs to him. For he intends not to claim for God any arbitrary power
but what ought to be justly ascribed to him.

<span id="xiii.v-p24"></span>And further, bear this in mind, — that as
the potter takes away nothing from the clay, whatever form he may give
it; so God takes away nothing from man, in whatever condition he may
create him. Only this is to be remembered, that God is deprived of a
portion of his honor, except such an authority over men be conceded to
him as to constitute him the arbitrator of life and death.  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305)

<span id="xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
9:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)<span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p2"></span>**22.** *What* if God, willing to show
*his* wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction:

<span id="xiii.vi-p3"></span>**22.** Quid autem si Deus volens
demonstrare iram, et notam facere potentiam suam, sustinuit in multa
patientia vasa irae, in interitum ap-parata;

<span id="xiii.vi-p4"></span>**23.** And that he might make known the
riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared
unto glory,

<span id="xiii.vi-p5"></span>**23.** Ut notas quoque faceret divi-tins
gloriae sum in vasa misericordiae, quae preparavit in gloriam?

<span id="xiii.vi-p6"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p7"></span>**22.** *And what, etc.* A second answer,
by which he briefly shows, that though the counsel of God is in fact
incomprehensible, yet his unblamable justice shines forth no less in the
perdition of the reprobate than in the salvation of the elect. He does
not indeed give a reason for divine election, so as to assign a cause
why this man is chosen and that man rejected; for it was not meet that
the things contained in the secret counsel of God should be subjected to
the judgment of men; and, besides, this mystery is inexplicable. He
therefore keeps us from curiously examining those things which exceed
human comprehension. He yet shows, that as far as God’s predestination
manifests itself, it appears perfectly just.

<span id="xiii.vi-p8"></span>The particles, <span
id="xiii.vi-p8.1"></span>εἰ δὲ, used by Paul, I take to mean, *And what
if?* so that the whole sentence is a question; and thus the sense will
be more evident: and there is here an ellipsis, when we are to consider
this as being understood, — “Who then can charge him with
unrighteousness, or arraign him?*”* for here appears nothing but the
most perfect course of justice.  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306)

<span id="xiii.vi-p15"></span>But if we wish fully to understand Paul,
almost every word must be examined. He then argues thus, — There are
vessels prepared for destruction, that is, given up and appointed to
destruction: they are also vessels of wrath, that is, made and formed
for this end, that they may be examples of God’s vengeance and
displeasure. If the Lord bears patiently for a time with these, not
destroying them at the first moment, but deferring the judgment prepared
for them, and this in order to set forth the decisions of his severity,
that others may be terrified by so dreadful examples, and also to make
known his power, to exhibit which he makes them in various ways to
serve; and, further, that the amplitude of his mercy towards the elect
may hence be more fully known and more brightly shine forth; — what is
there worthy of being reprehended in this dispensation? But that he is
silent as to the reason, why they are vessels appointed to destruction,
is no matter of wonder. He indeed takes it as granted, according to what
has been already said, that the reason is hid in the secret and
inexplorable counsel of God; whose justice it behoves us rather to adore
than to scrutinize.

<span id="xiii.vi-p16"></span>And he has mentioned *vessels,* as
commonly signifying instruments; for whatever is done by all creatures,
is, as it were, the ministration of divine power. For the best reason
then are we, the faithful, called the vessels of mercy, whom the Lord
uses as instruments for the manifestation of his mercy; and the
reprobate are the vessels of wrath, because they serve to show forth the
judgments of God.

<span id="xiii.vi-p17"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p18"></span>**23.** *That he might also make known the
riches of his glory, etc.* I doubt not but the two particles <span
id="xiii.vi-p18.1"></span>καὶ ἵνα, is an instance of a construction,
where the first word is put last; (<span
id="xiii.vi-p18.2"></span>ὕστερον πρότερον) and that this clause may
better unite with the former, I have rendered it, *That he might also
make known, etc.* *(*<span id="xiii.vi-p18.3"></span>*Ut notas quoque
faceret, etc.)* It is the second reason which manifests the glory of God
in the destruction of the reprobate, because the greatness of divine
*mercy* towards the elect is hereby more clearly made known; for how do
they differ from them except that they are delivered by the Lord from
the same gulf of destruction? and this by no merit of their own, but
through his gratuitous kindness. It cannot then be but that the infinite
mercy of God towards the elect must appear increasingly worthy of
praise, when we see how miserable are all they who escape not his wrath.

<span id="xiii.vi-p19"></span>The word *glory*, which is here twice
mentioned, I consider to have been used for God’s mercy, a metonymy of
effect for the cause; for his chief praise or glory is in acts of
kindness. So in <span id="xiii.vi-p19.1"></span>[Eph
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)<span id="xiii.vi-p19.1"></span>,
after having taught us, that we have been adopted to the praise of the
glory of his grace, he adds, that we are sealed by the Spirit of promise
unto the praise of his glory, the word grace being left out. He wished
then to show, that the elect are instruments or vessels through whom God
exercises his mercy, that through them he may glorify his name.

<span id="xiii.vi-p20"></span>Though in the second clause he asserts
more expressly that it is God who prepares the elect for glory, as he
had simply said before that the reprobate are vessels prepared for
destruction; there is yet no doubt but that the preparation of both is
connected with the secret counsel of God. Paul might have otherwise
said, that the reprobate give up or cast themselves into destruction;
but he intimates here, that before they are born they are destined to
their lot.

<span id="xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
9:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)<span
id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p2"></span>**24.** Even us, whom he hath called, not
of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles?

<span id="xiii.vii-p3"></span>**24.** Quos etiam vocavit, nimirum nos,
non solum ex Iudaeis, sed etiam ex Gentibus:

<span id="xiii.vii-p4"></span>**25.** As he saith also in Osee, I will
call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved, which
was not beloved.

<span id="xiii.vii-p5"></span>**25.** Quemadmodum et in Osee dicit,
Vocabo populum meum eum qui non est populus, et dilectam cam quae non
est dilecta:

<span id="xiii.vii-p6"></span>**26.** And it shall come to pass, *that*
in the place where it was said unto than, Ye *are* not my people; there
shall they be called the children of the living God.

<span id="xiii.vii-p7"></span>**26.** Et erit in loco ubi dictum est
eis, Non populus meus ves, illie vocabuntur filii Dei viventis.

<span id="xiii.vii-p8"></span>**27.** Esaias also crieth concerning
Israel, Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of
the sea, a remnant shall be saved:

<span id="xiii.vii-p9"></span>**27.** Iesaias autem clamat super Israel,
Si fuerit numerus filiorum Israel ut arena maris, reliquiae servabuntur:

<span id="xiii.vii-p10"></span>**28.** For he will finish the work, and
cut *it* short in righteousness: because a short work will the Lord make
upon the earth.

<span id="xiii.vii-p11"></span>**28.** Sermonem enim consummans et
abbrevians,  <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) quoniam sermonem
abbreviatum faciet Dominus in terra:

<span id="xiii.vii-p13"></span>**29.** And as Esaias said before, Except
the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been
made like unto Gomorrha.

<span id="xiii.vii-p14"></span>**29.** Et quemadmodum prius dix erat
Iesaias, Nisi Dominus Sabbaoth. Reliquisset nobis semen, instar Sodorate
facti essemus, et Gomorrhae essemus assimilati.

<span id="xiii.vii-p15"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p16"></span>**24.** *Whom he also called, etc.* From
the reasoning which he has been hitherto carrying on respecting the
freedom of divine election, two things follow, — that the grace of God
is not so confined to the Jewish people that it does not also flow to
other nations, and diffuse itself through the whole world, — and then,
that it is not even so tied to the Jews that it comes without exception
to all the children of Abraham according to the flesh; for if God’s
election is based on his own good pleasure alone, wherever his will
turns itself, there his election exists. Election being then
established, the way is now in a manner prepared for him to proceed to
those things which he designed to say respecting the calling of the
Gentiles, and also respecting the rejection of the Jews; the first of
which seemed strange for its novelty, and the other wholly unbecoming.
As, however, the last had more in it to offend, he speaks in the first
place of that which was less disliked. He says then, that the vessels of
God’s mercy, whom he selects for the glory of his name, are taken from
every people, from the Gentiles no less than from the Jews.

<span id="xiii.vii-p17"></span>But though in the relative *whom* the
rule of grammar is not fully observed by Paul,  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) yet his object was, by making as it
were a transition, to subjoin that we are the vessels of God’s glory,
who have been taken in part from the Jews and in part from the Gentiles;
and he proves from the calling of God, that there is no difference
between nations made in election. For if to be descended from the
Gentiles was no hinderance that God should not call us, it is evident
that the Gentiles are by no means to be excluded from the kingdom of God
and the covenant of eternal salvation.

<span id="xiii.vii-p19"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p20"></span>**25.** *As he says in Hosea,*  <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) *etc.* He proves now that the calling
of the Gentiles ought not to have been deemed a new thing, as it had
long before been testified by the prediction of the prophet. The meaning
is evident; but there is some difficulty in the application of this
testimony; for no one can deny but that the prophet in that passage
speaks of the Israelites. For the Lord, having been offended with their
wickedness, declared that they should be no longer his people: he
afterwards subjoined a consolation, and said, that of those who were not
beloved he would make some beloved, and from those who were not a people
he would make a people. But Paul applies to the Gentiles what was
expressly spoken to the Israelites.

<span id="xiii.vii-p22"></span>They who have hitherto been most
successful in untying this knot have supposed that Paul meant to adopt
this kind of reasoning, — “What may seem to be an hinderance to the
Gentiles to become partakers of salvation did also exist as to the
Jewish nation: as then God did formerly receive into favor the Jews,
whom he had cast away and exterminated, so also now he exercises the
same kindness towards the Gentiles.” But as this interpretation, though
it may be supported, yet seems to me to be somewhat strained, let the
readers consider this, — Whether it would not be a more suitable view to
regard the consolation given by the prophet, as intended, not only for
the Jews, but also for the Gentiles: for it was not a new or an unusual
thing with the prophets, after having pronounced on the Jews God’s
vengeance on account of their sins, to turn themselves to the kingdom of
Christ, which was to be propagated through the whole world. And this
they did, not without reason; for since the Jews so provoked God’s wrath
by their sins, that they deserved to be rejected by him, no hope of
salvation remained, except they turned to Christ, through whom the
covenant of grace was to be restored: and as it was based on him, so it
was then renewed, when he interposed. And doubtless, as Christ was the
only refuge in great extremities, no solid comfort could have been
brought to miserable sinners, and such as saw God’s wrath impending over
them, except by setting Christ before their eyes, it was usual with the
prophets, as we have reminded you, after having humbled the people by
pronouncing on them divine vengeance, to call their attention to Christ,
as the only true asylum of those in despair. And where the kingdom of
Christ is erected there also is raised up that celestial Jerusalem, into
which citizens from all parts of the world assemble. And this is what is
chiefly included in the present prophecy: for when the Jews were
banished from God’s family, they were thus reduced to a common class,
and put on a level with the Gentiles. The difference being taken away,
God’s mercy is now indiscriminately extended to all the Gentiles. We
hence see that the prophet’s prediction is fitly applied to the present
subject; in which God declares, that after having equalized the Jews and
the Gentiles, he would gather a Church for himself from aliens, so that
they who were not a people would begin to be so.

<span id="xiii.vii-p23"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p24"></span> **26.** *I will call them my people
which are not a people* This is said with respect to the divorce, which
God had already made with the people, by depriving them of all honor, so
that they did not excel other nations. Though they indeed, whom God in
his eternal counsel has destined as sons to himself, are perpetually his
sons, yet Scripture in many parts counts none to be God’s children but
those the election of whom has been proved by their calling: and hence
he teaches us not to judge, much less to decide, respecting God’s
election, except as far as it manifests itself by its own evidences.
Thus Paul, after having shown to the Ephesians that their election and
adoption had been determined by God before the creation of the world,
shortly after declares, that they were once alienated from God, (<span
id="xiii.vii-p24.2"></span>[Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.vii-p24.2"></span>,) that is, during that time when the Lord
had not manifested his love towards them; though he had embraced them in
his eternal mercy. Hence, in this passage, they are said not to be
beloved, to whom God declares wrath rather than love: for until adoption
reconciles men to God, we know that his wrath abides on them.

<span id="xiii.vii-p25"></span>The feminine gender of the participle
depends on the context of the prophet; for he had said, that a daughter
had been born to him, to whom he gave this name, *Not beloved,* in order
that the people might know that they were hated by God. Now as rejection
was the reason for hatred, so the beginning of love, as the prophet
teaches, is, when God adopts those who had been for a time strangers.
 <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310)

<span id="xiii.vii-p28"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p29"></span>**27.** *And Isaiah exclaims, etc.* He
proceeds now to the second part, with which he was unwilling to begin,
lest he should too much exasperate their minds. And it is not without a
wise contrivance, that he adduces Isaiah as exclaiming, not, speaking,
in order that he might excite more attention. But the words of the
Prophet were evidently intended to keep the Jews from glorying too much
in the flesh: for it was a thing dreadful to be heard, that of so large
a multitude, a small number only would obtain salvation. For though the
Prophet, after having described the devastation of the people, lest the
faithful should think that the covenant of God was wholly abolished,
gave some remaining hope of favor; yet he confined it to a few. But as
the Prophet predicted of his own time, let us see how could Paul rightly
apply this to his purpose. It must be in this sense, — When the Lord
resolved to deliver his people from the Babylonian captivity, his
purpose was, that this benefit of deliverance should come only to a very
few of that vast multitude; which might have been said to be the remnant
of that destruction, when compared with the great number which he
suffered to perish in exile. Now that temporal restoration was typical
of the real renovation of the Church of God; yea, it was only its
commencement. What therefore happened then, is to be now much more
completely fulfilled as the very progress and completion of that
deliverance.

<span id="xiii.vii-p30"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p31"></span>**28.** *For I will finish and shorten
the matter, etc.*  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) Omitting
various interpretations, I will state what appears to me to be the real
meaning: The Lord will so cut short, and cut off his people, that the
residue may seem as it were a consumption, that is, may have the
appearance and the vestige of a very great ruin. However, the few who
shall remain from the consumption shall be a proof of the work of God’s
righteousness, or, what I prefer, shall serve to testify the
righteousness of God throughout the world. As *word* often in Scripture
means a thing, the consummated word is put for consumption. Many
interpreters have here been grossly mistaken, who have attempted to
philosophize with too much refinement; for they have imagined, that the
doctrine of the gospel is thus called, because it is, when the
ceremonies are cut off, a brief compendium of the law; though the word
means on the contrary a consumption.  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) And not only here is an error
committed by the translator, but also in <span
id="xiii.vii-p35.6"></span>[Isa.
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023)<span id="xiii.vii-p35.6"></span>;
<span id="xiii.vii-p35.7"></span>[Isa
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#022)<span
id="xiii.vii-p35.7"></span>; and in <span
id="xiii.vii-p35.8"></span>[Eze
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#013)<span
id="xiii.vii-p35.8"></span>; where it is said, “Ah! ah! Lord God! wilt
thou make a completion of the remnant of Israel*?”* But the Prophets
meant to say, “Wilt thou destroy the very remnant with utter
destruction?*”* And this has happened through the ambiguity of the
Hebrew word. For as the word, <span id="xiii.vii-p35.9"></span>כלה*,
cale,* means to finish and to perfect, as well as to consume, this
difference has not been sufficiently observed according to the passages
in which it occurs.

<span id="xiii.vii-p36"></span>But Isaiah has not in this instance
adopted one word only, but has put down two words, *consumption,* and
*termination,* or cutting off; so that the affectation of Hebraism in
the Greek translator was singularly unseasonable; for to what purpose
was it to involve a sentence, in itself clear, in an obscure and
figurative language? It may be further added, that Isaiah speaks here
hyperbolically; for by consumption he means diminution, such as is wont
to be after a remarkable slaughter.

<span id="xiii.vii-p37"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p38"></span>**29.** *And as Isaiah had before said,
etc.*  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) He brings another
testimony from the first chapter, where the Prophet deplores the
devastation of Israel in his time: and as this had happened once, it was
no new thing. The people of Israel had indeed no pre-eminence, except
what they had derived from their ancestors; who had yet been in such a
manner treated, that the Prophet complained that they had been so
afflicted, that they were not far from having been destroyed, as Sodom
and Gomorrah had been. There was, however, this difference, that a few
were preserved for a seed, to raise up the name, that they might not
wholly perish, and be consigned to eternal oblivion. For it behoved God
to be ever mindful of his promise, so as to manifest his mercy in the
midst of the severest judgments.

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
9:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)<span
id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span>**30.** What shall we say then? That the
Gentiles, which followed not after righteousness, have attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith.

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span>**30.** Quid ergo dicemus? Quod gentes
quae non sectabantur justitiam, adeptae sunt justitiam, justi-tiam autem
ex fide:

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span>**31.** But Israel, which followed after
the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the law of righteousness.

<span id="xiii.viii-p5"></span>**31.** Israel autem sectando legem
justitiae, ad legem justitiae non per-venit.

<span id="xiii.viii-p6"></span>**32.** Wherefore? Because *they sought
it* not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. For they
stumbled at that stumblingstone;

<span id="xiii.viii-p7"></span>**32.** Quare? Quid non ex fide, sed
quasi ex operibus; offenderunt enim ad lapidem offensionis:

<span id="xiii.viii-p8"></span>**33.** As it is written, Behold, I lay
in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offence: and whosoever believeth on
him shall not be ashamed.

<span id="xiii.viii-p9"></span>**33.** Quemadmodum scriptum eat, Ecce
pono in Sion lapidem offensionis et petram offendiculi: et omnis qui
crediderit in eum non pudefiet.

<span id="xiii.viii-p10"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p11"></span>**30.** *What then, etc.* That he might
cut off from the Jews every occasion of murmuring against God, he now
begins to show those causes, which may be comprehended by human minds,
why the Jewish nation had been rejected. But they do what is absurd and
invert all order, who strive to assign and set up causes above the
secret predestination of God, which he has previously taught us is to be
counted as the first cause. But as this is superior to all other causes,
so the corruption and wickedness of the ungodly afford a reason and an
occasion for the judgments of God: and as he was engaged on a difficult
point, he introduced a question, and, as though he were in doubt, asked
what might be said on the subject.

<span id="xiii.viii-p12"></span>*That the Gentiles who did not pursue,
etc.* Nothing appeared more unreasonable, or less befitting, than that
the Gentiles, who, having no concern for righteousness, rolled
themselves in the lasciviousness of their flesh, should be called to
partake of salvation, and to obtain righteousness; and that, on the
other hand, the Jews, who assiduously laboured in the works of the law,
should be excluded from the reward of righteousness. Paul brings forward
this, which was so singular a paradox, in such a manner, that by adding
a reason he softens whatever asperity there might be in it; for he says,
that the righteousness which the Gentiles attained was by faith; and
that it hence depends on the Lord’s mercy, and not on man’s own
worthiness; and that a zeal for the law, by which the Jews were
actuated, was absurd; for they sought to be justified by works, and thus
laboured for what no man could attain to; and still further, they
stumbled at Christ, through whom alone a way is open to the attainment
of righteousness.

<span id="xiii.viii-p13"></span>But in the first clause it was the
Apostle’s object to exalt the grace of God alone, that no other reason
might be sought for in the calling of the Gentiles but this, — that he
deigned to embrace them when unworthy of his favor.

<span id="xiii.viii-p14"></span>He speaks expressly of righteousness,
without which there can be no salvation: but by saying that the
righteousness of the Gentiles proceeded from faith, he intimates, that
it was based on a gratuitous reconciliation; for if any one imagines
that they, were justified, because they had by faith obtained the Spirit
of regeneration, he departs far from the meaning of Paul; it would not
indeed have been true, that they had attained what they sought not,
except God had freely embraced them while they were straying and
wandering, and had offered them righteousness, for which, being unknown,
they could have had no desire. It must also be observed, that the
Gentiles could not have obtained righteousness by faith, except God had
anticipated their faith by his grace; for they followed it when they
first by faith aspired to righteousness; and so faith itself is a
portion of his favor.

<span id="xiii.viii-p15"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p16"></span>**31.** *But Israel, by pursuing, etc.*
Paul openly states what seemed incredible, — that it was no wonder that
the Jews gained nothing by sedulously following after righteousness; for
by running out of the way, they wearied themselves in vain. But in the
first place it seems to me that the law of righteousness is here an
instance of transposition, and means the righteousness of the law;
 <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) and then, that when repeated in
the second clause, it is to be taken in another sense, as signifying the
model or the rule of righteousness.

<span id="xiii.viii-p21"></span>The meaning then is, — “That Israel,
depending on the righteousness of the law, even that which is prescribed
in the law, did not understand the true method of justification.” But
there is a striking contrast in the expression, when he teaches us that
the legal righteousness was the cause that they had fallen away from the
law of righteousness.

<span id="xiii.viii-p22"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p23"></span>**32.** *Not by faith, but as it were by
works, etc.* As false zeal seems commonly to be justly excused, Paul
shows that they are deservedly rejected, who attempt to attain salvation
by trusting in their own works; for they, as far as they can, abolish
faith, without which no salvation can be expected. Hence, were they to
gain their object, such a success would be the annihilation of true
righteousness. You farther see how faith and the merits of works are
contrasted, as things altogether contrary to each other. As then trust
in works is the chief hinderance, by which our way to obtain
righteousness is closed up, it is necessary that we should wholly
renounce it in order that we may depend on God’s goodness alone. This
example of the Jews ought indeed justly to terrify all those who strive
to obtain the kingdom of God by works. Nor does he understand by the
works of the law, ceremonial observances, as it has been before shown,
but the merits of those works to which faith is opposed, which looks, as
I may say, with both eyes on the mercy of God alone, without casting one
glance on any worthiness of its own.

<span id="xiii.viii-p24"></span>*For they have stumbled at the stone,
etc.* He confirms by a strong reason the preceding sentence. There is
indeed nothing more inconsistent than that they should obtain
righteousness who strive to destroy it. Christ has been given to us for
righteousness, whosoever obtrudes on God the righteousness of works,
attempts to rob him of his own office. And hence it appears that
whenever men, under the empty pretence of being zealous for
righteousness, put confidence in their works, they do in their furious
madness carry on war with God himself.

<span id="xiii.viii-p25"></span>But how they stumble at Christ, who
trust in their works, it is not difficult to understand; for except we
own ourselves to be sinners, void and destitute of any righteousness of
our own, we obscure the dignity of Christ, which consists in this, that
to us all he is light, life, resurrection, righteousness, and healing.
But how is he all these things, except that he illuminates the blind,
restores the lost, quickens the dead, raises up those who are reduced to
nothing, cleanses those who are full of filth, cures and heals those
infected with diseases? Nay, when we claim for ourselves any
righteousness we in a manner contend with the power of Christ; for his
office is no less to beat down all the pride of the flesh, than to
relieve and comfort those who labour and are wearied under their burden.

<span id="xiii.viii-p26"></span>The quotation is rightly made; for God
in that passage declares that he would be to the people of Judah and of
Israel for a rock of offence, at which they should stumble and fall.
Since Christ is that God who spoke by the Prophets, it is no wonder that
this also should be fulfilled in him. And by calling Christ the *stone
of stumbling,* he reminds us that it is not to be wondered at if they
made no progress in the way of righteousness, who through their wilful
stubbornness stumbled at the rock of offence, when God had showed to
them the way so plainly.  <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) But we
must observe, that this stumbling does not properly belong to Christ
viewed in himself; but, on the contrary, it is what happens through the
wickedness of men, according to what immediately follows.

<span id="xiii.viii-p28"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p29"></span>**33.** *And every one who believes in
him shall not be ashamed.* He subjoins this testimony from another part
for the consolation of the godly; as though he had said, “Because Christ
is called the stone of stumbling, there is no reason that we should
dread him, or entertain fear instead of confidence; for he is appointed
for ruin to the unbelieving, but for life and resurrection to the
godly.” As then the former prophecy, concerning the stumbling and
offence, is fulfilled in the rebellious and unbelieving, so there is
another which is intended for the godly, and that is, that he is a firm
stone, precious, a corner-stone, most firmly fixed, and whosoever builds
on it shall never fall. By putting *shall not be ashamed* instead of
s*hall not hasten* or fall, he has followed the Greek Translator. It is
indeed certain that the Lord in that passage intended to strengthen the
hope of His people: and when the Lord bids us to entertain good hope, it
hence follows that we cannot be ashamed.  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) See a passage like this in <span
id="xiii.viii-p31.1"></span>[1Pe
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010)<span id="xiii.viii-p31.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc38012.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xiii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span> The connection seems to be this: he had
been speaking of the impossibility of separating God’s people from the
protecting influence and preserving power of his love; he had clearly
shown, that no divorce or separation can take place through any possible
circumstances. Then the Jews might say, “If this be true, then we are
safe, we are still God’s people.” Hence he proceeds to remove this
objection, and in order to prepare their mind to receive what he is
going to say and to prove, he speaks first of his deep concern for their
welfare: and then he resumes the doctrine he touched upon in <span
id="xiii.i-p14.1"></span>[Ro
8:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span
id="xiii.i-p14.1"></span>, and illustrates it by a reference to the past
dealings of God with the Jews, and proves it by passages from the
ancient Prophets. He shows that God’s people are the called according to
his purpose, and not all who wear the outward symbol of his covenant —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc38012.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xiii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p17.1"></span>Idem valet
ac secundum Christum, — it is the same with According to Christ;” “λέγω
ἐν Χριστῳ — I speak in Christ,” that is, as a Christian; to be in Christ
and to be a Christian is the same. This idea bears on the import of the
passage more than any other. It is as though he said, “Though I am in
Christ or a Christian, yet I tell you this as the truth or the fact, and
I have the testimony of conscience enlightened by the Spirit, that I
have great grief and unceasing sorrow on your account.” The Jews had the
impression that the Apostle, having become the follower of Christ, must
have necessarily entertained hatred towards them, and must have
therefore felt no concern for them; for this is really the case with all
*real* apostates, that is, with those who leave the truth for error, but
not with them who leave error for the truth. To obviate this impression
seems to have been the object here. How the idea of an oath comports
with what follows it is difficult to see. It is no argument to say that
what is here means the same as in <span id="xiii.i-p17.2"></span>[Mt
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="xiii.i-p17.2"></span>,
where it follows the verb “to swear.” There is a passage similar to this
in <span id="xiii.i-p17.3"></span>[Eph
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)<span id="xiii.i-p17.3"></span>;
but ἐν κυρίῳ there clearly signifies “by the Lord’s authority.” We may
add, that to swear by Christ would have had no influence on the Jews. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc38012.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xiii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p24.1"></span>Ut ad aras
usque procedat.” <span id="xiii.i-p24.2"></span>Ainsworth gives a
similar phrase and explains its reason, “<span
id="xiii.i-p24.3"></span>Usque ad aras amicus — As far as conscience
permits,” Gell.*,* because in swearing they held the horns of the altar.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc38012.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xiii.i-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span> Most of those who take this view of the
passage express the implied condition more distinctly than is done here.
They have regarded the wish in this sense, “I could wish were it right
or lawful.” So thought <span id="xiii.i-p25.2"></span>Chrysostom*,*
<span id="xiii.i-p25.3"></span>Photius*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p25.4"></span>Theophlylact*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p25.5"></span>Luther*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p25.6"></span>Parcus, <span id="xiii.i-p25.7"></span>Beza*,*
<span id="xiii.i-p25.8"></span>Estius*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p25.9"></span>Lightfoot*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p25.10"></span>Witsius*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p25.11"></span>Mode*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p25.12"></span>Whitby*,* and others. The words of <span
id="xiii.i-p25.13"></span>Photius are given by <span
id="xiii.i-p25.14"></span>Wolfius*, “He* says not, I wish to be
separated, but I could wish, that is, were it possible — ἠυχόμην ἂν τουτ
ἐστιν εἰ δυνατὸν ἦν,*”* <span id="xiii.i-p25.15"></span>Stuart and <span
id="xiii.i-p25.16"></span>Hodge adopt the same view. “It was a
conditional wish,” says <span id="xiii.i-p25.17"></span>Pareus*,* “like
that of Christ in <span id="xiii.i-p25.18"></span>[Mt
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="xiii.i-p25.18"></span>.
Christ knew and Paul knew that it could not be granted, and yet both
expressed their strong desire.” See <span id="xiii.i-p25.19"></span>[Ex
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span id="xiii.i-p25.19"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span>Almost all critics agree that the Vulgate
is wrong in rendering the verb <span id="xiii.i-p26.1"></span>*optabam*
— “I did wish,” as though the Apostle referred to the time, as <span
id="xiii.i-p26.2"></span>Ambrose supposed, when he was a Pharisee; but
this is wholly inconsistent with the tenor of the passage. <span
id="xiii.i-p26.3"></span>Erasmus*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p26.4"></span>Grotius*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p26.5"></span>Beza*,* and most others regard the verb as
having an optative meaning; ἂν being understood after it, as the case is
with ἐβουλόμην in <span id="xiii.i-p26.6"></span>[Ac
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#022)<span id="xiii.i-p26.6"></span>,
and ἤθελον in <span id="xiii.i-p26.7"></span>[Ga
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020)<span id="xiii.i-p26.7"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>There are two other opinions which deserve
notice. The first is, that “<span id="xiii.i-p27.1"></span>anathema“
here means excommunication, and that “from Christ” signifies from his
Church, Christ the head being taken for his body the Church, as in <span
id="xiii.i-p27.2"></span>[1Co
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)<span id="xiii.i-p27.2"></span>,
and in <span id="xiii.i-p27.3"></span>[Ga
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span id="xiii.i-p27.3"></span>,
according to the manner of the Hebrews, as <span
id="xiii.i-p27.4"></span>Grotius says, who called the wife by the name
of the husband, <span id="xiii.i-p27.5"></span>[Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p27.5"></span>.
This is the view taken by <span id="xiii.i-p27.6"></span>Hammond*,*
<span id="xiii.i-p27.7"></span>Grotius*,* and some of the Lutheran
divines. But the word “<span id="xiii.i-p27.8"></span>anathema“ has not
in Scripture this meaning, though in after-ages it had attained it both
in the Church and among the Rabbins. In the New Testament it occurs only
here and in <span id="xiii.i-p27.9"></span>[Ac
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#014)<span id="xiii.i-p27.9"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p27.10"></span>[1 Cor.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003), [1 Cor.
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022)<span id="xiii.i-p27.10"></span>;
and <span id="xiii.i-p27.11"></span>[Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="xiii.i-p27.11"></span>;
and the verb ἀναθεματίζω is found in <span id="xiii.i-p27.12"></span>[Mr
14:71](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#071)<span id="xiii.i-p27.12"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p27.13"></span>[Acts
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#014),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#021)<span id="xiii.i-p27.13"></span>;
and with κατὰ prefixed in <span id="xiii.i-p27.14"></span>[Mt
26:74](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#074)<span id="xiii.i-p27.14"></span>.
The corresponding word in Hebrew, <span id="xiii.i-p27.15"></span>הרם,
rendered *“*<span id="xiii.i-p27.16"></span>*anathema“* by the
*Septuagint,* means two things: what is separated for a holy purpose and
wholly devoted to God, incapable of being redeemed, <span
id="xiii.i-p27.17"></span>[Le
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028)<span id="xiii.i-p27.17"></span>;
and what is set apart and devoted to death or destruction, <span
id="xiii.i-p27.18"></span>[Jos
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017)<span id="xiii.i-p27.18"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p27.19"></span>[Ezr
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#008)<span id="xiii.i-p27.19"></span>.
It never means excommunication, but cutting off by death. Compare <span
id="xiii.i-p27.20"></span>[Ex
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020)<span id="xiii.i-p27.20"></span>,
and <span id="xiii.i-p27.21"></span>[De
13:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)<span
id="xiii.i-p27.21"></span>. It has hence been applied to designate a man
that is execrable and accursed, deserving death. So the Apostle uses it
in <span id="xiii.i-p27.22"></span>[1Co
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022)<span id="xiii.i-p27.22"></span>,
and <span id="xiii.i-p27.23"></span>[Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="xiii.i-p27.23"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>The other view is more in accordance with
the meaning of the term. It is thought that “<span
id="xiii.i-p28.1"></span>anathema“ means an ignominious death, and that
of one apparently separated from Christ; or that he wished to be made
“an anathema” by Christ, or for the sake of Christ, or after Christ,
that is, his example. The words ἀπὸ τοῦ Χριστοῦ create all the
difficulty in this case. This is the explanation given by <span
id="xiii.i-p28.2"></span>Jerome*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p28.3"></span>Locke*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p28.4"></span>Limborch*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p28.5"></span>Doddridge*,* and <span
id="xiii.i-p28.6"></span>Scott The first meaning, however, as materially
given by <span id="xiii.i-p28.7"></span>Calvin*,* is the most obvious
and natural.

<span id="xiii.i-p29"></span>Both <span id="xiii.i-p29.1"></span>Haldane
and <span id="xiii.i-p29.2"></span>Chalmers follow the Vulgate, and put
the clause in a parenthesis, as expressing the Apostle’s wish when
unconverted; but there is altogether an incongruity in the terms he
employs to express this wish; he surely would not have said that he
wished to be separated from Christ as an accursed thing, for that is the
meaning of <span id="xiii.i-p29.3"></span>anathema; for while he was a
Pharisee he deemed it a privilege and an honour even to persecute
Christ. And we cannot suppose that the Apostle would now describe his
former wish in terms unsuitable to what it really was, but as he now
regarded it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc38012.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xiii.i-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p42"></span> *Vitriaga* thinks that “the glory” was the
pillar of fire and the cloud in the wilderness: but <span
id="xiii.i-p42.1"></span>Beza*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p42.2"></span>Grotius*,* and <span
id="xiii.i-p42.3"></span>Hammond agree with <span
id="xiii.i-p42.4"></span>Calvin*,* that the ark is meant. See <span
id="xiii.i-p42.5"></span>[Ps
78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061)<span id="xiii.i-p42.5"></span>.
It seems to refer to those manifestations made in the tabernacle, and
afterwards in the temple, by peculiar brightness or splendour. See <span
id="xiii.i-p42.6"></span>[Exod. 40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034),
[1 Kings 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#011)<span
id="xiii.i-p42.6"></span>. This splendour or glory signified God’s
presence, a privilege peculiar to the Israelites. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc38012.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xiii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p44"></span> Why he mentions “covenants,” αἱ
διαθὢκαι*,* in the plural number, has been variously accounted for, —
“there were various things included — the land of Canaan, prosperity,
and the priesthood, — there were three laws — the moral, ceremonial, and
judicial, — there were several repetitions of the covenant made to the
patriarchs;” but if we read <span id="xiii.i-p44.1"></span>[Ga
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)<span id="xiii.i-p44.1"></span>,
we shall see the true reason, for the Apostle there makes a distinct
difference between the Abrahamic and the Mosaic covenant; but both these
belonged to the Jews. See also <span id="xiii.i-p44.2"></span>[Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="xiii.i-p44.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc38012.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xiii.i-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p50"></span> <span id="xiii.i-p50.1"></span>Stuart has
in a most convincing manner vindicated the true and obvious meaning of
this clause. There is no reading of any authority, nor any early
version, that affects the genuineness of the received text: and it is
amazing what ingenuity has been exercised by various critics to evade
the plain construction of the passage, — a remarkable instance of the
debasing power of preconceived notions. It is somewhat singular too,
that some who professed at least the doctrine of Christ’s divinity, such
as <span id="xiii.i-p50.2"></span>Erasmus*,* <span
id="xiii.i-p50.3"></span>Whitby*,* and <span
id="xiii.i-p50.4"></span>Locke*,* have attempted to make changes in the
text, and those for the most part conjectural, by which the obvious
meaning is wholly altered.

<span id="xiii.i-p51"></span>It is very clearly shown by <span
id="xiii.i-p51.1"></span>Stuart*,* that the very position of the words,
and their connection with the context, will admit of no other
construction than that which our version contains.

<span id="xiii.i-p52"></span>It is well known, that in Hebrew the word
*“blessed”* is *always* placed before “God,” or Jehovah, when it is an
ascription of praise; and it appears that the Septuagint has in more
than *thirty* instances followed the same order, and, indeed, in every
instance except one, (<span id="xiii.i-p52.1"></span>[Ps
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)<span id="xiii.i-p52.1"></span>,)
and that evidently a typographical mistake. The same is the case with
*all* the examples in the New Testament. So that if the phrase here was
a doxology, it must have been written εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεός. In the *Welsh*
language, which in many of its idioms is identically the same with the
Hebrew, the order of the words is the same: when it is a doxology, the
word “blessed” invariably precedes the word “God*;”* and when otherwise
it follows it.

<span id="xiii.i-p53"></span>The opinion of <span
id="xiii.i-p53.1"></span>Chrysostom on this sentence, to which <span
id="xiii.i-p53.2"></span>Erasmus attaches some importance, is of no
value whatever, as he did not understand Hebrew; and Paul, for the most
part, wrote as a Hebraist.

<span id="xiii.i-p54"></span>The participle ὢν, being put for ἐστι*,* is
what is common in Hebrew and in the New Testament. See a remarkable
instance of two participles and a verb in the middle, in <span
id="xiii.i-p54.1"></span>[Re 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004)<span
id="xiii.i-p54.1"></span>. It has been said, that “amen” unsuitably
follows a declarative sentence; but see an instance in <span
id="xiii.i-p54.2"></span>[Ro 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="xiii.i-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p55"></span>It is justly observed by <span
id="xiii.i-p55.1"></span>Stuart*,* that the context requires the
application of this sentence to Christ, as otherwise there would be no
antithesis to the words *“according* to the flesh.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc38012.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xiii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span> Were this the case, the verb which
follows, as <span id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>Wolfius says and proves by
an example, must have been in the infinitive mood. <span
id="xiii.ii-p13.2"></span>Piscator says the same. But <span
id="xiii.ii-p13.3"></span>Pareus and <span
id="xiii.ii-p13.4"></span>Beza take this to be the meaning; and so does
<span id="xiii.ii-p13.5"></span>Macknight*,* “Now it is not possible
that the promise of God hath fallen.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc38012.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xiii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p24"></span> <span id="xiii.ii-p24.1"></span>[Ge
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010)<span id="xiii.ii-p24.1"></span>.
The quotation is not from the Septuagint, but is much nearer a literal
version of the Hebrew: the only material difference is in the words, “at
this time,” instead of “according to the time of life.” The words in
different forms occur *four* times, — <span
id="xiii.ii-p24.2"></span>[Ge
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#021)<span id="xiii.ii-p24.2"></span>;
<span id="xiii.ii-p24.3"></span>[Gen.
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014)<span id="xiii.ii-p24.3"></span>;
<span id="xiii.ii-p24.4"></span>[Ge
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#002)<span id="xiii.ii-p24.4"></span>;
we meet with the same words in <span id="xiii.ii-p24.5"></span>[2 Kings
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#017)<span id="xiii.ii-p24.5"></span>.
It appears that the Apostle here took this expression, “at this time,”
from <span id="xiii.ii-p24.6"></span>[Ge
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#021)<span id="xiii.ii-p24.6"></span>,
while he mainly followed the text in <span id="xiii.ii-p24.7"></span>[Ge
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010)<span id="xiii.ii-p24.7"></span>.
The meaning of the phrase, “according to the time of life,” as given in
Genesis and in Kings, evidently is the time of child-bearing, what
passes between conception and the birth. This was repeatedly mentioned
in order to show that the usual course of nature would be followed,
though the conception would be miraculous; the child to be born was to
be nourished the usual time in the womb, — “according to the time of
producing life,” or of child-bearing.

<span id="xiii.ii-p25"></span>The exposition of <span
id="xiii.ii-p25.1"></span>Gesenius*,* adopted by <span
id="xiii.ii-p25.2"></span>Tholuck and <span
id="xiii.ii-p25.3"></span>Stuart*,* “when the time shall be *renewed,”*
does not comport with the passage, as it introduces a tautology. <span
id="xiii.ii-p25.4"></span>Hammond says, that the Hebrews interpret the
expression in Kings as meaning the time between the conception and the
birth. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc38012.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xiii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span> Here is a striking instance of a
difficulty as to the construction, while the meaning of the whole
passage is quite evident. The ellipsis has been variously supplied; “and
not only *this,” i.e.,* what I have stated; “and not only he,” *i.e.,*
Abraham to whom the first communication was made; “and not only *she,”
i.e.,* Sarah, mentioned in the preceding verse; “but Rebecca also is
another instance.” But it may be thus supplied, — “and not only *so,”
i.e.,* as to the word of promise; “but Rebecca also *had a word,”* or a
message conveyed to her. That the verse has a distinct meaning in itself
is evident, for the next begins with a γὰρ, “for;” and to include <span
id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>[Ro
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)<span id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>,
in a parenthesis, seems by no means satisfactory. The three verses may
be thus rendered, —

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span>**10.** And not only *so,* but Rebecca
also *received a message,* when she conceived by the first, *(i.e.,* son
or seed,) even our father Isaac:

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>**11.** for they being not yet born, and
having not done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to
election might stand, not

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span>**12.** through works, but through him
who calls, it was said to her, “The elder shall serve the younger.”

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span>The words ἐξ ἑνὸς, rendered commonly “by
one,” have never been satisfactorily accounted for. It. seems to be an
instance of Hebraism; the word <span id="xiii.iii-p17.1"></span>אחד,
“one,” means also “first.” We have other instances of this in the New
Testament; εἰς μίαν των σαββάτων — “on the first *(i.e.,* day) of the
week,” <span id="xiii.iii-p17.2"></span>[Mt
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001)<span id="xiii.iii-p17.2"></span>;
see also <span id="xiii.iii-p17.3"></span>[Mr
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#002)<span id="xiii.iii-p17.3"></span>;
<span id="xiii.iii-p17.4"></span>[Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)<span
id="xiii.iii-p17.4"></span>. “The first day” in <span
id="xiii.iii-p17.5"></span>[Ge
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005)<span id="xiii.iii-p17.5"></span>,
is rendered by the Septuagint, ἡμέρα μία. Isaac was the first son or
seed of promise: and a difference was made in the children of the very
first seed. But this meaning of εἰς is said by <span
id="xiii.iii-p17.6"></span>Schleusner to be sanctioned by Greek writers,
such as <span id="xiii.iii-p17.7"></span>Herodotus and <span
id="xiii.iii-p17.8"></span>Thucydides There is no necessity of
introducing the word “children,” at the beginning of <span
id="xiii.iii-p17.9"></span>[Ro
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)<span id="xiii.iii-p17.9"></span>;
the antecedent in this case, as it sometimes happens, comes after the
pronoun; and it is the “elder” and “younger” at the end of <span
id="xiii.iii-p17.10"></span>[Ro
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.iii-p17.10"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc38012.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xiii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p24"></span> Archbishop <span
id="xiii.iii-p24.1"></span>Usher asks this question, “Did God, before he
made man, determine to save some and reject others?” To this he gives
this answer, — “Yes, surely; before they had done either good or evil,
God in his eternal counsel set them apart.” It is the same sentiment
that is announced here by <span id="xiii.iii-p24.2"></span>Calvin But to
deduce it from what is said of Jacob and Esau, does not seem legitimate,
inasmuch as they were in a fallen condition by nature, and the reference
is evidently made to anything done personally by themselves. Election
and reprobation most clearly presuppose man as fallen and lost: it is
hence indeed, that the words derive their meaning. That it was God’s
eternal purpose to choose some of man’s fallen race, and to leave others
to perish, is clearly taught us: but this is a different question from
the one touched upon here, — that this purpose was irrespective of man’s
fall, — a sentiment which, as far as I can see, is not recognised nor
taught in Scripture. And not only <span
id="xiii.iii-p24.3"></span>Calvin*,* but many other divines, both before
and after him, seem to have gone in this respect somewhat beyond the
limits of revelation; it is true, by a process of reasoning apparently
obvious; but when we begin to reason on this high and mysterious
subject, we become soon bewildered and lost in mazes of difficulties. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc38012.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xiii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p26"></span> Nothing can be conceived more conclusive
in argument than what is contained here. The idea of foreseen works, as
the reason or the ground of election, is wholly excluded. The choice is
expressly denied to be on account of any works, and is as expressly
ascribed to the sovereign will of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p27"></span>“He does not oppose *works* to *faith,*
but to him who calls, or to the calling, which precedes faith, that is,
to that calling which is according to God’s purpose. Paul means, that
the difference between Jacob and Esau was made through the sole will and
pleasure of God, not through their wills or works, existing or
*foreseen.”* — *Poli. Syn.*

<span id="xiii.iii-p28"></span>Yet some of the Fathers, as <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.1"></span>Chrysostom and <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.2"></span>Theodoret*,* as well as some modern divines,
ascribe election to foreseen works. How this is reconcilable with the
argument of the Apostle, and with the instances he adduces, it is indeed
a very hard matter to see. One way by which the Apostle’s argument is
evaded, is, that the election here is to temporal and outward
privileges. Be it so: let this be granted; but it is adduced by the
Apostle as an illustration — and of what? most clearly of spiritual and
eternal election. He refers both to the same principle, to the free
choice of God, and not to anything in man. “God foresaw the disposition
of *each.”* — <span id="xiii.iii-p28.3"></span>Theodoret and <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.4"></span>Chrysostom “His election corresponds with the
foreseen disposition of *men.”* — <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.5"></span>Theodoret “It was done by the prescience of
God, whereby he knew while yet unborn, what each would *be.”* — <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.6"></span>Augustine These are quotations made by a
modern writer *(*<span id="xiii.iii-p28.7"></span>Bos*anquet)* with
approbation: but surely nothing could be suggested more *directly*
contrary to the statements and the argument of the Apostle. There is a
mistake, I apprehend, as to the last quotation; perhaps similar to that
made in quoting <span id="xiii.iii-p28.8"></span>Augustine on the latter
part of the 7th chapter of this Epistle, where the writer quotes a
sentiment of <span id="xiii.iii-p28.9"></span>Augustine*,* which he
afterwards retracted, a thing which has been often done by the advocates
of Popery, but by no means becoming a Protestant. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc38012.htm#fr_294) <span
id="xiii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p33"></span> The meaning of the words “loving” and
“hating” is here rightly explained. It is usual in Scripture to state a
preference in terms like these. See <span id="xiii.iii-p33.1"></span>[Ge
29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031)<span
id="xiii.iii-p33.1"></span>; <span id="xiii.iii-p33.2"></span>[Lu
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026)<span
id="xiii.iii-p33.2"></span>; <span id="xiii.iii-p33.3"></span>[Joh
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025)<span id="xiii.iii-p33.3"></span>
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc38012.htm#fr_295) <span
id="xiii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p20"></span> The quotation is from <span
id="xiii.iv-p20.1"></span>[Ex
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019)<span id="xiii.iv-p20.1"></span>,
and literally from the Septuagint. The verb ἐλεέω is to be taken here in
the sense of showing favour rather than mercy, according to the meaning
of the Hebrew word; for the idea of mercy is what the other verb,
οἰκτείρω*,* conveys. <span id="xiii.iv-p20.2"></span>Schleusner renders
it here and in some other passages in this sense. The rendering then
would be — “I will favour whom I favour,” that is, whom I choose to
favour; “and I will pity whom I pity,” which means whom I choose to
pity. The latter verb in both clauses is in Hebrew in the future tense,
but rendered properly in Greek in the present, as it commonly expresses
a present act. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc38012.htm#fr_296) <span
id="xiii.iv-p23.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p24"></span> These two words clearly show that
election regards man as fallen; for favour is what is shown to the
undeserving, and mercy to the wretched and miserable, so that the choice
that is made is out of the corrupted mass of mankind, contemplated in
that state, and not as in a state of innocency. <span
id="xiii.iv-p24.1"></span>Augustine says, “<span
id="xiii.iv-p24.2"></span>Deus alios facit vasa irae secundum meritus;
alios vasa miserieordiae secundum gratiam — God makes some vessels of
wrath according to their merit; others vessels of mercy according to his
grace.” In another place he says, “<span id="xiii.iv-p24.3"></span>Deus
ex eadem massa damnata originaliter, tanquam figulus, fecit aliud vas ad
honorem, aliud in contumeliam — God, as a potter, made of the same
originally condemned mass, one vessel to honor, another to dishonor.”
“Two sorts of vessels God forms out of the great lump of fallen
mankind.” — <span id="xiii.iv-p24.4"></span>Henry

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc38012.htm#fr_297) <span
id="xiii.iv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p29"></span> The terms “willing” and “running” are
evidently derived from the circumstances connected with the history of
Esau. “In vain,” says <span id="xiii.iv-p29.1"></span>Turrettin*, “*did
Esau seek the blessing. In vain did Isaac hasten to grant it, and in
vain did Esau run to procure venison for his father; neither the
father’s willingness nor the running of the son availed anything; God’s
favour overruled the whole.” But the subject handled is God’s
sovereignty in the manifestation of his favour and grace. Esau was but a
type of the unbelieving Jews, when the gospel was proclaimed, and of
thousands of such as are in name Christians. There is some sort of
“willing,” and a great deal of “running,” and yet the blessing is not
attained. There was much of apparent willing, and running in the strict
formality and zeal of Pharisaism, and there is much of the same kind
still in the austerities and mechanical worship of superstition, and
also in the toils and devotions of self-righteousness. The word or the
revealed will of God is in all these instances misunderstood and
neglected.

<span id="xiii.iv-p30"></span>Isaac’s “willingness” to give the blessing
to Esau, notwithstanding the announcement made at his birth, and
Rebecca’s conduct in securing it to Jacob, are singular instances of
man’s imperfections, and of the overruling power of God. Isaac acted as
though he had forgotten what God had expressed as his will; and Rebecca
acted as though God could not effect his purpose without her
interference, and an interference, too, in a way highly improper and
sinful. It was the trial of faith, and the faith of both halted
exceedingly; yet the purpose of God was still fulfilled, but the
improper manner in which it was fulfilled was afterwards visited with
God’s displeasure. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc38012.htm#fr_298) <span
id="xiii.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p34"></span> “For,” at the beginning of this verse,
connects it with <span id="xiii.iv-p34.1"></span>[Ro
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)<span id="xiii.iv-p34.1"></span>;
it is the second reason given for what that verse contains: this is in
accordance with Paul’s manner of writing, and it may be rendered here,
moreover, or besides, or farther. <span
id="xiii.iv-p34.2"></span>Macknight renders it “besides.” Were γὰρ
rendered thus in many instances, the meaning would be much more evident.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc38012.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xiii.iv-p36.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p37"></span> It is somewhat remarkable, that Paul, in
quoting this passage, <span id="xiii.iv-p37.2"></span>[Ex
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.2"></span>,
substitutes a clause for the first that is given by the *Septuagint:*
instead of “ἓνεκεν τούτο διετηρήθης on this account thou hast been
preserved,” he gives, “εἰς αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἐξήγειρά σε — for this very end
have I raised thee.” The Hebrew is, “And indeed for this end have I made
thee to stand, <span id="xiii.iv-p37.3"></span>העמדתיך” The verb used by
Paul is found only in one other place in the New Testament, <span
id="xiii.iv-p37.4"></span>[1Co
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#014)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.4"></span>;
where it refers to the resurrection. In the *Septuagint* it often
occurs, but never, as <span id="xiii.iv-p37.5"></span>Stuart tells us,
in the sense of *creating,* or bringing *into existence,* but in that of
*exciting, rousing* from sleep, or *rendering active.* References are
made to <span id="xiii.iv-p37.6"></span>[Gen.
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#016), [Judg.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012), [Ps.
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007), [Jer.
50:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#041), [Joel
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.6"></span>,
etc. Hence it is by him rendered here, “I have roused thee up.” But to
make the Hebrew verb to bear this sense is by no means easy: the three
places referred to, <span id="xiii.iv-p37.7"></span>[Neh.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#007), [Dan.
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#013)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.7"></span>,
do not seem to afford a satisfactory proof. <span
id="xiii.iv-p37.8"></span>[Ps
107:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#025)<span
id="xiii.iv-p37.8"></span>, is more to the point. Its first meaning is,
*to make to stand,* and then, *to present* persons, <span
id="xiii.iv-p37.9"></span>[Nu
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#006)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.9"></span>,
— -to *establish* or *make strong* a kingdom or a city, <span
id="xiii.iv-p37.10"></span>[1Ki
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#004)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.10"></span>,
— to *fix* persons in office, <span id="xiii.iv-p37.11"></span>[2Ch
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#002)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.11"></span>,
— to *set up* or build a house, <span id="xiii.iv-p37.12"></span>[Ezr
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#009)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.12"></span>,
— to *appoint* teachers, <span id="xiii.iv-p37.13"></span>[Ne
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#007)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.13"></span>,
— and to *arrange* or *set in order* an army, <span
id="xiii.iv-p37.14"></span>[Da
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#013)<span
id="xiii.iv-p37.14"></span>. Such are the ideas included in this verb.
“I have made thee to stand,” established, or made thee strong, may be
its meaning in this passage. To establish or to make one strong, is more
than to *preserve,* the word used by the *Septuagint:* and hence it was,
it may be, that Paul adopted another word, which conveys the idea, that
Pharaoh had been elevated into greater power than his predecessors,
which the Hebrew verb seems to imply.

<span id="xiii.iv-p38"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p38.1"></span>Venema*,*
as well as <span id="xiii.iv-p38.2"></span>Stuart*,* thought that the
idea of *exciting, rousing* in to action, or *stimulating,* is to be
ascribed to the verbs here used, and that what is meant is, that God by
his plagues awakened and excited all the evil that was in Pharaoh’s
heart for the purposes here described, and that by this process he
*“hardened”* him; and the conclusion of <span
id="xiii.iv-p38.3"></span>[Ro
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)<span id="xiii.iv-p38.3"></span>
seems to favour this view, for the hardening mentioned there can have no
reference to anything in the context except to what is said in this
verse.

<span id="xiii.iv-p39"></span>But the simpler view is that mentioned by
<span id="xiii.iv-p39.1"></span>Wolfius — that reference is made to the
dangers which Pharaoh had already escaped. God says, “I have made thee
to stand,” *i.e.,* to remain alive in the midst of them. We hence see
the reason why Paul changed the verb; for “preserve,” used by the
*Septuagint,* did not fully express the meaning; but to “raise *up,”* as
it were from the jaws of death, conveys more fully what is meant by the
original. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc38012.htm#fr_300) <span
id="xiii.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p43"></span> Much has been unnecessarily written on
this subject of *hardening.* Pharaoh is several times said to have
hardened his own heart, and God is said also several times to have
hardened him too. The Scripture in many instances makes no minute
distinctions, for these may be easily gathered from the general tenor of
its teaching. God is in his nature holy, and therefore hardening as his
act cannot be sinful: and as he is holy, he hates sin and punishes it;
and for this purpose he employs wicked men, and even Satan himself, as
in the case of Ahab. As a punishment, he affords occasions and
opportunities to the obstinate even to increase their sins, and thus in
an indirect way hardens them in their rebellion and resistance to his
will; and this was exactly the case with Pharaoh. This, as <span
id="xiii.iv-p43.1"></span>Calvin says, was the operation or working of
his wrath. The history of Pharaoh is a sufficient explanation of what is
said here. He was a cruel tyrant and oppressor; and God in his first
message to Moses said, “I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let
you go, no, not by a mighty hand.” God might indeed have softened his
heart and disposed him to allow them to depart: but it pleased him to
act otherwise, and to manifest his power and his greatness in another
way: so that “whom he wills, he favours, and whom he wills, he hardens;”
and for reasons known only to himself.

<span id="xiii.iv-p44"></span>Reference is at the end of this section
made to <span id="xiii.iv-p44.1"></span>[Pr
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004)<span id="xiii.iv-p44.1"></span>.
The creation mentioned can be understood in no other sense than the
continued exercise of divine power in bringing into existence human
beings in their present fallen state. But “creation” is not the word
used, nor is the passage correctly rendered. It is not <span
id="xiii.iv-p44.2"></span>ברא nor <span id="xiii.iv-p44.3"></span>עשה,
but <span id="xiii.iv-p44.4"></span>פעל; and it is not a verb but a
substantive. Literally rendered the passage is the following —

<span id="xiii.iv-p45"></span>Every work of Jehovah *is* for its (or,
his) purpose,  
And even the wicked *is* for the day of calamity.

<span id="xiii.iv-p46"></span>The Rev. <span
id="xiii.iv-p46.1"></span>G. Holden is very indignant that this text has
been applied to support the doctrine of reprobation. Be it, that it has
been misapplied; yet the doctrine does not thereby fall to the ground.
If Paul does not maintain it in this chapter and in other passages, we
must hold that words have no meaning. The history of God’s providence is
an obvious confirmation of the same awful truth. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc38012.htm#fr_301) <span
id="xiii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p10"></span> The clause rendered by <span
id="xiii.v-p10.1"></span>Calvin*, “*<span
id="xiii.v-p10.2"></span>*Quid* adhuc conqueritur — why does he yet
complain?” is rendered by <span id="xiii.v-p10.3"></span>Beza*, “*<span
id="xiii.v-p10.4"></span>*quid* adhuc suecenset — why is he yet angry?”
Our common version is the best, and is followed by <span
id="xiii.v-p10.5"></span>Doddridge*,* <span
id="xiii.v-p10.6"></span>Macknight*,* and <span
id="xiii.v-p10.7"></span>Stuart The γὰρ, in the next clause, is omitted
by <span id="xiii.v-p10.8"></span>Calvin*,* but <span
id="xiii.v-p10.9"></span>Griesbach says that it ought to be retained. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc38012.htm#fr_302) <span
id="xiii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p13"></span> “But” is not sufficiently emphatical here;
μενοῦνγε; “yes, verily,” in <span id="xiii.v-p13.1"></span>[Ro
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span id="xiii.v-p13.1"></span>;
“yea, rather,” in <span id="xiii.v-p13.2"></span>[Lu
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#028)<span id="xiii.v-p13.2"></span>;
“doubtless,” in <span id="xiii.v-p13.3"></span>[Php
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="xiii.v-p13.3"></span>; it
may be rendered here, “nay, rather.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc38012.htm#fr_303) <span
id="xiii.v-p13.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p14"></span> “<span id="xiii.v-p14.1"></span>Quis es
qui contendas judicio cum Deo;” τίς εἶ ὁ ἀνταποκρινόμενος τῳ Θεῳ “that
repliest against God,” is the rendering of <span
id="xiii.v-p14.2"></span>Macknight and <span
id="xiii.v-p14.3"></span>Stuart*; “who* enterest into a debate with
God,” is what <span id="xiii.v-p14.4"></span>Doddridge gives. The verb
occurs once in another place, <span id="xiii.v-p14.5"></span>[Lu
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#006)<span id="xiii.v-p14.5"></span>,
and “answer again” is our version. <span
id="xiii.v-p14.6"></span>Schleusner says that ἀντὶ prefixed to verbs is
often redundant. In <span id="xiii.v-p14.7"></span>[Job
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008), [Job
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#012)<span id="xiii.v-p14.7"></span>,
this compound is used by the Septuagint simply in the sense of
answering, for <span id="xiii.v-p14.8"></span>ענה He renders it here,
“<span id="xiii.v-p14.9"></span>cure Deo altercari — to quarrel, or,
dispute with God.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc38012.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xiii.v-p19.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p20"></span> The words in <span
id="xiii.v-p20.1"></span>[Ro 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span
id="xiii.v-p20.1"></span> are taken almost literally from <span
id="xiii.v-p20.2"></span>[Isa
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#016)<span id="xiii.v-p20.2"></span>,
only the latter clause is somewhat different; the sentence is, “μὴ ἐρεῖ
τὸ πλάσμα τῷ πλάσαντι αὐτὸ οὐ σύ με ἔπλασας — shall what is formed say
to its former, Thou hast not formed me?” This is a faithful rendering of
the Hebrew.

<span id="xiii.v-p21"></span>Then the words in <span
id="xiii.v-p21.1"></span>[Ro 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span
id="xiii.v-p21.1"></span> are not verbally taken from either of the two
places referred to above; but the simile is adopted. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc38012.htm#fr_305) <span
id="xiii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p25"></span> The metaphor in these verses is doubtless
to be interpreted according to the context. Not only <span
id="xiii.v-p25.1"></span>Calvin*,* but many others, have deduced from it
what is not consistent with what the next verse contains, which gives
the necessary explanation. By the “mass” or the lump of clay, is not
meant mankind, contemplated as creatures, but as fallen creatures; or,
as <span id="xiii.v-p25.2"></span>Augustine and <span
id="xiii.v-p25.3"></span>Pareus call them, “<span
id="xiii.v-p25.4"></span>massa damnata — the condemned mass;” for they
are called in the next verse *vessels of wrath,* that is, the objects of
wrath; and such are all by nature, according to what Paul says in <span
id="xiii.v-p25.5"></span>[Eph 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span
id="xiii.v-p25.5"></span>; “we were,” he says, “by nature the children
of wrath, even as others.”

<span id="xiii.v-p26"></span>“The words, ‘I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy,’ imply that all deserved wrath; so that the lump of
clay in the hands of the potter must refer to men already existing in
God’s foreknowledge as fallen creatures.” — <span
id="xiii.v-p26.1"></span>Scott

<span id="xiii.v-p27"></span>In all the instances in which this metaphor
is used by Isaiah and Jeremiah, it is applied to the Jews in *their
state of degeneracy,* and very pointedly in <span
id="xiii.v-p27.1"></span>[Isa
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008)<span id="xiii.v-p27.1"></span>:
where it is preceded, in <span id="xiii.v-p27.2"></span>[Isa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006)<span id="xiii.v-p27.2"></span>,
by that remarkable passage, “We are all as an unclean thing,” etc. The
clay then, or the mass, is the mass of mankind as corrupted and
depraved. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc38012.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xiii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p9"></span> Critics have in various ways attempted to
supply the ellipsis, but what is here proposed is most approved. <span
id="xiii.vi-p9.1"></span>Beza considered the corresponding clause to be
at <span id="xiii.vi-p9.2"></span>[Ro
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)<span id="xiii.vi-p9.2"></span>,
and viewed the intervening verses as parenthetic, “And if God,” etc., —
“What then shall we say?” <span id="xiii.vi-p9.3"></span>Grotius
subjoined, “Does God do any wrong?” <span
id="xiii.vi-p9.4"></span>Elsner*,”* Has he not the power?” and <span
id="xiii.vi-p9.5"></span>Wolfius,” What canst, thou say against God?”
<span id="xiii.vi-p9.6"></span>Stuart proposes to repeat the question in
<span id="xiii.vi-p9.7"></span>[Ro
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span id="xiii.vi-p9.7"></span>,
“Who art thou?” etc. Some connect this verse with the question in <span
id="xiii.vi-p9.8"></span>[Ro 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span
id="xiii.vi-p9.8"></span>, and include the latter part of it and <span
id="xiii.vi-p9.9"></span>[Ro 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span
id="xiii.vi-p9.9"></span> in a parenthesis. Whatever way may be adopted,
the sense is materially the same. It has also been suggested that εἰ δὲ
is for εἴπερ, *since, seeing,* <span id="xiii.vi-p9.10"></span>[2Th
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span id="xiii.vi-p9.10"></span>;
<span id="xiii.vi-p9.11"></span>[1Pe
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#003)<span id="xiii.vi-p9.11"></span>.
In this case no apodosis is necessary. But we may take εἰ as meaning
*since,* and δὲ as an iliatire, and render the three verses thus, —

<span id="xiii.vi-p10"></span>**22.** “Since then God willed (or, it was
God’s will) to show His wrath and to make known his power, he endured
with much forbearance the vessels of wrath, fitted for destruction;

<span id="xiii.vi-p11"></span>**23.** So *he willed* to make known the
riches of his glory towards the vessels of mercy, whom he has
fore-prepared for glory,

<span id="xiii.vi-p12"></span>**24.** Even us, whom he has called not
only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles.”

<span id="xiii.vi-p13"></span>The verb ἐστι, or ἦν, is often understood
after participles, especially in Hebrew; and καὶ has the meaning of ‘so’
in some instances, <span id="xiii.vi-p13.1"></span>[Mt
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="xiii.vi-p13.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.vi-p13.2"></span>[Ac
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span id="xiii.vi-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="xiii.vi-p13.3"></span>[Ga
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="xiii.vi-p13.3"></span>;
and in some cases, as <span id="xiii.vi-p13.4"></span>Schleusner says,
without being preceded by any particle of comparison, such as <span
id="xiii.vi-p13.5"></span>[Mt
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#026)<span id="xiii.vi-p13.5"></span>,
and <span id="xiii.vi-p13.6"></span>[1 John
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028)<span id="xiii.vi-p13.6"></span>;
but εἰ; here stands somewhat in that character.

<span id="xiii.vi-p14"></span>The beginning of <span
id="xiii.vi-p14.1"></span>[Ro
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)<span id="xiii.vi-p14.1"></span>
presents an anomaly, if, with <span id="xiii.vi-p14.2"></span>Stuart and
others, we consider “willing:” or wills to be understood, as it is
followed in the preceding verse by an infinitive, and here by a
subjunctive mood. But <span id="xiii.vi-p14.3"></span>Beza*,* <span
id="xiii.vi-p14.4"></span>Grotius*,* and <span
id="xiii.vi-p14.5"></span>Hammond*,* seem to regard the verb “endured,”
to be here, as it were, repeated, which gives the same meaning to the
passage as that which is given to it by <span
id="xiii.vi-p14.6"></span>Calvin — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc38012.htm#fr_307) <span
id="xiii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p12"></span> “In righteousness,” left out. The word
rendered “matter” is “<span id="xiii.vii-p12.1"></span>sermo,” But it is
explained in this sense in the comment. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc38012.htm#fr_308) <span
id="xiii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p18"></span> It is an instance of Hebraism, the use
of a double *pronoun* — *whom* and *us*, governed by the same verb. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc38012.htm#fr_309) <span
id="xiii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p21"></span> <span id="xiii.vii-p21.1"></span>[Ho
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span id="xiii.vii-p21.1"></span>.
See <span id="xiii.vii-p21.2"></span>[1Pe
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010)<span id="xiii.vii-p21.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc38012.htm#fr_310) <span
id="xiii.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p26"></span> The quotation is from <span
id="xiii.vii-p26.1"></span>[Ho
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span id="xiii.vii-p26.1"></span>,
and is not literal either from the Hebrew or from the *Septuagint.* The
order of the verse is reversed; and the word “beloved” is taken from the
*Septuagint.* “Not beloved,” in Hebrew, is *lo-ruhamah,* *i.e.,* one not
pitied, or one who has not received mercy: which is the same in meaning.

<span id="xiii.vii-p27"></span>In <span id="xiii.vii-p27.1"></span>[Ro
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026)<span id="xiii.vii-p27.1"></span>,
the words are taken from <span id="xiii.vii-p27.2"></span>[Ho
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010)<span id="xiii.vii-p27.2"></span>
and are not *verbatim* either from the Hebrew or the *Septuagint,* but
the difference is very trifling. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc38012.htm#fr_311) <span
id="xiii.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p32"></span> <span
id="xiii.vii-p32.1"></span>Sermonem enim consummans et abbrevians,”
etc.; Λόγον γὰρ, etc. It is literally the *Septuagint* except in two
instances: Paul puts in γὰρ, and substitutes ἐπὶ τὢς γὢς for ἐν τὣ
οἰκουμένὟ ὅλὟ. It is a difficult passage in Hebrew: but the following
rendering will make it materially consistent with the words of the
Apostle, who evidently did not intend to give the words literally.

<span id="xiii.vii-p33"></span>A destruction, soon executed,  
*Shall* overflow in righteousness;  
For completed and soon executed shall it be;  
The Lord, Jehovah of hosts, shall do *it,  
*In the midst of the whole land.

<span id="xiii.vii-p34"></span>The word rendered above “soon executed,”
means literally, abbreviated or cut short, signifying the quick
execution of a thing or work. *“Shall* overflow in righteousness,”
imports, “*shall* justly or deservedly overflow.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc38012.htm#fr_312) <span
id="xiii.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p35"></span> There are many venerable names in favour
of this opinion, such as <span id="xiii.vii-p35.1"></span>Ambrose*,*
<span id="xiii.vii-p35.2"></span>Chrysostom*,* <span
id="xiii.vii-p35.3"></span>Augustine*,* etc. Not knowing the Hebrew
language, they attached a classical meaning to the expression, λόγον
συντετμημένον, wholly at variance with what the Hebrew means, as <span
id="xiii.vii-p35.4"></span>Calvin justly observes. The word,
συντετμημένον, in this passage, as <span
id="xiii.vii-p35.5"></span>Schleusner says, bears a meaning different
from what it has in the classics; it imports what is cut short, that is,
quickly executed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc38012.htm#fr_313) <span
id="xiii.vii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p39"></span> <span id="xiii.vii-p39.1"></span>[Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="xiii.vii-p39.1"></span>.
The words of the Septuagint are given literally, and differ only in one
instance from the Hebrew; “seed” is put for “remnant;” but as “seed” in
this case evidently means a small portion reserved for sowing, the idea
of the original is conveyed. <span id="xiii.vii-p39.2"></span>Schleusner
refers to examples both in <span id="xiii.vii-p39.3"></span>Josephus and
<span id="xiii.vii-p39.4"></span>Plato*,* in which the word “seed,” is
used in the sense of a small reserved portion. Its most common meaning
in Scripture is posterity.

<span id="xiii.vii-p40"></span>Paul has given *“Sabaoth”* from the
Septuagint, which is the Hebrew untranslated. This word, in connection
with God, is variously rendered by the Septuagint: for the most part in
Isaiah, and in some other places, it is found untranslated as here; but
in the Psalms and in other books, it is often rendered τῶν δυναμέων,
that is, Jehovah or Lord “of the powers,” and often παντοκράτωρ,
“*omnipotent*;” and sometimes ὁ ἃγιος “the holy one.” But our version,
“Jehovah” or “Lord of hosts,” is the proper rendering. It means the
hosts of animate and inanimate creatures; in fact, the whole universe,
all created things; but, according to the context, it often specifically
refers to material things, or to things immaterial. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc38012.htm#fr_314) <span
id="xiii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p17"></span> There seems to be no necessity for this
transposition. “A law (not the law) of righteousness” means a law which
prescribes righteousness, and which, if done, would have conferred
righteousness. But the Jews following this did not attain to a law of
righteousness, such a law as secured righteousness. The Apostle often
uses the same words in the same verse in a different sense, and leaves
the meaning to be made out by the context. <span
id="xiii.viii-p17.1"></span>Grotius takes “law” as meaning way, “They
followed the way of righteousness, but did not attain to a way of
righteousness.”

<span id="xiii.viii-p18"></span>What follows the question in the next
verse stands more connected with <span id="xiii.viii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)<span id="xiii.viii-p18.1"></span>
than with <span id="xiii.viii-p18.2"></span>[Ro
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)<span
id="xiii.viii-p18.2"></span>; and we must consider that the word
righteousness, and not law, is referred to by “it” after the verb
“pursue,” which is evidently to be understood before the words, “not by
faith,” etc., as the sentence is clearly elliptical.

<span id="xiii.viii-p19"></span>The verb διώκω, rendered “<span
id="xiii.viii-p19.1"></span>sector“ by <span
id="xiii.viii-p19.2"></span>Calvin*,* means strictly to pursue what
flees away from us, whether a wild beast or an enemy; it signifies also
to follow a leader, and to run a race, and further, to desire, to attend
to, or *earnestly* to seek a thing: and in this latter sense Paul often
uses it. See <span id="xiii.viii-p19.3"></span>[Rom.
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013), [Rom.
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019), [1 Cor.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)<span
id="xiii.viii-p19.3"></span>. Similar is the application of the
corresponding verb, <span id="xiii.viii-p19.4"></span>רדף in Hebrew. See
<span id="xiii.viii-p19.5"></span>[Deut.
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020), [Ps.
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014)<span
id="xiii.viii-p19.5"></span> *“*<span
id="xiii.viii-p19.6"></span>*Quaero* — *to* seek,” is the word adopted
by <span id="xiii.viii-p19.7"></span>Grotius

<span id="xiii.viii-p20"></span>But <span
id="xiii.viii-p20.1"></span>Pareus and <span
id="xiii.viii-p20.2"></span>Hammond consider that there are here three
agonistic terms, διώκων κατέλαβε, and ἔφθασε. The first signifies the
running; the third, the reaching of the goal; and the second, the laying
hold on the prize: and with this corresponds the stumbling afterwards
mentioned. The Gentiles did not run at all, but the Jews did, and in
running, they stumbled; while the Gentiles reached the goal, not by
running, or by their own efforts, but by faith, and laid hold on the
prize of righteousness. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc38012.htm#fr_315) <span
id="xiii.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p27"></span> “Error is often a greater obstacle to
the salvation of men than carelessness or vice... Let no man think error
in doctrine a slight practical evil. No road to perdition has ever been
more thronged than that of false doctrine. Error is a shield over the
conscience and a bandage over the eyes.” — *Professor* <span
id="xiii.viii-p27.1"></span>Hodge

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc38012.htm#fr_316) <span
id="xiii.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p30"></span> The citation in this verse is made in a
remarkable manner. The first part, “Behold I lay in Zion,” is taken from
<span id="xiii.viii-p30.1"></span>[Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span
id="xiii.viii-p30.1"></span>; what follows, “a stone of stumbling and
rock of offense,” is taken from <span id="xiii.viii-p30.2"></span>[Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span
id="xiii.viii-p30.2"></span>; and then the last words, “and whosoever
believes in him shall not be ashamed,” are given from the preceding
passage in <span id="xiii.viii-p30.3"></span>[Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span
id="xiii.viii-p30.3"></span>. The subject is the same.

<span id="xiii.viii-p31"></span>With respect to the last clause Paul has
followed the *Septuagint*, “shall not be ashamed.” But the Hebrew word,
rendered in our version “shall not make haste,” will bear a similar
meaning, and may be translated, shall not hurry or be confounded. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc38013)
