[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc38009)  [Next](cc38011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to
them that know the law,) how that the law hath dominion over a man as
long as he liveth?

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Num ignoratis fratres (scientibus enim
Legem loquor) quod Lex dominatur homini quamdiu vivit?

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** For the woman which hath an husband is
bound by the law to *her* husband so long as he liveth; but if the
husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of *her* husband.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Nam viro subjecta mulier, viventi viro
alligata est per Legem; quod si mortuus fuerit vir, soluta est a Lege
viri.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**3.** So then if, while *her* husband liveth,
she be married to another man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if
her husband be dead, she is free from that law; so that she is no
adulteress, though she be married to another man.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Proinde vivente marito, si alteri viro
conjuncta fuerit, adultera vocabitur: quod si mortuus fuerit vir,
liberata est a Lege ne amplius sit adultera si alteri nupserit.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**4.** Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are
become dead to the law by the body of Christ; that ye should be married
to another, *even* to him who is raised from the dead, that we should
bring forth fruit unto God.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Itaque fratres mei, vos quoque mortui
estis Legi per corpus Christi, ut posthac alterius sitis, ejus qui ex
mortuis suscitatus est, ut fructificemus Deo.  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md)

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span><span id="xi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>Though he had, in a brief manner,
sufficiently explained the question respecting the abrogation of the
law; yet as it was a difficult one, and might have given rise to many
other questions, he now shows more at large how the law, with regard to
us, is become abrogated; and then he sets forth what good is thereby
done to us: for while it holds us separated from Christ and bound to
itself, it can do nothing but condemn us. And lest any one should on
this account blame the law itself, he takes up and confutes the
objections of the flesh, and handles, in a striking manner, the great
question respecting the use of the law.  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md)

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**1.** *Know ye not,* *etc.* Let the general
proposition be that the law was given to men for no other end but to
regulate the present life, and that it belongs not to those who are
dead: to this he afterwards subjoins this truth — that we are dead to it
through the body of Christ. Some understand, that the dominion of the
law continues so long to bind us as it remains in force. But as this
view is rather obscure, and does not harmonize so well with the
proposition which immediately follows, I prefer to follow those who
regard what is said as referring to the life of man, and not to the law.
The question has indeed a peculiar force, as it affirms the certainty of
what is spoken; for it shows that it was not a thing new or unknown to
any of them, but acknowledged equally by them all.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>*(For to those who know the law I speak.)*
This parenthesis is to be taken in the same sense with the question, as
though he had said — that he knew that they were not so unskilful in the
law as to entertain any doubt on the subject. And though both sentences
might be understood of all laws, it is yet better to take them as
referring to the law of God, which is the subject that is discussed.
There are some who think that he ascribes knowledge of the law to the
Romans, because the largest part of the world was under their power and
government; but this is puerile: for he addressed in part the Jews or
other strangers, and in part common and obscure individuals; nay, he
mainly regarded the Jews, with whom he had to do respecting the
abrogation of the law: and lest they should think that he was dealing
captiously with them, he declares that he took up a common principle,
known to them all, of which they could by no means be ignorant, who had
from their childhood been brought up in the teaching of the law.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span><span id="xi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>**2.** *For a woman subject to a man,* *etc.*
He brings a similitude, by which he proves, that we are so loosed from
the law, that it does not any longer, properly and by its own right,
retain over us any authority: and though he could have proved this by
other reasons, yet as the example of marriage was very suitable to
illustrate the subject, he introduced this comparison instead of
evidence to prove his point. But that no one may be puzzled, because the
different parts of the comparison do not altogether correspond, we are
to be reminded, that the Apostle designedly intended, by a little
change, to avoid the invidiousness of a stronger expression. He might
have said, in order to make the comparison complete, “A woman after the
death of her husband is loosed from the bond of marriage: the law, which
is in the place of a husband to us, is to us dead; then we are freed
from its power.” But that he might not offend the Jews by the asperity
of his expressions, had he said that the law was dead, he adopted a
digression, and said, that we are dead to the law  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) To some indeed he appears to reason
from the less to the greater: however, as I fear that this is too
strained, I approve more of the first meaning, which is simpler. The
whole argument then is formed in this manner “The woman is bound to her
living husband by the law, so that she cannot be the wife of another;
but after the death of her husband she is loosed from the bond of his
law so, that she is free to marry whom she pleases.”

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>*Then follows the application,* — *  
The law was, as it were our husband,  
under whose yoke we were kept until it became dead to us:  
After the death of the law Christ received us, that is, he joined us,  
when loosed from the law, to himself:  
Then being united to Christ risen from the dead,  
we ought to cleave to him alone:  
And as the life of Christ after the resurrection is eternal,  
so hereafter there shall be no divorce.*

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>But further, the word law is not mentioned
here in every part in the same sense: for in one place it means the bond
of marriage; in another, the authority of a husband over his wife; and
in another, the law of Moses: but we must remember, that Paul refers
here only to that office of the law which was peculiar to the
dispensation of Moses; for as far as God has in the ten commandments
taught what is just and right, and given directions for guiding our
life, no abrogation of the law is to be dreamt of; for the will of God
must stand the same forever. We ought carefully to remember that this is
not a release from the righteousness which is taught in the law, but
from its rigid requirements, and from the curse which thence follows.
The law, then, as a rule of life, is not abrogated; but what belongs to
it as opposed to the liberty obtained through Christ, that is, as it
requires absolute perfection: for as we render not this perfection, it
binds us under the sentence of eternal death. But as it was not his
purpose to decide here the character of the bond of marriage, he was not
anxious to mention the causes which releases a woman from her husband.
It is therefore unreasonable that anything decisive on this point should
be sought here.

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span><span id="xi.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>**4.** *Through the body of Christ.* Christ,
by the glorious victory of the cross, first triumphed over sin; and that
he might do this, it was necessary that the handwriting, by which we
were held bound, should be cancelled. This handwriting was the law,
which, while it continued in force, rendered us bound to serve  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) sin; and hence it is called the power
of sin. It was then by cancelling this handwriting that we were
delivered through the body of Christ — through his body as fixed to the
cross.  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) But the Apostle goes
farther, and says, that the bond of the law was destroyed; not that we
may live according to our own will, like a widow, who lives as she
pleases while single; but that we may be now bound to another husband;
nay, that we may pass from hand to hand, as they say, that is, from the
law to Christ. He at the same time softens the asperity of the
expression, by saying that Christ, in order to join us to his own body,
made us free from the yoke of the law. For though Christ subjected
himself for a time of his own accord to the law, it is not yet right to
say that the law ruled over him. Moreover, he conveys to his own members
the liberty which he himself possesses. It is then no wonder that he
exempts those from the yoke of the law, whom he unites by a sacred bond
to himself, that they may be one body in him.

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span>*Even his who has been raised*, *etc.* We
have already said, that Christ is substituted for the law, lest any
freedom should be pretended without him, or lest any, being not yet dead
to the law, should dare to divorce himself from it. But he adopts here a
periphrastic sentence to denote the eternity of that life which Christ
attained by his resurrection, that Christians might know that this
connection is to be perpetual. But of the spiritual marriage between
Christ and his Church he speaks more fully in <span
id="xi.i-p27.1"></span>[Eph 6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#000.md)<span
id="xi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>*That we may bring forth fruit to God.* He
ever annexes the final cause, lest any should indulge the liberty of
their flesh and their own lusts, under the pretense that Christ has
delivered them from the bondage of the law; for he has offered us,
together with himself, as a sacrifice to the Father, and he regenerates
us for this end — that by newness of life we may bring forth fruit unto
God: and we know that the fruits which our heavenly Father requires from
us are those of holiness and righteousness. It is indeed no abatement to
our liberty that we serve God; nay, if we desire to enjoy so great a
benefit as there is in Christ, it will not henceforth be right in us to
entertain any other thought but that of promoting the glory of God; for
which purpose Christ has connected us with himself. We shall otherwise
remain the bond-slaves, not only of the law, but also of sin and of
death.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005.md)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For when we were in the flesh, the
motions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members to bring
forth fruit unto death.

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Quum enim essemus in carne, affectus
peccatorum qui sunt per Legem, in membris nostris operabantur ad
fructificandum morti:

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span>**6.** But now we are delivered from the law,
that being dead wherein we were held; that we should serve in newness of
spirit, and not *in* the oldness of the letter.

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Nunc vero soluti sumus a Lege, mortui
ei in qua detinebamur; ut serviamus in novitate spiritus, et non in
vetustate literæ.

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span><span id="xi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span>**5.** *For when we were,* *etc.* He shows
still more clearly by stating the contrary effect, how unreasonably the
zealots of the law acted, who would still detain the faithful under its
dominion; for as long as the literal teaching of the law, unconnected
with the Spirit of Christ, rules and bears sway, the wantonness of the
flesh is not restrained, but, on the contrary, breaks out and prevails.
It hence follows, that the kingdom of righteousness is not established,
except when Christ emancipates us from the law. Paul at the same time
reminds us of the works which it becomes us to do, when set free from
the law. As long, then, as man is kept under the yoke of the law, he
can, as he is sinning continually, procure nothing for himself but
death. Since bondage to the law produces sin only, then freedom, its
opposite, must tend to righteousness; if the former leads to death, then
the latter leads to life. But let us consider the very words of Paul.

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>In describing our condition during the time
we were subject to the dominion of the law, he says, that we were *in
the flesh*. We hence understand, that all those who are under the law
attain nothing else but this — that their ears are struck by its
external sound without any fruit or effect, while they are inwardly
destitute of the Spirit of God. They must therefore necessarily remain
altogether sinful and perverse, until a better remedy succeeds to heal
their diseases. Observe also this usual phrase of Scripture, to *be in
the flesh;* it means to be endued only with the gifts of nature, without
that peculiar grace with which God favors his chosen people. But if this
state of life is altogether sinful, it is evident that no part of our
soul is naturally sound, and that the power of free will is no other
than the power of casting evil emotions as darts into all the faculties
of the soul.  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md)

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>*The emotions of sins,*  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) *which are through the law*, *etc.*;
that is, the law excited in us evil emotions, which exerted their
influence through all our faculties; for there is no part which is not
subject to these depraved passions. What the law does, in the absence of
the inward teacher, the Spirit, is increasingly to inflame our hearts,
so that they boil up with lusts. But observe here, that the law is
connected with the vicious nature of man, the perversity of which, and
its lusts, break forth with greater fury, the more they are checked by
the restraints of righteousness. He further adds, that as long as the
emotions of the flesh were under the dominion of the law they brought
forth fruit to death; and he adds this to show that the law by itself is
destructive. It hence follows, that they are infatuated, who so much
desire this bondage which issues in death.

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span><span id="xi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *But now we have been loosed from the
law*, *etc.* He pursues the argument derived from the opposite effect of
things, — “If the restraint of the law availed so little to bridle the
flesh, that it became rather the exciter of sin; then, that we may cease
from sin, we must necessarily be freed from the law.” Again, “If we are
freed from the bondage of the law for this end, that we may serve God;
then, perversely do they act who hence take the liberty to indulge in
sin; and falsely do they speak who teach, that by this means loose reins
are given to lusts.” Observe, then, that we are then freed from the law,
when God emancipates us from its rigid exactions and curse, and endues
us with his Spirit, through whom we walk in his ways.  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md)

<span id="xi.ii-p16"></span>*Having died to that, etc.* This part
contains a reason, or rather, indicates the manner in which we are made
free; for the law is so far abrogated with regard to us, that we are not
pressed down by its intolerable burden, and that its inexorable rigor
does not overwhelm us with a curse.  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md) — *In newness of spirit;* He sets the
spirit in opposition to the letter; for before our will is formed
according to the will of God by the Holy Spirit, we have in the law
nothing but the outward letter, which indeed bridles our external
actions, but does not in the least restrain the fury of our lusts. And
he ascribes *newness* to the Spirit, because it succeeds the *old* man;
as the letter is called *old*, because it perishes through the
regeneration of the Spirit.

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007.md)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**7.** What shall we say then? *Is* the law
sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not
known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md)

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span>**7.** Quid ergo dicemus? Lex peccatum est?
Absit: sed peccatum non cognovi nisi per Legem: concupiscentiam enim non
noveram, nisi Lex diceret, Non concupisces

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span>**8.** But sin, taking occasion by the
commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. ...

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span>**8.** Occasione autem sumpta, peccatum per
mandatum effecit in me omnem concupiscentiam.

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span><span id="xi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span>**7.** *What then shall we say?* Since it
has been said that we must be freed from the law, in order that we may
serve God in newness of spirit, it seemed as though this evil belonged
to the law, — that it leads us to sin. But as this would be above
measure inconsistent, the Apostle rightly undertook to disprove it. Now
when he adds, *Is the law sin?* what he means is, “Does it so produce
sin that its guilt ought to be imputed to the law?” — *But sin I knew
not, except through the law;* sin then dwells in us, and not in the law;
for the cause of it is the depraved lust of our flesh, and we come to
know it by the knowledge of God’s righteousness, which is revealed to us
in the law.  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md) You are not indeed
to understand, that no difference whatever can be known between right
and wrong without the law; but that without the law we are either too
dull of apprehension to discern our depravity, or that we are made
wholly insensible through self-flattery, according to what follows, —

<span id="xi.iii-p10"></span>*For coveting I had not known,* *etc.* This
is then an explanation of the former sentence, by which he proves that
ignorance of sin, of which he had spoken, consisted in this — that he
perceived not his own coveting. And he designedly referred to this one
kind of sin, in which hypocrisy especially prevails, which has ever
connected with itself supine self-indulgence and false assurance. For
men are never so destitute of judgment, but that they retain a
distinction in external works; nay, they are constrained even to condemn
wicked counsels and sinister purposes: and this they cannot do, without
ascribing to a right object its own praise. But coveting is more hidden
and lies deeper; hence no account is made of it, as long as men judge
according to their perceptions of what is outward. He does not indeed
boast that he was free from it; but he so flattered himself, that he did
not think that this sin was lurking in his heart. For though for a time
he was deceived, and believed not that righteousness would be violated
by coveting, he yet, at length, understood that he was a sinner, when he
saw that coveting, from which no one is free, was prohibited by the law.

<span id="xi.iii-p11"></span><span id="xi.iii-p11.1"></span>Augustine
says, that Paul included in this expression the whole law; which, when
rightly understood, is true: for when Moses had stated the things from
which we must abstain, that we may not wrong our neighbor, he subjoined
this prohibition as to coveting, which must be referred to all the
things previously forbidden. There is no doubt but that he had in the
former precepts condemned all the evil desires which our hearts
conceive; but there is much difference between a deliberate purpose, and
the desires by which we are tempted. God then, in this last command,
requires so much integrity from us, that no vicious lust is to move us
to evil, even when no consent succeeds. Hence it was, that I have said,
that Paul here ascends higher than where the understanding of men can
carry them. But civil laws do indeed declare, that intentions and not
issues are to be punished. Philosophers also, with greater refinement,
place vices as well as virtues in the soul. But God, by this precept,
goes deeper and notices coveting, which is more hidden than the will;
and this is not deemed a vice. It was pardoned not only by philosophers,
but at this day the Papists fiercely contend, that it is no sin in the
regenerate.  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) But Paul says, that
he had found out his guilt from this hidden disease: it hence follows,
that all those who labor under it, are by no means free from guilt,
except God pardons their sin. We ought, at the same time, to remember
the difference between evil lustings or covetings which gain consent,
and the lusting which tempts and moves our hearts, but stops in the
midst of its course.

<span id="xi.iii-p13"></span>**8.** *But an occasion being taken*,
*etc.* From sin, then, and the corruption of the flesh, proceeds every
evil; the law is only the occasion. And though he may seem to speak only
of that excitement, by which our lusting is instigated through the law,
so that it boils out with greater fury; yet I refer this chiefly to the
knowledge the law conveys; as though he had said, “It has discovered to
me every lust or coveting which, being hid, seemed somehow to have no
existence.” I do not yet deny, but that the flesh is more sharply
stimulated to lusting by the law, and also by this means more clearly
shows itself; which may have been also the case with Paul: but what I
have said of the knowledge it brings, seems to harmonize better with the
context;  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) for he immediately
subjoins —

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008.md)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**8.** For without the law sin *was* dead.
 <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md)

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span>**8.** Sine Lege enim peccatum est mortuum:

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>**9.** For I was alive without the law once:
but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died.

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span>**9.** Ego autem vivebam sine Lege aliquando
 <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) adveniente autem mandato,
peccatum revixit,

<span id="xi.iv-p9"></span>**10.** And the commandment, which *was
ordained* to life, I found *to be* unto death.

<span id="xi.iv-p10"></span>**10.** Ego autem mortuus sum; et
deprehensum est a me mandatum quod erat in vitam, cedere in mortem.

<span id="xi.iv-p11"></span>**11.** For sin, taking occasion by the
commandment, deceived me, and by it slew *me*

<span id="xi.iv-p12"></span>**11.** Peccatum enim, occasione sumpta per
mandatum, abduxit me a via et per illud occidit:

<span id="xi.iv-p13"></span>**12.** Wherefore the law *is* holy, and the
commandment holy, and just, and good.

<span id="xi.iv-p14"></span>**12.** Itaque Lex quidem sancta, et
mandatum sanctum, et justum et bonum.

<span id="xi.iv-p15"></span><span id="xi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p16"></span>**8.** *For without the law,* *etc.* He
expresses most clearly the meaning of his former words; for it is the
same as though he had said, that the knowledge of sin without the law is
buried. It is a general truth, which he presently applies to his own
case. I hence wonder what could have come into the minds of interpreters
to render the passage in the preterimperfect tense, as though Paul was
speaking of himself; for it is easy to see that his purpose was to begin
with a general proposition, and then to explain the subject by his own
example.

<span id="xi.iv-p17"></span><span id="xi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p18"></span>**9.** *For I was alive,* *etc.* He means to
intimate that there had been a time when sin was dead to him or in him.
But he is not to be understood as though he had been without law at any
time, but this word *I was alive* has a peculiar import; for it was the
absence of the law that was the reason why he was alive; that is, why he
being inflated with a conceit as to his own righteousness, claimed life
to himself while he was yet dead. That the sentence may be more clear,
state it thus, “When I was formerly without the law, I was alive.” But I
have said that this expression is emphatic; for by imagining himself
great, he also laid claim to life. The meaning then is this, “When I
sinned, having not the knowledge of the law, the sin, which I did not
observe, was so laid to sleep, that it seemed to be dead; on the other
hand, as I seemed not to myself to be a sinner, I was satisfied with
myself, thinking that I had a life of mine own.” But the death of sin is
the life of man, and again the life of sin is the death of man.

<span id="xi.iv-p19"></span>It may be here asked, what time was that
when through his ignorance of the law, or as he himself says, through
the absence of it, he confidently laid claim to life. It is indeed
certain, that he had been taught the doctrine of the law from his
childhood; but it was the theology of the letter, which does not humble
its disciples, for as he says elsewhere, the veil interposed so that the
Jews could not see the light of life in the law; so also he himself,
while he had his eyes veiled, being destitute of the Spirit of Christ,
was satisfied with the outward mask of righteousness. Hence he
represents the law as absent, though before his eyes, while it did not
really impress him with the consciousness of God’s judgment. Thus the
eyes of hypocrites are covered with a veil, that they see not how much
that command requires, in which we are forbidden to lust or covet.

<span id="xi.iv-p20"></span>*But when the commandment came,* *etc.* So
now, on the other hand, he sets forth the law as coming when it began to
be really understood. It then raised sin as it were from be dead; for it
discovered to Paul how great depravity abounded in the recesses of his
heart, and at the same time it slew him. We must ever remember that he
speaks of that inebriating confidence in which hypocrites settle, while
they flatter themselves, because they overlook their sins.

<span id="xi.iv-p21"></span><span id="xi.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p22"></span>**10.** *Was found by me,* *etc.* Two things
are stated here — that the commandment shows to us a way of life in the
righteousness of God, and that it was given in order that we by keeping
the law of the Lord might obtain eternal life, except our corruption
stood in the way. But as none of us obey the law, but, on the contrary,
are carried headlong on our feet and hands into that kind of life from
which it recalls us, it can bring us nothing but death. We must thus
distinguish between the character of the law and our own wickedness. It
hence follows, that it is incidental that the law inflicts on us a
deadly wound, as when an incurable disease is more exasperated by a
healing remedy. I indeed allow that it is an inseparable incident, and
hence the law, as compared with the gospel, is called in another place
the ministration of death; but still this remains unaltered, that it is
not in its own nature hurtful to us, but it is so because our corruption
provokes and draws upon us its curse.

<span id="xi.iv-p23"></span><span id="xi.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p24"></span>**11.** *Led me out of the way,* *etc.* It
is indeed true, that while the will of God is hid from us, and no truth
shines on us, the life of men goes wholly astray and is full of errors;
nay, we do nothing but wander from the right course, until the law shows
to us the way of living rightly: but as we begin then only to perceive
our erroneous course, when the Lord loudly reproves us, Paul says
rightly, that we are led out of the way, when sin is made evident by the
law. Hence the verb, <span id="xi.iv-p24.1"></span>ἐξαπατᾷν, must be
understood, not of the thing itself, but of our knowledge; that is, that
it is made manifest by the law how much we have departed from the right
course. It must then be necessarily rendered, *led me out of the way;*
for hence sinners, who before went on heedlessly, loathe and abominate
themselves, when they perceive, through the light which the law throws
on the turpitude of sin, that they had been hastening to death. But he
away introduces the word occasion, and for this purpose — that we may
know that the law of itself does not bring death, but that this happens
through something else, and that this is as it were adventitious.  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md)

<span id="xi.iv-p26"></span><span id="xi.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p27"></span>**12.** *So then the law is indeed holy*,
*etc.* Some think that the words *law* and *commandment* is a repetition
of the same thing; with whom I agree;  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) and I consider that there is a
peculiar force in the words, when he says, that the law itself and
whatever is commanded in the law, is *holy*, and therefore to be
regarded with the highest reverence, — that it is *just*, and cannot
therefore be charged with anything wrong, — that it is *good,* and hence
pure and free from everything that can do harm. He thus defends the law
against every charge of blame, that no one should ascribe to it what is
contrary to goodness, justice, and holiness.

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span><span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013.md)<span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>**13.** Was then that which is good made death
unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might appear sin, working death in
me by that which is good; that sin by the commandment might become
exceeding sinful.

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span>**13.** Quod ergo bonum est, mihi in mortem
cessit? Absit: imo peccatum, ut appareat peccatum, per bonum operatur
mihi mortem: ut fiat super modum peccans peccatum Per mandatum.

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span><span id="xi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span>**13.** *Has then what is good*, *etc.* He had
hitherto defended the law from calumnies, but in such a manner, that it
still remained doubtful whether it was the cause of death; nay, the
minds of men were on this point perplexed, — how could it be that
nothing but death was gained from so singular a gift of God. To this
objection then he now gives an answer; and he denies, that death
proceeds from the law, though death through its means is brought on us
by sin. And though this answer seems to militate in appearance against
what he had said before — that he had found the commandment, which was
given for life, to be unto death, there is yet no contrariety. He had
indeed said before, that it is through our wickedness that the law is
turned to our destruction, and that contrary to its own character; but
here he denies, that it is in such a sense the cause of death, that
death is to be imputed to it. In <span id="xi.v-p5.1"></span>[2Co
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#000.md)<span id="xi.v-p5.1"></span> he
treats more fully of the law. He there calls it the ministration of
death; but he so calls it according to what is commonly done in a
dispute, and represents, not the real character of the law, but the
false opinion of his opponents.  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md)

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span>*But sin,* *etc.* With no intention to offend
others, I must state it as my opinion, that this passage ought to be
read as I have rendered it, and the meaning is this, — “Sin is in a
manner regarded as just before it is discovered by the law; but when it
is by the law made known, then it really obtains its own name of sin;
and hence it appears the more wicked, and, so to speak, the more sinful,
because it turns the goodness of the law, by perverting it, to our
destruction; for that must be very pestiferous, which makes what is in
its own nature salutary to be hurtful to us.” The import of the whole is
— that it was necessary for the atrocity of sin to be discovered by the
law; for except sin had burst forth into outrageous, or, as they say,
into enormous excess, it would not have been acknowledged as sin; and
the more outrageous does its enormity appear, when it converts life into
death; and thus every excuse is taken away from it.  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md)

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014.md)<span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>**14.** For me know that the law is
spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin.

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span>**14.** Scimus enim quod Lex spiritualis est:
ego autem carnalis sum, venditus sub peccato.

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span>**15.** For that which I do I allow not: for
what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I.

<span id="xi.vi-p5"></span>**15.** Quod enim operor, non intelligo;
siquidem non quod volo, hoc ago: sed quod odi, hoe facio.

<span id="xi.vi-p6"></span>**16.** If then I do that which I would not,
I consent unto the law that *it is* good.

<span id="xi.vi-p7"></span>**16.** Si vero quod nolo, hoe facio,
consentio Legi Dei quod sit bona.

<span id="xi.vi-p8"></span>**17.** Now then it is no more I that do it,
but sin that dwelleth in me.

<span id="xi.vi-p9"></span>**17.** Nunc vero non jam illud operor ego,
sed quod habitat in me peccatum.

<span id="xi.vi-p10"></span><span id="xi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p11"></span>**14.** *For we know that the law,* *etc.*
He now begins more closely to compare the law with what man is, that it
may be more clearly understood whence the evil of death proceeds. He
then sets before us an example in a regenerate man, in whom the remnants
of the flesh are wholly contrary to the law of the Lord, while the
spirit would gladly obey it. But first, as we have said, he makes only a
comparison between nature and the law. Since in human things there is no
greater discord than between spirit and flesh, the law being spiritual
and man carnal, what agreement can there be between the natural man and
the law? Even the same as between darkness and light. But by calling the
law *spiritual*, he not only means, as some expound the passage, that it
requires the inward affections of the heart; but that, by way of
contrast, it has a contrary import to the word *carnal*  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md) These interpreters give this
explanation, “The law is spiritual, that is, it binds not only the feet
and hands as to external works, but regards the feelings of the heart,
and requires the real fear of God.”

<span id="xi.vi-p13"></span>But here a contrast is evidently set forth
between the flesh and the spirit. And further, it is sufficiently clear
from the context, and it has been in fact already shown, that under the
term flesh is included whatever men bring from the womb; and flesh is
what men are called, as they are born, and as long as they retain their
natural character; for as they are corrupt, so they neither taste nor
desire anything but what is gross and earthly. Spirit, on the contrary,
is renewed nature, which God forms anew after his own image. And this
mode of speaking is adopted on this account — because the newness which
is wrought in us is the gift of the Spirit.

<span id="xi.vi-p14"></span>The perfection then of the doctrine of the
law is opposed here to the corrupt nature of man: hence the meaning is
as follows, “The law requires a celestial and an angelic righteousness,
in which no spot is to appear, to whose clearness nothing is to be
wanting: but I am a carnal man, who can do nothing but oppose it.”
 <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) But the exposition of <span
id="xi.vi-p16.12"></span>Origen, which indeed has been approved by many
before our time, is not worthy of being refuted; he says, that the law
is called spiritual by Paul, because the Scripture is not to be
understood literally. What has this to do with the present subject?

<span id="xi.vi-p17"></span>*Sold under sin.* By this clause he shows
what flesh is in itself; for man by nature is no less the slave of sin,
than those bondmen, bought with money, whom their masters ill treat at
their pleasure, as they do their oxen and their asses. We are so
entirely controlled by the power of sin, that the whole mind, the whole
heart, and all our actions are under its influence. Compulsion I always
except, for we sin spontaneously, as it would be no sin, were it not
voluntary. But we are so given up to sin, that we can do willingly
nothing but sin; for the corruption which bears rule within us thus
drives us onward. Hence this comparison does not import, as they say, a
forced service, but a voluntary obedience, which an inbred bondage
inclines us to render.

<span id="xi.vi-p18"></span><span id="xi.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p19"></span>**15.** *For what I do I know not*, *etc.*
He now comes to a more particular case, that of a man already
regenerated;  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md) in whom both the
things which he had in view appear more clearly; and these were, — the
great discord there is between the Law of God and the natural man, — and
how the law does not of itself produce death. For since the carnal man
rushes into sin with the whole propensity of his mind, he seems to sin
with such a free choice, as though it were in his power to govern
himself; so that a most pernicious opinion has prevailed almost among
all men — that man, by his own natural strength, without the aid of
Divine grace, can choose what he pleases. But though the will of a
faithful man is led to good by the Spirit of God, yet in him the
corruption of nature appears conspicuously; for it obstinately resists
and leads to what is contrary. Hence the case of a regenerated man is
the most suitable; for by this you may know how much is the contrariety
between our nature and the righteousness of the law. From this case,
also, a proof as to the other clause may more fitly be sought, than from
the mere consideration of human nature; for the law, as it produces only
death in a man wholly carnal, is in him more easily impeached, for it is
doubtful whence the evil proceeds. In a regenerate man it brings forth
salutary fruits; and hence it appears, that it is the flesh only that
prevents it from giving life: so far it is from producing death of
itself.

<span id="xi.vi-p23"></span>That the whole, then, of this reasoning may
be more fully and more distinctly understood, we must observe, that this
conflict, of which the Apostle speaks, does not exist in man before he
is renewed by the Spirit of God: for man, left to his own nature, is
wholly borne along by his lusts without any resistance; for though the
ungodly are tormented by the stings of conscience, and cannot take such
delight in their vices, but that they have some taste of bitterness; yet
you cannot hence conclude, either that evil is hated, or that good is
loved by them; only the Lord permits them to be thus tormented, in order
to show to them in a measure his judgment; but not to imbue them either
with the love of righteousness or with the hatred of sin.

<span id="xi.vi-p24"></span>There is then this difference between them
and the faithful — that they are never so blinded and hardened, but that
when they are reminded of their crimes, they condemn them in their own
conscience; for knowledge is not so utterly extinguished in them, but
that they still retain the difference between right and wrong; and
sometimes they are shaken with such dread under a sense of their sin,
that they bear a kind of condemnation even in this life: nevertheless
they approve of sin with all their heart, and hence give themselves up
to it without any feeling of genuine repugnance; for those stings of
conscience, by which they are harassed, proceed from opposition in the
judgment, rather than from any contrary inclination in the will. The
godly, on the other hand, in whom the regeneration of God is begun, are
so divided, that with the chief desire of the heart they aspire to God,
seek celestial righteousness, hate sin, and yet they are drawn down to
the earth by the relics of their flesh: and thus, while pulled in two
ways, they fight against their own nature, and nature fights against
them; and they condemn their sins, not only as being constrained by the
judgment of reason, but because they really in their hearts abominate
them, and on their account loathe themselves. This is the Christian
conflict between the flesh and the spirit of which Paul speaks in <span
id="xi.vi-p24.1"></span>[Ga 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md)<span
id="xi.vi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="xi.vi-p25"></span>It has therefore been justly said, that the
carnal man runs headlong into sin with the approbation and consent of
the whole soul; but that a division then immediately begins for the
first time, when he is called by the Lord and renewed by the Spirit. For
regeneration only begins in this life; the relics of the flesh which
remain, always follow their own corrupt propensities, and thus carry on
a contest against the Spirit.

<span id="xi.vi-p26"></span>The inexperienced, who consider not the
subject which the Apostle handles, nor the plan which he pursues,
imagine, that the character of man by nature is here described; and
indeed there is a similar description of human nature given to us by the
Philosophers: but Scripture philosophizes much deeper; for it finds that
nothing has remained in the heart of man but corruption, since the time
in which Adam lost the image of God. So when the Sophisters wish to
define free-will, or to form an estimate of what the power of nature can
do, they fix on this passage. But Paul, as I have said already, does not
here set before us simply the natural man, but in his own person
describes what is the weakness of the faithful, and how great it is.
<span id="xi.vi-p26.1"></span>Augustine was for a time involved in the
common error; but after having more clearly examined the passage, he not
only retracted what he had falsely taught, but in his first book to
Boniface, he proves, by many strong reasons, that what is said cannot be
applied to any but to the regenerate. And we shall now endeavor to make
our readers clearly to see that such is the case.

<span id="xi.vi-p27"></span>*I know not.* He means that he acknowledges
not as his own the works which he did through the weakness of the flesh,
for he hated them. And so <span id="xi.vi-p27.1"></span>Erasmus has not
unsuitably given this rendering, “I approve not,” (<span
id="xi.vi-p27.2"></span>*non probo*.)  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md) We hence conclude, that the doctrine
of the law is so consentaneous to right judgment, that the faithful
repudiate the transgression of it as a thing wholly unreasonable. But as
Paul seems to allow that he teaches otherwise than what the law
prescribes, many interpreters have been led astray, and have thought
that he had assumed the person of another; hence has arisen the common
error, that the character of an unregenerate man is described throughout
this portion of the chapter. But Paul, under the idea of transgressing
the law, includes all the defects of the godly, which are not
inconsistent with the fear of God or with the endeavor of acting
uprightly. And he denies that he did what the law demanded, for this
reason, because he did not perfectly fulfil it, but somewhat failed in
his effort.

<span id="xi.vi-p30"></span>*For not what I desire,* *etc.* You must not
understand that it was always the case with him, that he could not do
good; but what he complains of is only this — that he could not perform
what he wished, so that he pursued not what was good with that alacrity
which was meet, because he was held in a manner bound, and that he also
failed in what he wished to do, because he halted through the weakness
of the flesh. Hence the pious mind performs not the good it desires to
do, because it proceeds not with due activity, and doeth the evil which
it would not; for while it desires to stand, it falls, or at least it
staggers. But the expressions to will and not to will must be applied to
the Spirit, which ought to hold the first place in all the faithful. The
flesh indeed has also its own will, but Paul calls that the will which
is the chief desire of the heart; and that which militates with it he
represents as being contrary to his will.

<span id="xi.vi-p31"></span>We may hence learn the truth of what we have
stated — that Paul speaks here of the faithful,  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) in whom the grace of the Spirit
exists, which brings an agreement between the mind and the righteousness
of the law; for no hatred of sin is to be found in the flesh.

<span id="xi.vi-p34"></span><span id="xi.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p35"></span>**16.** *But if what I desire not, I do, I
consent to the law,* *etc.*; that is, “When my heart acquiesces in the
law, and is delighted with its righteousness, (which certainly is the
case when it hates the transgression of it,) it then perceives and
acknowledges the goodness of the law, so that we are fully convinced,
experience itself being our teacher, that no evil ought to be imputed to
the law; nay, that it would be salutary to men, were it to meet with
upright and pure hearts.” But this consent is not to be understood to be
the same with what we have heard exists in the ungodly, who have
expressed words of this kind, “I see better things and approve of them;
I follow the worse.” Again, “What is hurtful I follow; I shun what I
believe would be profitable.” For these act under a constraint when they
subscribe to the righteousness of God, as their will is wholly alienated
from it, but the godly man consents to the law with the real and most
cheerful desire of his heart; for he wishes nothing more than to mount
up to heaven.  <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md)

<span id="xi.vi-p37"></span><span id="xi.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p38"></span>**17.** *Now it is no more I who do it*,
*etc.* This is not the pleading of one excusing himself, as though he
was blameless, as the case is with many triflers who think that they
have a sufficient defense to cover all their wickedness, when they cast
the blame on the flesh; but it is a declaration, by which he shows how
very far he dissented from his own flesh in his spiritual feeling; for
the faithful are carried along in their obedience to God with such
fervour of spirit that they deny the flesh.

<span id="xi.vi-p39"></span>This passage also clearly shows, that Paul
speaks here of none but of the godly, who have been already born again;
for as long as man remains like himself, whatsoever he may be, he is
justly deemed corrupt; but Paul here denies that he is wholly possessed
by sin; nay, he declares himself to be exempt from its bondage, as
though he had said, that sin only dwelt in some part of his soul, while
with an earnest feeling of heart he strove for and aspired after the
righteousness of God, and clearly proved that he had the law of God
engraven within him.  <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md)

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018.md)<span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p2"></span>**18.** For I know that in me (that is, in
my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but
*how* to perform that which is good I find not.

<span id="xi.vii-p3"></span>**18.** Novi enim quod non habitat  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) in me (hoc est, in came mea.md) bonum:
siquidem velle adest mihi, sed ut perficiam bonum non reperio.

<span id="xi.vii-p5"></span>**19.** For the good that I would I do not:
but the evil which I would not, that I do.

<span id="xi.vii-p6"></span>**19.** Non enim quod volo facio bonum; sed
quod nolo malum, id ago.

<span id="xi.vii-p7"></span>**20.** Now if I do that I would not, it is
no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.

<span id="xi.vii-p8"></span>**20.** Si vero quod nolo ego id facio, non
jam ego operor illud, sed quod habitat in me peccatum.

<span id="xi.vii-p9"></span><span id="xi.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p10"></span>**18.** *For I know*, *etc.* He says that
no good by nature dwelt in him. Then *in me*, means the same as though
he had said, “So far as it regards myself.” In the first part he indeed
arraigns himself as being wholly depraved, for he confesses that no good
dwelt in him; and then he subjoins a modification, lest he should slight
the grace of God which also dwelt in him, but was no part of his flesh.
And here again he confirms the fact, that he did not speak of men in
general, but of the faithful, who are divided into two parts — the
relics of the flesh, and grace. For why was the modification made,
except some part was exempt from depravity, and therefore not flesh?
Under the term *flesh*, he ever includes all that human nature is,
everything in man, except the sanctification of the Spirit. In the same
manner, by the term *spirit*, which is commonly opposed to the flesh, he
means that part of the soul which the Spirit of God has so re-formed,
and purified from corruption, that God’s image shines forth in it. Then
both terms, flesh as well as spirit, belong to the soul; but the latter
to that part which is renewed, and the former to that which still
retains its natural character.  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226.md)

<span id="xi.vii-p12"></span>*To will is present*, *etc.* He does not
mean that he had nothing but an ineffectual desire, but his meaning is,
that the work really done did not correspond to his will; for the flesh
hindered him from doing perfectly what he did. So also understand what
follows, *The evil I desire not, that I do:* for the flesh not only
impedes the faithful, so that they can not run swiftly, but it sets also
before them many obstacles at which they stumble. Hence they do not,
because they accomplish not, what they would, with the alacrity that is
meet. This, *to will*, then, which he mentions, is the readiness of
faith, when the Holy Spirit so prepares the godly that they are ready
and strive to render obedience to God; but as their ability is not equal
to what they wish, Paul says, that he found not what he desired, even
the accomplishment of the good he aimed at.

<span id="xi.vii-p13"></span><span id="xi.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p14"></span>**19.** The same view is to be taken of the
expression which next follows, — that he *did not the good* which he
*desired*, but, on the contrary, *the evil* which he *desired not:* for
the faithful, however rightly they may be influenced, are yet so
conscious of their own infirmity, that they can deem no work proceeding
from them as blameless. For as Paul does not here treat of some of the
faults of the godly, but delineates in general the whole course of their
life, we conclude that their best works are always stained with some
blots of sin, so that no reward can be hoped, unless God pardons them.

<span id="xi.vii-p15"></span>He at last repeats the sentiment, — that,
as far as he was endued with celestial light, he was a true witness and
subscriber to the righteousness of the law. It hence follows, that had
the pure integrity of our nature remained, the law would not have
brought death on us, and that it is not adverse to the man who is endued
with a sound and right mind and abhors sin. But to restore health is the
work of our heavenly Physician.

<span id="xi.viii"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p1"></span><span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021.md)<span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p2"></span>**21.** I find then a law, that, when I
would do good, evil is present with me.

<span id="xi.viii-p3"></span>**21.** Reperio igitur Legem volenti mihi
facere bonum quod mihi malum insideat.  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227.md)

<span id="xi.viii-p5"></span>**22.** For I delight in the law of God
after the inward man:

<span id="xi.viii-p6"></span>**22.** Consentio enim Legi Dei secundum
interiorem hominem.

<span id="xi.viii-p7"></span>**23.** But I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.

<span id="xi.viii-p8"></span>**23.** Video autem alterum Legem in
membris meis, repugnantem  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md) legi
mentis meæ, et captivum me reddentem legi peccati, quæ est in membris
meis.

<span id="xi.viii-p10"></span><span id="xi.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p11"></span>**21.** *I find then*, *etc.* Here Paul
supposes a fourfold law. The first is the law of God, which alone is
properly so called, which is the rule of righteousness, by which our
life is rightly formed. To this he joins the law of the mind, and by
this he means the prompt readiness of the faithful mind to render
obedience to the divine law, it being a certain conformity on our part
with the law of God. On the other hand, he sets in opposition to this
the law of unrighteousness; and according to a certain kind of
similarity, he gives this name to that dominion which iniquity exercises
over a man not yet regenerated, as well as over the flesh of a
regenerated man; for the laws even of tyrants, however iniquitous they
may be, are called laws, though not properly. To correspond with this
law of sin he makes the law of the members, that is, the lust which is
in the members, on account of the concord it has with iniquity.

<span id="xi.viii-p12"></span>As to the first clause, many interpreters
take the word *law* in its proper sense, and consider <span
id="xi.viii-p12.1"></span>κατὰ or <span id="xi.viii-p12.2"></span>διὰ to
be understood; and so <span id="xi.viii-p12.3"></span>Erasmus renders
it, “by the law;” as though Paul had said, that he, by the law of God as
his teacher and guide, had found out that his sin was innate. But
without supplying anything, the sentence would run better thus, “While
the faithful strive after what is good, they find in themselves a
certain law which exercises a tyrannical power; for a vicious
propensity, adverse to and resisting the law of God, is implanted in
their very marrow and bones.”

<span id="xi.viii-p13"></span><span id="xi.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p14"></span>**22.** *For I consent*  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md) *to the law of God*, *etc.* Here then
you see what sort of division there is in pious souls, from which arises
that contest between the spirit and the flesh, which <span
id="xi.viii-p16.2"></span>Augustine in some place calls the Christian
struggle (<span id="xi.viii-p16.3"></span>*luctam Christianam*.) The law
calls man to the rule of righteousness; iniquity, which is, as it were,
the tyrannical law of Satan, instigates him to wickedness: the Spirit
leads him to render obedience to the divine law; the flesh draws him
back to what is of an opposite character. Man, thus impelled by contrary
desires, is now in a manner a twofold being; but as the Spirit ought to
possess the sovereignty, he deems and judges himself to be especially on
that side. Paul says, that he was bound a captive by his flesh for this
reason, because as he was still tempted and incited by evil lusts; he
deemed this a coercion with respect to the spiritual desire, which was
wholly opposed to them.  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md)

<span id="xi.viii-p21"></span>But we ought to notice carefully the
meaning of the *inner man* and of the *members;* which many have not
rightly understood, and have therefore stumbled at this stone. The inner
man then is not simply the soul, but that spiritual part which has been
regenerated by God; and the members signify the other remaining part;
for as the soul is the superior, and the body the inferior part of man,
so the spirit is superior to the flesh. Then as the spirit takes the
place of the soul in man, and the flesh, which is the corrupt and
polluted soul, that of the body, the former has the name of the inner
man, and the latter has the name of members. The inner man has indeed a
different meaning in <span id="xi.viii-p21.1"></span>[2Co
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.viii-p21.1"></span>;
but the circumstances of this passage require the interpretation which I
have given: and it is called the inner by way of excellency; for it
possesses the heart and the secret feelings, while the desires of the
flesh are vagrant, and are, as it were, on the outside of man. Doubtless
it is the same thing as though one compared heaven to earth; for Paul by
way of contempt designates whatever appears to be in man by the term
members, that he might clearly show that the hidden renovation is
concealed from and escapes our observation, except it be apprehended by
faith.

<span id="xi.viii-p22"></span>Now since the *law of the mind*
undoubtedly means a principle rightly formed, it is evident that this
passage is very absurdly applied to men not yet regenerated; for such,
as Paul teaches us, are destitute of mind, inasmuch as their soul has
become degenerated from reason.

<span id="xi.ix"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p1"></span><span id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Romans
7:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md)<span id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p2"></span>**24.** O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?

<span id="xi.ix-p3"></span>**24.** Miser ego homo! quis me eripiet a
corpore mortis hoc?

<span id="xi.ix-p4"></span>**25.** I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord. So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the
flesh the law of sin.

<span id="xi.ix-p5"></span>**25.** Gratias ago Deo per Iesum Christum
Dominum nostrum: itaque idem ego mente servio Legi Dei,carne autem legi
peccati.

<span id="xi.ix-p6"></span><span id="xi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p7"></span>**24.** *Miserable*, *etc.* He closes his
argument with a vehement exclamation, by which he teaches us that we are
not only to struggle with our flesh, but also with continual groaning to
bewail within ourselves and before God our unhappy condition. But he
asks not by whom he was to be delivered, as one in doubt, like
unbelievers, who understand not that there is but one real deliverer:
but it is the voice of one panting and almost fainting, because he does
not find immediate help,  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) as he
longs for. And he mentions the word rescue,  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) in order that he might show, that for
his liberation no ordinary exercise of divine power was necessary.

<span id="xi.ix-p10"></span>By the *body of death* he means the whole
mass of sin, or those ingredients of which the whole man is composed;
except that in him there remained only relics, by the captive bonds of
which he was held. The pronoun <span id="xi.ix-p10.1"></span>τούτου
*this*, which I apply, as <span id="xi.ix-p10.2"></span>Erasmus does, to
the body, may also be fitly referred to death, and almost in the same
sense; for Paul meant to teach us, that the eyes of God’s children are
opened, so that through the law of God they wisely discern the
corruption of their nature and the death which from it proceeds. But the
word *body* means the same as the *external man* and *members;* for Paul
points out this as the origin of evil, that man has departed from the
law of his creation, and has become thus carnal and earthly. For though
he still excels brute beasts, yet his true excellency has departed from
him, and what remains in him is full of numberless corruptions so that
his soul, being degenerated, may be justly said to have passed into a
body. So God says by Moses,

<span id="xi.ix-p11"></span>“No more shall my Spirit contend with man,
for he is even flesh,” (<span id="xi.ix-p11.1"></span>[Ge
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span id="xi.ix-p11.1"></span>:.md)

<span id="xi.ix-p12"></span>thus stripping man of his spiritual
excellency, he compares him, by way of reproach, to the brute creation.
 <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md)

<span id="xi.ix-p14"></span>This passage is indeed remarkably fitted for
the purpose of beating down all the glory of the flesh; for Paul teaches
us, that the most perfect, as long as they dwell in the flesh, are
exposed to misery, for they are subject to death; nay, when they
thoroughly examine themselves, they find in their own nature nothing but
misery. And further, lest they should indulge their torpor, Paul, by his
own example, stimulates them to anxious groanings, and bids them, as
long as they sojourn on earth, to desire death, as the only true remedy
to their evils; and this is the right object in desiring death. Despair
does indeed drive the profane often to such a wish; but they strangely
desire death, because they are weary of the present life, and not
because they loathe their iniquity. But it must be added, that though
the faithful level at the true mark, they are not yet carried away by an
unbridled desire in wishing for death, but submit themselves to the will
of God, to whom it behoves us both to live and to die: hence they clamor
not with displeasure against God, but humbly deposit their anxieties in
his bosom; for they do not so dwell on the thoughts of their misery, but
that being mindful of grace received, they blend their grief with joy,
as we find in what follows.

<span id="xi.ix-p15"></span><span id="xi.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p16"></span>**25.** *I thank God; etc.* He then
immediately subjoined this thanksgiving, lest any should think that in
his complaint he perversely murmured against God; for we know how easy
even in legitimate grief is the transition to discontent and impatience.
Though Paul then bewailed his lot, and sighed for his departure, he yet
confesses that he acquiesced in the good pleasure of God; for it does
not become the saints, while examining their own defects, to forget what
they have already received from God.  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md)

<span id="xi.ix-p18"></span>But what is sufficient to bridle impatience
and to cherish resignation, is the thought, that they have been received
under the protection of God, that they may never perish, and that they
have already been favored with the first-fruits of the Spirit, which
make certain their hope of the eternal inheritance. Though they enjoy
not as yet the promised glory of heaven, at the same time, being content
with the measure which they have obtained, they are never without
reasons for joy.

<span id="xi.ix-p19"></span>*So I myself*, *etc.* A short epilogue, in
which he teaches us, that the faithful never reach the goal of
righteousness as long as they dwell in the flesh, but that they are
running their course, until they put off the body. He again gives the
name of *mind*, not to the rational part of the soul which philosophers
extol, but to that which is illuminated by the Spirit of God, so that it
understands and wills aright: for there is a mention made not of the
understanding alone, but connected with it is the earnest desire of the
heart. However, by the exception he makes, he confesses, that he was
devoted to God in such a manner, that while creeping on the earth he was
defiled with many corruptions. This is a suitable passage to disprove
the most pernicious dogma of the Purists, (<span
id="xi.ix-p19.1"></span>*Catharorum*,) which some turbulent spirits
attempt to revive at the present day.  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc38010.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="xi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span> That is, the law by which she was bound to
her husband, or, the law by which he became her husband. It is an
instance of the latitude in which the genitive case is used. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc38010.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="xi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span> The connection of the beginning of this
chapter with <span id="xi.i-p13.1"></span>[Ro
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014.md)<span id="xi.i-p13.1"></span>
deserves to be noticed. He says there, that sin shall not rule over us,
*because* we are not under law, but under grace. Then he asks, in <span
id="xi.i-p13.2"></span>[Ro 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015.md)<span
id="xi.i-p13.2"></span>,

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>“Shall we sin, because we are not under law,
but under grace?”

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span>This last subject, according to his usual
mode, he takes up *first*, and discusses it till the end of the chapter:
and then in this chapter he reassumes the first subject — freedom from
the law. This is a striking instance of the Apostle’s manner of writing,
quite different from what is usual with us in the present day. He
mentions two things; he proceeds with the last, and then goes back to
the first. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc38010.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="xi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span> This is a plausible reason, derived from
<span id="xi.i-p20.1"></span>Theodoret and <span
id="xi.i-p20.2"></span>Chrysostom; but hardly necessary. Commentators
have felt much embarrassed in applying the illustration given here. The
woman is freed by the death of the husband; but the believer is
represented as freed by dying himself. This does not correspond: and if
we attend to what the Apostle says, we shall see that he did not
contemplate such a correspondence. Let us notice how he introduces the
illustration; “the law,” he says in the first verse, “rules, or
exercises authority, over a man while he lives;” and then let us observe
the application in <span id="xi.i-p20.3"></span>[Ro
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004.md)<span id="xi.i-p20.3"></span>,
where he speaks of our dying to the law The main design of the
illustration then was, to show that there is no freedom from a law but
by *death;* so that there is no necessity of a correspondence in the
other parts, As in the case of man and wife, death destroys the bond of
marriage; so in the case of man and the law, that is, the law as the
condition of life, there must be a death; else there is no freedom. But
there is one thing more in the illustration, which the Apostle adopts,
the liberty to marry another, when death has given a release: The bond
of connection being broken, a union with another is legitimate. So far
only is the example adduced to be applied — *death* puts an end to the
right and authority of law; and then the party released may justly form
another connection. It is the attempt to make all parts of the
comparison to correspond that has occasioned all the difficulty. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc38010.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="xi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p25.1"></span>Obæratos“ —
debtors bound to serve their creditors until payment is made. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc38010.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="xi.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span> That his crucified body is intended, is
clear from what follows; for he is spoken of as having “been raised from
the dead.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc38010.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span> To be “in the flesh” has two meanings, — to
be unrenewed, and in our natural corrupt state, as <span
id="xi.ii-p9.1"></span>Calvin says, see <span id="xi.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ro
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008.md)<span id="xi.ii-p9.2"></span>, —
and to be subject to external rites and ceremonies as the Jews were, see
<span id="xi.ii-p9.3"></span>[Ga
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003.md)<span id="xi.ii-p9.3"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p9.4"></span>[Php
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004.md)<span id="xi.ii-p9.4"></span>. Its
meaning here, according to <span id="xi.ii-p9.5"></span>Beza and <span
id="xi.ii-p9.6"></span>Pareus, is the first; according to <span
id="xi.ii-p9.7"></span>Grotius and <span id="xi.ii-p9.8"></span>Hammond,
the second; and according to <span id="xi.ii-p9.9"></span>Turrettin and
<span id="xi.ii-p9.10"></span>Hodge, both are included, as the context,
in their view, evidently shows. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc38010.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p11.1"></span>Affectus
peccatorum — affections of sins;” τα παθήματα, etc., — “<span
id="xi.ii-p11.2"></span>cupiditates — desires,” or lusts, <span
id="xi.ii-p11.3"></span>Grotius.. The word is commonly taken passively,
as signifying afflictions, sufferings; <span id="xi.ii-p11.4"></span>[Ro
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018.md)<span id="xi.ii-p11.4"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p11.5"></span>[2Co
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#005.md)<span id="xi.ii-p11.5"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p11.6"></span>[Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024.md)<span id="xi.ii-p11.6"></span>;
but here, and in <span id="xi.ii-p11.7"></span>[Ga
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024.md)<span id="xi.ii-p11.7"></span>, it
evidently means excitements, commotions, emotions, lusts or lustings.
“Passion” in our language admits of two similar meanings — suffering,
and an excited feeling, or an inward commotion.

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span>These “emotions” are said to be through the
law, — “made known by the law,” says <span
id="xi.ii-p12.1"></span>Chrysostom*;* but “occasioned by the law,” is
more correct, as it appears from <span id="xi.ii-p12.2"></span>[Ro
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008.md)<span id="xi.ii-p12.2"></span>, or,
“made to abound by the law,” as in <span id="xi.ii-p12.3"></span>[Ro
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020.md)<span id="xi.ii-p12.3"></span>.
The law, instead of making men holy, made them, through the perversity
of human nature, to sin the more. “Emotions of sins” is an Hebraism for
“sinful emotions” — “The members” are those of the “old man,” and not
those of the material body, though it is commonly thought that they are
the latter, and mentioned, because they are employed as the instruments
of sin: but there are many sins, and those of the worst kind, which are
confined to the mind and heart. It is therefore more consistent to
regard them as the members of “the body of sin,” <span
id="xi.ii-p12.4"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md)<span
id="xi.ii-p12.4"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc38010.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p15"></span> That the moral, and not the ceremonial law,
is meant here, is incontestably evident from what the Apostle adds in
the following verses. He quotes the moral law in the next verse; he
calls this law, in <span id="xi.ii-p15.1"></span>[Ro
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#010.md)<span id="xi.ii-p15.1"></span>,
the commandment, την ἐντολὴν, which was unto life, see <span
id="xi.ii-p15.2"></span>[Mt 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016.md)<span
id="xi.ii-p15.2"></span>; and he says, that “by it” sin “slew” him,
which could not have been said of the ceremonial law. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc38010.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p17"></span> Our common version is evidently incorrect
as to this clause. The pronoun αὐτῷ or ἐκεινῷ, is to be supplied. There
is an exactly similar ellipsis in <span id="xi.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ro
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021.md)<span id="xi.ii-p17.1"></span>
<span id="xi.ii-p17.2"></span>Beza and several others, as well as our
version, have followed a reading, αποθανοντὀ, which <span
id="xi.ii-p17.3"></span>Griesbach disregards as of no authority; and it
is inconsistent with the usual phraseology of the Apostle. See <span
id="xi.ii-p17.4"></span>[Ro 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004.md)<span
id="xi.ii-p17.4"></span>, and <span id="xi.ii-p17.5"></span>[Ga
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019.md)<span id="xi.ii-p17.5"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc38010.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span> Perhaps the sentence ought to have been
rendered, For lust (<span id="xi.iii-p3.1"></span>concupiscentiam) I had
not known, except the law had said, “Thou shalt not lust” (<span
id="xi.iii-p3.2"></span>non concupisces.) Then the word “coveting” in
the next verse should be “lust” (<span
id="xi.iii-p3.3"></span>concupiscentiam.) But “Thou shalt not covet,” is
the commandment; and to retain a similarity of idea, for the lack of a
more suitable word, it seems necessary to have coveting, as covetousness
has not the meaning here intended. There is the same correspondence in
the words in Greek as in <span id="xi.iii-p3.4"></span>Calvin*’s* Latin.
The noun is rendered first in our version “lust,” and then
“concupiscence;” and the same is done by <span
id="xi.iii-p3.5"></span>Doddridge*;* the “strong desire” of <span
id="xi.iii-p3.6"></span>Macknight is by no means suitable; the
“inordinate desire” of <span id="xi.iii-p3.7"></span>Stuart is better,
though “Thou shalt not lust” cannot be approved. By ἐπιθυμία, desire, is
meant the inward propensity that is sinful, It is called “sin” in the
preceding clause; and, according to the usual stage of the Apostle, to
show what sin was intended, it is called here desire: it is then sin in
the wish, in the inclination or disposition within. And this very sinful
*desire* the tenth commandment distinctly forbids. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc38010.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span> It was the saying of <span
id="xi.iii-p9.1"></span>Ambrose, “<span id="xi.iii-p9.2"></span>Lex
index peccati est, non genitrix — the law is the discoverer, not the
begetter of sin.” “The law,’ says <span id="xi.iii-p9.3"></span>Pareus,
“prohibits sin; it is not then the cause of it: sin is made known by the
law; it is not then by the law produced.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc38010.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p12"></span> As an instance of the frivolous and
puerile mode of reasoning adopted by the Papists, the following may be
adduced: quoting <span id="xi.iii-p12.1"></span>[Jas
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015.md)<span id="xi.iii-p12.1"></span>,
“When lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin; and sin, when it is
finished, bringeth forth death,” they reason thus: — “Lust is not simply
a sin, for it brings it forth; and when it is sin, it is not mortal sin,
for it afterwards brings forth death. “Taking advantage of a metaphor,
they apply it strictly and literally, without considering that the
Apostle is only exhibiting the rise, progress, and termination — of
what? of sin no doubt. The like produces its like. If lust were not
sinful, it could not generate what is sinful. Such childish and profane
reasoning is an outrage both on common sense and on religion. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc38010.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p14"></span> Most commentators take the opposite view,
— that the irritation of sin occasioned by the law is more especially
meant here. The two ideas, the knowledge and the excitement, or the
increase of sin by the law, are no doubt referred to by the Apostle in
these verses. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc38010.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span> This clause is rightly separated from the
former verse; for it clearly announces what is illustrated in the
following verses. “Without the law,” means without the knowledge of the
law. The law is known and not known still. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc38010.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p7.1"></span>Aliquando;”
ποτε — formerly, while he was a Pharisee, when be thought himself
blameless. Critics often make difficulties when there are none. What is
said here of being alive without the law, or when the law is not known,
and of the commandment supposed to be for life being found to be unto
death, is still exemplified in the character of men, and takes place in
the experience of all who are brought out of darkness, as Paul was, unto
marvellous light. Experience is often the best expositor.

<span id="xi.iv-p8"></span>To understand this passage, no more is
necessary than to read what Paul says of himself in <span
id="xi.iv-p8.1"></span>[Php 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009.md)<span
id="xi.iv-p8.1"></span>; and also in <span id="xi.iv-p8.2"></span>[Ga
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019.md)<span id="xi.iv-p8.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc38010.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p25"></span> This verse will be better understood if we
consider it as in a manner a repetition, in another form, of what the
former verse contains, and this is perfectly consistent with the usual
manner of the Apostle. His object seems to have been to prevent a
misapprehension of what he had said, that the commandment which was for
life proved to be unto death. He hence says, that sin availed itself of
the commandment, and by it deceived him, that is, promised him life, and
then by it killed him, that is, proved fatal to him. There is a
correspondence in meaning between the commandment unto life and
deceiving, and between death and killing. In <span
id="xi.iv-p25.1"></span>[Ro 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008.md)<span
id="xi.iv-p25.1"></span>, sin, as a person, is said to take advantage of
the commandment to work every kind of sinful desires: but it is said
here to take this advantage to deceive by promising life, and then to
destroy, to expose, and subject him to death and misery. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc38010.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p28"></span> This is doubtless true, and it is an
example of what the Apostle’s manner of writing is, it being that of the
ancient prophets. How various are the words used in the <span
id="xi.iv-p28.1"></span>[Ps 119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000.md)<span
id="xi.iv-p28.1"></span> to designate the law or the revealed will of
God? and two different words are often used in the same verse.

<span id="xi.iv-p29"></span>Having spoken of the law in connection with
sin, the Apostle may be supposed to have had the character of sin in
view in characterizing the law. Sin works depraved desires and lusts;
the law is *holy:* sin deceives and acts the traitor, the law is
plain-dealing and *just:* sin leads to death and misery; the law is
*good* and leads to happiness. The last contrast is evident from what
follows in the next verse, “Was that which is good made death unto me?”
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc38010.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="xi.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span> This can hardly be admitted. The Apostle in
Corinthians evidently states a fact, as he often does, without going
into an explanation; and the fact was, that the law proved to be the
ministration of death: but it proved to be so through the sin and
wickedness of man. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc38010.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="xi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span> <span id="xi.v-p8.1"></span>Erasmus, <span
id="xi.v-p8.2"></span>Beza, <span id="xi.v-p8.3"></span>Pareus, <span
id="xi.v-p8.4"></span>Stuart, and others, make up the ellipsis by
putting in, “was made death to me,” after “sin.” But there is no need of
adding anything. The sentence throughout is thoroughly Hebraistic. What
is partially announced in the words, “that it might appear sin,” or, to
be sin, etc., is more fully stated in the last clause; and the
participle, “working” — κατεργαζομένη, is used instead of a verb, the
auxiliary verb being understood. See similar instances in <span
id="xi.v-p8.5"></span>[Ro 14:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md)<span
id="xi.v-p8.5"></span> <span id="xi.v-p8.6"></span>Calvin*’s* version is
no doubt the correct one. What follows the last ἵνα more fully explains
what comes after the first. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc38010.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p12"></span> This is evidently the case here. As
*carnal* means what is sinful and corrupt, so spiritual imports what is
holy, just, and good. As the works of the flesh are evil and depraved
works, so the fruits of the Spirit are good and holy fruits. See <span
id="xi.vi-p12.1"></span>[Gal. 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md)<span id="xi.vi-p12.1"></span>, and
particularly <span id="xi.vi-p12.2"></span>[Joh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006.md)<span id="xi.vi-p12.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc38010.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p15"></span> “He is ‘carnal’ in exact proportion to the
degree in which he falls short of *perfect* conformity to the law of
God.” — <span id="xi.vi-p15.1"></span>Scott

<span id="xi.vi-p16"></span>It has been usual with a certain class of
divines, such as <span id="xi.vi-p16.1"></span>Hammond and *Bull*, to
hold that all the Fathers before <span id="xi.vi-p16.2"></span>Augustine
viewed Paul here as not speaking of himself. But this is plainly
contradicted by what <span id="xi.vi-p16.3"></span>Augustine declares
himself in several parts of his writings. In his <span
id="xi.vi-p16.4"></span>Retractations, B. 1, chapter 23, he refers to
some authors of divine discourses (<span
id="xi.vi-p16.5"></span>*quibusdam divinorum tractatoribus eloquiorom*)
by whose authority he was induced to change his opinion, and to regard
Paul here as speaking of himself. He alludes again in his work against
<span id="xi.vi-p16.6"></span>Julian, an advocate of Pelagianism, B. 6,
chapter 11, to this very change in his view, and ascribes it to the
reading of the works of those who were better and more intelligent than
himself, (<span id="xi.vi-p16.7"></span>*melioribus et
intelligentioribus cessi*.) Then he refers to them by name, and says,
“Hence it was that I came to understand these things, as <span
id="xi.vi-p16.8"></span>Hilary, <span id="xi.vi-p16.9"></span>Gregory,
<span id="xi.vi-p16.10"></span>Ambrose, and other holy and known doctors
of the Church, understood them, who thought that the Apostle himself
strenuously struggled against carnal lusts, which he was unwilling to
have, and yet had, and that he bore witness as to this confiict in these
words,” (referring to this very text,) — <span
id="xi.vi-p16.11"></span>*Hinc factum est. ut sic ista intelligerem,
quemadmodum intellexit* Hilarius, Gregorius, Ambroslus, *et cœteri
Ecclsiœ sancti notique doctores*, *qui et ipsum Apostolum adversus
carnales concupiscentias*, *quas habere nolebat, et tamen habebat*,
*strenue conflixisse*, *eundemque conflictum suum illis suis verbis
contestatum fuisse senserunt* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc38010.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p20"></span> It appears from this, that <span
id="xi.vi-p20.1"></span>Calvin did not apply the foregoing words, “I am
carnal, sold under sin,” in the same way: but they are evidently
connected together. They are indeed strong words, and some explain them
in such a way as to be wholly unsuitable to a renewed man; but we ought
to take the explanation as given by the Apostle himself in what follows,
for he handles the subject to the end of the chapter.

<span id="xi.vi-p21"></span>Various fictions have been resorted to by
critics on this point. The Apostle has been supposed by some to speak of
himself as under the law, or as <span id="xi.vi-p21.1"></span>Stuart
terms it, “in a law state,” and such is the scheme of <span
id="xi.vi-p21.2"></span>Hammond Others have imagined, that he personates
a Jew living during the time between Abraham and the giving of the law;
and this was <span id="xi.vi-p21.3"></span>Locke*’s* idea. A third party
have entertained the notion, that the Apostle, speaking in his own
person, represents, by a sort of fiction, as <span
id="xi.vi-p21.4"></span>Vitringa and some others have imagined, the
effects of the law in Jews and proselytes, as opposed to the effects of
the gospel, as delineated in the next chapter. And a fourth party
maintain, that the Apostle describes a man in a transition state, in
whom God’s Spirit works for his conversion, but who is as yet doubtful
which way to turn, to sin or to God.

<span id="xi.vi-p22"></span>All these conjectures have arisen, because
the language is not taken in its obvious meaning, and according to the
Apostle’s own explanation. As soon as we depart from the plain meaning
of the text and the context, we open a door to endless conjectures and
fictions. The Apostle says nothing here of himself, but what every real
Christian finds to be true. Is not a Christian, yea, the best, in this
world *carnal*, as well as spiritual? Is he not “sold under sin?” that
is, subjected to a condition, in which he is continually annoyed,
tempted, hindered, restrained, checked, and seduced by the depravity and
corruption of his nature; and in which he is always kept far below what
he aims at, seeks and longs for. It was the saying of a good man, lately
gone to his rest, whose extended pilgrimage was ninety-three years, that
he must have been often swallowed up by despair, had it not been for the
seventh chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. The best interpreter of
many things in Scripture is spiritual experience; without it no right
judgment can be formed. Hence it is that the learned often stumble at
what is quite plain and obvious to the illiterate when spiritually
enlightened. Critics sometimes find great difficulties in what is fully
understood by a simpler minded Christian, taught from above. “Wayfaring
men” are far better divines than any of the learned, who possess nothing
more than natural talents and natural acquirements. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc38010.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p27.3"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p28"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p28.1"></span>Pii quod
perpetrant non agnoscunt, non approbant, non excusant, non palliant;” —
“What the godly do \[amiss,\] they know not, approve not, excuse not,
palliate not.” — <span id="xi.vi-p28.2"></span>Pareus

<span id="xi.vi-p29"></span>The verb γινώσκω is used here in the sense
of the Hebrew verb <span id="xi.vi-p29.1"></span>ידע which is often so
rendered by the Septuagint. See <span id="xi.vi-p29.2"></span>[Ps
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006.md)<span id="xi.vi-p29.2"></span>;
<span id="xi.vi-p29.3"></span>[Ho
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004.md)<span id="xi.vi-p29.3"></span>; and
<span id="xi.vi-p29.4"></span>[Mt
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023.md)<span id="xi.vi-p29.4"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc38010.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p32"></span> “As the Apostle was far more enlightened
and humble than Christians in general are, doubtless this clog
(indwelling sin) was more uneasy to him than it is to them, though most
of us find our lives at times greatly embittered by it. So that this
energetic language, which many imagine to describe an unestablished
believer’s experience, or even that of an unconverted man, seems to have
resulted from the extraordinary degree of St. Paul’s sanctification, and
the depth of his self-abasement and hatred of sin; and the reason of our
not readily understanding him seems to be, because we are far beneath
him in holiness, humility, acquaintance with the spirituality of God’s
law, and the evil of our own hearts, and in our degree of abhorrence of
moral evil.” — <span id="xi.vi-p32.1"></span>Scott

<span id="xi.vi-p33"></span>“What some mistake as the evidence of a
spiritual decline on the part of the Apostle, was in fact the evidence
of his growth. It is the effusion of a more quick and cultured
sensibility than fell to the lot of ordinary men.” — <span
id="xi.vi-p33.1"></span>Chalmers

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc38010.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p36"></span> “I consent — <span
id="xi.vi-p36.1"></span>*consentio* — συμφημι, I say with, assent to,
agree with, confirm.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc38010.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p40"></span> The last clause of this verse is worthy of
notice, as the expression “indwelling sin” seems to have arisen from the
words ἡ οἰκουσα ἐν ἐμοὶ — “which dwells in me.” Sin was in him as in a
house or dwelling; it was an in-habiting sin, or that which is
in-abiding or resident. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc38010.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="xi.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p4"></span> <span id="xi.vii-p4.1"></span>*Non habitat*
*bonum* — οὐκ οἰκει ἀγαθόν. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc38010.htm#fr_226.md) <span
id="xi.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p11"></span> The Apostle here is his own interpreter;
he explains who the *I* is that does what the other *I* disapproved, and
who the *I* is that hates what the other *I* does. He tells us here that
it is not the same *I*, though announced at first as though it were the
same. The one *I*, he informs us here, was his flesh, his innate sin or
Corruption, and the other *I*, he tells us in <span
id="xi.vii-p11.1"></span>[Ro 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022.md)<span
id="xi.vii-p11.1"></span>, was “the inner man,” his new nature. The
“inner man,” as <span id="xi.vii-p11.2"></span>Calvin will tell us
presently, is not the soul as distinguished from the body, but the
renewed man as distinguished from the flesh. It is the same as the “new
man” as distinguished from “the old man.” See <span
id="xi.vii-p11.3"></span>[Eph. 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024.md)<span id="xi.vii-p11.3"></span>;
<span id="xi.vii-p11.4"></span>[Ro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md)<span id="xi.vii-p11.4"></span>;
<span id="xi.vii-p11.5"></span>[2Co
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017.md)<span id="xi.vii-p11.5"></span>.
But “the inward man,” and “the outward man,” in <span
id="xi.vii-p11.6"></span>[2Co
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.vii-p11.6"></span>,
are the soul and the body; and “the inner man,” in <span
id="xi.vii-p11.7"></span>[Eph
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.vii-p11.7"></span>,
the same expression as in <span id="xi.vii-p11.8"></span>[Ro
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022.md)<span id="xi.vii-p11.8"></span>,
means the soul, as it is evident from the context. The same is meant by
“the hidden man of the heart,” in <span id="xi.vii-p11.9"></span>[1Pe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004.md)<span id="xi.vii-p11.9"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc38010.htm#fr_227.md) <span
id="xi.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p4"></span> “<span id="xi.viii-p4.1"></span>Insideat,”
— παράκειταί; the same verb in <span id="xi.viii-p4.2"></span>[Ro
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018.md)<span id="xi.viii-p4.2"></span>,
is rendered <span id="xi.viii-p4.3"></span>*adest* — is present. It
means, to lie near, to be at hand. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc38010.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="xi.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p9"></span> “<span
id="xi.viii-p9.1"></span>Repugnantem, — ἀντιστρατεύομενον, placing
itself in battle array, fighting or warring against, taking the field or
marching against an enemy. Then follows “taking” an enemy “captive,”
αἰχμαλωτίζοντα. There are two sorts of captives, willing and unwilling.
The latter is the case here; for the Apostle compares himself to
captives of war, which are made so by force. The same is meant as by the
expression, “sold under sin,” <span id="xi.viii-p9.2"></span>[Ro
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014.md)<span id="xi.viii-p9.2"></span>, —
the constrained condition of being subject during life, to the
annoyances, to the tempting, seducing, and deadening power of innate
corruption. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc38010.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="xi.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xi.viii-p15.1"></span>Consentio,” συνήδομαι: it is not the same verb
as in <span id="xi.viii-p15.2"></span>[Ro
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.viii-p15.2"></span>;
this signifies more than consent, for it includes gratification and
delight. See <span id="xi.viii-p15.3"></span>[Ps
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002.md)<span id="xi.viii-p15.3"></span>.
The verb is found only here. <span
id="xi.viii-p15.4"></span>Macknight*’s* version, “I am pleased with,” is
very feeble and inexpressive; <span id="xi.viii-p15.5"></span>Stuart*’s*
is better, “I take pleasure in;” but our common version is the best, “I
delight in.”

<span id="xi.viii-p16"></span>The γὰρ here would be better rendered
“indeed:” the Apostle makes declaration as to his higher principle; and
then in the next verse he states more fully what he had said in <span
id="xi.viii-p16.1"></span>[Ro
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021.md)<span id="xi.viii-p16.1"></span>.
This exactly corresponds with his usual mode in treating subjects. He
first states a thing generally, and afterwards more particularly, in
more specific terms, and with something additional. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc38010.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="xi.viii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p17"></span> Some consider the conclusion of <span
id="xi.viii-p17.1"></span>[Ro
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md)<span id="xi.viii-p17.1"></span>,
“to the law of sin which is in my members,” as a paraphrase for “to
itself;” as the Apostle describes it at the beginning as the law in his
members: and the reason which may be assigned for the repetition is
twofold, — to preserve the distinction between it and “the law of the
mind” in the preceding clause, — and to give it a more distinctive
character, by denominating it “the law of sin.” We in fact find a
gradation in the way in which it is set forth: in <span
id="xi.viii-p17.2"></span>[Ro
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021.md)<span id="xi.viii-p17.2"></span>,
he calls it simply “a law;” in this verse he first calls it “another law
in his members,” and then, “the law of sin in his members.”

<span id="xi.viii-p18"></span>The construction of <span
id="xi.viii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021.md)<span id="xi.viii-p18.1"></span>,
is difficult. <span id="xi.viii-p18.2"></span>Pareus quotes <span
id="xi.viii-p18.3"></span>Chrysostom as supposing σύμφηναι from <span
id="xi.viii-p18.4"></span>[Ro
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.viii-p18.4"></span>,
to be understood after “law,” so as to give this rendering, “I find then
that the law assents to me desiring to do good,” etc., that is, that the
law of God was on his side, “though evil was present with him.” He then
gives his own view, it being essentially that of <span
id="xi.viii-p18.5"></span>Augustine*:* he supposes ὅτι καλὸς from <span
id="xi.viii-p18.6"></span>[Ro
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.viii-p18.6"></span>,
to be understood after “law,” and that ὅτι, in the last clause, is to be
construed “though:” the verse is then to be rendered thus, — “I find
then the law, that it is good to me desiring to do good, though evil is
present with me;” The verse taken by itself may thus present a good
meaning, but not one that harmonizes with the context, or that forms a
part of the Apostle’s argument. The only other construction that
deserves notice is that of our own version, and of <span
id="xi.viii-p18.7"></span>Calvin, and it is that alone which corresponds
with the context. It has been adopted by <span
id="xi.viii-p18.8"></span>Beza, <span id="xi.viii-p18.9"></span>Grotius,
<span id="xi.viii-p18.10"></span>Venema, <span
id="xi.viii-p18.11"></span>Turrettin, <span
id="xi.viii-p18.12"></span>Doddridge, and others.

<span id="xi.viii-p19"></span>This verse, and the two which follow,
conclude the subject, and also explain what he had been saying about
willing and doing. He in fact accounts here for the paradoxical
statements which he had made, by mentioning the operation and working of
two laws, which were directly contrary to one another. It seems to be a
mistake that he alludes to *four* laws; for the law of the mind and the
law of God are the same, under different names; it is that of the mind,
because it belongs to and resides in the mind: and it is the law of God,
because it comes from him, and is implanted by his Spirit. To the other
law he also gives two names, the “law in his members,” and the “law of
sin.” This view is confirmed by the last verse in the chapter, which
contains a summary of the whole.

<span id="xi.viii-p20"></span>The latter part of <span
id="xi.viii-p20.1"></span>[Ro
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md)<span id="xi.viii-p20.1"></span>
is in character with the Hebraistic style, when the noun is stated
instead of the pronoun; see <span id="xi.viii-p20.2"></span>[Ge
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.viii-p20.2"></span>;
<span id="xi.viii-p20.3"></span>[Ps
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023.md)<span id="xi.viii-p20.3"></span>;
and it is also agreeable to the same style to add the same sentiment
with something more specific appended to it. This part then might be
rendered thus, — “and making me captive *to itself*, *even* to the law
of sin, which is he my members.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc38010.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="xi.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p8"></span> Ταλαίπωρος, miser, <span
id="xi.ix-p8.1"></span>ærumnosus; “it denotes,” says <span
id="xi.ix-p8.2"></span>Schleusner, “one who is broken down and wearied
with the most grievous toils.” It is used by the Septuagint for the word
<span id="xi.ix-p8.3"></span>שדוד, wasted, spoiled, desolated. See <span
id="xi.ix-p8.4"></span>[Ps 137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008.md)<span
id="xi.ix-p8.4"></span>; <span id="xi.ix-p8.5"></span>[Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.ix-p8.5"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc38010.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="xi.ix-p8.6"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p9"></span> “<span id="xi.ix-p9.1"></span>Eripere“ —
pluck out, rescue, take away by force; ῥύσεται — shall draw, rescue or
extricate; it means a forcible act, effected by power. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc38010.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="xi.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p13"></span> “This body of death” is an evident
Hebraism, meaning “this deadly or mortiferous body;” which is not the
material body, but the body of “the old man,” <span
id="xi.ix-p13.1"></span>[Ro 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006.md)<span
id="xi.ix-p13.1"></span>; called the “body of sin,” when its character
is described, and the “body of death,” when the issue to which it leads
is intended: it conducts to death, condemnation, and misery. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc38010.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="xi.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p17"></span> There is a different reading for the first
clause of this verse, χάρις τῳ Θέω, “thanks to God,” which, <span
id="xi.ix-p17.1"></span>Griesbach says, is nearly equal to the received
text; and there are a few copies which have ἡ χάρις κυρίου, “the grace
of our Lord,” etc.; which presents a direct answer to the foregoing
question: but a considerable number more have ἡ χάρις του θέου, “the
grace of God,” etc.; which also gives an answer to the preceding
question. But the safest way, when there is no strong reason from the
context, is to follow what is mostly sanctioned by MSS. Taking then the
received text, we shall find a suitable answer to the foregoing
question, if we consider the verb used in the question to be here
understood, a thing not unusual; then the version would be, “I thank
God, *who will deliver me* through Jesus Christ our Lord;” not as <span
id="xi.ix-p17.2"></span>Macknight renders the verb, “who delivers me;”
for the answer must be in the same tense with the question. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc38010.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="xi.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p20"></span> “<span id="xi.ix-p20.1"></span>Idem ego —
the same I,” or, “I the same;” αὐτὸς ἐγὼ <span
id="xi.ix-p20.2"></span>Beza renders it the same — “<span
id="xi.ix-p20.3"></span>idem ego,” and makes this remark, “This was
suitable to what follows, by which one man seems to have been divided
into two.” Others render it, “<span id="xi.ix-p20.4"></span>ipse ego — I
myself,” and say that Paul used this dictlon emphatically, that none
might suspect that he spoke in the person of another. See <span
id="xi.ix-p20.5"></span>[Ro 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003.md)<span
id="xi.ix-p20.5"></span>; <span id="xi.ix-p20.6"></span>[2 Cor.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013.md)<span id="xi.ix-p20.6"></span>. The
phrase imports this, “It is myself, and none else.”

<span id="xi.ix-p21"></span>He terms his innate sin “the flesh.” By the
flesh, says <span id="xi.ix-p21.1"></span>Pareus, “is not meant
physically the muscular substance, but theologically the depravity of
nature, — not sensuality alone, but the unregenerated reason, will, and
affections.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc38011.md)
