[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38015)  [Next](cc38017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
13:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are
ordained of God.

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Omnis anima potestatibus
supereminentibus subdita sit: non enim est potestas, nisi a Deo; quae
vero sunt potestates a Deo sunt ordinatae.

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Whosoever therefore resisteth the
power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation.

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Itaque qui resistit potestati, Dei
ordinationi resistit; qui vero restiterint judicium sibi accersent.

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span><span id="xvii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>**1.** *Let every soul,*  <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) *etc.* Inasmuch as he so carefully
handles this subject in connection with what forms the Christian life,
it appears that he was constrained to do so by some great necessity
which existed especially in that age, though the preaching of the gospel
at all times renders this necessary. There are indeed always some
tumultuous spirits who believe that the kingdom of Christ cannot be
sufficiently elevated, unless all earthly powers be abolished, and that
they cannot enjoy the liberty given by him, except they shake off every
yoke of human subjection. This error, however, possessed the minds of
the Jews above all others; for it seemed to them disgraceful that the
offspring of Abraham, whose kingdom flourished before the Redeemer’s
coming, should now, after his appearance, continue in submission to
another power. There was also another thing which alienated the Jews no
less than the Gentiles from their rulers, because they all not only
hated piety, but also persecuted religion with the most hostile
feelings. Hence it seemed unreasonable to acknowledge them for
legitimate princes and rulers, who were attempting to take away the
kingdom from Christ, the only Lord of heaven and earth.

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>By these reasons, as it is probable, Paul
was induced to establish, with greater care than usual, the authority of
magistrates, and first he lays down a general precept, which briefly
includes what he afterwards says: secondly, he subjoins an exposition
and a proof of his precept.

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>He calls them the *higher powers,*  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) not the supreme, who possess the chief
authority, but such as excel other men. Magistrates are then thus called
with regard to their subjects, and not as compared with each other. And
it seems indeed to me, that the Apostle intended by this word to take
away the frivolous curiosity of men, who are wont often to inquire by
what right they who rule have obtained their authority; but it ought to
be enough for us, that they *do rule;* for they have not ascended by
their own power into this high station, but have been placed there by
the Lord’s hand. And by mentioning *every soul,* he removes every
exception, lest any one should claim an immunity from the common duty of
obedience.  <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400)

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span>*For there is no power, etc.* The reason
why we ought to be subject to magistrates is, because they are
constituted by God’s ordination. For since it pleases God thus to govern
the world, he who attempts to invert the order of God, and thus to
resist God himself, despises his power; since to despise the providence
of him who is the founder of civil power, is to carry on war with him.
Understand further, that powers are from God, not as pestilence, and
famine, and wars, and other visitations for sin, are said to be from
him; but because he has appointed them for the legitimate and just
government of the world. For though tyrannies and unjust exercise of
power, as they are full of disorder, (<span
id="xvii.i-p13.1"></span>ἀταξίας) are not an ordained government; yet
the right of government is ordained by God for the wellbeing of mankind.
As it is lawful to repel wars and to seek remedies for other evils,
hence the Apostle commands us willingly and cheerfully to respect and
honor the right and authority of magistrates, as useful to men: for the
punishment which God inflicts on men for their sins, we cannot properly
call ordinations, but they are the means which he designedly appoints
for the preservation of legitimate order.

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span><span id="xvii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span>**2.** *And they who resist, etc.* As no
one can resist God but to his own ruin, he threatens, that they shall
not be unpunished who in this respect oppose the providence of God. Let
us then beware, lest we incur this denunciation. And *by judgment,*
 <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) I understand not only the
punishment which is inflicted by the magistrate, as though he had only
said, that they would be justly punished who resisted authority; but
also the vengeance of God, however it may at length be executed: for he
teaches us in general what end awaits those who contend with God.

<span id="xvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
13:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003)<span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** For rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do
that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same:

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Principes enim non sunt terrori
bonis operibus sed malis; vis ergo non timere potestatem? bene fac, et
habebis laudem ab ea;

<span id="xvii.ii-p4"></span>**4.** For he is the minister of God to
thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he
beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger
to *execute* wrath upon him that doeth evil.

<span id="xvii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Dei enim minister est tibi in bonum;
si vero quid mali feceris, time; non enim frustra gladium gerit; Dei
enim minister est, vindex in iram adversus eos qui male agunt.  <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402)

<span id="xvii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p8"></span>**3***. For princes, etc.* He now commends
to us obedience to princes on the ground of utility; for the causative
<span id="xvii.ii-p8.1"></span>γὰρ, *for,* is to be referred to the
first proposition, and not to the last verse. Now, the utility is this,
— that the Lord has designed in this way to provide for the tranquillity
of the good, and to restrain the waywardness of the wicked; by which two
things the safety of mankind is secured: for except the fury of the
wicked be resisted, and the innocent be protected from their violence,
all things would come to an entire confusion. Since then this is the
only remedy by which mankind can be preserved from destruction, it ought
to be carefully observed by us, unless we wish to avow ourselves as the
public enemies of the human race.

<span id="xvii.ii-p9"></span>And he adds, *Wilt not thou then fear the
power? Do good.* By this he intimates, that there is no reason why we
should dislike the magistrate, if indeed we are good; nay, that it is an
implied proof of an evil conscience, and of one that is devising some
mischief, when any one wishes to shake off or to remove from himself
this *yoke.* But he speaks here of the true, and, as it were, of the
native duty of the magistrate, from which however they who hold power
often degenerate; yet the obedience due to princes ought to be rendered
to them. For since a *wicked* prince is the Lord’s scourge to punish the
sins of the people, let us remember, that it happens through our fault
that this *excellent* blessing of God is turned into a curse.

<span id="xvii.ii-p10"></span>Let us then continue to honor the good
appointment of God, which may be easily done, provided we impute to
ourselves whatever evil may accompany it. Hence he teaches us here the
end for which magistrates are instituted by the Lord; the happy effects
of which would always appear, were not so noble and salutary an
institution marred through our fault. At the same time, princes do never
so far abuse their power, by harassing the good and innocent, that they
do not retain in their tyranny some kind of just government: there can
then be no tyranny which does not in some respects assist in
consolidating the society of men.

<span id="xvii.ii-p11"></span>He has here noticed two things, which even
philosophers have considered as making a part of a well-ordered
administration of a commonwealth, that is, rewards for the good, and
punishment for the wicked. The word *praise* has here, after the Hebrew
manner, a wide meaning.

<span id="xvii.ii-p12"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p13"></span>**4.** *For he is God’s minister for good,
etc.* Magistrates may hence learn what their vocation is, for they are
not to rule for their own interest, but for the public good; nor are
they endued with unbridled power, but what is restricted to the
wellbeing of their subjects; in short, they are responsible to God and
to men in the exercise of their power. For as they are deputed by God
and do his business, they must give an account to him: and then the
ministration which God has committed to them has a regard to the
subjects, they are therefore debtors also to them. And private men are
reminded, that it is through the divine goodness that they are defended
by the sword of princes against injuries done by the wicked.

<span id="xvii.ii-p14"></span>*For they bear not the sword in vain,
etc.* It is another part of the office of magistrates, that they ought
forcibly to repress the waywardness of evil men, who do not willingly
suffer themselves to be governed by laws, and to inflict such punishment
on their offenses as God’s judgment requires; for he expressly declares,
that they are armed with the sword, not for an *empty* show, but that
they may smite evil-doers.

<span id="xvii.ii-p15"></span>And then he says, *An avenger, to execute
wrath,*  <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) *etc.* This is the same
as if it had been said, that he is an executioner of God’s wrath; and
this he shows himself to be by having the sword, which the Lord has
delivered into his hand. This is a remarkable passage for the purpose of
proving the right of the sword; for if the Lord, by arming the
magistrate, has also committed to him the use of the sword, whenever he
visits the guilty with death, by executing God’s vengeance, he obeys his
commands. Contend then do they with God who think it unlawful to shed
the blood of wicked men.

<span id="xvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
13:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005)<span id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p2"></span>**5.** Wherefore *ye* must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

<span id="xvii.iii-p3"></span>**5.** Itaque necesse est subjici, non
modo propter iram, sed etiam propter conscientiam.

<span id="xvii.iii-p4"></span>**6.** For, for this cause pay ye tribute
also: for they are God’s ministers, attending continually upon this very
thing.

<span id="xvii.iii-p5"></span>**6.** Propterea enim tributa quoque
solutis; ministri  <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) enim Dei
sunt, in hoc incumbentes.

<span id="xvii.iii-p7"></span>**7.** Render therefore to all their dues:
tribute to whom tribute *is due*; custom to whom custom; fear to whom
fear; honour to whom honour.

<span id="xvii.iii-p8"></span>**7.** Reddite ergo omnibus quod debetur;
cui tributum, tributum; cui vectigal, vectigal; cui timorem, timorem;
cui honorem, honorem.

<span id="xvii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p10"></span>**5.** *It is therefore necessary, etc.*
What he had at first commanded as to the rendering of obedience to
magistrates, he now briefly repeats, but with some addition, and that
is, — that we ought to obey them, not only on the ground of necessity
arising from man, but that we thereby obey God; for by *wrath* he means
the punishment which the magistrates inflict for the contempt of their
dignity; as though he had said, “We must not only obey, because we
cannot with impunity resist the powerful and those armed with authority,
as injuries are wont to be borne with which cannot be repelled; but we
ought to obey willingly, as conscience through God’s word thus binds
us.” Though then the magistrate were disarmed, so that we could with
impunity provoke and despise him, yet such a thing ought to be no more
attempted than if we were to see punishment suspended over us; for it
belongs not to a private individual to take away authority from him whom
the Lord has in power set over us. This whole discourse is concerning
civil government; it is therefore to no purpose that they who would
exercise dominion over consciences do hence attempt to establish their
sacrilegious tyranny.

<span id="xvii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p12"></span>**6.** *For this reason also, etc.* He
takes occasion to introduce the subject of tributes, the reason for
which he deduces from the office of magistrates; for if it be their duty
to defend and safely preserve the peace of the good, and to resist the
mischievous attempts of the wicked, this they cannot do unless they are
aided by sufficient force. Tributes then are justly paid to support such
necessary expenses.  <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) But
respecting the proportion of taxes or tributes, this is not the place to
discuss the subject; nor does it belong to us either to prescribe to
princes how much they ought to expend in every affair, or to call them
to an account. It yet behooves them to remember, that whatever they
receive from the people, is as it were public property, and not to be
spent in the gratification of private indulgence. For we see the use for
which Paul appoints these tributes which are to be paid — even that
kings may be furnished with means to defend their subjects.

<span id="xvii.iii-p14"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p15"></span>**7.** *Render then to all what is due,
etc.* The Apostle seems here summarily to include the particulars in
which the duties of subjects towards magistrates consist, — that they
are to hold them in esteem and honor, that they are to obey their
edicts, laws, and judgments, — that they are to pay tributes and
customs. By the word *fear,* he means obedience; by *customs* and
*tributes,* not only imposts and taxes, but also other revenues.  <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406)

<span id="xvii.iii-p17"></span>Now this passage confirms what I have
already said, — that we ought to obey kings and governors, whoever they
may be, not *because* we are constrained, but because it is a service
*acceptable* to God; for he will have them not only to be feared, but
also honored by a voluntary respect.

<span id="xvii.iv"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
13:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008)<span id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p2"></span>**8.** Owe no man any thing, but to love
one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law.

<span id="xvii.iv-p3"></span>**8.** Nemini quicquam debeatis, nisi ut
invicem diligatis; qui enim diligit alterum Legem implevit.

<span id="xvii.iv-p4"></span>**9.** For this, Thou shalt not commit
adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear
false witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if *there be* any other
commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

<span id="xvii.iv-p5"></span>**9.** Illud enim, Non moechaberis, Non
occides, Non falsum testimonium dices, Non concupisces, et si quod est
aliud praeceptum, in hoc sermone comprehenditur, Diliges proximum sicut
teipsum.

<span id="xvii.iv-p6"></span>**10.** Love worketh no ill to his
neighbour: therefore love *is* the fulfilling of the law.

<span id="xvii.iv-p7"></span>**10.** Dilectio proximo malum non infert:
plenitudo ergo legis est dilectio.

<span id="xvii.iv-p8"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p9"></span>**8.** *To no one owe ye, etc.* There are
those who think that this was not said without a taunt, as though Paul
was answering the objection of those who *contended* that Christians
were burdened in having other precepts than that of love enjoined them.
And indeed I do not deny, but that it may be taken ironically, as though
he conceded to those who allowed no other law but that of love, what
they required, but in another sense. And *yet* I prefer to take the
words simply as they are; for I think that Paul meant to refer the
*precept* respecting the power of magistrates to the law of love, lest
it should seem to any one too feeble; as though he had said, — “When I
require you to obey princes, I require nothing more than what all the
faithful ought to do, as demanded by the law of love: for if ye wish
well to the good, (and not to wish this is inhuman,) ye ought to strive,
that the laws and judgments may prevail, that the administrators of the
laws may have an obedient people, so that through them peace may be
secured to all.” He then who introduces anarchy, violates love; for what
immediately follows anarchy, is the confusion of all things.  <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407)

<span id="xvii.iv-p11"></span>*For he who loves another, etc.* Paul’s
design is to reduce all the precepts of the law to love, so that we may
know that we then rightly obey the commandments, when we observe the law
of love, and when we refuse to undergo no burden in order to keep it. He
thus fully confirms what he has commanded respecting obedience to
magistrates, in which consists no small portion of love.

<span id="xvii.iv-p12"></span>But some are here impeded, and they cannot
well extricate themselves from this difficulty, — that Paul teaches us
that the law is fulfilled when we love our neighbor, for no mention is
here made of what is due to God, which ought not by any means to have
been omitted. But Paul refers not to the whole law, but speaks only of
what the law requires from us as to our neighbor. And it is doubtless
true, that the whole law is fulfilled when we love our neighbors; for
true love towards man does not flow except from the love of God, and it
is its evidence, and as it were its effects. But Paul records here only
the precepts of the second table, and of these only he speaks, as though
he had said, — “He who loves his neighbor as himself, performs his duty
towards the whole world.” Puerile then is the gloss of the Sophists, who
attempt to elicit from this passage what may favor justification by
works: for Paul declares not what men do or do not, but he speaks
hypothetically of that which you will find nowhere accomplished. And
when we say, that men are not justified by works, we deny not that the
keeping of the law is true righteousness: but as no one performs it, and
never has performed it, we say, that all are excluded from it, and that
hence the only refuge is in the grace of Christ.

<span id="xvii.iv-p13"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p14"></span>**9.** *For this, Thou shalt not commit
adultery, etc.* It cannot be from this passage concluded what precepts
are contained in the second table, for he subjoins at the end, *and if
there be any other precept* He indeed omits the command respecting the
honoring of parents; and it may seem strange, that what especially
belonged to his subject should have been passed by. But what if he had
left it out, lest he should obscure his argument? Though I dare not to
affirm this, yet I see here nothing wanting to answer the purpose he had
in view, which was to show, — that since God intended nothing else by
all his commandments than to teach us the duty of love, we ought by all
means to strive to perform it. And yet the uncontentious reader will
readily acknowledge, that Paul intended to prove, by things of a like
nature, that the import of the whole law is, that love towards one
another ought to be exercised by us, and that what he left to be implied
is to be understood, and that is, — that obedience to magistrates is not
the least thing which tends to nourish peace, to preserve brotherly
love.

<span id="xvii.iv-p15"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p16"></span>**10.** *Love doeth no evil to a neighbor,
etc.* He demonstrates by the effect, that under the word love are
contained those things which are taught us in all the commandments; for
he who is endued with true love will never entertain the thought of
injuring others. What else does the whole law forbid, but that we do no
harm to our neighbor? This, however, ought to be applied to the present
subject; for since magistrates are the guardians of peace and justice,
he who desires that his own right should be secured to every one, and
that all may live free from wrong, ought to defend, as far as he can,
the power of magistrates. But the enemies of government show a
disposition to do harm. And when he repeats that the fulfilling of the
law is love, understand this, as before, of that part of the law which
refers to mankind; for the first table of the law, which contains what
we owe to God, is not here referred to at all.

<span id="xvii.v"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p1"></span><span id="xvii.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
13:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011)<span id="xvii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p2"></span>**11.** And that, knowing the time, that now
*it is* high time to awake out of sleep: for now *is* our salvation
nearer than when we believed.

<span id="xvii.v-p3"></span>**11.** Hoc enim, quum noverimus tempus,
quia hora est qua jam e somno expergiscamur (nunc enim propior est salus
nostra quam quum credi-dimus,)

<span id="xvii.v-p4"></span>**12.** The night is far spent, the day is
at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put
on the armour of light.

<span id="xvii.v-p5"></span>**12.** Nox progressa est, dies vero
appropinquavit: abjiciamus ergo opera tenebrarum, et induamus arma
lucis.

<span id="xvii.v-p6"></span>**13.** Let us walk honestly, as in the day;
not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying.

<span id="xvii.v-p7"></span>**13** Sicut in die decenter ambulemus; non
comessationibus neque ebrietatibus, neque eubilibus neque lasciviis,
neque contentione neque aemulatione:

<span id="xvii.v-p8"></span>**14.** But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make not provision for the flesh, to *fulfil* the lusts *thereof*

<span id="xvii.v-p9"></span>**14.** Sed induamini Dominum Iesum
Christum, et carnis curam ne agatis ad concupiscentias.

<span id="xvii.v-p10"></span><span id="xvii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p11"></span>**11.** *Moreover, etc.* He enters now on
another subject of exhortation, that as the rays of celestial life had
begun to shine on us as it were at the dawn, we ought to do what they
are wont to do who are in public life and in the sight of men, who take
diligent care lest they should commit anything that is base or
unbecoming; for if they do anything amiss, they see that they are
exposed to the view of many witnesses. But we, who always stand in the
sight of God and of angels, and whom Christ, the true sun of
righteousness, invites to his presence, we indeed ought to be much more
careful to beware of every kind of pollution.

<span id="xvii.v-p12"></span>The import then of the words is this,
“Since we know that the seasonable time has already come, in which we
should awake from sleep, let us cast aside whatever belongs to the
night, let us shake off all the works of darkness, since the darkness
itself has been dissipated, and let us attend to the works of light, and
walk as it becomes those who are enjoying the day.” The intervening
words are to be read as in a parenthesis.

<span id="xvii.v-p13"></span>As, however, the words are metaphorical, it
may be useful to consider their meaning: Ignorance of God is what he
calls *night;* for all who are thus ignorant go astray and sleep as
people do in the night. The unbelieving do indeed labor under these two
evils, they are blind and they are insensible; but this insensibility he
shortly after designated by sleep, which is, as one says, an image of
death. By *light* he means the revelation of divine truth, by which
Christ the sun of righteousness arises on us.  <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) He mentions *awake,* by which he
intimates that we are to be equipped and prepared to undertake the
services which the Lord requires from us. *The* *works of darkness* are
shameful and wicked works; for night, as some one says, is shameless.
*The* *armor of light* represents good, and temperate, and holy actions,
such as are suitable to the day; and armor is mentioned rather than
works, because we are to carry on a warfare for the Lord.

<span id="xvii.v-p16"></span>But the particles at the beginning, *And
this,* are to be read by themselves, for they are connected with what is
gone before; as we say in Latin *Adhoec* — besides, or *proeterea* —
moreover. The *time,* he says, was known to the faithful, for the
calling of God and the day of visitation required a new life and new
morals, and he immediately adds an explanation, and says, that it was
the *hour* to awake: for it is not <span id="xvii.v-p16.1"></span>χρόνος
but <span id="xvii.v-p16.2"></span>καιρὸς which means a fit occasion or
a seasonable time.  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409)

<span id="xvii.v-p21"></span>*For nearer is now our salvation, etc.*
This passage is in various ways perverted by interpreters. Many refer
the word *believed* to the time of the law, as though Paul had said,
that the Jews believed before Christ came; which view I reject as
unnatural and strained; and surely to confine a general truth to a small
part of the Church, would have been wholly inconsistent. Of that whole
assembly to which he wrote, how few were Jews? Then this declaration
could not have been suitable to the Romans. Besides, the comparison
between the night and the day does in my judgment dissipate every doubt
on the point. The declaration then seems to me to be of the most simple
kind, — “Nearer is salvation now to us than at that time when we began
to believe:” so that a reference is made to the time which had preceded
as to their faith. For as the adverb here used is in its import
indefinite, this meaning is much the most suitable, as it is evident
from what follows.

<span id="xvii.v-p22"></span><span id="xvii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p23"></span>**12.** *The night has advanced, and the
day*, *etc.* This is the season which he had just mentioned; for as the
faithful are not as yet received into full light, he very fitly compares
to the dawn the knowledge of future life, which shines on us through the
gospel: for *day* is not put here, as in other places, for the light of
faith, (otherwise he could not have said that it was only approaching,
but that it was present, for it now shines as it were in the middle of
its progress,) but for that glorious brightness of the celestial life,
the beginnings of which are now seen through the gospel.

<span id="xvii.v-p24"></span>The sum of what he says is, — that as soon
as God begins to call us, we ought to do the same, as when we conclude
from the first dawn of the day that the full sun is at hand; we ought to
look forward to the coming of Christ.

<span id="xvii.v-p25"></span>He says that *the* *night had advanced,*
because we are not so overwhelmed with thick darkness as the unbelieving
are, to whom no spark of life appears; but the hope of resurrection is
placed by the gospel before our eyes; yea, the light of faith, by which
we discover that the full brightness of celestial glory is nigh at hand,
ought to stimulate us, so that we may not grow torpid on the earth. But
afterwards, when he bids us to walk in the light, as it were during the
day time, he does not continue the same metaphor; for he compares to the
day our present state, while Christ shines on us. His purpose was in
various ways to exhort us, — at one time to meditate on our future life;
at another, to contemplate the present favor of God.

<span id="xvii.v-p26"></span><span id="xvii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p27"></span>**13.** *Not in reveling, etc.* He mentions
here three kinds of vices, and to each he has given two names, —
intemperant and excess in living, — carnal lust and uncleanness, which
is connected with it, — and envy and contention. If these have in them
so much filthiness, that even carnal men are ashamed to commit them
before the eyes of men, it behooves us, who are in the light of God, at
all times to abstain from them; yea, even when we are withdrawn from the
presence of men. As to the third vice, though contention is put before
envying, there is yet. no doubt but that Paul intended to remind us,
that strifes and contests arise from this fountain; for when any one
seeks to excel, there is envying of one another; but ambition is the
source of both evils.  <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410)

<span id="xvii.v-p29"></span><span id="xvii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p30"></span>**14.** *But put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.* This metaphor is commonly used in Scripture with respect
to what tends to adorn or to deform man; both of which may be seen in
his clothing: for a filthy and torn garment dishonors a man; but what is
becoming and clean recommends him. Now to *put on* Christ, means here to
be on every side fortified by the power of his Spirit, and be thereby
prepared to discharge all the duties of holiness; for thus is the image
of God renewed in us, which is the only true ornament of the soul. For
Paul had in view the end of our calling; inasmuch as God, by adopting
us, unites us to the body of his only-begotten Son, and for this
purpose, — that we, renouncing our former life, may *become* new men in
him.  <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) On this account he says
also in another place, that we put on Christ in baptism. (<span
id="xvii.v-p31.2"></span>[Ga 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span
id="xvii.v-p31.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.v-p32"></span>*And have no care, etc.* As long as we
carry about us our flesh, we cannot cast away every care for it; for
though our conversation is in heaven, we yet sojourn on earth. The
things then which belong to the body must be taken care of, but not
otherwise than as they are helps to us in our pilgrimage, and not that
they may make us to forget our country. Even heathens have said, that a
few things suffice nature, but that the appetites of men are insatiable.
Every one then who wishes to satisfy the desires of the flesh, must
necessarily not only fall into, but be immerged in a vast and deep gulf.

<span id="xvii.v-p33"></span>Paul, setting a bridle on our desires,
reminds us, that the cause of all intemperance is, that no one is
content with a moderate or lawful use of things: he has therefore laid
down this rule, — that we are to provide for the wants of our flesh, but
not to indulge its lusts. It is in this way that we shall use this world
without abusing it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc38016.htm#fr_398) <span
id="xvii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p8.1"></span>Anima,”
ψυχὴ, not only the Hebrews, (see <span id="xvii.i-p8.2"></span>[Gen.
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021), [Gen.
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027)<span id="xvii.i-p8.2"></span>,)
but the Greeks also designate man by this word. Man is sometimes
designated by his immaterial part, *soul*, and sometimes by his material
part, *flesh*, or body, as in <span id="xvii.i-p8.3"></span>[Ro
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p8.3"></span>.
One author says that the word soul is used here in order to show that
the obedience enforced should be from the soul, not feigned, but sincere
and genuine. *Let every soul*, that is “every one,” says <span
id="xvii.i-p8.4"></span>Grotius, “even apostles, prophets, and bishops.”
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc38016.htm#fr_399) <span
id="xvii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p11.1"></span>Potestates
supereminentes — pre-eminent powers.” <span
id="xvii.i-p11.2"></span>Hammond renders the words ἐξουσίαις
ὑπερεχούσαις, *supreme* *powers*, meaning kings, and refers to ἄρχοντες
in <span id="xvii.i-p11.3"></span>[Ro
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003)<span id="xvii.i-p11.3"></span>,
as a proof; but this word means magistrates as well as kings. See <span
id="xvii.i-p11.4"></span>[Lu
12:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#058)<span id="xvii.i-p11.4"></span>.
The ruling power as exercised by those in authority is evidently what is
meant here, without any reference to any form of government. Of course
obedience to kings, or to emperors, or to any exercising a ruling power,
whatever name they may bear, is included. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc38016.htm#fr_400) <span
id="xvii.i-p11.5"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span> <span id="xvii.i-p12.1"></span>Grotius
qualifies this obedience by saying, that it should not extend to what is
contrary to the will of God. But it is remarkable, that often in
Scripture things are stated broadly and without any qualifying terms,
and yet they have limits, as it is clear from other portions. This
peculiarity is worthy of notice. Power is from God, the abuse of power
is from what is evil in men. The Apostle throughout refers only to power
justly exercised. He does not enter into the subject of tyranny and
oppression. And this is probably the reason why he does not set limits
to the obedience required: he contemplated no other than the proper and
legitimate use of power. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc38016.htm#fr_401) <span
id="xvii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p16.1"></span>Judicium,”
κρίμα; some render it “punishment;” <span id="xvii.i-p16.2"></span>Beza,
“condemnation.” The word is used in both senses: but according to the
tenor of the former part of the verse, it seems that the Apostle means
that which is inflicted by God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc38016.htm#fr_402) <span
id="xvii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p6"></span> The words, “<span
id="xvii.ii-p6.1"></span>Vindex in iram adversus eos qui male agunt,”
can hardly be translated; and the latter part is improperly put in the
plural. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc38016.htm#fr_403) <span
id="xvii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p16"></span> <span id="xvii.ii-p16.1"></span>*Vindex
in iram*, ἔκδικος εἰς ὀργὴν; “a revenger to *execute* wrath,” Com. Ver.,
<span id="xvii.ii-p16.2"></span>Doddridge; “a revenger for wrath,” <span
id="xvii.ii-p16.3"></span>Hammond. Wrath is here taken to mean
punishment, by <span id="xvii.ii-p16.4"></span>Luther, <span
id="xvii.ii-p16.5"></span>Beza, <span id="xvii.ii-p16.6"></span>Grotius,
<span id="xvii.ii-p16.7"></span>Mede, etc. see <span
id="xvii.ii-p16.8"></span>[Ro 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span
id="xvii.ii-p16.8"></span>; <span id="xvii.ii-p16.9"></span>[Ro
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005)<span id="xvii.ii-p16.9"></span>;
<span id="xvii.ii-p16.10"></span>[Ro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span id="xvii.ii-p16.10"></span>.
The phrase then might be rendered, “condemning to punishment the doer of
evil.” There is a contrast between “for wrath” and “for good” at the
beginning of the verse. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc38016.htm#fr_404) <span
id="xvii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p6"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iii-p6.1"></span>Ministri,” λειτουργοὶ, administrators,
functionaries, the performers of public service, or public ministers,
according to <span id="xvii.iii-p6.2"></span>Macknight. Rulers were
called before, in <span id="xvii.iii-p6.3"></span>[Ro
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)<span id="xvii.iii-p6.3"></span>,
διάκονοι, servants, deacons, ministers. The same titles are given to
them as to the Apostles and ministers of the gospel, and even to Christ
himself: and they are said to be the ministers and functionaries of
*God*, being so in civil matters, as those are in spiritual things who
preach the gospel. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc38016.htm#fr_405) <span
id="xvii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p13"></span> The words “to this very thing,” εἰς αὐτὸ
τούτο, seem to be an instance of Hebraism, as <span
id="xvii.iii-p13.1"></span>זאת, “this,” in that language is both
singular and plural, and means “this,” or “those,” according to the
context. “To these very things,” before mentioned as to the works and
duties of magistrates, appears to be the meaning here: and so the words
are rendered in the Syriac and Ethiopic versions. A singular instance is
found at the beginning of <span id="xvii.iii-p13.2"></span>[Ro
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009)<span id="xvii.iii-p13.2"></span>,
“For this,” τὸ γὰρ, and then several commandments are mentioned; “for
this” is the law, says <span id="xvii.iii-p13.3"></span>Stuart; but the
word for “law” is of a different gender. What we would say in English
is, “for these,” etc. It is a Hebrew idiom transferred into Greek. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc38016.htm#fr_406) <span
id="xvii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p16"></span> The distinction commonly made between
the two words is this, — φόρος, “tribute,” is a tax on the person or on
lands, and τέλος, “custom,” is what is levied on merchandise. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc38016.htm#fr_407) <span
id="xvii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p10"></span> The debt of love is to be always paid,
and is always due: for love is ever to be exercised. We are to pay other
debts, and we may pay them fully and finally: but the debt of love ever
continues, and is to be daily discharged. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc38016.htm#fr_408) <span
id="xvii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p14"></span> The preceding explanation of *night* and
*day*, as here to be understood, does not comport with what is
afterwards said on <span id="xvii.v-p14.1"></span>[Ro
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012)<span id="xvii.v-p14.1"></span>.
The distinction between night and day of a Christian, ought to be
clearly kept in view. The first is what is here described, but the
latter is what the passage refers to. And the *sleep* mentioned here is
not the sleep of ignorance and unbelief, but the sleep, the torpor, or
inactivity of Christians.

<span id="xvii.v-p15"></span>That the present state of believers, their
condition in this world, is meant here by “night,” and their state of
future glory is meant by “day,” appears evident from the words which
follow, “for nearer now is our salvation than when we believed.”
Salvation here, as in <span id="xvii.v-p15.1"></span>[Ro
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="xvii.v-p15.1"></span>,
and in <span id="xvii.v-p15.2"></span>[1Pe
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009)<span id="xvii.v-p15.2"></span>,
means salvation made complete and perfect, the full employment of all
its blessings. Indeed in no other sense can what is said here of night
and day be appropriate. The night of heathen ignorance as to Christians
had already passed, and the day of gospel light was not approaching, but
had appeared. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc38016.htm#fr_409) <span
id="xvii.v-p16.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p17"></span> The words καὶ τούτο, according to <span
id="xvii.v-p17.1"></span>Beza, <span id="xvii.v-p17.2"></span>Grotius,
<span id="xvii.v-p17.3"></span>Mede*,* etc., connect what follows with
the preceding exhortation to love, “And this do, or let us do, as we
know,” etc. But the whole tenor of what follows by no means favors this
view. The subject is wholly different. It is evidently a new subject of
exhortation, as <span id="xvii.v-p17.4"></span>Calvin says, and the
words must be rendered as he proposes, or be viewed as elliptical; the
word “I say,” or “I command,” according to <span
id="xvii.v-p17.5"></span>Macknight, being understood, “This also I
*say*, since we know the time,” etc. If we adopt “I command,” or
“moreover,” as <span id="xvii.v-p17.6"></span>Calvin does, it would be
better to regard the participle εἰδότες, as having the meaning of an
imperative, εστε being understood, several instances of which we have in
the preceding chapter, <span id="xvii.v-p17.7"></span>[Rom.
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)<span id="xvii.v-p17.7"></span>.
The whole passage would then read better in this manner, —

<span id="xvii.v-p18"></span>**11.** Moreover, know the time, that it is
even now the very time for us to awake from sleep; for nearer now is our
salvation than when we

<span id="xvii.v-p19"></span>**12.** believed: the night has advanced,
and the day has approached; let us then cast away the works of darkness,
and let us put on the

<span id="xvii.v-p20"></span>**13.** armor of light; let us, as in the
day, walk in a becoming manner, etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc38016.htm#fr_410) <span
id="xvii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p28"></span> The case is the same with the two
preceding instances; the vice which seems to follow is placed first.
Revelling is first mentioned, though drunkenness goes before it; and
“chambering,” or concubinage, or indulgence in unlawful lusts is first
stated, though lasciviousness or wantonness is the source from which it
proceeds. It is an example of the Apostle’s mode of writing similar to
what we find in <span id="xvii.v-p28.1"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span id="xvii.v-p28.1"></span>,
as to “the gifts and calling of God,” and in <span
id="xvii.v-p28.2"></span>[Ro
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span id="xvii.v-p28.2"></span>,
as to “the wisdom and knowledge of God.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc38016.htm#fr_411) <span
id="xvii.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p31"></span> Many have explained “the putting on” here
in a manner wholly inconsistent with the passage, as though the putting
on of Christ’s righteousness was intended. <span
id="xvii.v-p31.1"></span>Calvin keeps to what accords with the context,
the putting on of Christ as to his holy image. Sanctification, and not
justification, is the subject of the passage. To put on Christ, then, is
to put on his virtues and graces, to put on or be endued with his
spirit, to imitate his conduct and to copy his example. This is in
addition to the putting him on as our righteousness, and not as a
substitute for it. Both are necessary: for Christ is our sanctification,
the author, worker, and example of it, as well as our righteousness. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](cc38017)
