[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc38014)  [Next](cc38016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001.md)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** I beseech you therefore, brethren, by
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, *which is* your reasonable service.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Obsecro itaque vos fratres, per
miserationes Dei, ut sistatis corpora vestra hostiam vivam, sanctam,
acceptam Deo, rationabilem cultum vestrum.

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And be not conformed to this world:
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove
what *is* that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God.

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et ne conformetis vos huic mundo, sed
transfiguremini renovatione mentis vestrae, ut probetis quae sit
voluntas Dei bona et placita et perfecta.

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span><span id="xvi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>After having handled those things necessary
for the erection of the kingdom of God, — that righteousness is to be
sought from God alone, that salvation is to come to us alone from his
mercy, that all blessings are laid up and daily offered to us in Christ
only, — Paul now passes on, according to the best order, to show how the
life is to be formed. If it be, that through the saving knowledge of God
and of Christ, the soul is, as it were, regenerated into a celestial
life, and that the life is in a manner formed and regulated by holy
exhortations and precepts; it is then in vain that you show a desire to
form the life aright, except you prove first, that the origin of all
righteousness in men is in God and Christ; for this is to raise them
from the dead.

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>And this is the main difference between the
gospel and philosophy: for though the philosophers speak excellently and
with great judgment on the subject of morals, yet whatever *excellency*
shines forth in their precepts, it is, as it were, a beautiful
superstructure without a foundation; for by omitting principles, they
offer a mutilated doctrine, like a body without a head. Not very unlike
this is the mode of teaching under the Papacy: for though they mention,
by the way, faith in Christ and the grace of the Holy Spirit, it yet
appears quite evident, that they approach heathen philosophers far
nearer than Christ and his Apostles.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>But as philosophers, before they lay down
laws respecting morals, discourse first of the end of what is good, and
inquire into the sources of virtues, from which afterwards they draw and
derive all duties; so Paul lays down here the principle from which all
the duties of holiness flow, even this, — that we are redeemed by the
Lord for this end — that we may consecrate to him ourselves and all our
members. But it may be useful to examine *every* part.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>**1.** *I therefore beseech you by the
mercies* (<span id="xvi.i-p10.1"></span>miserationes — *compassions*)
*of God, etc.* We know that unholy men, in order to gratify the flesh,
anxiously lay hold on whatever is set forth in Scripture respecting the
infinite goodness of God; and hypocrites also, as far as they can,
maliciously darken the knowledge of it, as though the grace of God
extinguished the desire for a godly life, and opened to audacity the
door of sin. But this exhortation teaches us, that until men really
apprehend how much they owe to the mercy of God, they will never with a
right feeling worship him, nor be effectually stimulated to fear and
obey him. It is enough for the Papists, if they can extort by terror
some sort of forced obedience, I know not what. But Paul, that he might
bind us to God, not by servile fear, but by the voluntary and cheerful
love of righteousness, allures us by the sweetness of that favor, by
which our salvation is effected; and at the same time he reproaches us
with ingratitude, except we, after having found a Father so kind and
bountiful, do strive in our turn to dedicate ourselves wholly to him.
 <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376.md)

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>And what Paul says, in thus exhorting us,
ought to have more power over us, inasmuch as he excels all others in
setting forth the grace of God. Iron indeed must be the heart which is
not kindled by the doctrine which has been laid down into love towards
God, whose kindness towards itself it finds to have been so abounding.
Where then are they who think that all exhortations to a holy life are
nullified, if the salvation of men depends on the grace of God alone,
since by no precepts, by no sanctions, is a pious mind so framed to
render obedience to God, as by a serious meditation on the Divine
goodness towards it?

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>We may also observe here the benevolence of
the Apostle’s spirit, — that he preferred to deal with the faithful by
admonitions and friendly exhortations rather than by strict commands;
for he *knew* that he could prevail more with the teachable in this way
than in any other.

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>*That ye present your bodies, etc.* It is
then the beginning of a right course in good works, when we understand
that we are consecrated to the Lord; for it hence follows, that we must
cease to live to ourselves, in order that we may devote all the actions
of our life to his service.

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span>There are then two things to be considered
here, — the first, that we are the Lord’s, — and secondly, that we ought
on this account to be holy, for it is an indignity to God’s holiness,
that anything, not first consecrated, should be offered to him. These
two things being admitted, it then follows that holiness is to be
practiced through life, and that we are guilty of a kind of *sacrilege*
when we relapse into uncleanness, as it is nothing else than to profane
what is consecrated.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span>But there is throughout a great suitableness
in the expressions. He says first, that our *body* ought to be offered a
sacrifice to God; by which he implies that we are not our own, but have
entirely passed over so as to become the property of God; which cannot
be, except we renounce ourselves and thus deny ourselves. Then,
secondly, by adding two adjectives, he shows what sort of sacrifice this
ought to be. By calling it *living,* he intimates, that we are
sacrificed to the Lord for this end, — that our former life being
destroyed in us, we may be raised up to a new life. By the term *holy,*
he points out that which necessarily belongs to a sacrifice, already
noticed; for a victim is then only approved, when it had been previously
made holy. By the third word, *acceptable,* he reminds us, that our life
is framed aright, when this sacrifice is so made as to be pleasing to
God: he brings to us at the same time no common consolation; for he
teaches us, that our work is pleasing and acceptable to God when we
devote ourselves to purity and holiness.

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span>By *bodies* he means not only our bones and
skin, but the whole mass of which we are composed; and he adopted this
word, that he might more fully designate all that we are: for the
members of the body are the instruments by which we execute our
purposes.  <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377.md) He indeed requires
from us holiness, not only as to the body, but also as to the soul and
spirit, as in <span id="xvi.i-p20.2"></span>[1Th
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md)<span id="xvi.i-p20.2"></span>. In
bidding us to *present* our bodies, he alludes to the Mosaic sacrifices,
which were presented at the altar, as it were in the presence of God.
But he shows, at the same time, in a striking manner, how prompt we
ought to be to receive the commands of God, that we may without delay
obey them.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>Hence we learn, that all mortals, whose
object is not to worship God, do nothing but miserably wander and go
astray. We now also find what sacrifices Paul recommends to the
Christian Church: for being reconciled to God through the one only true
sacrifice of Christ, we are all through his grace made priests, in order
that we may dedicate ourselves and all we have to the glory of God. No
sacrifice of expiation is wanted; and no one can be set up, without
casting a manifest reproach on the cross of Christ.

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span>*Your reasonable service* This sentence, I
think, was added, that he might more clearly apply and confirm the
preceding exhortation, as though he had said, — “Offer yourselves a,
sacrifice to God, if ye have it in your heart to serve God: for this is
the right way of serving God; from which, if any depart, they are but
false worshippers.” If then only God is rightly worshipped, when we
observe all things according to what he has prescribed, away then with
all those devised modes of worship, which he justly abominates, since he
values obedience more than sacrifice. Men are indeed pleased with their
own inventions, which have an empty show of wisdom, as Paul says in
another place; but we learn here what the celestial Judge declares in
opposition to this by the mouth of Paul; for by calling that a
reasonable service which he commands, he repudiates as foolish, insipid,
and presumptuous, whatever we attempt beyond the rule of his word.
 <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378.md)

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span><span id="xvi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p25"></span>**2.** *And conform ye not to this world,
etc.* The term *world* has several significations, but here it means the
sentiments and the morals of men; to which, not without cause, he
forbids us to conform. For since the whole world lies in wickedness, it
behooves us to put off whatever we have of the old man, if we would
really put on Christ: and to remove all doubt, he explains what he
means, by stating what is of a contrary nature; for he bids us to be
transformed into a newness of mind. These kinds of contrast are common
in Scripture; and thus a subject is more clearly set forth.

<span id="xvi.i-p26"></span>Now attend here, and see what kind of
renovation is required from us: It is not that of the flesh only, or of
the inferior part of the soul, as the Sorbonists explain this word; but
of the mind, which is the most *excellent* part of us, and to which
philosophers ascribe the supremacy; for they call it <span
id="xvi.i-p26.1"></span>ἡγεμονικὸν, the leading power; and reason is
imagined to be a most wise queen. But Paul pulls her down from her
throne, and so reduces her to nothing by teaching us that we must be
renewed in mind. For how much soever we may flatter ourselves, that
declaration of Christ is still true, — that every man must be born
again, who would enter into the kingdom of God; for in mind and heart we
are altogether alienated from the righteousness of God.

<span id="xvi.i-p27"></span>*That ye may prove,*  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379.md) *etc.* Here you have the purpose for
which we must put on a new mind, — that bidding adieu to our own
counsels and desires, and those of all men, we may be attentive to the
only will of God, the knowledge of which is true wisdom. But if the
renovation of our mind is necessary, in order that we may prove what is
the will of God, it is hence evident how opposed it is to God.

<span id="xvi.i-p32"></span>The epithets which are added are intended
for the purpose of recommending God’s will, that we may seek to know it
with greater alacrity: and in order to constrain our perverseness, it is
indeed necessary that the true glory of justice and perfection should be
ascribed to the will of God. The world persuades itself that those works
which it has devised are good; Paul exclaims, that what is good and
right must be ascertained from God’s commandments. The world praises
itself, and takes delight in its own inventions; but Paul affirms, that
nothing pleases God except what he has commanded. The world, in order to
find perfection, slides from the word of God into its own devices; Paul,
by fixing perfection in the will of God, shows, that if any one passes
over that mark he is deluded by a false imagination.

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** For I say, through the grace given
unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think *of* *himself*
more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as
God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith.

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Dico enim per gratiam, quae data est
mihi, cuilibet vestrum, ne supra modum sapiat praeter id quod oportet
sapere, sed sapiat ad sobrietatem, sicuti unicuique distribuit Deus
mensuram fidei.

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span>**3.** *For I say, through the grace, etc.*
If you think not the causal particle superfluous, this verse will not be
unsuitably connected with the former; for since he wished that our whole
study should be employed in investigating the will of God, the next
thing to this was, to draw us away from vain curiosity. As however the
causal particle is often used redundantly by Paul, you may take the
verse as containing a simple affirmation; for thus the sense would also
be very appropriate.

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>But before he specifies his command, he
reminds them of the authority which had been given to him, so that they
might not otherwise attend to his voice than if it was the voice of God
himself; for his words are the same, as though he had said, “I speak not
of myself; but, as God’s ambassador, I bring to you the commands which
he has entrusted to me.” By “*grace*” (as before) he means the
Apostleship, with respect to which he exalts God’s kindness, and at the
same time intimates, that he had not crept in through his own
presumption, but, that he was chosen by the calling of God. Having then
by this preface secured authority to himself, he laid the Romans under
the necessity of obeying, unless they were prepared to despise God in
the person of his minister.

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span>Then the command follows, by which he draws
us away from the investigation of those things which can bring nothing
but harassment to the mind, and no edification; and he forbids every one
to assume more than what his capacity and calling will allow; and at the
same time he exhorts us to think and meditate on those things which may
render us sober-minded and modest. For so I understand the words, rather
than in the sense given by <span id="xvi.ii-p7.1"></span>Erasmus*,* who
thus renders them, “Let no one think proudly of himself;” for this sense
is somewhat remote from the words, and the other is more accordant with
the context. The clause, *Beyond what it behooves him to be wise,* shows
what he meant by the former verb <span
id="xvi.ii-p7.2"></span>ὑπερφρόνειν*,* to be above measure wise; that
is, that we exceed the measure of wisdom, if we engage in those things
concerning which it is not meet that we should be anxious.  <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380.md) To be *wise unto sobriety* is to
attend to the study of those things by which you may find that you learn
and gain moderation.

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span>*To every one as God has distributed, etc.*
*(*<span id="xvi.ii-p9.1"></span>*Unicuique ut divisit Deus.)* There is
here an inversion of words, instead of — *As to every one God has
distributed*  <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381.md) And here a reason
is given for that sober-minded wisdom which he had mentioned; for as
distribution of graces is various, so every one preserves himself within
the due boundaries of wisdom, who keeps within the limits of that grace
of faith bestowed on him by the Lord. Hence there is an immoderate
affectation of wisdom, not only in empty things and in things useless to
be known, but also in the knowledge of those things which are otherwise
useful, when we regard not what has been given to us, but through
rashness and presumption go beyond the measure of our knowledge; and
such outrage God will not suffer to go unpunished. It is often to be
seen, with what insane trifles they are led away, who, by foolish
ambition, proceed beyond those bounds which are set for them.  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382.md)

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span>The meaning is, that it is a part of our
reasonable sacrifice to surrender ourselves, in a meek and teachable
spirit, to be ruled and guided by God. And further, by setting up faith
in opposition to human judgment, he restrains us from our own opinions,
and at the same time specifies the due measure of it, that is, when the
faithful humbly keep themselves within the limits allotted to them.
 <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383.md)

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
12:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**4.** For as we have many members in one
body, and all members have not the same office:

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Quemadmodum enim in uno corpore
membra multa habemus, membra vero omnia non eandem habent actionem;

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span>**5.** So we, *being* many, are one body in
Christ, and every one members one of another.

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span>**5.** Sic multi unum sumus corpus in
Christo membra mutuo alter alterius.

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span>**6.** Having then gifts differing
according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, *let us
prophesy* according to the proportion of faith;

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span>**6.** Habentes autem dona secundum gratiam
nobis datam differentia; sive prophetiam, secundum analogiam fidei;

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span>**7.** Or ministry, *let us wait* on *our*
ministering: or he that teacheth, on teaching;

<span id="xvi.iii-p9"></span>**7.** Sive ministerium, in ministerio;
sive qui docet, in doctrina;

<span id="xvi.iii-p10"></span>**8.** Or he that exhorteth, on
exhortation: he that giveth, *let him do it* with simplicity; he that
ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.

<span id="xvi.iii-p11"></span>**8.** Sive qui exhortatur, in
exhortatione; sive qui largitur, in simplicitate; sive qui praeest, in
studio; sive qui miseretur, in hilaritate.

<span id="xvi.iii-p12"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p13"></span>**4.** *For as in one body, etc.* The very
thing which he had previously said of limiting the wisdom of each
according to the measure of faith, he now confirms by a reference to the
vocation of the faithful; for we are called for this end, that we may
unite together in one body, since Christ has ordained a fellowship and
connection between the faithful similar to that which exists between the
members of the human body; and as men could not of themselves come
together into such an union, he himself becomes the bond of this
connection. As then the case is with the human body, so it ought to be
with the society of the faithful. By applying this similitude he proves
how necessary it is for each to consider what is suitable to his own
nature, capacity, and vocation. But though this similitude has various
parts, it is yet to be chiefly thus applied to our present subject, —
that as the members of the same body have distinct offices, and all of
them are distinct, for no member possesses all powers, nor does it
appropriate to itself the offices of others; so God has distributed
various gifts to us, by which diversity he has determined the order
which he would have to be observed among us, so that every one is to
conduct himself according to the measure of his capacity, and not to
thrust himself into what peculiarly belongs to others; nor is any one to
seek to have all things himself, but to be content with his lot, and
willingly to abstain from usurping the offices of others. When, however,
he points out in express words the communion which is between us, he at
the same time intimates, how much diligence there ought to be in all, so
that they may contribute to the common good of the body according to the
faculties they possess.  <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384.md)

<span id="xvi.iii-p15"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p16"></span>**6.** *Having gifts, etc.* Paul speaks
not now simply of cherishing among ourselves brotherly love, but
commends humility, which is the best moderator of our whole life. Every
one desires to have so much himself, so as not to need any help from
others; but the bond of mutual communication is this, that no one has
sufficient for himself, but is constrained to borrow from others. I
admit, then that the society of the godly cannot exist, except when each
one is content with his own measure, and imparts to others the gifts
which he has received, and allows himself by turns to be assisted by the
gifts of others.

<span id="xvi.iii-p17"></span>But Paul especially intended to beat down
the pride which he knew to be innate in men; and that no one might be
dissatisfied that all things have not been bestowed on him, he reminds
us that according to the wise counsel of God every one has his own
portion given to him; for it is necessary to the common benefit of the
body that no one should be furnished with fullness of gifts, lest he
should heedlessly despise his brethren. Here then we have the main
design which the Apostle had in view, that all things do not meet in
all, but that the gifts of God are so distributed that each has a
limited portion, and that *each* ought to be so attentive in imparting
his own gifts to the edification of the Church, that no one, by leaving
his own function, may trespass on that of another. By this most
beautiful order, and as it were symmetry, is the safety of the Church
indeed preserved; that is, when every one imparts to all in common what
he has received from the Lord, in such a way as not to impede others. He
who inverts this order fights with God, by whose ordinance it is
appointed; for the difference of gifts proceeds not from the will of
man, but because it has pleased the Lord to distribute his grace in this
manner.

<span id="xvi.iii-p18"></span>*Whether prophecy, etc.* By now bringing
forward some examples, he shows how every one in his place, or as it
were in occupying his station, ought to be engaged. For all gifts have
their own defined limits, and to depart from them is to mar the gifts
themselves. But the passage appears somewhat confused; we may yet
arrange it in this manner, “Let him who has prophecy, test it by the
analogy of faith; let him in the ministry discharge it in teaching,”
 <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385.md) etc. They who will keep this
end in view, will rightly preserve themselves within their own limits.

<span id="xvi.iii-p20"></span>But this passage is variously understood.
There are those who consider that by *prophecy* is meant the gift of
predicting, which prevailed at the commencement of the gospel in the
Church; as the Lord then designed in every way to commend the dignity
and excellency of his Church; and they think that what is added,
*according to the analogy of faith,* is to be applied to all the
clauses. But I prefer to follow those who extend this word wider, even
to the peculiar gift of revelation, by which any one skillfully and
wisely performed the office of an interpreter in explaining the will of
God. Hence prophecy at this day in the Christian Church is hardly
anything else than the right understanding of the Scripture, and the
peculiar faculty of explaining it, inasmuch as all the ancient
prophecies and all the oracles of God have been completed in Christ and
in his gospel. For in this sense it is taken by Paul when he says,

<span id="xvi.iii-p21"></span>“I wish that you spoke in tongues, but
rather that ye prophesy,”  
(<span id="xvi.iii-p21.2"></span>[1Co
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005)<span id="xvi.iii-p21.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="xvi.iii-p22"></span>“In part we know and in part we
prophesy,”  
(<span id="xvi.iii-p22.2"></span>[1Co
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009)<span id="xvi.iii-p22.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.iii-p23"></span>And it does not appear that Paul intended
here to mention those miraculous graces by which Christ at first
rendered illustrious his gospel; but, on the contrary, we find that he
refers only to ordinary gifts, such as were to continue perpetually in
the Church.  <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386.md)

<span id="xvi.iii-p26"></span>Nor does it seem to me a solid objection,
that the Apostle to no purpose laid this injunction on those who, having
the Spirit of God, could not call Christ an anathema; for he testifies
in another place that the spirit of the Prophets is subject to the
Prophets; and he bids the first speaker to be silent, if anything were
revealed to him who was sitting down, (<span
id="xvi.iii-p26.1"></span>[1Co
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032.md)<span
id="xvi.iii-p26.1"></span>;) and it was for the same reason it may be
that he gave this admonition to those who prophesied in the Church, that
is, that they were to conform their prophecies to the rule of faith,
lest in anything they should deviate from the right line. By *faith* he
means the first principles of religion, and whatever doctrine is not
found to correspond with these is here condemned as false.  <span
id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387.md)

<span id="xvi.iii-p28"></span>As to the other clauses there is less
difficulty. Let him who is ordained a minister, he says, execute his
office in ministering; nor let him think, that he has been admitted into
that degree for himself, but for others; as though he had said, “Let him
fulfill his office by ministering faithfully, that he may answer to his
name.” So also he immediately adds with regard to teachers; for by the
word teaching, he recommends sound edification, according to this
import, — “Let him who excels in teaching know that the end is, that the
Church may be really instructed; and let him study this one thing, that
he may render the Church more informed by his teaching:” for a teacher
is he who forms and builds the Church by the word of truth. Let him also
who excels in the gift of exhorting, have this in view, to render his
exhortation effectual.

<span id="xvi.iii-p29"></span>But these offices have much affinity and
even connection; not however that they were not different. No one indeed
could exhort, except by doctrine: yet he who teaches is not therefore
endued with the qualification to exhort. But no one prophesies or
teaches or exhorts, without at the same time ministering. But it is
enough if we preserve that distinction which we find to be in God’s
gifts, and which we know to be adapted to produce order in the Church.
 <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388.md)

<span id="xvi.iii-p32"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p33"></span>**8.** *Or he who gives, let him do so in
simplicity, etc.* From the former clauses we have clearly seen, that he
teaches us here the legitimate use of God’s gifts. By the <span
id="xvi.iii-p33.1"></span>μεταδιδούντοις, *the givers,* of whom he
speaks here, he did not understand those who gave of their own property,
but the deacons, who presided in dispensing the public charities of the
Church; and by the <span id="xvi.iii-p33.2"></span>ἐλούντοις, *those who
showed mercy,* he meant the widows, and other ministers, who were
appointed to take care of the sick, according to the custom of the
ancient Church: for there were two different offices, — to provide
necessaries for the poor, and to attend to their condition. But to the
first he recommends *simplicity,* so that without fraud or respect of
persons they were faithfully to administer what was entrusted to them.
He required the services of the other party to be rendered with
*cheerfulness,* lest by their peevishness (which often happens) they
marred the favor conferred by them. For as nothing gives more solace to
the sick or to any one otherwise distressed, than to see men cheerful
and prompt in assisting them; so to observe sadness in the countenance
of those by whom assistance is given, makes them to feel themselves
despised.

<span id="xvi.iii-p34"></span>Though he rightly calls those <span
id="xvi.iii-p34.1"></span>προϊστάμενους *presidents,* to whom was
committed the government of the Church, (and they were the elders, who
presided over and ruled others and exercised discipline;) yet what he
says of these may be extended universally to all kinds of governors: for
no small solicitude is required from those who provide for the safety of
all, and no small diligence is needful for them who ought to watch day
and night for the wellbeing of the whole community. Yet the state of
things at that time proves that Paul does not speak of all kinds of
rulers, for there were then no pious magistrates; but of the elders who
were the correctors of morals.

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
12:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009.md)<span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**9.** *Let* love be without dissimulation.
Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good.

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span>**9.** Dilectio sit non simulata; sitis
aversantes malum, adherentes bono;

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span>**10.** *Be* kindly affectioned one to
another with brotherly love; in honour preferring one another;

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span>**10.** Fraterna charitate ad vos mutuo
amandos propensi, alii alios honore paevenientes;

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span>**11.** Not slothful in business; fervent in
spirit; serving the Lord;

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span>**11.** Studio non pigri, spiritu ferventes,
tempori servientes;

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span>**12.** Rejoicing in hope; patient in
tribulation; continuing instant in prayer;

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>**12.** Spe gaudientes, in tribulatione
patientes, in oratione perseverantes;

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span>**13.** Distributing to the necessity of
saints; given to hospitality.

<span id="xvi.iv-p11"></span>**13.** Necessitatibus sanctorum
communicantes, hospitalitatem sectantes.

<span id="xvi.iv-p12"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p13"></span>**9.** *Let love be, etc.* Proceeding now
to speak of particular duties, he fitly begins with love, which is the
bond of perfection. And respecting this he enjoins what is especially
necessary, that all disguises are to be cast aside, and that love is to
arise from pure sincerity of mind. It is indeed difficult to express how
ingenious almost all men are to pretend a love which they really have
not, for they not only deceive others, but impose also on themselves,
while they persuade themselves that those are not loved amiss by them,
whom they not only neglect, but really slight. Hence Paul declares here,
that love is no other but that which is free from all dissimulation: and
any one may easily be a witness to himself, whether he has anything in
the recesses of his heart which is opposed to love.  <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389.md) The words *good* and *evil,* which
immediately follow in the context, have not here a general meaning; but
*evil* is to be taken for that malicious wickedness by which an injury
is done to men; and *good* for that kindness, by which help is rendered
to them; and there is here an antithesis usual in Scripture, when vices
are first forbidden and then virtues enjoined.

<span id="xvi.iv-p15"></span>As to the participle, <span
id="xvi.iv-p15.1"></span>ἀποστυγούντες*,* I have followed neither <span
id="xvi.iv-p15.2"></span>Erasmus nor the old translators, who have
rendered it “*hating,*” *(*<span id="xvi.iv-p15.3"></span>*odio
habentes;)* for in my judgment Paul intended to express something more;
and the meaning of the term “turning away,” corresponds better with the
opposite clause; for he not only bids us to exercise kindness, but even
to cleave to it.

<span id="xvi.iv-p16"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p17"></span>**10.** *With brotherly love, etc.* By no
words could he satisfy himself in setting forth the ardor of that love,
with which we ought to embrace one another: for he calls it *brotherly,*
and its emotion <span id="xvi.iv-p17.1"></span>στοργὴν*,* affection,
which, among the Latins, is the mutual affection which exists between
relatives; and truly such ought to be that which we should have towards
the children of God.  <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390.md) That this
may be the case, he subjoins a precept very necessary for the
preservation of benevolence, — that every one is to give honor to his
brethren and not to himself; for there is no poison more effectual in
alienating the minds of men than the thought, that one is despised. But
if by honor you are disposed to understand every act of friendly
kindness, I do not much object: I however approve more of the former
interpretation. For as there is nothing more opposed to brotherly
concord than contempt, arising from haughtiness, when each one,
neglecting others, advances himself; so the best fomenter of love is
humility, when every one honors others.

<span id="xvi.iv-p20"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p21"></span>**11.** *Not slothful in business, etc.*
This precept is given to us, not only because a Christian life ought to
be an active life; but because it often becomes us to overlook our own
benefit, and to spend our labors in behalf of our brethren. In a word,
we ought in many things to forget ourselves; for except we be in
earnest, and diligently strive to shake off all sloth, we shall never be
rightly prepared for the service of Christ.  <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391.md)

<span id="xvi.iv-p23"></span>By adding *fervent in spirit,* he shows how
we are to attain the former; for our flesh, like the ass, is always
torpid, and has therefore need of goals; and it is only the fervency of
the Spirit that can correct our slothfulness. Hence diligence in doing
good requires that zeal which the Spirit of God kindles in our hearts.
Why then, some one may say, does Paul exhort us to cultivate this
fervency? To this I answer, — that though it be the gift of God, it is
yet a duty enjoined the faithful to shake off sloth, and to cherish the
flame kindled by heaven, as it for the most part happens, that the
Spirit is suppressed and extinguished through our fault.

<span id="xvi.iv-p24"></span>To the same purpose is the third
particular, *serving the time:* for as the course of our life is short,
the opportunity of doing good soon passes away; it hence becomes us to
show more alacrity in the performance of our duty. So Paul bids us in
another place to redeem the time, because the days are evil. The meaning
may also be, that we ought to know how to accommodate ourselves to the
time, which is a matter of great importance. But Paul seems to me to set
in opposition to idleness what he commands as to the serving of time.
But as <span id="xvi.iv-p24.1"></span>κυρίῳ*, the Lord,* is read in many
old copies, though it may seem at first sight foreign to this passage, I
yet dare not wholly to reject this reading. And if it be approved, Paul,
I have no doubt, meant to refer the duties to be performed towards
brethren, and whatever served to cherish love, to a service done to God,
that he might add greater encouragement to the faithful.  <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392.md)

<span id="xvi.iv-p26"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p27"></span>**12.** *Rejoicing in hope, etc.* Three
things are here connected together, and seem in a manner to belong to
the clause “serving the time;” for the person who accommodates himself
best to the time, and avails himself of the opportunity of actively
renewing his course, is he who derives his joy from the hope of future
life, and patiently bears tribulations. However this may be, (for it
matters not much whether you regard them as connected or separated,) he
first; forbids us to acquiesce in present blessings, and to ground our
joy on earth and on earthly things, as though our happiness were based
on them; and he bids us to raise our minds up to heaven, that we may
possess solid and full joy. If our joy is derived from the hope of
future life, then patience will grow up in adversities; for no kind of
sorrow will be able to overwhelm this joy. Hence these two things are
closely connected together, that is, joy derived from hope, and patience
in adversities. No man will indeed calmly and quietly submit to bear the
cross, but he who has learnt to seek his happiness beyond this world, so
as to mitigate and allay the bitterness of the cross with the
consolation of hope.

<span id="xvi.iv-p28"></span>But as both these things are far above our
strength, we must be instant in prayer, and continually call on God,
that he may not suffer our hearts to faint and to be pressed down, or to
be broken by adverse events. But Paul not only stimulates us to prayer,
but expressly requires perseverance; for we have a continual warfare,
and new conflicts daily arise, to sustain which, even the strongest are
not equal, unless they frequently gather new rigor. That we may not then
be wearied, the best remedy is diligence in prayer.

<span id="xvi.iv-p29"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p30"></span>**13.** *Communicating to the necessities,*
 <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393.md) *etc.* He returns to the duties
of love; the chief of which is to do good to those from whom we expect
the least recompense. As then it commonly happens, that they are
especially despised who are more than others pressed down with want and
stand in need of help, (for the benefits conferred on them are regarded
as lost,) God recommends them to us in an especial manner. It is indeed
then only that we prove our love to be genuine, when we relieve needy
brethren, for no other reason but that of exercising our benevolence.
Now *hospitality* is not one of the least acts of love; that is, that
kindness and liberality which are shown towards strangers, for they are
for the most part destitute of all things, being far away from their
friends: he therefore distinctly recommends this to us. We hence see,
that the more neglected any one commonly is by men, the more attentive
we ought to be to his wants.

<span id="xvi.iv-p32"></span>Observe also the suitableness of the
expression, when he says, that we are to *communicate* to the
necessities of the saints; by which he implies, that we ought so to
relieve the wants of the brethren, as though we were relieving our own
selves. And he commands us to assist especially the *saints:* for though
our love ought to extend itself to the whole race of man, yet it ought
with peculiar feeling to embrace the household of faith, who are by a
closer bond united to us.

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span><span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
12:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014.md)<span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span>**14.** Bless them which persecute you:
bless, and curse not.

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span>**14.** Benedicite iis qui vos persequuntur;
benedicite et ne malum imprecemini.

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span>**15.** Rejoice with them that do rejoice,
and weep with them that weep.

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span>**15.** Gaudete cum gaudentibus, flete cum
fientibus;

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span>**16.** *Be* of the same mind one toward
another. Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be
not wise in your own conceits.

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span>**16.** Mutuo alii in altos sensu affecti,
non arroganter de vobis sentientes, sed humilibus vos accommodantes: ne
sitis apud vos ipsos prudentes.

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span><span id="xvi.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p9"></span>**14.** *Bless them, etc.* I wish, once for
all, to remind the reader, that he is not scrupulously to seek a precise
order as to the precepts here laid down, but must be content to have
short precepts, unconnected, though suited to the formation of a holy
life, and such as are deduced from the principle the Apostle laid down
at the beginning of the chapter.

<span id="xvi.v-p10"></span>He will presently give direction respecting
the retaliation of the injuries which we may suffer: but here he
requires something even more difficult, — that we are not to imprecate
evils on our enemies, but to wish and to pray God to render all things
prosperous to them, how much soever they may harass and cruelly treat
us: and this kindness, the more difficult it is to be practiced, so with
the more intense desire we ought to strive for it; for the Lord commands
nothing, with respect to which he does not require our obedience; nor is
any excuse to be allowed, if we are destitute of that disposition, by
which the Lord would have his people to differ from the ungodly and the
children of this world.

<span id="xvi.v-p11"></span>Arduous is this, I admit, and wholly opposed
to the nature of man; but there is nothing too arduous to be overcome by
the power of God, which shall never be wanting to us, provided we
neglect not to seek for it. And though you can hardly find one who has
made such advances in the law of the Lord that he fulfills this precept,
yet no one can claim to be the child of God or glory in the name of a
Christian, who has not in part attained this mind, and who does not
daily resist the opposite disposition.

<span id="xvi.v-p12"></span>I have said that this is more difficult than
to let go revenge when any one is injured: for though some restrain
their hands and are not led away by the passion of doing harm, they yet
wish that some calamity or loss would in some way happen to their
enemies; and even when they are so pacified that they wish no evil,
there is yet hardly one in a hundred who wishes well to him from whom he
has received an injury; nay, most men daringly burst forth into
imprecations. But God by his word not only restrains our hands from
doing evil, but also subdues the bitter feelings within; and not only
so, but he would have us to be solicitous for the wellbeing of those who
unjustly trouble us and seek our destruction.

<span id="xvi.v-p13"></span><span id="xvi.v-p13.1"></span>Erasmus was
mistaken in the meaning of the verb <span id="xvi.v-p13.2"></span>γεῖν
to bless; for he did not perceive that it stands opposed to curses and
maledictions: for Paul would have God in both instances to be a witness
of our patience, and to see that we not only bridle in our prayers the
violence of our wrath, but also show by praying for pardon that we
grieve at the lot of our enemies when they willfully ruin themselves.

<span id="xvi.v-p14"></span><span id="xvi.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p15"></span>**15.** *Rejoice with those who rejoice,
etc.* A general truth is in the third place laid down, — that the
faithful, regarding each other with mutual affection, are to consider
the condition of others as their own. He first specifies two particular
things, — That they were to “rejoice with the joyful, and to weep with
the weeping.” For such is the nature of true love, that one prefers to
weep with his brother, rather than to look at a distance on his grief,
and to live in pleasure or ease. What is meant then is, — that we, as
much as possible, ought to sympathize with one another, and that,
whatever our lot may be, each should transfer to himself the feeling of
another, whether of grief in adversity, or of joy in prosperity. And,
doubtless, not to regard with joy the happiness of a brother is envy;
and not to grieve for his misfortunes is inhumanity. Let there be such a
sympathy among us as may at the same time adapt us to all kinds of
feelings.

<span id="xvi.v-p16"></span><span id="xvi.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p17"></span>**16.** *Not thinking arrogantly of
yourselves,*  <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394.md) *etc.* The Apostle
employs words in Greek more significant, and more suitable to the
antithesis, “Not thinking,” he says, “of high things:” by which he
means, that it is not the part of a Christian ambitiously to aspire to
those things by which he may excel others, nor to assume a lofty
appearance, but on the contrary to exercise humility and meekness: for
by these we excel before the Lord, and not by pride and contempt of the
brethren. A precept is fitly added to the preceding; for nothing tends
more to break that unity which has been mentioned, than when we elevate
ourselves, and aspire to something higher, so that we may rise to a
higher situation. I take the term *humble* in the neuter gender, to
complete the antithesis.

<span id="xvi.v-p21"></span>Here then is condemned all ambition and that
elation of mind which insinuates itself under the name of magnanimity;
for the chief virtue of the faithful is moderation, or rather lowliness
of mind, which ever prefers to give honor to others, rather than to take
it away from them.

<span id="xvi.v-p22"></span>Closely allied to this is what is subjoined:
for nothing swells the minds of men so much as a high notion of their
own wisdom. His desire then was, that we should lay this aside, hear
others, and regard their counsels. <span id="xvi.v-p22.1"></span>Erasmus
has rendered <span id="xvi.v-p22.2"></span>φρονίμους*,* <span
id="xvi.v-p22.3"></span>*arrogantes* — arrogant; but the rendering is
strained and frigid; for Paul would in this case repeat the same word
without any meaning. However, the most appropriate remedy for curing
arrogance is, that man should not be over-wise in his own esteem.

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
12:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span>**17.** Recompense to no man evil for evil.
Provide things honest in the sight of all men.

<span id="xvi.vi-p3"></span>**17.** Nemini malum pro malo rependentes,
providentes bona coram omnibus hominibus.

<span id="xvi.vi-p4"></span>**18.** If it be possible, as much as lieth
in you, live peaceably with all men.

<span id="xvi.vi-p5"></span>**18.** Si fieri potest, quantum est in
vobis, cum omnibus hominibus pacem habentes;

<span id="xvi.vi-p6"></span>**19.** Dearly beloved, avenge not
yourselves, but *rather* give place unto wrath: for it is written,
Vengeance *is* mine; I will repay, saith the Lord.

<span id="xvi.vi-p7"></span>**19.** Non vosmetipsos ulciscentes,
dilecti; sed date locum irae; scriptum est enim, Mihi vindictam, et ego
rependam, dicit Dominus.

<span id="xvi.vi-p8"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p9"></span>**17.** *Repaying to no one, etc.* This
differs but little from what shortly after follows, except that revenge
is more than the kind of repaying of which he speaks here; for we render
evil for evil sometimes, even when we exact not the requiting of an
injury, as when we treat unkindly those who do us no good. We are indeed
wont to form an estimate of the deserts of each, or of what they merit
at our hands, so that we may confer our benefits on those, by whom we
have been already obliged, or from whom we expect something: and again,
when any one denies help to us when we need it, we, by returning like
for like, as they say, do not help him in time of need, any more than he
assisted us. There are also other instances of the same kind, in which
evil is rendered for evil, when there is no open revenge.

<span id="xvi.vi-p10"></span>*Providing good things, etc.* I no not
disapprove of the rendering of <span id="xvi.vi-p10.1"></span>Erasmus*,*
“Providently preparing,” *(*<span id="xvi.vi-p10.2"></span>*Provide
parantes;)* but I prefer a literal rendering. As every one is more than
justly devoted to his own advantage, and provident in avoiding losses,
Paul seems to require a care and an attention of another kind. What is
meant is, that we ought diligently to labor, that all may be edified by
our honest dealings. For as purity of conscience is necessary for us
before God, so uprightness of character before men is not to be
neglected: for since it is meet that God should be glorified by our good
deeds, even so much is wanting to his glory, as there is a deficiency of
what is praiseworthy in us; and not only the glory of God is thus
obscured, but he is branded with reproach; for whatever sin we commit,
the ignorant employ it for the purpose of calumniating the gospel.

<span id="xvi.vi-p11"></span>But when we are bidden to prepare good
things before men,  <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395.md) we must at
the same time notice for what purpose: it is not indeed that men may
admire and praise us, as this is a desire which Christ carefully forbids
us to indulge, since he bids us to admit God alone as the witness of our
good deeds, to the exclusion of all men; but that their minds being
elevated to God, they may give praise to him, that by our example they
may be stirred up to the practice of righteousness, that they may, in a
word, perceive the good and the sweet odor of our life, by which they
may be allured to the love of God. But if we are evil spoken of for the
name of Christ, we are by no means to neglect to provide good things
before men: for fulfilled then shall be that saying, that we are counted
as false, and are yet true. (<span id="xvi.vi-p12.7"></span>[2Co
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008)<span id="xvi.vi-p12.7"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.vi-p13"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p14"></span>**18.** *If it be possible, etc.*
Peaceableness and a life so ordered as to render us beloved by all, is
no common gift in a Christian. If we desire to attain this, we must not
only be endued with perfect uprightness, but also with very courteous
and kind manners, which may not only conciliate the just and the good,
but produce also a favorable impression on the hearts of the ungodly.

<span id="xvi.vi-p15"></span>But here two cautions must be stated: We
are not to seek to be in such esteem as to refuse to undergo the hatred
of any for Christ, whenever it may be necessary. And indeed we see that
there are some who, though they render themselves amicable to all by the
sweetness of their manners and peaceableness of their minds, are yet
hated even by their nearest connections on account of the gospel. The
second caution is, — that courteousness should not degenerate into
compliance, so as to lead us to flatter the vices of men for the sake of
preserving peace. Since then it cannot always be, that we can have peace
with all men, he has annexed two particulars by way of exception, *If it
be possible,* and, *as far as you can.* But we are to conclude from what
piety and love require, that we are not to violate peace, except when
constrained by either of these two things. For we ought, for the sake of
cherishing peace, to bear many things, to pardon offenses, and kindly to
remit the full rigor of the law; and yet in such a way, that we may be
prepared, whenever necessity requires, to fight courageously: for it is
impossible that the soldiers of Christ should have perpetual peace with
the world, whose prince is Satan.

<span id="xvi.vi-p16"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p17"></span>**19.** *Avenge not yourselves, etc.* The
evil which he corrects here, as we have reminded you, is more grievous
than the preceding, which he has just stated; and yet both of them arise
from the same fountain, even from an inordinate love of self and innate
pride, which makes us very indulgent to our own faults and inexorable to
those of others. As then this disease begets almost in all men a furious
passion for revenge, whenever they are in the least degree touched, he
commands here, that however grievously we may be injured, we are not to
seek revenge, but to commit it to the Lord. And inasmuch as they do not
easily admit the bridle, who are once seized with this wild passion, he
lays, as it were, his hand upon us to restrain us, by kindly addressing
us as *beloved*

<span id="xvi.vi-p18"></span>The *precept;* then is, — that we are not
to revenge nor seek to revenge injuries done to us. The manner is added,
a *place* is to be *given to wrath.* To give place to wrath, is to
commit to the Lord the right of judging, which they take away from him
who attempt revenge. Hence, as it is not lawful to usurp the office of
God, it is not lawful to revenge; for we thus anticipate the judgment of
God, who will have this office reserved for himself. He at the same time
intimates, that they shall have God as their defender, who patiently
wait for his help; but that those who anticipate him leave no place for
the help of God.  <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396.md)

<span id="xvi.vi-p20"></span>But he prohibits here, not only that we are
not to execute revenge with our own hands, but that our hearts also are
not to be influenced by a desire of this kind: it is therefore
superfluous to make a distinction here between public and private
revenge; for he who, with a malevolent mind and desirous of revenge,
seeks the help of a magistrate, has no more excuse than when he devises
means for self-revenge. Nay, revenge, as we shall presently see, is not
indeed at all times to be sought from God: for if our petitions arise
from a private feeling, and not from pure zeal produced by the Spirit,
we do not make God so much our judge as the executioner of our depraved
passion.

<span id="xvi.vi-p21"></span>Hence, we do not otherwise give place to
wrath, than when with quiet minds we wait for the seasonable time of
deliverance, praying at the same time, that they who are now our
adversaries, may by repentance become our friends.

<span id="xvi.vi-p22"></span>*For it is written, etc.* He brings proof,
taken from the song of Moses, <span id="xvi.vi-p22.1"></span>[De
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p22.1"></span>,
where the Lord declares that he will be the avenger of his enemies; and
God’s enemies are all who without cause oppress his servants. “He who
touches you,” he says, “touches the pupil of mine eye.” With this
consolation then we ought to be content, — that they shall not escape
unpunished who undeservedly oppress us, — and that we, by enduring,
shall not make ourselves more subject or open to the injuries of the
wicked, but, on the contrary, shall give place to the Lord, who is our
only judge and deliverer, to bring us help.

<span id="xvi.vi-p23"></span>Though it be not indeed lawful for us to
pray to God for vengeance on our enemies, but to pray for their
conversion, that they may become friends; yet if they proceed in their
impiety, what is to happen to the despisers of God will happen to them.
But Paul quoted not this testimony to show that it is right for us to be
as it were on fire as soon as we are injured, and according to the
impulse of our flesh, to ask in our prayers that God may become the
avenger of our injuries; but he first teaches us that it belongs not to
us to revenge, except we would assume to ourselves the office of God;
and secondly, he intimates, that we are not to fear that the wicked will
more furiously rage when they see us bearing patiently; for God does not
in vain take upon himself the office of executing vengeance.

<span id="xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
12:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020.md)<span
id="xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p2"></span>**20.** Therefore if thine enemy hunger,
feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap
coals of fire on his head.

<span id="xvi.vii-p3"></span>**20.** Itaque si esurit inimicus tuus,
pasce illum; si sitit, potum da illi: hoc enim faciens carbones ignis
congeres in caput ipsius.

<span id="xvi.vii-p4"></span>**21.** Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good.

<span id="xvi.vii-p5"></span>**21.** Ne vincaris a malo, sed vincas bono
malum.

<span id="xvi.vii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p7"></span>**20.** *If therefore, etc.* He now shows
how we may really fulfill the precepts of not revenging and of not
repaying evil, even when we not only abstain from doing injury but when
we also do good to those who have done wrong to us; for it is a kind of
an indirect retaliation when we turn aside our kindness from those by
whom we have been injured. Understand as included under the words *meat*
and *drink,* all acts of kindness. Whatsoever then may be thine ability,
in whatever business thy enemy may want either thy wealth, or thy
counsel, or thy efforts, thou oughtest to help him. But he calls him our
enemy, not whom we regard with hatred, but him who entertains enmity
towards us. And if they are to be helped according to the flesh, much
less is their salvation to be opposed by imprecating vengeance on them.

<span id="xvi.vii-p8"></span>*Thou shalt heap coals of fire, etc.* As we
are not willing to lose our toil and labor, he shows what fruit will
follow, when we treat our enemies with acts of kindness. But some by
*coals* understand the destruction which returns on the head of our
enemy, when we show kindness to one unworthy, and deal with him
otherwise than he deserves; for in this manner his guilt is doubled.
Others prefer to take this view, that when he sees himself so kindly
treated, his mind is allured to love us in return. I take a simpler
view, that his mind shall be turned to one side or another; for
doubtless our enemy shall either be softened by our benefits, or if he
be so savage that nothing can tame him, he shall yet be burnt and
tormented by the testimony of his own conscience, on finding himself
overwhelmed with our kindness.  <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397.md)

<span id="xvi.vii-p11"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p12"></span>**21.** *Be not overcome by evil, etc.*
This sentence is laid down as a confirmation; for in this case our
contest is altogether with perverseness, if we try to retaliate it, we
confess that we are overcome by it; if, on the contrary, we return good
for evil, by that very deed we show the invincible firmness of our mind.
This is truly a most glorious kind of victory, the fruit of which is not
only apprehended by the mind, but really perceived, while the Lord is
giving success to their patience, than which they can wish nothing
better. On the other hand, he who attempts to overcome evil with evil,
may perhaps surpass his enemy in doing injury, but it is to his own
ruin; for by acting thus he carries on war for the devil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc38015.htm#fr_376.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span> By “mercies,” the Apostle refers, as some
think, to the various sects of God’s mercy, such as election, vocation,
justification, and final salvation. <span
id="xvi.i-p11.1"></span>Grotius considers that God’s attributes are
referred to, such as are described in <span
id="xvi.i-p11.2"></span>[Exod. 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.i-p11.2"></span>.
<span id="xvi.i-p11.3"></span>Erasmus, quoting <span
id="xvi.i-p11.4"></span>Origen, says, that the plural is used for
amplification, in order to show the greatness of God’s mercy, as though
the Apostle had said, “by God’s great mercy.” <span
id="xvi.i-p11.5"></span>Schleusner renders the clause, “<span
id="xvi.i-p11.6"></span>per summam Dei benignitatem — by God’s great
kindness,” that is, in bringing you to the knowledge of the gospel. So
“Father of mercies,” in <span id="xvi.i-p11.7"></span>[2Co
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.i-p11.7"></span>, may
mean “most merciful Father,” or the meaning may be, “the Father of all
blessings,” as mercy signifies sometimes what mercy bestows, (<span
id="xvi.i-p11.8"></span>[Php 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p11.8"></span>,) as grace or favor often means the gift which
flows from it. According to this view, “mercies” here are the blessings
which God bestows, even the blessings of redemption. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc38015.htm#fr_377.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span> The word σώματα, “bodies,” he seems to have
used, because of the similitude he adopts respecting sacrifices; for the
bodies of beasts we are to consecrate our own bodies. As he meant before
by “members,” <span id="xvi.i-p18.1"></span>[Ro
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013.md)<span id="xvi.i-p18.1"></span>,
the whole man, so he means here by “bodies,” that is, themselves.

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span>They were to be *living* sacrifices, not
killed as the legal sacrifices, they were to be *holy*, not maimed or
defective, but whole and perfect as to all the members, and free from
disease. See <span id="xvi.i-p19.1"></span>[Le
22:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p19.1"></span>. They were to be *acceptable*, εὐάρεστον;
“<span id="xvi.i-p19.2"></span>placentem — pleasing,” <span
id="xvi.i-p19.3"></span>Beza; “well-pleasing,” <span
id="xvi.i-p19.4"></span>Doddridge. It was not sufficient under the law
for the sacrifices themselves to be holy, blameless, such as God
required; but a right motive and a right feeling on the part of the
offerer were necessary, in order that they might be accepted or approved
by God. Without faith and repentance, and a reformed life, they were not
accepted, but regarded as abominations. See <span
id="xvi.i-p19.5"></span>[Ps 51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p19.5"></span>; <span id="xvi.i-p19.6"></span>[Isa
1:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.i-p19.6"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>It is said by <span
id="xvi.i-p20.1"></span>Wolfius, that all the terms here are derived
from the sacrificial rites of the law, and that Christians are
represented both as the priests who offered, and as the sacrifices which
were offered by them. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc38015.htm#fr_378.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span> The word λογικὴν, “reasonable,” was
considered by <span id="xvi.i-p23.1"></span>Origen, and by many after
him, as designating Christian service consonant with reason, in
opposition to the sacrifices under the law, which were not agreeable to
reason. But <span id="xvi.i-p23.2"></span>Chrysostom, whom also many
have followed, viewed the word as meaning what is *spiritual*, or what
belongs to the mind, in contradistinction to the ritual and external
service of the law; but there is no example of the word having such a
meaning, except it be <span id="xvi.i-p23.3"></span>[1Pe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002.md)<span id="xvi.i-p23.3"></span>,
which is by no means decisive. Rational, or reasonable, is its meaning,
or, what agrees with the word, as *Phavorinus* explains it. There is no
need here to suppose any contrast: the expression only designates the
act or the service which the Apostle prescribes; as though he said,
“What I exhort you to do is nothing but a reasonable service, consistent
with the dictates of reason. God has done great things for you, and it
is nothing but right and just that you should dedicate yourselves wholly
to him.” This seems to be the obvious meaning. To draw this expression
to another subject, in order to set up reason as an umpire in matters of
faith, is wholly a perversion: and to say, that as it seems to refer to
the word in <span id="xvi.i-p23.4"></span>[1Pe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002.md)<span id="xvi.i-p23.4"></span>, it
must be so considered here, is what does not necessarily follow; for as
λόγος sometimes means “word,” and sometimes “reason,” so its derivative
may have a similar variety. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc38015.htm#fr_379.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p28"></span> <span id="xvi.i-p28.1"></span>*Ut
probetis,* εἰς τὸ δοκιμάζειν ὑμᾶς; “<span id="xvi.i-p28.2"></span>ut
noscatis — that ye may know,” <span id="xvi.i-p28.3"></span>Theophylact;
“<span id="xvi.i-p28.4"></span>ut diligenter scrutemini — that ye may
carefully search,” <span id="xvi.i-p28.5"></span>Jerome, “That ye may
experimentally know,” <span id="xvi.i-p28.6"></span>Doddridge; “that ye
may learn,” <span id="xvi.i-p28.7"></span>Stuart. The verb means chiefly
three things, — to *test*, i.e., metals by fire, to *try*, to *prove*,
to *examine*, <span id="xvi.i-p28.8"></span>[1Pe
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.i-p28.8"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p28.9"></span>[Lu
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#019.md)<span id="xvi.i-p28.9"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p28.10"></span>[2Co
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#005.md)<span id="xvi.i-p28.10"></span>, —
to *approve* what is proved, <span id="xvi.i-p28.11"></span>[Ro
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022.md)<span id="xvi.i-p28.11"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p28.12"></span>[1Co
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.i-p28.12"></span>, —
and also to *prove* a thing so as to make a proper distinction, to
*discern*, to *understand*, to *distinguish*, <span
id="xvi.i-p28.13"></span>[Lu
12:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#056.md)<span id="xvi.i-p28.13"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p28.14"></span>[Ro
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018.md)<span id="xvi.i-p28.14"></span>.
The last idea is the most suitable here, “in order that ye may
understand what the will of God is, even that which is good and
acceptable and perfect.”

<span id="xvi.i-p29"></span>What <span id="xvi.i-p29.1"></span>Stuart
says on the last clause seems just, that it is to be taken by itself,
and that the words do not agree with “will,” but stand by themselves,
being in the neuter gender. Otherwise we cannot affix any idea to
“acceptable;” for it would be unsuitable to say that God’s will is
“acceptable” to him, that being self-evident.

<span id="xvi.i-p30"></span>“Good,” ἀγαθὸν, is useful, advantageous,
beneficial; “acceptable,” εὐαρεστον, is what is pleasing to and accepted
by God; and “perfect,” τέλειον, is complete, entire, without any defect,
or just and right.

<span id="xvi.i-p31"></span>It ought to be borne in mind, as <span
id="xvi.i-p31.1"></span>Pareus observes, that in order to discern, and
rightly to understand God’s will, the Apostle teaches us, that “the
renewing of the mind” is necessary; otherwise, as he adds, “our corrupt
nature will fascinate our eyes that they may not see, or if they see,
will turn our hearts and wills, that they may not approve, or if they
approve, will hinder us to follow what is approved.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc38015.htm#fr_380.md) <span
id="xvi.ii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p8.1"></span>Ne supra
modum sapiat,” so the *Vulgate* and <span id="xvi.ii-p8.2"></span>Beza;
μὴ ὑπερθρόνειν, “<span id="xvi.ii-p8.3"></span>ne supra modum de se
sentiat — let him not think immoderately of himself,” <span
id="xvi.ii-p8.4"></span>Mede; “not to arrogate to himself,” <span
id="xvi.ii-p8.5"></span>Doddridge; “not to overestimate himself,” <span
id="xvi.ii-p8.6"></span>Stuart. This and the following clause may be
thus rendered, “not to think highly above what it behooves him to
think,” that is, of himself. Then what follows may admit of this
rendering, “but to think so as to think rightly,” or modestly, (εἰς τὸ
σωφρόνειν.) The last verb occurs elsewhere five times; thrice it means
“to be of a sane mind,” <span id="xvi.ii-p8.7"></span>[Mark
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#015.md), [Luke
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#035.md), [2 Cor.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#013.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p8.7"></span>;
and twice it means “to act prudently,” <span
id="xvi.ii-p8.8"></span>Titus 2:6; <span id="xvi.ii-p8.9"></span>[1Pe
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p8.9"></span>; or,
it may be, in the last passage, “to live temperately.” As it refers here
to the mind, it must mean such an estimate of one’s self as is sound,
just, and right, such as becomes on who is sound and sane in his mind.
Pride is a species of insanity; but humility betokens a return to a sane
mind: and an humble estimate of ourselves, as Professor <span
id="xvi.ii-p8.10"></span>Hodge observes, is the only sound, sane, and
right estimate. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc38015.htm#fr_381.md) <span
id="xvi.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span> We find a similar transposition in <span
id="xvi.ii-p10.1"></span>[1Co 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005.md)<span
id="xvi.ii-p10.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc38015.htm#fr_382.md) <span
id="xvi.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span> “It is better,” says <span
id="xvi.ii-p11.1"></span>Augustine, “to doubt respecting hidden things,
than to contend about things uncertain.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc38015.htm#fr_383.md) <span
id="xvi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span> The expression “the measures of faith,”
μέτρον πίστεως, is differently explained. Some, as <span
id="xvi.ii-p13.1"></span>Beza and <span id="xvi.ii-p13.2"></span>Pareus,
consider “faith” here as including religion or Christian truth, because
faith is the main principle, “as God has divided to each the measure of
Christian truth or knowledge.” Others suppose with <span
id="xvi.ii-p13.3"></span>Mede, that “faith” here is to be taken for
those various gifts and endowments which God bestowed on those who
believed or professed the faith of the gospel; “as God has divided to
each the measure of those gifts which come by faith, or which are given
to those who believe.” The last view is most suitable to the context. We
may, however, take, “faith” here for grace, and consider the meaning the
same as in <span id="xvi.ii-p13.4"></span>[Eph
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p13.4"></span>.
The subject there is the same as here, for the Apostle proceeds there to
mention the different offices which Christ had appointed in his Church.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc38015.htm#fr_384.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p14"></span> The Apostle pursues this likeness of the
human body much more at large in <span id="xvi.iii-p14.1"></span>[1Co
12:12-31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012.md)<span
id="xvi.iii-p14.1"></span>. There are two bonds of union; one, which is
between the believer and Christ by true faith; and the other, which is
between the individual member of a church or a congregation and the rest
of the members by a professed faith. It is the latter that is handled by
the Apostle, both here and in the Epistle to the Corinthians. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc38015.htm#fr_385.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p19"></span> The ellipsis to be supplied here is
commonly done as in our version, adopted from <span
id="xvi.iii-p19.1"></span>Beza. The supplement proposed by <span
id="xvi.iii-p19.2"></span>Pareus is perhaps more in unison with the
passage; he repeats after “prophecy” the words in verse 3, changing the
person, “let us think soberly,” or “let us be modestly wise.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc38015.htm#fr_386.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p24"></span> It is somewhat difficult exactly to
ascertain what this “prophecy” was. The word “prophet,” <span
id="xvi.iii-p24.1"></span>נביא, means evidently two things in the Old
Testament and also in the New — a foreteller and a teacher, or rather an
interpreter of the word. Prophecy in the New Testament sometimes
signifies prediction, its primary meaning. <span
id="xvi.iii-p24.2"></span>[Ac
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p24.2"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p24.3"></span>[2Pe
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p24.3"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p24.4"></span>[Re
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p24.4"></span>;
but most commonly, as it is generally thought, the interpretation of
prophecy, that is, of prophecies contained in the Old Testament, and for
this work there were some in the primitive Church, as it is supposed,
who were inspired, and thus peculiarly qualified. It is probable that
this kind of prophecy is what is meant here. See <span
id="xvi.iii-p24.5"></span>[1Co
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p24.5"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p24.6"></span>[1 Cor.
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p24.6"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p24.7"></span>[1 Cor.
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p24.7"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p24.8"></span>[1Th
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#020.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p24.8"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p25"></span>That is was a distinct function from that
of apostles, evangelists, pastors, and teachers, is evident from <span
id="xvi.iii-p25.1"></span>[Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p25.1"></span>;
and from the interpretation of tongues, as it appears from <span
id="xvi.iii-p25.2"></span>[1Co
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p25.2"></span>;
and from revelation, knowledge, and doctrine, as we find from <span
id="xvi.iii-p25.3"></span>[1Co
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p25.3"></span>.
It also appears that it was more useful than other extraordinary gifts,
as it tended more to promote edification and comfort, <span
id="xvi.iii-p25.4"></span>[1 Cor.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p25.4"></span>. It
is hence most probable that it was the gift already stated, that of
interpreting the Scriptures, especially the prophecies of the Old
Testament, and applying them for the edification of the Church.
“Prophets” are put next to “apostles” in <span
id="xvi.iii-p25.5"></span>[Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p25.5"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc38015.htm#fr_387.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p27.1"></span>Secundum
analogiam fidei,” so <span id="xvi.iii-p27.2"></span>Pareus; κατὰ τὴν
ἀναλογίαν της πίστεως; “<span id="xvi.iii-p27.3"></span>pro proportione
fidei — according to the proportions of faith,” <span
id="xvi.iii-p27.4"></span>Beza, <span
id="xvi.iii-p27.5"></span>Piscator; that is, as the former explains the
phrase, “according to the measure or extent of the individual’s faith;”
he was not to go beyond what he knew or what had been communicated to
him by the Spirit. But the view which <span
id="xvi.iii-p27.6"></span>Calvin takes is the most obvious and
consistent with the passage; and this is the view which <span
id="xvi.iii-p27.7"></span>Hammond gives, “according to that form of
faith or wholesome doctrine by which every one who is sent out to preach
the gospel is appointed to regulate his preaching, according to those
heads or principles of faith and good life which are known among you.”
The word ἀναλογία means properly congruity, conformity, or proportion,
not in the sense of measure or extent, but of equality, as when one
thing is equal or comformable to another; hence the analogy of faith
must mean what is conformable to the faith. And faith here evidently
signifies divine truth, the object of faith, or what faith receives. See
<span id="xvi.iii-p27.8"></span>[Ro
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p27.8"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p27.9"></span>[Ga
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p27.9"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p27.10"></span>Titus 1:4; <span
id="xvi.iii-p27.11"></span>[Jude
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p27.11"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc38015.htm#fr_388.md) <span
id="xvi.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p30"></span> Critics have found it difficult to
distinguish between these offices. The word διακονία, ministry is taken
sometimes in a restricted sense, as meaning deaconship, an office
appointed to manage the temporal affairs of the Church, <span
id="xvi.iii-p30.1"></span>[Ac
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p30.1"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p30.2"></span>[1Ti
3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md)<span
id="xvi.iii-p30.2"></span>; and sometimes in a general sense, as
signifying the ministerial office, <span id="xvi.iii-p30.3"></span>[2Co
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p30.3"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p30.4"></span>[Eph
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p30.4"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p30.5"></span>[Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p30.5"></span>.
As the “teacher” and “exhorter” are mentioned, some think that the
deaconship is to be understood here, and that the Apostle first
mentioned the highest office, next to the apostleship — prophecy, and
the lowest — the deaconship, and afterwards named the intervening
offices — those of teachers and exhorters.

<span id="xvi.iii-p31"></span>But what are we to think of those
mentioned in the following clauses? <span
id="xvi.iii-p31.1"></span>Stuart thinks that they were not public
officers, but private individuals, and he has sustained this opinion by
some very cogent reasons. The form of the sentence is here changed; and
the Apostle, having mentioned the deaconship, cannot be supposed to have
referred to the same again. The word that seems to stand in the way of
this view is what is commonly rendered “ruler,” or, “he who rules:” but
ὁ προϊστάμενος, as our author shows, means a helper, an assistant, (see
<span id="xvi.iii-p31.2"></span>[Ro
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002)<span id="xvi.iii-p31.2"></span>,.md)
as well as a ruler; it means to stand over, either for the purpose of
taking care of, assisting, protecting others, or of presiding over,
ruling, guiding them. Then ἐν σπουδὣ, with promptness or diligence, will
better agree with the former than with the latter idea. The other two
clauses correspond also more with this view than with the other. It has
been said, that if a distributor of alms had been intended, the word
would have been διαδιδοὺς and not μεταδιδοὺς. See <span
id="xvi.iii-p31.3"></span>[Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p31.3"></span>.
The expression ἁπλότητι, means “with liberality, or liberally.” See
<span id="xvi.iii-p31.4"></span>[2Co
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p31.4"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p31.5"></span>[2 Cor.
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#011.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p31.5"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iii-p31.6"></span>[Jas
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p31.6"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc38015.htm#fr_389.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p14"></span> “Love,” says an old author, “is the sum
and substance of all virtues. Philosophers make justice the queen of
virtues; but love is the mother of justice, for it renders to God and to
our neighbor what is justly due to them.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc38015.htm#fr_390.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p18"></span> It is difficult to render this clause:
<span id="xvi.iv-p18.1"></span>Calvin*’s* words are, “<span
id="xvi.iv-p18.2"></span>Fraterna charitate ad vos mutuo amandos
propensi;” so <span id="xvi.iv-p18.3"></span>Beza. The Apostle joins two
things — mutual love of brethren, with the natural love of parents and
children, as though he said, “Let your brotherly love have in it the
affectionate feelings which exists between parents and children.” “In
brotherly love, be mutually full of tender affection,” <span
id="xvi.iv-p18.4"></span>Doddridge. “In brotherly love, be kindly
disposed toward each other,” <span id="xvi.iv-p18.5"></span>Macknight.
It may be thus rendered, “In brotherly love, be tenderly affectionate to
one another.”

<span id="xvi.iv-p19"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p19.1"></span>Calvin*’s*
version of the next clause is, “<span id="xvi.iv-p19.2"></span>Alii
alios honore praevenientes;” so <span id="xvi.iv-p19.3"></span>Erasmus;
τὣ τιμὣ ἀλλήλους προηγούμενοι; “<span id="xvi.iv-p19.4"></span>honore
alii aliis praeuntes — in honor (that is, in conceding honor) going
before one another,” <span id="xvi.iv-p19.5"></span>Beza, <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.6"></span>Piscator, <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.7"></span>Macknight. It is thus explained by <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.8"></span>Mede, “Wait not for honor from others, but be
the first to concede it.” The participle means to take the lead of, or
outrunning, one another.” See <span id="xvi.iv-p19.9"></span>[Php
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.iv-p19.9"></span> —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc38015.htm#fr_391.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p22.1"></span>Studio non
pigri,” τὣ σπουδὣ μὴ ὀκνηροι; “Be not slothful in haste,” that is, in a
matter requiring haste. “We must strive,” says <span
id="xvi.iv-p22.2"></span>Theophylact, “to assist with promptness those
whose circumstances require immediate help and relief.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc38015.htm#fr_392.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p25"></span> The balance of evidence, according to
<span id="xvi.iv-p25.1"></span>Griesbach, is in favor, of τῷ καιρῷ,
“time,” though there is much, too, which countenances the other reading.
<span id="xvi.iv-p25.2"></span>Luther, <span
id="xvi.iv-p25.3"></span>Erasmus, and <span
id="xvi.iv-p25.4"></span>Hammond prefer the former, while <span
id="xvi.iv-p25.5"></span>Beza, <span id="xvi.iv-p25.6"></span>Piscator,
<span id="xvi.iv-p25.7"></span>Pareus, and most of the moderns, the
latter. The most suitable to the context is the former. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc38015.htm#fr_393.md) <span
id="xvi.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p31"></span> There is here an instance of the
depravation of the text by some of the fathers, such as <span
id="xvi.iv-p31.1"></span>Ambrose, <span id="xvi.iv-p31.2"></span>Hilary,
<span id="xvi.iv-p31.3"></span>Pelagius, <span
id="xvi.iv-p31.4"></span>Optatus, etc., who substituted μνείας,
*monuments*, for χρείας, *necessities*, or *wants*: but though there are
a few copies which have this reading, yet it has been discarded by most;
it is not found in the *Vulgate*, nor approved by <span
id="xvi.iv-p31.5"></span>Erasmus nor <span
id="xvi.iv-p31.6"></span>Grotius. The word was introduced evidently, as
<span id="xvi.iv-p31.7"></span>Whitby intimates, to countenance the
superstition of the early Church respecting the monuments or sepulchres
of martyrs and confessors. The *fact*, that there were no monuments of
martyrs at *this* time in Rome, was wholly overlooked. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc38015.htm#fr_394.md) <span
id="xvi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p18"></span> The first clause is omitted. The text of
<span id="xvi.v-p18.1"></span>Calvin is, “<span
id="xvi.v-p18.2"></span>Mutuo alii in alios sensu affecti;” τὸ αὐτὸ εἰς
αλλήλους φρονοῦντες; “<span id="xvi.v-p18.3"></span>Itidem alii in alios
affecti — Feel alike towards on another,” <span
id="xvi.v-p18.4"></span>Beza; “Be entirely united in your regards for
each other,” <span id="xvi.v-p18.5"></span>Doddridge; “Be of the same
disposition towards one another,” <span
id="xvi.v-p18.6"></span>Macknight. The verb means to think, or to feel,
or to mind, in the sense of attending to, or aspiring after a thing. It
is used also in the next clause, evidently in the last sense, *minding*.
There is no reason why its meaning should be different here; it would
then be, “Mind the same things towards one another,” that is, Do to
others what you expect others to do to you. It is to reduce to an axiom
what is contained in the former verse. We may indeed give this version,
“Feel the same, or alike towards one another,” that is, sympathize with
one another: and this would still be coincident in meaning with the
former verse; and it would be in accordance with the Apostle’s mode of
writing.

<span id="xvi.v-p19"></span>But another construction has been given,
“Think the same of one another,” that is, Regard one another alike in
dignity and privilege as Christians, without elevating yourselves, and
viewing yourselves better than others. This would well agree with the
sentence which follows.

<span id="xvi.v-p20"></span>The two following clauses are thus given by
<span id="xvi.v-p20.1"></span>Doddridge, “Affect not high things, but
condescend to men of low rank,” — and by <span
id="xvi.v-p20.2"></span>Macknight, “Do not care for high things; but
associate with lowly men.” The word ταπεινοῖς, is not found in the New
Testament to be applied to things, but to persons. “Associate” is
perhaps the best rendering of συναπαγόμενοι, which literally means to
withdraw from one party in order to walk with another: they were to
withdraw from those who minded high things, and walk or associate with
the humble and lowly. “And cleave to the humble,” is the Syriac version.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc38015.htm#fr_395.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p12"></span> “<span
id="xvi.vi-p12.1"></span>Providentes bona;” προνοούμενοι καλὰ; “<span
id="xvi.vi-p12.2"></span>procurantes honesta — providing honest things,”
<span id="xvi.vi-p12.3"></span>Beza; “providing things reputable,” <span
id="xvi.vi-p12.4"></span>Doddridge; “premeditating things comely,” <span
id="xvi.vi-p12.5"></span>Macknight. The participle means to mind
beforehand, to prepare, to provide, and also to take care of or to
attend to a thing. “Attending to things honorable” may be the rendering
here. The adjective καλὸς, means fair, good; and good in conduct as here
is not “comely,” but just, right, or reputable, as <span
id="xvi.vi-p12.6"></span>Doddridge renders it. The word “honest” does
not now retain its original idea of honorable. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc38015.htm#fr_396.md) <span
id="xvi.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p19"></span> Many have been the advocates of this
exposition, <span id="xvi.vi-p19.1"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.2"></span>Theophylact, <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.3"></span>Luther, <span id="xvi.vi-p19.4"></span>Beza,
<span id="xvi.vi-p19.5"></span>Hammond, <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.6"></span>Macknight, <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.7"></span>Stuart, etc. But there is no instance of the
expression, “to give place,” having this meaning. In the two places
where it occurs, it means to give way, to yield. See <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.8"></span>[Lu 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#009.md)<span
id="xvi.vi-p19.8"></span>; <span id="xvi.vi-p19.9"></span>[Eph
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#027.md)<span id="xvi.vi-p19.9"></span>.
Then to give place to wrath, is to yield to and patiently to endure the
wrath of the man who does the wrong. Some have maintained that the
meaning is, that the injured man is to give place to his own wrath, that
is, allow it time to cool: but this view comports not with the passage.
The subject is, that a Christian is not to retaliate, or to return wrath
for wrath, but to endure the wrath of his enemy, and to leave the matter
in the hand of God. With this sense the quotation accords as much as
with that given by <span id="xvi.vi-p19.10"></span>Calvin. Not a few
have taken this view, <span id="xvi.vi-p19.11"></span>Basil, <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.12"></span>Ambrose, <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.13"></span>Drusius, <span id="xvi.vi-p19.14"></span>Mede,
<span id="xvi.vi-p19.15"></span>Doddridge, <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.16"></span>Scott, etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc38015.htm#fr_397.md) <span
id="xvi.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p9"></span> <span id="xvi.vii-p9.1"></span>Calvin has
in this exposition followed <span id="xvi.vii-p9.2"></span>Chrysostom
and <span id="xvi.vii-p9.3"></span>Theodoret. The former part no doubt
contains the right view; the following verse proves it, “Overcome evil
with good.” The idea of “heaping coals of fire” is said to have been
derived from the practice of heaping coals on the fire to melt hard
metals; but as “the coals of fire” must mean “burning coals,” as indeed
the word in <span id="xvi.vii-p9.4"></span>[Pr
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#022.md)<span id="xvi.vii-p9.4"></span>,
whence the passage is taken, clearly means, this notion cannot be
entertained. It seems to be a sort of proverbial saying, signifying
something intolerable, which cannot be borne without producing strong
effects: such is represented to be kindness to any enemy, to feed him
when hungry and to give him drink when thirsty, has commonly such a
power over him that he cannot resist its influence, no more than he can
withstand the scorching heat of burning coals. Of course the natural
tendency of such a conduct is all that is intended, and not that it
invariably produces such an effect; for in Scripture things are often
stated in this way; but human nature is such a strange thing, that it
often resists what is right, just, and reasonable, and reverses, as it
were, the very nature of things.

<span id="xvi.vii-p10"></span>It is not true what <span
id="xvi.vii-p10.1"></span>Whitby and others have held, that “coals of
fire” always mean judgments or punishments. The word indeed in certain
connections, as in <span id="xvi.vii-p10.2"></span>[Ps.
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013.md), [Ps.
140:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#010.md)<span
id="xvi.vii-p10.2"></span>, has this meaning, but in <span
id="xvi.vii-p10.3"></span>[Pr
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#022.md)<span id="xvi.vii-p10.3"></span>,
it cannot be taken in this sense, as the preceding verse most clearly
proves. There is no canon of interpretation more erroneous than to make
words or phrases to bear the same meaning in every place. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](cc38016.md)
