[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar158) [Next](gbar160.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 159.

The disciples answered: 'O master, exceeding great are thy words,
therefore have mercy upon us, for we understand them not.'

Said Jesus: 'Think ye perchance that God hath created his messenger to
be a rival, who should be fain to make himself equal with God? Assuredly
not, but rather as his good slave, who should not will that which his
Lord willeth not. Ye are not able to understand this because ye know not
what a thing is sin. Wherefore hearken unto my words, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, sin cannot arise in man save as a contradiction of God,
seeing that that only is sin which God willeth not: insomuch that all
that God willeth is most alien from sin. Accordingly, if our
high-priests and priests, with the Pharisees, persecuted me because the
people of Israel hath called me God, they would be doing a thing
pleasing to God, and God would reward them; but because they persecute
me for a contrary reason, since they will not have me say the truth, how
they have contaminated the book of Moses, and that of David, prophets
and friends of God, by their traditions, and therefore hate me and
desire my death—therefore God hath them in abomination.

'Tell me—Moses slew men and Ahab slew men—is this in each case murder?
Assuredly not; for Moses slew the men to destroy idolatry and to
preserve the worship of the true God, but Ahab slew the men to destroy
the worship of the true God and to preserve idolatry. Wherefore to Moses
the slaying of men was converted into sacrifice, while to Ahab it was
converted into sacrilege: insomuch that one and the same work produced
these two contrary effects.

'As God liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, if Satan had spoken
to the angels in order to see how they loved God, he would not have been
rejected of God, but because he sought to turn them away from God,
therefore is he reprobate.'

Then answered he who writeth: 'How, then, is to be understood that which
was said in Micaiah the prophet, concerning the lie which God ordained
to be spoken by the mouth of false prophets, as is written in the book
of the kings of Israel?'

Jesus answered: 'O Barnabas, recite briefly all that befell, that we may
see the truth clearly.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar160.md)
