[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar125) [Next](gbar127)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 126.

Jesus having called together his disciples, sent them forth by two and
two through the region of Israel, saying: 'Go and preach even as ye have
heard.'

Then they bowed themselves and he laid his hand upon their heads,
saying: 'In the name of God, give health to the sick, cast out the
demons, and undeceive Israel concerning me, telling them that which I
said before the high priest.'

They departed therefore, all of them save him who writeth, with James
and John; and they went through all Judaea, preaching penitence even as
Jesus had told them, healing every sort of sickness, insomuch that in
Israel were confirmed the words of Jesus that God is one and Jesus is
prophet of God, when they saw such a multitude do that which Jesus did
concerning the healing of the sick.

But the sons of the devil found another way to persecute Jesus, and
these were the priests and the scribes. Whereupon they began to say that
Jesus aspired to the monarchy over Israel. But they feared the common
people, wherefore they plotted against Jesus secretly.

Having passed throughout Judaea the disciples returned to Jesus, who
received them as a father receiveth his sons, saying: 'Tell me, how hath
wrought the Lord our God? Surely I have seen Satan fall under your feet
and ye trample upon him even as the vinedresser treadeth the grapes!'

The disciples answered: 'O Master, we have healed numberless sick
persons, and cast out many demons which tormented men.'

Said Jesus: 'God forgive you, O brethren, because ye have sinned in
saying "We have healed," seeing it is God that hath done all.'

Then said they: 'We have talked foolishly; wherefore, teach us how to
speak.'

Jesus answered: 'In every good work say "God hath wrought" and in every
bad one say "I have sinned."'

'So will we do,' said the disciples to him.

Then said Jesus: 'Now what saith Israel, having seen God do by the hands
of so many men that which God hath done by my hands?'

The disciples answered: 'They say that there is one God alone and that
thou art God's prophet.'

Jesus answered with joyful countenance: 'Blessed be the holy name of
God, who hath not despised the desire of me his servant!' And when he
had said this they retired to rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar127)
