[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar048) [Next](gbar050)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 49.

The scribe that day read the psalm of David, where saith David: 'When I
shall find a time, I will judge uprightly.' Then, after the reading of
the prophets, arose Jesus, and made sign of silence with his hands, and
opening his mouth he spake thus: 'Brethren, ye have heard the words
spoken by David the prophet, our father, that when he should have found
a time he would judge uprightly. I tell you in truth that many judge, in
which judgment they fall for no other reason than because they judge
that which is not meet for them, and that which is meet for them they
judge before the time. Wherefore the God of our fathers crieth to us by
his prophet David, saying: 'Justly judge, O sons of men'. Miserable
therefore are those who set themselves at street corners, and do nothing
but judge all those who pass by, saying: "That one is fair, this one is
ugly, that one is good, this one is bad." Woe unto them, because they
lift the scepter of his judgment from the mind of God, who saith: "I am
witness and judge, and my honour I will give to none." Verily I tell you
that these testify of that which they have not seen nor really heard,
and judge without having been constituted judges. Therefore are they
abominable on the earth before the eyes of God, who will pass tremendous
judgment upon them in the last day. Woe to you, woe to you who speak
good of the evil, and call the evil good, for ye condemn as a malefactor
God, who is the author of good, and justify as good Satan, who is the
origin of all evil. Consider what punishment ye shall have, and that it
is horrible to fall into the judgment of God, which shall be then upon
those who justify the wicked for money, and judge not the cause of the
orphans and widows. Verily I say unto you, that the devils shall tremble
at the judgment of such, so terrible shall it be. Thou man who art set
as a judge, regard no other thing; neither kinsfolk nor friends, neither
honour nor gain, but look solely with fear of God to the truth, which
thou shalt seek with greatest diligence, because it will secure thee in
the judgment of God. But I warn thee that without mercy shall he be
judged who judgeth without mercy.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar050)
