[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar140) [Next](gbar142)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 141.

'Tell me: when a man is born, how is he born? Surely, he is born naked.
And when he is laid dead beneath the ground, what advantage hath he? A
mean linen cloth, wherein he is wound: and this is the reward which the
world giveth him.

'Now if the means in every work must needs be proportionate to the
beginning and the end, in order that the work be brought to a good end,
what end shall the man have who desireth earthly riches? He shall die,
as saith David, prophet of God: "The sinner shall die a most evil
death."

'If a man sewing cloth should thread beams instead of thread in the
needle, how would the work attain its end? Of a surety he would work in
vain, and be despised of his neighbours. Now man seeth not that he is
doing this continually when he gathereth earthly goods. For death is the
needle, wherein the beams of earthly goods cannot be threaded.
Nevertheless in his madness he striveth continually to make the work
succeed, but in vain.

'And whoso believeth not this at my word, let him gaze upon the tombs,
for there shall he find the truth. He who would fain become wise beyond
all others in the fear of God, let him study the book of the tomb, for
there shall he find the true doctrine for his salvation. For he will
know to beware of the world, the flesh, and the sense, when he seeth
that man's flesh is reserved to be food of worms.

'Tell me, if there were a road which was of such condition that walking
in the midst thereof a man should go safely, but walking on the edges he
would break his head; what would ye say if ye saw men opposing one
another, and striving in emulation to get nearest to the edge and kill
themselves? What amazement would be yours! Assuredly ye would say: "They
are mad and frenzied, and if they are not frenzied they are desperate."'

'Even so is it true,' answered the disciples.

Then Jesus wept and said: 'Even so, verily, are the lovers of the world.
For if they lived according to reason, which holdeth a middle place in
man, they would follow the law of God, and would be saved from eternal
death. But because they follow the flesh and the world they are
frenzied, and cruel enemies of their own selves, striving to live more
arrogantly and more lasciviously than one another.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar142)
