[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar010) [Next](gbar012.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. Jesus miraculously healeth a leper, and goeth into Jerusalem.

Jesus descending from the mountain to come into Jerusalem, met a leper,
who by divine inspiration knew Jesus to be a prophet. Therefore, with
tears he prayed him, saying: 'Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on
me.' Jesus answered: 'What wilt thou, brother, that I should do unto
thee?'

The leper answered: 'Lord, give me health.'

Jesus reproved him, saying: 'Thou art foolish; pray to God who created
thee, and he will give thee health; for I am a man, as thou art.' The
leper answered: 'I know that thou, Lord, art a man, but an holy one of
the Lord. Wherefore pray thou to God and he will give me health.' Then
Jesus, sighing, said: 'Lord God Almighty, for the love of thy holy
prophets give health to this sick man.' Then, having said this, he said,
touching the sick man with his hands in the name of God: 'O brother,
receive thy health!' And when he had said this the leprosy was cleansed,
insomuch that the flesh of the leper was left unto him like that of a
child. Seeing which namely, that he was healed, the leper with a loud
voice cried out: 'Come hither, Israel, to receive the prophet whom God
sendeth unto thee.' Jesus prayed him, saying: 'Brother, hold thy peace
and say nothing,' but the more he prayed him the more he cried out,
saying: 'Behold the prophet! behold the holy one of God!' At which words
many that were going out of Jerusalem ran back, and entered with Jesus
into Jerusalem, recounting that which God through Jesus had done unto
the leper.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar012.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
