[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar141) [Next](gbar143.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 142.

Judas, the traitor, when he saw that Jesus was fled, lost the hope of
becoming powerful in the world, for he carried Jesus' purse, wherein was
kept all that was given him for love of God. He hoped that Jesus would
become king of Israel, and so he himself would be a powerful man.
Wherefore, having lost his hope, he said within himself: 'If this man
were a prophet, he would know that I steal his money; and so he would
lose patience and cast me out of his service, knowing that I believe not
in him. And if he were a wise man he would not flee from the honour that
God willeth to give him. Wherefore it will be better that I make
arrangement with the chief priests and with the scribes and Pharisees,
and see how to give him up into their hands, for so shall I be able to
obtain something good.' Whereupon, having made this resolution, he gave
notice to the scribes and Pharisees how the matter had passed in Nain.
And they took counsel with the high priest, saying: 'What shall we do if
this man become king? Of a surety we shall fare badly; because he is
fain to reform the worship of God after the ancient custom, for he
cannot away with our traditions. Now how shall we fare under the
sovereignty of such a man? Surely we shall all perish with our children:
for being cast out of our office we shall have to beg our bread.

'We now, praised be God, have a king and a governor that are alien to
our law, who care not for our law, even as we care not for theirs. And
so we are able to do whatsoever we list, for, even though we sin, our
God is so merciful that He is appeased with sacrifice and fasting. But
if this man become king he will not be appeased unless he shall see the
worship of God according as Moses wrote; and what is worse, he saith
that the Messiah shall not come of the seed of David (as one of his
chief disciples hath told us), but saith that he shall come of the seed
of Ishmael, and that the promise was made in Ishmael and not in Isaac.

'What then shall the fruit be if this man be suffered to live? Assuredly
the Ishmaelites shall come into repute with the Romans, and they shall
give them our country in possession; and so shall Israel again be
subjected to slavery as it was aforetime.' Wherefore, having heard the
proposal, the high priest gave answer that he must needs treat with
Herod and with the governor, 'because the people are so inclined towards
him that without the soldiery we shall not be able to do anything; and
may it please God that with the soldiery we may accomplish this
business.'

Wherefore, having taken counsel among themselves, they plotted to seize
him by night, when the governor and Herod should agree thereto.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar143.md)
