[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar063) [Next](gbar065.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 64.

'As God liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, a sinner is of
infirm mind when he persecuteth a man. For tell me, is there anyone who
would break his head for the sake of tearing the cloak of his enemy? Now
how can he be of sane mind who separateth himself from God, the head of
his soul, in order that he may injure the body of his enemy?

'Tell me, O man, who is thy enemy? Assuredly thy body, and every one who
praiseth thee. Wherefore if thou wert of sane mind thou wouldst kiss the
hand of those who revile thee, and present gifts to those who persecute
thee and strike thee much; because, O man, because the more that for,
thy sins thou art reviled and persecuted in this life the less shalt
thou be in the day of judgment. But tell me, O man, if the saints and
prophets of God have been persecuted and defamed by the world even
though they were innocent, what shall be done to thee, O sinner? And if
they endured all with patience, praying for their persecutors, what
shouldst thou do, O man, who art worthy of hell? Tell me, O my
disciples, do ye not know that Shimei cursed the servant of God, David
the prophet, and threw stones at him? Now what said David to those who
would fain have killed Shimei? "What is it to thee, O Joab, that thou
wouldst kill Shimei? let him curse me, for this is the will of God, who
will turn this curse into a blessing." And thus it was; for God saw the
patience of David and delivered him from the persecution of his own son,
Absalom.

Assuredly not a leaf stirreth without the will of God. Wherefore, when
thou art in tribulation do not think of how much thou hast borne, nor of
him who afflicted thee; but consider how much for thy sins thou art
worthy to receive at the hand of the devils of hell. Ye are angry with
this city because it would not receive us, nor sell bread to us. Tell
me, are these people your slaves? Have ye given them this city? Have ye
given them their corn? Or have ye helped them to reap it? Assuredly no;
for ye are strangers in this land, and poor men. What thing is this then
that thou sayest?'

The two disciples answered: 'Lord, we have sinned; may God have mercy on
us.'

And Jesus answered: 'So be it.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar065.md)
