[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar000) [Next](gbar002)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. In this first chapter is contained the annunciation of the angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary concerning the birth of Jesus.

In these last years a virgin called Mary, of the lineage of David, of
the tribe of Judah, was visited by the angel Gabriel from God. This
virgin, living in all holiness without any offence, being blameless and
abiding in prayer with fastings, being one day alone, there entered into
her chamber the angel Gabriel, and he saluted her, saying: 'God be with
thee, O Mary'.

The virgin was affrighted at the appearance of the angel; but the angel
comforted her saying: 'Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favour with
God, who hath chosen thee to be mother of a prophet, whom he will send
to the people of Israel in order that they may walk in his laws with
truth of heart'. The virgin answered: 'Now how shall I bring forth sons,
seeing I know not a man?' The angel answered: 'O Mary, God who made man
without a man is able to generate in thee man without a man, because
with him nothing is impossible.' Mary answered: 'I know that God is
almighty, therefore his will be done.' The angel answered: 'Now be
conceived in thee the prophet, whom thou shalt name Jesus: and thou
shalt keep him from wine and from strong drink and from every unclean
meat, because the child is an holy one of God.' Mary bowed herself with
humility, saying: 'Behold the handmaid of God, be it done according to
thy word.' The angel departed, and the virgin glorified God, saying:
Know, O my soul, the greatness of God, and exult, my spirit, in God my
Saviour; for he hath regarded the lowliness of his handmaiden, insomuch
that I shall be called blessed by all the nations, for he that is mighty
hath made me great, and blessed be his holy name. For his mercy
extendeth from generation to generation of them that fear him. Mighty
hath he made his hand, and he hath scattered the proud in the
imagination of his heart. He hath put down the mighty from their seat,
and hath exalted the humble. Him who hath been hungry hath he filled
with good things, and the rich he hath sent empty away. For he keepeth
in memory the promises made to Abraham and to his son for ever'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar002)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
