[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar182) [Next](gbar184.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 183.

While they sat at meat the scribe said: 'O master, thou saidst that God
loveth true humility. Tell us therefore what is humility, and how it can
be true and false.'

\[Jesus replied:\] 'Verily I say unto you that he who becometh not as a
little child shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.'

Everyone was amazed at hearing this, and they said one to another: 'Now
how shall he become a little child who is thirty or forty years old?
Surely, this is a hard saying.'

Jesus answered: 'As God liveth in whose presence my soul standeth, my
words are true. I said unto you that \[a man\] hath need to become as a
little child: for this is true humility. For if ye ask a little child:
"Who hath made thy garments?" he will answer: "My father." If ye ask him
whose is the house where he liveth, he will say: "My father's." If ye
shall say: "Who giveth thee to eat?" he will reply: "My father." If ye
shall say: "Who hath taught thee to walk and to speak?" he will answer:
"My father." But if ye shall say: "Who hath broken thy forehead, for
that thou hast thy forehead so bound up?" he will answer: "I fell down,
and so did I break my head." If ye shall say: "Now why didst thou fall
down?" he will answer: "See ye not that I am little, so that I have not
the strength to walk and run like a grown man? so my father must needs
take me by the hand if I would walk firmly. But in order that I might
learn to walk well, my father left me for a little space, and I, wishing
to run, fell down." If ye shall say: "And what said thy father?" he will
answer: "Now why didst thou not walk quite slowly? See that in future
thou leave not my side."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar184.md)
