[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar115) [Next](gbar117.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 116.

'It behoveth a man to live in the city, even as the soldier liveth when
he hath enemies around the fortress, defending himself against every
assault and always fearing treachery on the part of the citizens. Even
so, I say, let him repell every outward enticement of sin, and fear the
sense, because it hath a supreme desire for things impure. But how shall
he defend himself if he bridle not the eye, which is the origin of every
carnal sin? As God liveth in whose presence my soul standeth, he who
hath not bodily eyes is secure not to receive punishment save only to
the third degree, while he that hath eyes receiveth it to the seventh
degree.

'In the time of the prophet Elijah it came to pass that Elijah seeing a
blind man weeping, a man of good life, asked him, saying: "Why weepest
thou, O brother?" The blind man answered: "I weep because I cannot see
Elijah the prophet, the holy one of God."

'Then Elijah rebuked him, saying: "Cease from weeping, O man, for in
weeping thou sinnest."

'The blind man answered: "Now tell me, is it a sin to see a holy prophet
of God, that raiseth the dead and maketh the fire to come down from
heaven?"

'Elijah answered: "Thou speakest not the truth, for Elijah is not able
to do anything of all that thou sayest, because he is a man as thou art.
For all the men in the world cannot make one fly to be born."

'Said the blind man: "Thou sayest this, O man, because Elijah must have
rebuked thee for some sin of thine, wherefore thou hatest him."

'Elijah answered: "May it please God that thou be speaking the truth;
because, O brother, if I should hate Elijah I should love God, and the
more I should hate Elijah the more I should love God."

'Hereupon was the blind man greatly angered, and said: "As God liveth,
thou art an impious fellow! Can God then be loved while one hateth the
prophets of God? Begone forthwith, for I will not listen to thee any
longer!"

'Elijah answered: "Brother, now mayest thou see with thine intellect how
evil is bodily seeing. For thou desirest sight to see Elijah, and hatest
Elijah with thy soul."

'The blind man answered: "Now begone! For thou art the devil, that
wouldst make me sin against the holy one of God."

'Then Elijah gave a sigh, and said with tears: "Thou hast spoken the
truth, O brother, for my flesh, which thou desirest to see, separateth
thee from God."

'Said the blind man: "I do not wish to see thee; nay, if I had my eyes,
I would close them so as not to see thee?"

'Then said Elijah: Know, brother, that I am Elijah!"

'The blind man answered: "Thou speakest not the truth."

'Then said the disciples of Elijah: "Brother, he verily is the prophet
of God, Elijah."

'"Let him tell me," said the blind man, "if he be the prophet, of what
seed I am, and how I became blind?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar117.md)
