[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar150) [Next](gbar152.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 151.

'This man was a true Pharisee,' said Jesus to his disciples: 'and may it
please God that we be able on the day of judgment to have him for our
friend.

Jesus then embarked on a ship, and the disciples were sorry that they
had forgotten to bring bread. Jesus rebuked them, saying: 'Beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees of our day, for a little leaven marreth a mass
of meal.'

Then said the disciples one to another: 'Now what leaven have we, if we
have not even any bread?'

Then said Jesus: 'O men of little faith, have ye then forgotten what God
wrought in Nain, where there was no sign of corn? And how many ate and
were satisfied with five loaves and two fishes? The leaven of the
Pharisee is want of faith in God, and thought of self, which hath
corrupted not only the Pharisees of this day, but hath corrupted Israel.
For the simple folk, not knowing how to read, do that which they see the
Pharisees do, because they hold them for holy ones.

'Know ye what is the true Pharisee? He is the oil of human nature. For
even as oil resteth at the top of every liquor, so the goodness of the
true Pharisee resteth at the top of all human goodness. He is a living
book, which God giveth to the world; for everything that he saith and
doeth is according to the law of God. Wherefore, whoso doeth as he doeth
observeth the law of God. The true Pharisee is salt that suffereth not
human flesh to be putrefied by sin; for every one who seeth him is
brought to repentance. He is a light that lighteneth the pilgrims' way,
for every one that considereth his poverty with his penitence perceiveth
that in this world we ought not to shut up our heart.

'But he that maketh the oil rancid, corrupteth the book, putrefieth the
salt, extinguisheth the light—this man is a false Pharisee. If,
therefore, ye would not perish, beware that ye do not as do the Pharisee
to-day.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar152.md)
