[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar003) [Next](gbar005.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. Angels announce to the shepherds the birth of Jesus, and they, after having found him, announce him.

At that time the shepherds were watching over their flock, as is their
custom. And, behold, they were surrounded by an exceeding bright light,
out of which appeared to them an angel, who blessed God. The shepherds
were filled with fear by reason of the sudden light and the appearance
of the angel: 'Behold, I announce to you a great joy, for there is born
in the city of David a child who is a prophet of the Lord; who bringeth
great salvation to the house of Israel. The child ye shall find in the
manger, with his mother, who blesseth God.' And when he had said this
there came a great multitude of angels blessing God, announcing peace to
them that have good will. When the angels were departed, the shepherds
spake among themselves, saying: 'Let us go even unto Bethlehem, and see
the word which God by his angel hath announced to us.' There came many
shepherds to Bethlehem seeking the new-born babe, and they found outside
the city the child that was born, according to the word of the angel,
lying in the manger. They therefore made obeisance to him, and gave to
the mother that which they had, announcing to her what they had heard
and seen. Mary therefore kept all these things in her heart, and Joseph
\[likewise\], giving thanks to God. The shepherds returned to their
flocks, announcing to everyone how great a thing they had seen. And so
the whole hill-country of Judaea was filled with fear, and every man
laid up this word in his heart, saying: 'What, think we, shall this
child be?'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar005.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
