[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar018) [Next](gbar020)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 19. Jesus foretelleth his betrayal, and, descending from the mountain, healeth ten lepers.

When Jesus had said this, Peter answered: 'O teacher, behold we have
left all to follow thee, what shall become of us?'

Jesus answered: 'Verily ye in the day of judgment shall sit beside me,
giving testimony against the twelve tribes of Israel.'

And having said this Jesus sighed, saying: 'O Lord, what thing is this?
for I have chosen twelve, and one of them is a devil.'

The disciples were sore grieved at this word; whereupon he who writeth
secretly questioned Jesus with tears, saying: 'O master, will Satan
deceive me, and shall I then become reprobate?'

Jesus answered: 'Be not sore grieved, Barnabas; for those whom God hath
chosen before the creation of the world shall not perish. Rejoice, for
thy name is written in the book of life.

Jesus comforted his disciples, saying: 'Fear not, for he who shall hate
me is not grieved at my saying, because in him is not the divine
feeling.'

At his words the chosen were comforted. Jesus made his prayers, and his
disciples said: 'Amen, so be it, Lord God almighty and merciful.'

Having finished his devotions, Jesus came down from the mountain with
his disciples and met ten lepers, who from afar off cried out: 'Jesus,
son of David, have mercy on us!"

Jesus called them near to him, and said unto them: 'What will ye of me,
O brethren?'

They all cried out: 'Give us health!'

Jesus answered: 'Ah, wretched that ye are, have ye so lost your reason
for that ye say: "Give us health!" See ye not me to be a man like
yourselves. Call unto our God that hath created you and he that is
almighty and merciful will heal you.

With tears the lepers answered: 'We know that thou art man like us, but
yet an holy one of God and a prophet of the Lord; wherefore pray thou to
God, and he will heal us.

Thereupon the disciples prayed Jesus, saying: 'Lord, have mercy upon
them.' Then groaned Jesus and prayed to God, saying: 'Lord God almighty
and merciful, have mercy and hearken to the words of thy servant: and
for love of Abraham our father and for thy holy covenant have mercy on
the request of these men, and grant them health.' Whereupon Jesus,
having said this, turned himself to the lepers and said: 'Go and show
yourselves to the priests according to the law of God.'

The lepers departed, and on the way were cleansed. Whereupon one of
them, seeing that he was healed, returned to find Jesus, and he was an
Ishmaelite. And having found Jesus he bowed himself, doing reverence
unto him, and saying: 'Verily thou art an holy one of God,' and with
thanks he prayed him that he would receive him for servant. Jesus
answered: 'Ten have been cleansed; where are the nine?' And he said to
him that was cleansed: 'I am not come to be served, but to serve;
wherefore go to thine home, and recount how much God hath done in thee,
in order that they may know that the promises made to Abraham and his
son, with the kingdom of God, are drawing nigh.' The cleansed leper
departed, and having arrived in his own neighborhood recounted how much
God through Jesus had wrought in him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar020)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
