[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar105) [Next](gbar107.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 106.

When he had finished the prayer of dawn, Jesus sat down under a palm
tree, and thither his disciples drew nigh to him. Then said Jesus: As
God liveth, in whose presence standeth my soul, many are deceived
concerning our life. For so closely are the soul and the sense joined
together, that the more part of men affirm the soul and the sense to be
one and the same thing, dividing it by operation and not by essence,
calling it the sensitive, vegetative, and intellectual soul. But verily
I say to you, the soul is one, which thinketh and liveth. O foolish one,
where will they find the intellectual soul without life? Assuredly,
never. But life without senses will readily be found, as is seen in the
unconscious when the sense leaveth him.

Thaddaeus answered: 'O master, when the sense leaveth the life, a man
hath not life.'

Jesus answered: 'This is not true, because man is deprived of life when
the soul departeth; because the soul returneth not any more to the body,
save by miracle. But sense departeth by reason of fear that it
receiveth, or by reason of great sorrow that the soul hath. For the
sense hath God created for pleasure, and by that alone it liveth, even
as the body liveth by food and the soul liveth by knowledge and love.
This sense is now rebellious against the soul, through indignation that
it hath at being deprived of the pleasure of paradise through sin.
Wherefore there is the greatest need to nourish it with spiritual
pleasure for him who willeth not that it should live of carnal pleasure.
Understand ye? Verily I say unto you, that God having created it
condemned it to hell and to intolerable snow and ice; because it said
that it was God; but when he deprived it of nourishment, taking away its
food from it, it confessed that it was a slave of God and the work of
his hands. And now tell me, how doth sense work in the ungodly?
Assuredly, it is as God in them: seeing that they follow sense,
forsaking reason and the law of God. Whereupon they become abominable,
and work not any good.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar107.md)
