[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar019) [Next](gbar021)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 20. Miracle on the sea wrought by Jesus, and Jesus declares where the prophet is received.

Jesus went to the sea of Galilee, and having embarked in a ship sailed
to his city of Nazareth; whereupon there was a great tempest in the sea,
insomuch that the ship was nigh unto sinking. And Jesus was sleeping
upon the prow of the ship. Then drew near to him his disciples, and
awoke him, saying: 'O master, save thyself, for we perish!' They were
encompassed with very great fear, by reason of the great wind that was
contrary and the roaring of the sea. Jesus arose, and raising his eyes
to heaven, said: 'O Elohim Sabaoth, have mercy upon thy servants.' Then,
when Jesus had said this, suddenly the wind ceased, and the sea became
calm. Wherefore the seamen feared, saying: 'And who is this, that the
sea and the wind obey him?'

Having arrived at the city of Nazareth the seamen spread through the
city all that Jesus had wrought, whereupon the house where Jesus was,
was surrounded by as many as dwelt in the city. And the scribes and
doctors having presented themselves unto him, said: 'We have heard how
much thou hast wrought in the sea and Judea: give us therefore some sign
here in thine own country.'

Jesus answered: 'This faithless generation seek a sign, but it shall not
be given them, because no prophet is received in his own country. In the
time of Elijah there were many widows in Judea but he was not sent to be
nourished save unto a widow of Sidon. Many were the lepers in the time
of Elisha in Judea, nevertheless only Naaman the Syrian was cleansed.'

Then were the citizens enraged and seized him and carried him on to the
top of a precipice to cast him down. But Jesus walking through the midst
of them, departed from them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar021)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
