[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar017) [Next](gbar019.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 18. Here is shown forth the persecution of the servants of God by the world, and God's protection saving them.

Having said this, Jesus said: 'Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, that ye may be my disciples. If then the world shall hate you, ye
shall be truly my disciples; for the world hath been ever an enemy of
servants of God. Remember the holy prophets that have been slain by the
world, even as in the time of Elijah ten thousand prophets were slain by
Jezebel, insomuch that scarcely did poor Elijah escape, and seven
thousand sons of prophets who were hidden by the captain of Ahab's host.
Oh, unrighteous world, that knowest not God! Fear not therefore ye, for
the hairs of your head are numbered so that they shall not perish.
Behold the sparrows and other birds, whereof falleth not one feather
without the will of God. Shall God, then, have more care of the birds
than of man, for whose sake he hath created everything. Is there any
man, perchance, who careth more for his shoes than for his own son?
Assuredly not. Now how much less ought ye to think that God would
abandon you, while taking care of the birds! And why speak I of the
birds? A leaf of a tree falleth not without the will of God.

'Believe me, because I tell you the truth, that the world will greatly
fear you if ye shall observe my words. For if it feared not to have its
wickedness revealed it would not hate you, but it feareth to be
revealed, therefore it will hate you and persecute you. If ye shall see
your words scorned by the world lay it not to heart, but consider how
that God is greater than you; who is in such wise scorned by the world
that his wisdom is counted madness. If God endureth the world with
patience, wherefore will ye lay it to heart, O dust and clay of the
earth? In your patience ye shall possess your soul. Therefore if one
shall give you a blow on one side of the face, offer him the other that
he may smite it. Render not evil for evil, for so do all the worst
animals; but render good for evil, and pray God for them that hate you.
Fire is not extinguished with fire, but rather with water; even so I say
unto you that ye shall not overcome evil with evil, but rather with
good. Behold God, who causeth the sun to come upon the good and evil,
and likewise the rain. So ought ye to do good to all; for it is written
in the law: "Be ye holy, for I your God am holy; be ye pure, for I am
pure; and be ye perfect, for I am perfect." Verily I say unto you that
the servant studieth to please his master, and so he putteth not on any
garment that is displeasing to his master. Your garments are your will
and your love. Beware, then, not to will or to love a thing that is
displeasing to God, our Lord. Be ye sure that God hateth the pomps and
lusts of the world, and therefore hate ye the world.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar019.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
