[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar093) [Next](gbar095.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 94.

And having said this, Jesus said again: 'I confess before heaven, and
call to witness everything that dwelleth upon the earth, that I am a
stranger to all that men have said of me, to wit, that I am more than
man. For I am a man, born of a woman, subject to the judgement of God;
that live here like as other men, subject to the common miseries. As God
liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, thou hast greatly sinned, O
priest, in saying what thou hast said. May it please God that there come
not upon the holy city great vengeance for this sin.'

Then said the priest: 'May God pardon us, and do thou pray for us.'

Then said the governor and Herod: 'Sir, it is impossible that man should
do that which thou doest; wherefore we understand not that which thou
sayest.'

Jesus answered: 'That which ye say is true, for God worketh good in man,
even as Satan worketh evil. For man is like a shop, wherein whoso
entereth with his consent worketh and selleth therein. But tell me, O
governor, and thou O king, ye say this because ye are strangers to our
law; for if ye read the testament and covenant of our God ye would see
that Moses with a rod made the water turn into blood, the dust into
fleas, the dew into tempest, and the light into darkness. He made the
frogs and mice to come into Egypt, which covered the ground, he slew the
first-born, and opened the sea, wherein he drowned Pharaoh. Of these
things I have wrought none. And of Moses, every one confesseth that he
is a dead man at this present. Joshua made the sun to stand still, and
opened the Jordan, which I have not yet done. And of Joshua every one
confesseth that he is a dead man at this present. Elijah made fire to
come visibly down from heaven, and rain, which I have not done. And of
Elijah every one confesseth that he is a man. And \[in like manner\]
very many other prophets, holy men, friends of God, who in the power of
God have wrought things which cannot be grasped by the minds of those
who know not our God, almighty and merciful, who is blessed for
evermore.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar095.md)
