[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar084) [Next](gbar086)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 85.

'When a man worketh ill or talketh ill, if one go to correct him, and
hinder such work, what doth such an one?' said Jesus.

The disciples answered: 'He doth well, because he serveth God, who
always seeketh to hinder evil, even as the sun that always seeketh to
chase away the darkness.'

Said Jesus: 'And I tell you on the contrary that when one worketh well
or speaketh well, whosoever seeketh to hinder him under pretext of aught
that is not better, he serveth that devil, nay, he even becometh his
companion. For the devil attendeth to nought else but to hinder every
good thing.

'But what shall I say unto you now? I will say unto you as said Solomon
the prophet, holy one, and friend of God: 'Of a thousand whom ye know,
one be your friend.'

Then said Matthew: 'Then shall we not be able to love anyone.'

Jesus answered: 'Verily I say unto you, that it is not lawful for you to
hate anything save only sin: insomuch that ye cannot hate even Satan as
creature of God, but rather as enemy of God. Know ye wherefore? I will
tell you; because he is a creature of God, and all that God hath created
is good and perfect. Accordingly, whoso hateth the creature hateth also
the creator. But the friend is a singular thing, that is not easily
found, but is easily lost. For the friend will not suffer contradiction
against him whom he supremely loveth. Beware, be ye cautious, and choose
not for friend one who loveth not him whom ye love. Know ye what friend
meaneth? Friend meaneth naught but physician of the soul. And so, just
as one rarely findeth a good physician who knoweth the sickness and
understandeth to apply the medicines thereto, so also are friends rare
who know the faults and understand how to guide unto good. But herein is
an evil, that there are many who have friends that feign not to see the
faults of their friend; others excuse them; others defend them under
earthly pretext; and, what is worse, there are friends who invite and
aid their friend to err, whose end shall be like unto their villainy.
Beware that ye receive not such men for friends, for that in truth they
are enemies and slayers of the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar086)
