[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar130) [Next](gbar132)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 131.

His disciples drew nigh unto Jesus after the nightly prayer, and said:
'O Master, how must we do to escape pride?'

Jesus answered: 'Have ye seen a poor man invited to a prince's house to
eat bread?'

John answered: 'I have eaten bread in Herod's house. For before I knew
thee I went to fish, and used to sell the fish to the family of Herod.
Whereupon, one day when he was feasting, I having brought thither a fine
fish, he made me stay and eat there.'

Then said Jesus: 'Now how didst thou eat bread with infidels? God pardon
thee, O John! But tell me, how didst thou bear thyself at the board?
Didst thou seek to have the most honourable place? Didst thou ask for
the most delicate food? Didst thou speak when thou wast not questioned
at the table? Didst thou account thyself more worthy than the others to
sit at table?'

John answered: 'As God liveth, I did not dare to lift up my eyes, seeing
myself, a poor fisherman, ill-clad, sitting among the king's barons.
Whereupon, when the king gave me a little piece of flesh, methought that
the world had fallen upon my head, for the greatness of the favour that
the king did unto me. And verily I say that, if the king had been of our
Law, I should have been fain to serve him all the days of my life.'

Jesus cried out: 'Hold thy peace, John, for I fear lest God should cast
us into the abyss, even like Abiram, for our pride!'

The disciples trembled with fear at the words of Jesus; when he said
again: 'Let us fear God, that he cast us not into the abyss for our
pride.

'O brethren, have ye heard of John what is done in the house of a
prince? Woe to the man that come into the world, for as they live in
pride they shall die in contempt and shall go into confusion.

'For this world is a house where God feasteth men, wherein have eaten
all the holy ones and prophets of God. And verily I say to you,
everything that a man receiveth, he receiveth it from God. Wherefore man
ought to bear himself with deepest humility; knowing his own vileness
and the greatness of God, with the great bounty wherewith he nourisheth
us. Therefore it is not lawful for man to say: "Ah, why is this done and
this said in the world?" but rather to account himself, as in truth he
is, unworthy to stand in the world at God's board. As God liveth, in
whose presence my soul standeth, there is nothing so small received
there in the world from the hand of God, but that in return man ought to
spend his life for love of God.

'As God liveth, thou sinnedst not, O John, in eating with Herod, for it
was of God's disposition thou didst so, in order that thou mightest be
our teacher and \[the teacher\] of every one that feareth God. So do,'
said Jesus to disciples, 'that ye may live in the world as John lived in
the house of Herod when he ate bread with him, for so shall ye be in
truth free from all pride.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar132)
