[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar192) [Next](gbar194.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 193.

Jesus abode two days in the house of Nicodemus, and the third day he
departed for Bethany; and when he was nigh to the town he sent two of
his disciples before him, to announce to Mary his coming. She ran out of
the town, and when she had found Jesus, said, weeping: 'Lord, thou
saidst that my brother would not die; and now he hath been buried four
days. Would to God thou hadst come before I called thee, for then he had
not died!'

Jesus answered: 'Thy brother is not dead, but sleepeth, therefore I come
to awake him.'

Mary answered, weeping: 'Lord, from such asleep he shall be awakened on
the day of judgment by the angel of God sounding his trumpet.'

Jesus answered: 'Mary, believe me that he shall rise before \[that
day\], because God hath given me power over his sleep; and verily I say
to thee he is not dead, for he alone is dead who dieth without finding
mercy with God.

Mary returned quickly to announce to her sister Martha the coming of
Jesus.

Now there were assembled at the death of Lazarus a great number of Jews
from Jerusalem, and many scribes and Pharisees. Martha, having heard
from her sister Mary of the coming of Jesus, arose in haste and ran
outside, whereupon the multitude of Jews, scribes, and Pharisees
followed her to comfort her, because they supposed she was going to the
sepulchre to weep over her brother. When therefore she arrived at the
place where Jesus had spoken to Mary, Martha weeping said: 'Lord, would
to God thou hadst been here, for then my brother had not died!'

Mary then came up weeping; whereupon Jesus shed tears, and sighing said:
'Where have ye laid him?' They answered: 'Come and see.'

The Pharisees said among themselves: 'Now this man, who raised the son
of the widow at Nain, why did he suffer this man to die, having said
that he should not die?'

Jesus having come to the sepulchre, where every one was weeping, said:
'Weep not, for Lazarus sleepeth, and I am come to awake him.'

The Pharisees said among themselves: 'Would to God that thou didst so
sleep!' Then said Jesus: 'Mine hour is not yet come; but when it shall
come I shall sleep in like manner, and shall be speedily awakened.' Then
said Jesus again: 'Take away the stone from the sepulchre.'

Said Martha: 'Lord, he stinketh, for he hath been dead four days.'

Said Jesus: 'Why then am I come hither, Martha? Believest thou not in
me, that I shall awaken him?'

Martha answered: 'I know that thou art the holy one of God, who hath
sent thee into this world.'

Then Jesus lifted up his hands to heaven, and said: 'Lord God of
Abraham, God of Ishmael and Isaac, God of our fathers, have mercy upon
the affliction of these women, and give glory to thy holy name.' And
when every one had answered 'Amen,' Jesus said with a loud voice:

'Lazarus, come forth!'

Whereupon he that was dead arose; and Jesus said to his disciples:
'Loose him.' For he was bound in the grave-clothes with the napkin over
his face, even as our fathers were accustomed to bury \[their dead\].

A great multitude of the Jews and some of the Pharisees believed in
Jesus, because the miracle was great. Those that remained in their
unbelief departed and went to Jerusalem and announced to the chief of
the priests the resurrection of Lazarus, and how that many were become
Nazarenes; for so they called them who were brought to penitence through
the word of God which Jesus preached.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar194.md)
