[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar016) [Next](gbar018)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 17. In this chapter is clearly perceived the unbelief of Christians, and the true faith of Mumin.

When Jesus had said this, Philip answered: 'We are content to serve God,
but we desire, however, to know God. For Isaiah the prophet said:
"Verily thou art a hidden God," and God said to Moses his servant: "I am
that which I am."

Jesus answered: 'Philip, God is a good without which there is naught
good; God is a being without which there is naught that is; God is a
life without which there is naught that liveth; so great that he filleth
all and is everywhere. He alone hath no equal. He hath had no beginning,
nor will he ever have an end, but to everything hath he given a
beginning and to everything shall he give an end. He hath no father nor
mother; he hath no sons, nor brethren, nor companions. And because God
hath no body, therefore he eateth not, sleepeth not, dieth not, walketh
not, moveth not, but abideth eternally without human similitude, for
that he is incorporeal, uncompounded, immaterial, of the most simple
substance. He is so good that he loveth goodness only; he is so just
that when he punisheth or pardoneth it cannot be gainsaid. In short, I
say unto thee, Philip, that here on earth thou canst not see him nor
know him perfectly; but in his kingdom thou shalt see him for ever:
wherein consisteth all our happiness and glory.'

Philip answered: 'Master, what sayest thou? It is surely written in
Isaiah that God is our father; how, then, hath he no sons?'

Jesus answered: 'There are written in the prophets many parables,
wherefore thou oughtest not to attend to the letter, but to the sense.
For all the prophets, that are one hundred and forty-four thousand, whom
God hath sent into the world, have spoken darkly. But after me shall
come the Splendour of all the prophets and holy ones, and shall shed
light upon the darkness of all that the prophets have said, because he
is the messenger of God.' And having said this, Jesus sighed and said:
'Have mercy on Israel, O Lord God and look with pity upon Abraham and
upon his seed, in order that they may serve thee with truth of heart.

His disciples answered: 'So be it, O Lord our God!'

Jesus said: 'Verily I say unto you, the scribes and doctors have made
void the law of God with their false prophecies, contrary to the
prophecies of the true prophets of God: Wherefore God is wroth with the
house of Israel and with this faithless generation.' His disciples wept
at these words, and said: 'Have mercy, O God, have mercy upon the temple
and upon the holy city, and give it not into contempt of the nations
that they despise not thy holy covenant.' Jesus answered: 'So be it,
Lord God of our fathers.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar018)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
