[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar026) [Next](gbar028)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 27. In this chapter is clearly seen how improper is laughter in men: also the prudence of Abraham.

The disciples laughed over the madness of the old man, and stood amazed
at the prudence of Abraham. But Jesus reproved them, saying: 'Ye have
forgotten the words of the prophet, who saith: "Present laughter is a
herald of weeping to come," and further, "Thou shalt not go where is
laughter, but sit where they weep, because this life passeth in
miseries."' Then said Jesus: 'In the time of Moses, know ye not that for
laughing and mocking at others God turned into hideous beasts many men
of Egypt: Beware that in anywise ye laugh not at anyone, for ye shall
surely weep \[for it\].'

The disciples answered: 'We laughed over the madness of the old man.'

Then said Jesus: 'Verily I say unto you, every like loveth his like, and
therein findeth pleasure. Therefore, if ye were not mad ye would not
laugh at madness.'

They answered: 'May God have mercy on us.'

Said Jesus: 'So be it.'

Then said Philip: 'O master, how came it to pass that Abraham's father
wished to burn his son?'

Jesus answered: 'One day, Abraham having come to the age of twelve
years, his father said to him: 'To-morrow is the festival of all the
gods; therefore we shall go to the great temple and bear a present to my
god, great Baal. And thou shalt choose for thyself a god, for thou art
of age to have a god."

'Abraham answered with guile: "Willingly, O my father." And so betimes
in the morning they went before every one else to the temple. But
Abraham bare beneath his tunic an axe hidden. Whereupon, having entered
into the temple, as the crowd increased Abraham hid himself behind an
idol in a dark part of the temple. His father, when he departed,
believed that Abraham had gone home before him, wherefore he did not
stay to seek him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar028)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
