[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar021) [Next](gbar023)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 22. Miserable condition of the uncircumcised in that a dog is better than they.

The disciples questioned Jesus on that day, saying: 'O master, why didst
thou make such answer to the woman, saying that they were dogs?'

Jesus answered: 'Verily I say unto you that a dog is better than an
uncircumcised man.' Then were the disciples sorrowful, saying: 'Hard are
these words, and who shall be able to receive them?'

Jesus answered: 'If ye consider, O foolish ones, what the dog doth, that
hath no reason, for the service of his master, ye will find my saying to
be true. Tell me, doth the dog guard the house of his master, and expose
his life against the robber? Yea, assuredly. But what receiveth he? Many
blows and injuries with little bread, and he always showeth to his
master a joyful countenance. Is this true?'

'True it is, O master,' answered the disciples.

Then said Jesus: 'Consider now how much God hath given to man, and ye
shall see how unrighteous he is in not observing the covenant of God
made with Abraham his servant. Remember that which David said to Saul
king of Israel, against Goliath the Philistine: "My lord," said David,
"while thy servant was keeping thy servant's flock there came the wolf,
the bear, and the lion and seized thy servant's sheep: whereupon thy
servant went and slew them, rescuing the sheep. And what is this
uncircumcised one but like unto them? Therefore will thy servant go in
the name of the Lord God of Israel, and will slay this unclean one that
blasphemeth the holy people of God."

Then said the disciples: 'Tell us, O master, for what reason man must
needs be circumcised?"

Jesus answered: 'Let it suffice you that God hath commanded it to
Abraham, saying: "Abraham, circumcise thy foreskin and that of all thy
house, for this is a covenant between me and thee for ever."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar023)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
