[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar030) [Next](gbar032)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 31.

Then drew near unto Jesus the priests, and said: 'Master, is it lawful
to give tribute to Caesar?' Jesus turned round to Judas, and said: 'Hast
thou any money?' And taking a penny in his hand, Jesus turned himself to
the priests, and said to them: 'This penny hath an image: tell me, whose
image is it?'

They answered: 'Caesar's.'

'Give therefore,' said Jesus, 'that which is Caesar's to Caesar, and
that which is God's give it to God.'

Then they departed in confusion.

And behold there drew nigh a centurion, saying: 'Lord, my son is sick;
have mercy on my old age!'

Jesus answered: 'The Lord God of Israel have mercy on thee!'

The man was departing; and Jesus said: 'Wait for me, for I will come to
thine house, to make prayer over thy son.'

The centurion answered: 'Lord, I am not worthy that thou, a prophet of
God, shouldest come unto my house, sufficient unto me is the word that
thou hast spoken for the healing of my son; for thy God hath made thee
lord over every sickness, even as his angel said unto me in my sleep.'

Then Jesus marvelled greatly, and turning to the crowd, he said: 'Behold
this stranger, for he hath more faith than all that I have found in
Israel.' And turning to the centurion, he said: 'Go in peace, because
God, for the great faith that he hath given thee, hath granted health to
thy son.'

The centurion went his way, and on the road he met his servants, who
announced to him how his son was healed.

The man answered: 'At what hour did the fever leave him?'

They said: 'Yesterday, at the sixth hour, the heat departed from him.'

The man knew that when Jesus said: 'The Lord God of Israel have mercy on
thee,' his son received his health. Whereupon the man believed in our
God, and having entered into his house, he brake in pieces all his own
gods, saying: 'There is only the God of Israel, the true and living
God.' Therefore said he: 'None shall eat of my bread that worshippeth
not the God of Israel.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar032)
