[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar092) [Next](gbar094)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 93.

Then Jesus, having lifted his hand in token of silence, said: 'Verily ye
have erred greatly, O Israelites, in calling me, a man, your God. And I
fear that God may for this give heavy plague upon the holy city, handing
it over in servitude to strangers. O a thousand times accursed Satan,
that hath moved you to this!'

And having said this, Jesus smote his face with both his hands,
whereupon arose such a noise of weeping that none could hear what Jesus
was saying. Whereupon once more he lifted up his hand in token of
silence, and the people being quieted from their weeping, he spake once
more: 'I confess before heaven, and I call to witness everything that
dwelleth upon the earth, that I am a stranger to all that ye have said:
seeing that I am man, born of mortal woman, subject to the judgement of
God, suffering the miseries of eating and sleeping, of cold and heat,
like other men. Wherefore when God shall come to judge, my words like a
sword shall pierce each one \[of them\] that believe me to be more than
man.'

And having said this, Jesus saw a great multitude of horsemen, whereby
he perceived that there were coming the governor with Herod and the
high-priest.

Then said Jesus: 'Perchance they also are become mad.'

When the governor arrived there, with Herod and the priest, every one
dismounted, and they made a circle round about Jesus, insomuch that the
soldiery could not keep back the people that were desirous to hear Jesus
speaking with the priest.

Jesus drew near to the priest with reverence, but he was wishful to bow
himself down and worship Jesus, when Jesus cried out: 'Beware of that
which thou doest, priest of the living God! Sin not against our God!'

The priest answered: 'Now is Judaea so greatly moved over thy signs and
thy teaching that they cry out that thou art God; wherefore, constrained
by the people, I am come hither with the Roman governor and king Herod.
We pray thee therefore from our heart, that thou wilt be content to
remove the sedition which is arisen on thy account. For some say thou
art God, some say thou art son of God, and some say thou art a prophet.'

Jesus answered: 'And thou, O high-priest of Ged, wherefore hast thou not
quieted this sedition? Art thou also, perchance, gone out of thy mind?
Have the prophecies, with the law of God, so passed into oblivion, O
wretched Judaea, deceived of Satan!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar094)
