[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar145) [Next](gbar147)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 146.

Then said Zacchaeus: 'Sir, behold I will give, for love of God, fourfold
all that I have received by usury.'

Then said Jesus: 'This day hath salvation come to this house. Verily,
verily, many publicans, harlots, and sinners shall go into the kingdom
of God, and they that account themselves righteous shall go into eternal
flames.'

Hearing this, the Pharisees departed in indignation. Then said Jesus to
them that were converted to repentance, and to his disciples: 'There was
a father who had two sons, and the younger said: "Father, give me my
portion of goods"; and his father gave it him. And he, having received
his portion, departed and went into a far country, whereupon he wasted
all his substance with harlots, living luxuriously. After this there
arose a mighty famine in that country, insomuch that the wretched man
went to serve a citizen, who set him to feed swine in his property. And
while feeding them he assuaged his hunger in company with the swine,
eating acorns. But when he came to himself he said: "Oh, how many in my
father's house have abundance in feasting, and I perish here with
hunger! I will arise, therefore, and will go to my father, and will say
unto him: Father, I have sinned in heaven against thee; do with me as
thou doest unto one of thy servants."

'The poor man went, whereupon it came to pass that his father saw him
coming from afar off, and was moved to compassion over him. So he went
forth to meet him, and having come up to him he embraced him and kissed
him.

'The son bowed himself down, saying: "Father, I have sinned in heaven
against thee, do unto me as unto one of thy servants, for I am not
worthy to be called thy son."

'The father answered: "Son, say not so, for thou art my son, and I will
not suffer thee to be in the condition of my slave." And he called his
servants and said: "Bring hither new robes and clothe this my son, and
give him new hosen, give him the ring on his finger, and straightway
kill the fatted calf and we will make merry. For this my son was dead
and is now come to life again, he was lost and now is found."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar147)
