[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar184) [Next](gbar186)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 185.

Jesus answered: 'Brother, it is not time that hath done this, but rather
the wicked world. For in every time it is possible to serve God in
truth, but by companying with the world, that is with the evil manners
in each time, men become bad.

'Now knowest thou not that Gehazi, servant of Elisha the prophet, lying,
and shaming his master, took the money and the raiment of Naaman the
Syrian? And yet Elisha had a great number of Pharisees to whom God made
him to prophesy.

'Verily I say unto thee, that men are so inclined to evil working, and
so much doth the world excite them thereto, and Satan entice them to
evil, that the Pharisees of the present day avoid every good work and
every holy example: and the example of Gehazi is sufficient for them to
be reprobated of God.'

The scribe answered: 'It is most true': whereupon Jesus said: 'I would
that thou wouldst narrate to me the example of Haggai and Hosea both
prophets of God, in order that we may behold the true Pharisee.'

The scribe answered: 'O master what shall I say? Of a surety many
believe it not, although it is written by Daniel the prophet; but in
obedience to thee I will narrate the truth.

'Haggai was fifteen years old when, having sold his patrimony and given
it to the poor, he went forth from Anathoth to serve Obadiah the
prophet. Now the aged Obadiah, who knew the humility of Haggai, used him
as a book wherewith to teach his disciples. Wherefore he oftentimes
presented him raiment and delicate food, but Haggai ever sent back the
messenger, saying: "Go, return to the house, for thou hast made a
mistake. Shall Obadaih send me such things? Surely not: for he knoweth
that I am good for naught, and only commit sins."

'And Obadiah, when he had anything bad used to give it to the one next
to Haggai in order that he might see it. Whereupon Haggai, when he saw
it, would say to himself: "Now, behold, Obadiah hath certainly forgotten
thee, for this thing is suited to me alone, because I am worse than all.
And there is nothing so vile but that, receiving it from Obadiah, by
whose hands God granteth it to me, it were a treasure."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar186)
