[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar041) [Next](gbar043)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 42.

Then the disciples wept after this discourse, and Jesus was weeping,
when they saw many who came to find him, for the chiefs of the priests
took counsel among themselves to catch him in his talk. Wherefore they
sent the Levites and some of the scribes to question him, saying: 'Who
art thou?'

Jesus confessed, and said the truth: 'I am not the Messiah.'

They said: 'Art thou Elijah or Jeremiah, or any of the ancient
prophets?'

Jesus answered: 'No.'

Then said they: 'Who art thou? Say, in order that we may give testimony
to those who sent us.'

Then said Jesus: 'I am a voice that crieth through all Judea, and
crieth: "Prepare ye the way for the messenger of the Lord," even as it
is written in Esaias.'

They said: 'If thou be not the Messiah nor Elijah, or any prophet,
wherefore dost thou preach new doctrine, and make thyself of more
account than the Messiah?'

Jesus answered: 'The miracles which God worketh by my hands show that I
speak that which God willeth; nor indeed do I make myself to be
accounted as him ofwhom ye speak. For I am not worthy to unloose the
ties of the hosen or the latchets of the shoes of the messenger of God
whom ye call "Messiah," who was made before me, and shall come after me,
and shall bring the words of truth, so that his faith shall have no
end.'

The Levites and scribes departed in confusion, and recounted all to the
chiefs of the priests, who said: 'He hath the devil on his back who
recounteth all to him.'

Then said Jesus to his disciples: 'Verily I say unto you, that the
chiefs and the elders of our people seek occasion against me.'

Then said Peter: 'Therefore go not thou any more into Jerusalem.'

Therefore said Jesus unto him: 'Thou art foolish, and knowest not what
thou sayest, for it is necessary that I should suffer many persecutions,
because so have suffered all the prophets and holy ones of God. But fear
not, for there be that are with us and there be that are against us.'

And having said this, Jesus departed and went to the mount Tabor, and
there ascended with him Peter and James and John his brother, with him
who writeth this. Whereupon there shone a great light above him, and his
garments became white like snow and his face glistened as the sun, and
lo! there came Moses and Elijah speaking with Jesus concerning all that
needs must come upon our race and upon the holy city.

Peter spake, saying: 'Lord, it is good to be here. Therefore, if thou
wilt, we will make here three tabernacles, one for thee and one for
Moses and the other for Elijah.' And while he spake they were covered
with a white cloud, and they heard a voice saying: 'Behold my servant,
in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.'

The disciples were filled with fear, and fell with their face upon the
earth as dead. Jesus went down and raised up his disciples, saying:
'Fear not, for God loveth you, and hath done this in order that ye may
believe on my words.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar043)
