[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar081) [Next](gbar083.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 82.

Then Jesus gave a sigh and wept, saying: 'Woe to thee, Judaea, for thou
gloriest, saying: "The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord," and
livest as though there were no God; given over wholly to the pleasures
and gains of the world; for this woman in the day of judgement shall
condemn thee to hell; for this woman seeketh to know how to find grace
and mercy before God.'

And turning to the woman he said: 'O woman, ye Samaritans worship that
which ye know not, but we Hebrews worship that which we know. Verily, I
say unto thee, that God is spirit and truth, and so in spirit and in
truth must he be worshipped. For the promise of God was made in
Jerusalem, in the temple of Solomon, and not elsewhere. But believe me,
a time will come that God will give his mercy in another city, and in
every place it will be possible to worship him in truth. And God in
every place will have accepted true prayer with mercy.'

The woman answered: 'We look for the Messiah; when he cometh he will
teach us.'

Jesus answered: 'Knowest thou, woman, that the Messiah must come?'

She answered: 'Yea, Lord.'

Then Jesus rejoiced, and said: 'So far as I see, O woman, thou art
faithful: know therefore that in the faith of the Messiah shall be saved
every one that is elect of God; therefore it is necessary that thou know
the coming of the Messiah.'

Said the woman: 'O Lord, perchance thou art the Messiah.'

Jesus answered: 'I am indeed sent to the house of Israel as a prophet of
salvation; but after me shall come the Messiah, sent of God to all the
world; for whom God hath made the world. And then through all the world
will God be worshipped, and mercy received, insomuch that the year of
jubilee, which now cometh every hundred years, shall by the Messiah be
reduced to every year in every place.'

Then the woman left her waterpot and ran to the city to announce all
that she had heard from Jesus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar083.md)
