[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar149) [Next](gbar151.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 150.

'The elder answered: "O brother, say not so, for thou despisest
knowledge, which our God willeth to be prized."

'The younger replied: "Now, how shall I speak now so as not to fall into
sin: for thy word is true, and mine also. I say, then, that they who
know the commandments of God written in the Law ought to observe those
\[first\] if they would afterwards learn more. And all that a man
learneth, let it be to observe it, and not \[merely\] to know it."

'Said the elder: "O brother, tell me, with whom hast thou spoken, that
thou knowest thou hast not learned all that I said?"

'The younger answered: "O brother, I speak with myself. Every day I
place myself before the judgment of God, to give account of myself. And
ever do I feel within myself one that excuseth my faults."

'Said the elder: "O brother, what faults hast thou, who art perfect?"

'The younger answered: "O brother, say not so, for that I stand between
two great faults; the one is that I do not know myself to be the
greatest of sinners, the other that I do not desire to do penance for it
more than other men."

'The elder answered: "Now, how shouldst thou know thyself to be the
greatest of sinners, if thou art the most perfect \[of men\]?"

'The younger replied: "The first word that my master said to me when I
took the habit of a Pharisee was this: that I ought to consider the
goodness of others and mine own iniquity for if I should do so I should
perceive myself to be the greatest of sinners."

'Said the elder: "O brother, whose goodness or whose faults considerest
thou on these mountains, seeing there are no men here?''

'The younger answered: "I ought to consider the obedience of the sun and
the planets, for they serve their Creator better than I. But them I
condemn, either because they give not light as I desire, or because
their heat is too great, or there is too much or too little rain upon
the ground."

'Whereupon, hearing this, the elder said: "Brother, where hast thou
learned this doctrine, for I am now ninety years old, for seventy-five
years whereof I have been a Pharisee?"

'The younger answered: "O brother, thou sayest this in humility, for
thou art a holy one of God. Yet I answer thee that God our creator
looketh not on time, but looketh on the heart: wherefore David, being
fifteen years old, younger than six other his brethren, was chosen king
of Israel, and became a prophet of God our Lord."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar151.md)
