[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar042) [Next](gbar044)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 43.

Jesus went down to the eight disciples who were awaiting him below. And
the four narrated to the eight all that they had seen: and so there
departed that day from their heart all doubt of Jesus, save \[from\]
Judas Iscariot, who believed naught. Jesus seated himself at the foot of
the mountain, and they ate of the wild fruits, because they had not
bread.

Then said Andrew: 'Thou has told us many things of the Messiah,
therefore of thy kindness tell us clearly all.' And in like manner the
other disciples besought him.

Accordingly Jesus said: 'Everyone that worketh worketh for an end in
which he findeth satisfaction. Wherefore I say unto you that God, verily
because he is perfect, hath not need of satisfaction, seeing that he
hath satisfaction himself. And so, willing to work, he created before
all things the soul of his messenger, for whom he determined to create
the whole, in order that the creatures should findjoy and blessedness in
God, whence his messenger should take delight in all his creatures which
he hath appointed to be his slaves. And wherefore is this so, save
because thus he hath willed?

'Verily I say unto you, that every prophet when he is come hath borne to
one nation only the mark of the mercy of God. And so their words were
not extended save to that people to which they were sent. But the
messenger of God, when he shall come, God shall give to him as it were
the seal of his hand, insomuch that he shall carry salvation and mercy
to all the nations of the world that shall receive his doctrine. He
shall come with power upon the ungodly, and shall destroy idolatry,
insomuch that he shall make Satan confounded; for so promised God to
Abraham, saying: "Behold, in thy seed I will bless all the tribes of the
earth; and as thou hast broken in pieces the Idols, O Abraham, even so
shall thy seed do."'

James answered: 'O master, tell us in whom this promise was made; for
the Jews say "in Isaac," and the Ishmaelites say "in Ishmael."'

Jesus answered: 'David, whose son was he, and of what lineage?'

James answered: 'Of Isaac; for Isaac was father of Jacob and Jacob was
father of Judah, of whose lineage is David.'

Then said Jesus: 'And the messenger of God when he shall come, of what
lineage will he be:'

The disciples answered: 'Of David.'

Whereupon Jesus said: 'Ye deceive yourselves; for David in spirit
calleth him lord, saying thus: "God said to my lord, sit thou on my
right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool. God shall send
forth thy rod which shall have lordship in the midst of thine enemies?
If the messenger of God whom ye call Messiah were son of David, how
should David call him lord? Believe me, for verily I say to you, that
the promise was made in Ishmael, not in Isaac.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar044)
