[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar117) [Next](gbar119.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 118.

Then said Jesus: 'Ye speak the truth, for now was Israel desirous to
establish the idolatry that they have in their hearts, in holding me for
God; many of whom have now despised my teaching, saying that I could
make myself lord of all Judaea, if I confessed myself to be God, and
that I am mad to wish to live in poverty among desert places, and not
abide continually among princes in delicate living. Oh hapless man, that
prizest the light that is common to flies and ants and despisest the
light that is common only to angels and prophets and holy friends of
God!

'If, then, the eye shall not be guarded, O Andrew, I tell thee that it
is impossible not to fall headlong into lust. Wherefore Jeremiah the
prophet, weeping vehemently, said truly: "Mine eye is a thief that
robbeth my soul." For therefore did David our father pray with greatest
longing to God our lord that he would turn away his eyes in order that
he might not behold vanity. For truly everything which hath an end is
vain. Tell me, then, if one had two pence to buy bread, would he spend
it to buy smoke? Assuredly not, seeing that smoke doth hurt to the eyes
and giveth no sustenance to the body. Even so then let man do, for with
the outward sight of his eyes and the inward sight of his mind he should
seek to know God his creator and the good-pleasure of his will, and
should not make the creature his end, which causeth him to lose the
creator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar119.md)
