[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar194) [Next](gbar196)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 195.

'They that shall believe in me shall not die eternally, for through my
word they shall perceive God within them, and therefore shall work out
their salvation.

'What is death but an act which nature doth by commandment of God? As it
would be if one held a bird tied, and held the cord in his hand; when
the head willeth the bird to fly away, what doeth it? Assuredly it
commandeth naturally the hand to open; and so straightway the bird
flieth away. "Our soul," as saith the prophet David, "is as a sparrow
freed from the snare of the fowler," when man abideth under the
protection of God. And our life is like a cord whereby nature holdeth
the soul bound to the body and the sense of man. When therefore God
willeth, and commandeth nature to open, the life is broken and the soul
escapeth in the hands of the angels whom God hath ordained to receive
souls.

'Let not, then, friends weep when their friend is dead; for our God hath
so willed. But let him weep without ceasing when he sinneth, for \[so\]
the soul dieth, seeing it separateth itself from God, the true Life.

'If the body is horrible without its union with the soul, much more
frightful is the soul without union with God, who with his grace and
mercy beautifieth and quickeneth it.'

And having said this Jesus gave thanks to God; whereupon Lazarus said:
'Lord, this house belongeth to God my creator, with all that he hath
given into my keeping, for the service of the poor. Wherefore, since
thou art poor, and hast a great number of disciples, come thou to dwell
here when thou pleasest, and as much as thou pleasest, for the servant
of God will minister to thee as much as shall be needful, for love of
God.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar196)
