[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar155) [Next](gbar157)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 156.

When he had made the midday prayer, Jesus, as he went out of the temple,
found one blind from his mother's womb. His disciples asked him saying:
'Master, who sinned in this man, his father or his mother, that he was
born blind?'

Jesus answered: 'Neither his father nor his mother sinned in him, but
God created him so, for a testimony of the Gospel.' And having called
the blind man up to him he spat on the ground and made clay and placed
it upon the eyes of the blind man and said to him: 'Go to the pool of
Siloam and wash thee!'

The blind man went, and having washed received light; whereupon, as he
returned home, many who met him said: 'If this man were blind I should
say for certam that it was he who was wont to sit at the beautiful gate
of the temple.' Others said: 'It is he, but how hath he received light?'
And they accosted him saying: 'Art thou the blind man that was wont to
sit at the beautiful gate of the temple?'

He answered: 'I am he—and wherefore?'

They said: 'Now how didst thou receive thy sight?'

He answered: 'A man made clay, spitting on the ground, and this clay he
placed upon mine eyes and said to me: "Go and wash thee in the pool of
Siloam." I went and washed, and now I see: blessed be the God of
Israel!'

When the man born blind was come again to the beautiful gate of the
temple, all Jerusalem was filled with the matter. Wherefore he was
brought unto the chief of the priests, who was conferring with the
priests and the Pharisees against Jesus.

The high-priest asked him, saying: 'Man, wast thou born blind?'

'Yea,' he replied.

'Now give glory of God,' said the high-priest, 'and tell us what prophet
hath appeared to thee in a dream and given thee light. Was it our father
Abraham, or Moses the servant of God, or some other prophet? For others
could not do such a thing.

The man born blind replied: 'Neither Abraham nor Moses, nor any prophet
have I seen in a dream and been healed by him, but as I sat at the gate
of the temple a man made me come near to him and, having made clay of
earth with his spittle, put some of that clay upon mine eyes and sent me
to the pool of Siloam to wash; whereupon I went, and washed me, and
returned with the light of mine eyes.'

The high-priest asked him the name of that man.

The man born blind answered: 'He told me not his name, but a man who saw
him called me and said: "Go and wash thee as that man hath said, for he
is Jesus the Nazarene, a prophet and an holy one of the God of Israel."'

Then said the high-priest: 'Did he heal thee perchance to-day, that is,
the Sabbath?'

The blind man answered: 'To-day he healed me.'

Said the high-priest: 'Behold now, how that this fellow is a sinner,
seeing he keepeth not the Sabbath!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar157)
