[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib23)  [Next](shib25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### THE CHARGE.

<span class="small">The following Charge may be omitted and the
Historical Lecture delivered instead. Or both may be omitted in the
discretion of the Commander.</span>

Sir Knight, having passed through the several degrees of our ancient and
honorable institution, we bid you a hearty welcome to all our rights and
privileges, even to that disinterested friendship and unbounded
hospitality which ever has, and we hope and trust ever will, continue to
adorn, distinguish and characterize this noble Order.

It will henceforth become your duty to assist, protect and defend the
weary, wayworn traveler who finds the heights of fortune inaccessible,
and the thorny paths of life broken, adverse and forlorn,—to succor,
defend and protect the *innocent*, the *distressed* and the *helpless*,
ever standing forth as a champion to espouse the cause of the *Christian
Religion*.

You are to inculcate, enforce and practice virtue; and amid all the
temptations which surround you, never to be drawn aside from the path
oaf duty, or forgetful of those due guards and passwords, which are
necessary to be had in perpetual remembrance; and while one hand is
wielding the Sword for the defense of your Companion in danger, let the
other grasp the mystic Trowel, and widely diffuse the genuine cement of
Brotherly Love and Friendship.

Should calumny assail the character of a Brother Sir Knight, recollect
that you are to step forth and vindicate his good name, and assist him
on all lawful occasions. Should assailants ever attempt your honor,
interest or happiness, remember, also, that you have the counsel and
support of your brethren, whose mystic Swords, combining the virtues of
Faith, Hope and Charity, with *Justice*, *Fortitude* and *Mercy*, will
leap from their scabbards in defense of your

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

just rights, and insure you a glorious triumph over all your enemies.

On this occasion permit me, Sir Knight, to remind you of our mutual
engagements, our reciprocal ties; for whatever may be your situation or
rank in life, you may find those in similar stations, who have dignified
themselves and been useful to mankind. You are, therefore, called upon
to discharge all your duties with fidelity and patience, whether in the
*Field*, in the *Senate*, on the *Bench*, at the *Bar*, or at the *Holy
Altar*. Whether you are placed upon the highest pinnacle of worldly
grandeur, or glide into the humble vale of obscurity, unnoticed, save by
a few, it matters not; for a few rolling suns will close the scene, when
naught but holiness will serve as a sure passport to gain admission into
that REST prepared from the foundation of the world.

If you see a Brother bending under the cross of adversity and
disappointment, look not idly on, neither pass by on the other side, but
fly to his relief. If he be deceived, tell him the *Truth*; if he be
calumniated, vindicate his cause; for, although he may have erred, still
recollect that indiscretion in him should never destroy humanity in you.

Finally, Sir Knight, as *memento mori* is deeply engraved on all
sublunary enjoyments, let us ever be found in the habiliments of
righteousness, traversing the straight path of rectitude, virtue and
true holiness; so that, having discharged our duty here below, performed
the pilgrimage of life, burst the bands of mortality, passed over the
Jordan of death and safely landed on the broad shore of eternity, there,
in the presence of myriads of attending angels, we may be greeted as
brethren, received into the arms of the <span class="smallcaps">Blessed
Emmanuel</span>, and forever made to participate in his <span
class="smallcaps">Heavenly Kingdom</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Close the Commandery](shib25)
