[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib36)  [Next](shib38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

### TEMPLAR UNIFORM.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

##### <span class="smallcaps">Edict of 1886</span>.

1\. The Uniform of Knights Templar, Knights of Malta, and Knights of the
Red Cross, under the immediate jurisdiction of the Grand Encampment, is
that prescribed by the Grand Encampment. No other Uniform is allowed,
except in case of Washington Commandery, No. 1, of District of Columbia,
whose members are permitted to wear the Uniform prescribed and worn in
that Commandery before the adoption of the regulation of 1882.

2\. Each Grand Commandery shall have full power and authority to
prescribe the Uniform to be worn by those belonging to its own
jurisdiction, except that the Insignia of Rank shall always be under the
exclusive control and regulation of the Grand Encampment, and no other
authority shall alter, modify, or in any way interfere therewith.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### INSIGNIA OF OFFICE.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

###### <span class="small">TO BE FOREVER UNDER THE EXCLUSIVE CONTROL OF THE GRAND ENCAMPMENT</span>.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

##### SHOULDER STRAPS.

##### <span class="smallcaps">Edict of 1892</span>.

*For the Grand Master, and Past Grand Masters of Grand Encampment:*

Royal purple silk velvet, two inches wide by four inches long (outside
measurement), bordered with two rows of embroidery, of gold,
three-eighths of an inch wide; the Cross of Salem embroidered, of gold,
in the center, lengthwise.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

*For all other Grand Officers of the Grand Encampment:*

The same as the Grand Master, except for the Cross of Salem the
Patriarchal Cross, of gold, with the initials of the office,
respectively, embroidered, of silver (Old English characters), at the
foot of the Cross, narrowwise of the Strap.

*For Officers and Past Grand Officers of Grand Commanderies, except Past
Grand Commanders:*

Bright red silk velvet, two inches wide by four inches long, bordered
with one row of embroidery, of gold, a quarter of an inch wide; the
Templar's Cross, of gold, with the initials of the office, respectively,
to be embroidered (Old English characters) in silver on the lower end of
the Strap.

*For Past Grand Commanders:*

The same as above, except that the color of the Shoulder Strap shall be
royal purple, and the lettering omitted.

*For the Commander of a Subordinate Commandery:*

Emerald green silk velvet, one and a half inches wide by four inches
long, bordered with one row of embroidery, of gold, one-quarter of an
inch wide; the Passion Cross, with a halo, embroidered, of silver, in
the center.

*For Past Commanders of Subordinate Commanderies:*

The same as for Commanders, except that the color of the Strap shall be
bright red.

*For the Generalissimo of a Subordinate Commandery:*

Same as the Commander, except for the Passion Cross the Square,
surmounted with the Paschal Lamb.

*For the Captain General of a Subordinate Commandery:*

Same as the Commander, except for the Passion Cross the Level,
surmounted with the Cock.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

##### CROSSES.

Commanders and Past Commanders will wear the Passion Cross.

Grand and Past Grand Officers of Grand Commanderies will wear the
Templar Cross.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Burial Service](shib38)
