[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib35)  [Next](shib37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### INSTALLATION OF GRAND ENCAMPMENT.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">The</span> Grand Encampment
has adopted only the Vow to be taken by its Officers, but certain
ceremonies are usually observed in administering that Vow, and in
installing each into his office. The following is offered to the
consideration of the Grand Encampment at its Conclave of 1895:</span>

GM.—Sir Knights, your Grand Master, and the other Grand Officers whom
you have chosen, are in readiness for installation. The Grand Marshal
will announce to them our readiness to install the Grand Master, and he
will escort the Grand Master and the Officers elect to the East.

<span class="small">*The Grand Marshal repairs to the room in which the
Officers elect are assembled, and will escort them, in single file, to
the Asylum. When they reach the door of the Asylum*—</span>

GW.—The Grand Master elect, and his associate Officers, approach.

<span class="small">*The Grand Master calls up the Grand Encampment; a
March is played as they pass down the Asylum, and halt in the East, in
front of chairs prepared as seats for them*.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">G. Mar.</span>—Most Eminent Grand Master, the
Grand Officers elect are before you, and await your pleasure.

GM.—Excellent Grand Prelate, lead us in a solemn Invocation to the
Throne of Grace. Sir Knights, <span class="smallcaps">Uncover</span>!

<span class="small">*The Grand Prelate will offer the following, or some
other appropriate*</span>

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="small">PRAYER.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Our Father</span>, who art in Heaven, bow down
Thine ear, we beseech Thee, and hearken unto the voice of our
supplication. Pardon our sins, and blot our transgressions, and give
unto each of us a broken and a contrite spirit.

Give unto these, Thy servants, whom we have chosen to rule over us,
wisdom from on high. Give unto each the spirit of the Master, and may
the words of their mouths and the meditations of their hearts be
acceptable in Thy sight, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, and our
Redeemer. <span class="smallcaps">Amen</span>!

GM.—Sir Knights, <span class="smallcaps">Re-cover</span>! Officers
elect, before I can install you into your respective stations, I must
receive from you a solemn Vow to be faithful to the trust about to be
reposed in you. Most Eminent Grand Master elect, are you ready to take
such a Vow?

<span class="small">*He answers in the affirmative*.</span>

GM.—Very Eminent Deputy Grand Master, are you so ready?

<span class="small">*He answers in the affirmative*.</span>

GM.—Are you all so ready?

<span class="small">*They all say, each for himself, "I am"*.</span>

GM.—Let the Grand Master elect approach the East.

<span class="small">*Grand Marshal escorts him to the East*.</span>

GM.—Most Eminent Sir, you will now uncover, place your right hand upon
your heart, and repeat after me:

<span class="small">*The Grand Master uncovers*.</span>

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

I, —, do promise and vow that I will support and maintain the
Constitution and Statutes of the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of
the United States of America, and will use my best endeavors to cause a
proper observance of the same, according to the authority which is in me
vested; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully discharge
the duties pertaining to the office to which I have been elected.

GM.—Most Eminent Sir, I now with pleasure invest you with the Jewel of
your high office, the highest in the gift of the great Order of the
Temple.

<span class="small">*The GM. takes the Jewel from his own breast, goes
down and places it on the breast of the new Grand Master*.</span>

GM.—One so distinguished in the Order needs no admonition from me as to
how this Jewel should be worn. The interests of the Order are placed in
your hands, whether for weal or woe depends upon the fulfillment of the
promises you have made to yourself, and to us. This body, whose chief
you now are, feels confident that you will not abuse or pervert the
powers conferred upon you as Grand Master.

It is known to you that to rule *well* has not been the lot of all
called to such duty. And it is further known to you that it is not by a
strong arm, or by an iron will, that order and obedience are secured,
but by holding the *key* to the hearts of men. We hope and believe that
you now and ever will hold such a key.

You will ascend to your station in the Grand East, and receive the
salutations of your Companions-in-arms.

<span class="small">T*he Grand Master is escorted to his chair by the
Grand Marshal. He stands in his station*.</span>

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

GM.—Most Eminent Sir, I now salute you, and proclaim you Grand Master of
the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of the United States of America!

GM.—Sir Knights, Behold your Grand Master!

<span class="small">*The Grand Encampment will salute with the sign of
the Order. The new Grand Master will make such remarks as he
desires*.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—Most Eminent Grand Master, the
remaining Officers elect await your pleasure.

<span class="small">*The Grand Master will install the remainder of the
Officers, or he may ask the Installing Officer to continue*.</span>

GM.—Sir Knights, <span class="smallcaps">Be seated</span>!

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—Officers elect, <span
class="smallcaps">Attention</span>! Place your right hands upon your
hearts, uncover, and repeat after me:

<span class="small">*Same Vow as that taken by the Grand Master*.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—Present the Deputy Grand Master,
and the remaining Officers elect will be seated.

<span class="smallcaps">G. Mar.</span>—Most Eminent Sir, I present Very
Eminent Sir —, who has been chosen Deputy Grand Master, and is now ready
for installation.

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—Very Eminent Sir, you are aware
that in case of incapacity of the Grand Master to act, you are to
succeed to his duties. Remember that you are placed in most intimate
relations with him, as head of the Order.

I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, and the Grand Marshal
will conduct you to your station, on the right of the Most Eminent Grand
Master.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="small">*The Grand Marshal will present the remaining Grand
Officers as the Installing Officer may direct*.</span>

<span class="small">GRAND GENERALISSIMO AND GRAND CAPTAIN
GENERAL.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—Invest the Eminent Fratres with
the Jewels of their offices. (*Done by Grand Marshal*.) Sir Knights,
repair to your stations, and be not weary in well doing, for in due
season you shall reap if you faint not!

<span class="small">THE GRAND WARDENS.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—Invest the Eminent Fratres with
the Jewels of their offices. (*Done*.) Sir Knights, repair to your
stations, and see that the courtesies of the Grand Encampment are
extended to all worthy visiting Knights of the Order of the Temple.

<span class="small">THE GRAND TREASURER AND GRAND RECORDER.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—Sir Knights, you have been chosen
to responsible stations, because the Grand Encampment believed you
worthy and competent. See to it that their confidence has been well
reposed. Repair to your stations.

<span class="small">STANDARD BEARER, SWORD BEARER, AND WARDER.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—Place the Grand Standard in
possession of its new Bearer. (*Done*.) Sir Knight, bear it worthily,
and so display its precious emblem—in which Sign we shall all
conquer—that each valiant Knight may be prompted to exclaim in the words
of its gracious inscription, "Not unto us, O Lord; not unto us, but unto
thy Name be the glory."

And you, Sir Knight Sword Bearer, protect that Banner at peril of your
life. And if, in the vicissitudes of the next three years, it should
fall from the hands of its Bearer, raise it aloft, for unto that honor
you temporarily succeed.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

Sir Knight Warder, be vigilant in the discharge of your responsible
duties. Look well to the avenues of the Asylum, and see that all are
duly guarded.

Sir Knights, repair to your stations, and remember that zeal and
vigilance are necessary prerequisites to your offices.

<span class="smallcaps">In. Of.</span>—The Grand Marshal will make
Proclamation. Grand Encampment, <span
class="smallcaps">Attention</span>!

<span class="smallcaps">G. Mar.</span>—In the name and by the authority
of the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of the United States of
America, I now proclaim the Officers thereof duly elected and installed.

GM.—Grand Encampment, <span class="smallcaps">Be seated</span>!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Templar Uniform](shib37)
