[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib06)  [Next](shib08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

#### THE RECORDS OF OUR FATHERS.

Now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God at
Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,
and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the
priests and the Levites and all they that were come out of the captivity
unto Jerusalem; and appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and
upward, to set forward the work of the house of the Lord. Then stood
Jeshua *with* his sons and his brethren, Cadmiel and his sons, the sons
of Judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the house of God: the
sons of Henadad, *with* their sons and their brethren the Levites. And
when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord, they
set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons
of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the Lord, after the ordinance of David
king of Israel. And they sang together by course in praising and giving
thanks unto the Lord; because *he is* good, for his mercy *endureth*
forever toward Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout,
when they praised the Lord, because the foundation of the house of the
Lord was laid.

Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children
of the captivity builded the temple unto the Lord God of Israel; then
they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the fathers, and said unto
them, Let us build with you: for we seek your God, as ye *do;* and we do
sacrifice unto him since the days of Esarhaddon king of Assur, which
brought us up hither. But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the
chief of the fathers of Israel, said unto them, Ye have nothing to do
with us to build an house unto our God; but we ourselves together will
build unto the Lord God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath
commanded us. Then the people of the land weakened the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building, and hired
counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose, all the days of
Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia. And
in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, wrote they
*unto him* an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.
And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the
rest of their companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the
writing of the letter *was* written in the Syrian tongue, and
interpreted in the Syrian tongue. Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the
scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this
sort: This *is* the copy of the letter that they sent unto him, *even*
unto Artaxerxes the king; Thy servants the men on this side of the
river, and at such a time. Be it known unto the king, that the Jews
which came up from thee to us are come unto Jerusalem, building the
rebellious and the bad city, and have set up the walls *thereof*, and
joined the foundations. Be it known now unto the king, that, if this
city be builded, and the walls set up *again*, *then* will they not pay
toll, tribute, and custom, and *so* thou shalt endamage the revenue of
the kings. Now because we have maintenance from *the king's* palace, and
it was not meet for us to see the king's dishonor, therefore have we
sent and certified the king; that search may be made in the book of the
records of thy fathers: so shalt thou find in the book of the records,
and know that this city *is* a rebellious city, and hurtful unto kings
and provinces, and that they have moved sedition within the same of old
time: for which cause was this city destroyed. We certify the king that,
if this city be builded *again*, and the walls thereof set up, by this
means thou shalt have no portion on this side the river. *Then* sent the
king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor, and to Shimshai the scribe,
and *to* the rest of their companions that

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

dwell in Samaria, and *unto* the rest beyond the river, Peace, and at
such a time. The letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainly read
before me. And I commanded, and search hath been made, and it is found
that this city of old time hath made insurrection against kings, and
*that* rebellion and sedition have been made therein. There have been
mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have ruled over all *countries*
beyond the river; and toll, tribute, and custom, was paid unto them.
Give ye now commandment to cause these men to cease, and that this city
be not builded, until *another* commandment shall be given from me. Take
heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow to the hurt
of the kings? Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes’ letter *was* read
before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went
up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease by force
and power. Then ceased the work of the house of God which *is* at
Jerusalem. So it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king
of Persia.

<span id="img_starsep"></span> ![](img/starsep.jpg)

#### PLEDGES OF FIDELITY.

<span id="img_starsep"></span> ![](img/starsep.jpg)

##### THE SWORD.

The glittering blade of the Sword entrusted to a Representative of the
Grand Council should symbolize tie purity of his intentions.

<span id="img_starsep"></span> ![](img/starsep.jpg)

##### THE GREEN SASH.

<span id="img_starsep"></span> ![](img/starsep.jpg)

The color of his Sash should in all places bring him cheering and
hallowed memories.

<span id="img_starsep"></span> ![](img/starsep.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Journey](shib08)
