[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mm03)  [Next](mm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1851709444/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mythical Monsters*, by Charles Gould, \[1886\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### CHAPTER I.

#### ON SOME REMARKABLE ANIMAL FORMS.

THE reasoning upon the question whether dragons, winged snakes,
sea-serpents, unicorns, and other so-called fabulous monsters have in
reality existed, and at dates coeval with man, diverges in several
independent directions.

We have to consider:—

1.—Whether the characters attributed to these creatures are or are not
so abnormal in comparison with those of known types, as to render a
belief in their existence impossible or the reverse.

2.—Whether it is rational to suppose that creatures so formidable, and
apparently so capable of self-protection, should disappear entirely,
while much more defenceless species continue to survive them.

3.—The myths, traditions, and historical allusions from which their
reality may be inferred require to be classified and annotated, and full
weight given to the evidence which has accumulated of the presence of
man upon the earth during ages long prior to the historic period, and
which may have been ages of slowly progressive civilization, or perhaps
cycles of alternate light and darkness, of knowledge and barbarism.

4.—Lastly, some inquiry may be made into the geographical conditions
obtaining at the time of their possible existence.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

It is immaterial which of these investigations is first entered upon,
and it will, in fact, be more convenient to defer a portion of them
until we arrive at the sections of this volume treating specifically of
the different objects to which it is devoted, and to confine our
attention for the present to those subjects which, from their nature,
are common and in a sense prefatory to the whole subject.

I shall therefore commence with a short examination of some of the most
remarkable reptilian forms which are known to have existed, and for that
purpose, and to show their general relations, annex the accompanying
tables, compiled from the anatomy of vertebrated animals by Professor
Huxley

<span id="img_03200"></span>

[![REPTILES CLASSIFIED BY HUXLEY.](tn/03200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03200.jpg)  
  

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span id="img_03300"></span>

[![REPTILES CLASSIFIED BY
HUXLEY.&lt;i&gt;cont&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/03300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03300.jpg)  
  

The most bird-like of reptiles, the Pterosauria, appear to have
possessed true powers of flight; they were provided with wings formed by
an expansion of the integument, and supported by an enormous elongation
of the ulnar finger of the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

anterior limb. The generic differences are based upon the comparative
lengths of the tail, and upon the dentition. In Pterodactylus (see [Fig.
2](mm03.htm#img_fig02), [p. 18](mm03.htm#page_18)), the tail is very
short, and the jaws strong, pointed, and toothed to their anterior
extremities. In Rhamphorynchus (see [Fig. 3](mm03.htm#img_fig03), [p.
18](mm03.htm#page_18)), the tail is very long and the teeth are not
continuous to the extremities of the jaws, which are produced into
toothless beaks. The majority of the species are small, and they are
generally considered to have been inoffensive creatures, having much the
habits and insectivorous mode of living of bats. One British species,
however, from the white chalk of Maidstone, measures more than sixteen
feet across the outstretched wings; and other forms recently discovered
by Professor Marsh in the Upper Cretaceous deposits of Kansas, attain
the gigantic proportions of nearly twenty-five feet for the same
measurements; and although these were devoid of teeth (thus approaching
the class Ayes still more closely), they could hardly fail, from their
magnitude and powers of flight, to have been formidable, and must, with
their weird aspects, and long outstretched necks and pointed heads, have
been at least sufficiently alarming.

We need go no farther than these in search of creatures which would
realise the popular notion of the winged dragon.

The harmless little flying lizards, belonging to the genus Draco,
abounding in the East Indian archipelago, which have many of their
posterior ribs prolonged into an expansion of the integument,
unconnected with the limbs, and have a limited and parachute-like
flight, need only the element of size, to render them also sufficiently
to be dreaded, and capable of rivalling the Pterodactyls in suggesting
the general idea of the same monster.

It is, however, when we pass to some of the other groups, that we find
ourselves in the presence of forms so vast and terrible, as to more than
realise the most exaggerated impression

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

of reptilian power and ferocity which the florid imagination of man can
conceive.

We have long been acquainted with numerous gigantic terrestrial
Saurians, ranging throughout the whole of the Mesozoic formations, such
as *Iguanodon* (characteristic of the Wealden), *Megalosaurus* (Great
Saurian), and *Hylæosaurus* (Forest Saurian), huge bulky creatures, the
last of which, at least, was protected by dermal armour partially
produced into prodigious spines; as well as with remarkable forms
essentially marine, such as *Icthyosaurus* (Fish-like Saurian),
*Plesiosaurus*, &c., adapted to an oceanic existence and propelling
themselves by means of paddles. The latter, it may be remarked, was
furnished with a long slender swan-like neck, which, carried above the
surface of the water, would present the appearance of the anterior
portion of a serpent.

To the related land forms the collective term Dinosauria (from δεινός
"terrible") has been applied, in signification of the power which their
structure and magnitude imply that they possessed; and to the others
that of Enaliosauria, as expressive of their adaptation to a maritime
existence. Yet, wonderful to relate, those creatures which have for so
many years commanded our admiration fade into insignificance in
comparison with others which are proved, by the discoveries of the last
few years, to have existed abundantly upon, or near to, the American
continent during the Cretaceous and Jurassic periods, by which they are
surpassed, in point of magnitude, as much as they themselves exceed the
mass of the larger Vertebrata.

Take, for example, those referred to by Professor Marsh in the course of
an address to the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
in 1877, in the following terms: "The reptiles most characteristic of
our American cretaceous strata are the Mososauria, a group with very few
representatives in other parts of the world. In our cretaceous seas

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

they rule supreme, as their numbers, size, and carnivorous habits
enabled them to easily vanquish all rivals. Some were at least sixty
feet in length, and the smallest ten or twelve. In the inland cretaceous
sea from which the Rocky Mountains were beginning to emerge, these
ancient 'sea-serpents' abounded, and many were entombed in its muddy
bottom; on one occasion, as I rode through a valley washed out of this
old ocean-bed, I saw no less than seven different skeletons of these
monsters in sight at once. The Mososauria were essentially swimming
lizards with four well-developed paddles, and they had little affinity
with modern serpents, to which they have been compared."

Or, again, notice the specimens of the genus Cidastes, which are also
described as veritable sea-serpents of those ancient seas, whose huge
bones and almost incredible number of vertebræ show them to have
attained a length of nearly two hundred feet. The remains of no less
than ten of these monsters were seen by Professor Mudge, while riding
through the Mauvaise Terres of Colorado, strewn upon the plains, their
whitened bones bleached in the suns of centuries, and their gaping jaws
armed with ferocious teeth, telling a wonderful tale of their power when
alive.

The same deposits have been equally fertile in the remains of
terrestrial animals of gigantic size. The *Titanosaurus montanus*,
believed to have been herbivorous, is estimated to have reached fifty or
sixty feet in length; while other Dinosaurians of still more gigantic
proportions, from the Jurassic beds of the Rocky Mountains, have been
described by Professor Marsh. Among the discovered remains of
*Atlantosaurus immanis* is a femur over six feet in length, and it is
estimated from a comparison of this specimen with the same bone in
living reptiles that this species, if similar in proportions to the
crocodile, would have been over one hundred feet in length.

But even yet the limit has not been reached, and we hear

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

of the discovery of the remains of another form, of such Titanic
proportions as to possess a thigh-bone over twelve feet in length.

<span id="img_fig05"></span>

[![FIG. 5.MONSTER BONES OF EXTINCT GIGANTIC SAURIANS FROM COLORADO,
SHOWING RELATIVE PROPORTIONS TO CORRESPONDING BONE IN THE CROCODILE
(A).&lt;br&gt; (&lt;i&gt;From the&lt;/i&gt; &lt;i&gt;Scientific
American&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig05.jpg)  
FIG. 5.—MONSTER BONES OF EXTINCT GIGANTIC SAURIANS FROM COLORADO,
SHOWING RELATIVE PROPORTIONS TO CORRESPONDING BONE IN THE CROCODILE
(A).  
(*From the* “*Scientific American*.”)  

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

From these considerations it is evident that, on account of the
dimensions usually assigned to them, no discredit can be attached to the
existence of the fabulous monsters of which we shall speak hereafter;
for these, in the various myths, rarely or never equal in size creatures
which science shows to have existed in a comparatively recent geological
age, while the quaintest conception could hardly equal the reality of
yet another of the American Dinosaurs, Stegosaurus, which appears to
have been herbivorous, and more or less aquatic in habit, adapted for
sitting upon its hinder extremities, and protected by bony plate and
numerous spines. It reached thirty feet in length. Professor Marsh
considers that this, when alive, must have presented the strangest
appearance of all the Dinosaurs yet discovered.

The affinities of birds and reptiles have been so clearly demonstrated
of late years, as to cause Professor Huxley and many other comparative
anatomists to bridge over the wide gap which was formerly considered to
divide the two classes, and to bracket them together in one class, to
which the name Sauropsidæ has been given. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34)

There are, indeed, not a few remarkable forms, as to the class position
of which, whether they should be assigned to

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

birds or reptiles, opinion was for a long time, and is in a few
instances still, divided. It is, for example, only of late years that
the fossil form Archæopteryx <span id="fr_35"></span>[\*](#fn_35) ([Fig.
4](mm03.htm#img_fig04), [p. 19](mm03.htm#page_19)) from the Solenhofen
slates, has been definitely relegated to the former, but arguments
against this disposal of it have been based upon the beak or jaws being
furnished with true teeth, and the feather of the tail attached to

<span id="img_fig06"></span>

[![FIG. 6. SIVATHERIUM (RESTORED), FROM THE UPPER MIOCENE DEPOSITS OF
THE SIWALIK HILLS. (&lt;i&gt;After Figuier&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig06.jpg)  
FIG. 6. SIVATHERIUM (RESTORED), FROM THE UPPER MIOCENE DEPOSITS OF THE
SIWALIK HILLS. (*After Figuier*.)  

a series of vertebræ, instead of a single flattened one as in birds. It
appears to have been entirely plumed, and to have had a moderate power
of flight.

On the other hand, the Ornithopterus is only provisionally

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

classed with reptiles, while the connection between the two classes is
drawn still closer by the copious discovery of the birds from the
Cretaceous formations of America, for which we are indebted to Professor
Marsh.

The Lepidosiren, also, is placed mid-way between reptiles and fishes.
Professor Owen and other eminent physiologists consider it a fish;
Professor Bischoff and others, an amphibian reptile. It has a two-fold
apparatus for respiration, partly aquatic, consisting of gills, and
partly aerial, of true lungs.

So far, then, as abnormality of type is concerned, we have here
instances quite as remarkable as those presented by most of the strange
monsters with the creation of which mythological fancy has been
credited.

<span id="img_fig07"></span>

[![FIG. 7.SKELETON OF MEGATHERIUM. (After Figuier.)](tn/fig07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig07.jpg)  
FIG. 7.—SKELETON OF MEGATHERIUM. (After Figuier.)  

Among mammals I shall only refer to the Megatherium, which appears to
have been created to burrow in the earth and to feed upon the roots of
trees and shrubs, for which purpose every organ of its heavy frame was
adapted. This

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hercules among
animals was as large as an elephant or rhinoceros of the largest
species, and might well, as it has existed until a late date, have
originated the myths, current among the Indians of South America, of a
gigantic tunnelling or burrowing creature, incapable of supporting the
light of day. <span id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_36)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[38:\*](mm04.htm#fr_34) "It is now generally
admitted by biologists who have made a study of the Vertebrata that
birds have come down to us through the Dinosaurs, and the close affinity
of the latter with recent struthious birds will hardly be questioned.
The case amounts almost to a demonstration if we compare with Dinosaurs
their contemporaries, the Mesozoic birds. The classes of birds and
reptiles as now living are separated by a gulf so profound that a few
years since it was cited by the opponents of evolution as the most
important break in the animal series, and one which that doctrine could
not bridge over. Since then, as Huxley has clearly shown, this gap has
been virtually filled by the discoveries of bird-like reptiles and
reptilian birds. Compsognathus and Archaeopteryx of the old world, and
Icthyornis and Hesperornis of the new, are the stepping-stones by which
the evolutionist of to-day leads the doubting brother across the shallow
remnant of the gulf, once thought impassable."—Marsh.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[39:\*](mm04.htm#fr_35) Professor Carl Vogt
regards the Archaeopteryx "as neither reptile nor bird, but as
constituting an intermediate type. He points out that there is complete
homology between the scales or spines of reptiles and the feathers of
birds. The feather of the bird is only a reptile's scale further
developed, and the reptile's scale is a feather which has remained in
the embryonic condition. He considers the reptilian homologies to
preponderate."

<span id="fn_36"></span>[41:\*](mm04.htm#fr_36) A similar habit is
ascribed by the Chinese to the mammoth and to the gigantic Sivatherium
([Fig. 6](#img_fig06), [p. 39](#page_39)), a four-horned stag, which had
the bulk of an elephant, and exceeded it in height. It was remarkable
for being in some respects between the stags and the pachyderms. The
Dinotherium ([Fig. 8](#img_fig08)), which had a trunk like an elephant,
and two inverted tusks, presented in its skull a mixture of the
characteristics of the elephant, hippopotamus, tapir, and dugong. Its
remains occur in the Miocene of Europe.

<span id="img_fig08"></span>

[![FIG. 8.DINOTHERIUM. (After Figuier.)](tn/fig08.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig08.jpg)  
FIG. 8.—DINOTHERIUM. (After Figuier.)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Extinction of Species](mm05)
