[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mm04)  [Next](mm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1851709444/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mythical Monsters*, by Charles Gould, \[1886\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### EXTINCTION OF SPECIES.

IN reviewing the past succession of different forms of ancient life upon
the globe, we are reminded of a series of dissolving views, in which
each species evolves itself by an imperceptible gradation from some
pre-existing one, arrives at its maximum of individuality, and then
slowly fades away, while another type, either higher or lower, evolved
in turn from it, emerges from obscurity, and succeeds it on the field of
view.

Specific individuality has in all cases a natural term, dependent on
physical causes, but that term is in many cases abruptly anticipated by
a combination of unfavourable conditions.

Alteration of climate, isolation by geological changes, such as the
submergence of continents and islands, and the competition of other
species, are among the causes which have at all times operated towards
its destruction; while, since the evolution of man, his agency, so far
as we can judge by what we know of his later history, has been
especially active in the same direction.

The limited distribution of many species, even when not enforced by
insular conditions, is remarkable, and, of course, highly favourable to
their destruction. A multiplicity of examples are familiar to
naturalists, and possibly not a few may have attracted the attention of
the ordinary observer.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

For instance, it is probably generally known, that in our own island,
the red grouse (which, by the way, is a species peculiar to Great
Britain) is confined to certain moorlands, the ruffs and reeves to fen
districts, and the nightingale, <span id="fr_37"></span>[\*](#fn_37)
chough, and other species to a few counties; while Ireland is devoid of
almost all the species of reptiles common to Great Britain. In the
former cases, the need of or predilection for certain foods probably
determines the favourite locality, and there are few countries which
would not furnish similar examples. In the latter, the explanation
depends on biological conditions dating prior to the separation of
Ireland from the main continent. Among birds, it might fairly be
presumed that the power of flight would produce unlimited territorial
expansion, but in many instances the reverse is found to be the case: a
remarkable example being afforded by the island of Tasmania, a portion
of which is called the unsettled waste lands, or Western Country. This
district, which comprises about one-third of the island upon the western
side, and is mainly composed of mountain chains of granites, quartzite,
and mica schists, is entirely devoid of the numerous species of
garrulous and gay-plumaged birds, such as the Mynah mocking-bird, white
cockatoo, wattle bird, and Rosella parrot, though these abundantly
enliven the eastern districts, which are fertilized by rich soils due to
the presence of ranges of basalt, greenstone, and other trappean rocks.

Another equally striking instance is given by my late father, Mr. J.
Gould, in his work on the humming-birds. Of two species, inhabiting
respectively the adjacent mountains

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

of Pichincha and Chimborazo at certain elevations, each is strictly
confined to its own mountain; and, if my memory serves me correctly, he
mentions similar instances of species peculiar to different peaks of the
Andes.

Limitation by insular isolation is intelligible, especially in the case
of mammals and reptiles, and of birds possessing but small power of
flight; and we are, therefore, not surprised to find Mr. Gosse
indicating, among other examples, that even the smallest of the Antilles
has each a fauna of its own, while the humming-birds, some of the
parrots, cuckoos, and pigeons, and many of the smaller birds are
peculiar to Jamaica. He states still further, that in the latter
instance many of the animals are not distributed over the whole island,
but confined to a single small district.

Continental limitation is effected by mountain barriers. Thus, according
to Mr. Wallace, almost all the mammalia, birds, and insects on one side
of the Andes and Rocky Mountains are distinct in species from those on
the other; while a similar difference, but smaller in degree, exists
with reference to regions adjacent to the Alps and Pyrenees.

Climate, broad rivers, seas, oceans, forests, and even large desert
wastes, like the Sahara or the great desert of Gobi, also act more or
less effectively as girdles which confine species within certain limits.

Dependence on each other or on supplies of appropriate food also form
minor yet practical factors in the sum of limitation; and a curious
example of the first is given by Dr. Van Lennep with reference to the
small migratory birds that are unable to perform the flight of three
hundred and fifty miles across the Mediterranean. He states that these
are carried across on the backs of cranes. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[\*](#fn_38)

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

In the autumn many flocks of cranes may be seen coming from the North,
with the first cold blast from that quarter, flying low, and uttering a
peculiar cry, as if of alarm, as they circle over the cultivated plains.
Little birds of every species may be seen flying up to them, while the
twittering cries of those already comfortably settled upon their backs
may be distinctly heard. On their return in the spring they fly high,
apparently considering that their little passengers can easily find
their way down to the earth.

The question of food-supply is involved in the more extended subject of
geological structure, as controlling the flora and the insect life
dependent on it. As an example we may cite the disappearance of the
capercailzie from Denmark with the decay of the pine forests abundant
during late Tertiary periods.

Collision, direct or indirect, with inimical species often has a fatal
ending. Thus the dodo was exterminated by the swine which the early
visitors introduced to the Mauritius and permitted to run wild there;
while the indigenous insects, molluscs, and perhaps some of the birds of
St. Helena, disappeared as soon as the introduction of goats caused the
destruction of the whole flora of forest trees.

The Tsetse fly extirpates all horses, dogs, and cattle, from certain
districts of South Africa, and a representative species in Paraguay is
equally fatal to new-born cattle and horses.

Mr. Darwin <span id="fr_39"></span>[\*](#fn_39) shows that the struggle
is more severe between species of the same genus, when they come into
competition with each other, than between species of distinct genera.
Thus one species of swallow has recently expelled another from part of
the United States; and the missel-thrush has driven the song-thrush from
part of Scotland. In Australia the imported hive-bee is rapidly
exterminating the small stingless native bee, and similar eases might be
found in any number.

Mr. Wallace, in quoting Mr. Darwin as to these facts, points the
conclusion that "any slight change, therefore,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

of physical geography or of climate, which allows allied species
hitherto inhabiting distinct areas to come into contact, will often lead
to the extermination of one of them."

It is the province of the palæontologist to enumerate the many
remarkable forms which have passed away since man's first appearance
upon the globe, and to trace their fluctuations over both hemispheres as
determined by the advance and retreat of glacial conditions, and by the
protean forms assumed by past and existing continents under oscillations
of elevation and depression. Many interesting points, such as the dates
of the successive separation of Ireland and Great Britain from the main
continent, can be determined with accuracy from the record furnished by
the fossil remains of animals of those times; and many interesting
associations of animals with man at various dates, in our present island
home and in other countries, have been traced by the discovery of their
remains in connection with his, in bone deposits in caverns and
elsewhere.

Conversely, most valuable deductions are drawn by the zoologist from the
review which he is enabled to take, through the connected labours of his
colleagues in all departments, of the distinct life regions now mapped
out upon the face of the globe. These, after the application of the
necessary corrections for various disturbing or controlling influences
referred to above, afford proof reaching far back into past periods, of
successive alterations in the disposition of continents and oceans, and
of connections long since obliterated between distant lands.

The palæontologist reasons from the past to the present, the zoologist
from the present to the past; and their mutual labours explain the
evolution of existing forms, and the causes of the disparity or
connection between those at present characterizing the different
portions of the surface of the globe.

The palæontologist, for example, traces the descent of the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

horse, which, until its reintroduction by the Spaniards was unknown in
the New World, through a variety of intermediate forms, to the genus
Orohippus occurring in Eocene deposits in Utah and Wyoming. This animal
was no larger than a fox, and possessed four separated toes in front,
and three behind. Domestic cattle he refers to the Bos primigenius, and
many existing Carnivora to Tertiary forms such as the cave-bear,
cave-lion, sabre-tiger, and the like.

The zoologist groups the existing fauna into distinct provinces, and
demands, in explanation of the anomalies which these exhibit, the
reconstruction of large areas, of which only small outlying districts
remain at the present date, in many instances widely separated by
oceans, though once forming parts of the same continent; and so, for the
simile readily suggests itself, the workers in another branch of
science, Philology, argue from words and roots scattered like fossils
through the various dialects of very distant countries, a mutual descent
from a common Aryan language: the language of a race of which no
historical record exists, though in regard to its habits, customs, and
distribution much may be affirmed from the large collection of word
specimens stored in philological museums.

Thus Mr. Sclater, on zoological grounds, claims the late existence of a
continent which he calls Lemuria, extending from Madagascar to Ceylon
and Sumatra; and for similar reasons Mr. Wallace extends the Australia
of Tertiary periods to New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, and perhaps
to Fiji, and from its marsupial types infers a connection with the
northern continent during the Secondary period.

Again, the connection of Europe with North Africa during a late
geological period is inferred by many zoologists from the number of
identical species of mammalia inhabiting the opposite sides of the
Mediterranean, and palæontologists confirm this by the discovery of the
remains of elephants in cave-deposits in Malta, and of hippopotami in

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gibraltar; while
hydrographers furnish the supplemental suggestive evidence that an
elevation of only fifteen hundred feet would be sufficient to establish
two broad connections between the two continents—so as to unite Italy
with Tripoli and Spain with Morocco, and to convert the Mediterranean
Sea into two great lakes, which appears, in fact, to have been its
condition during the Pliocene and Post Pliocene periods.

It was by means of these causeways that the large pachyderms entered
Britain, then united to the continent; and it was over them they
retreated when driven back by glacial conditions, their migration
northward being effectually prevented by the destruction of the
connecting arms of land.

Some difference of opinion exists among naturalists as to the extent to
which zoological regions should be subdivided, and as to their
respective limitations.

But Mr. A. R. Wallace, who has most recently written on the subject, is
of opinion that the original division proposed by Mr. Sclater in 1857 is
the most tenable, and he therefore adopts it in the very exhaustive work
upon the geographical distribution of animals which he has recently
issued. Mr. Sclater's Six Regions are as follows:—

1.—*The Palæarctic Region*, including Europe, Temperate Asia, and North
Africa to the Atlas mountains.

2.—*The Ethiopian Region*, Africa south of the Atlas, Madagascar, and
the Mascarene islands, with Southern Arabia.

3.—*The Indian Region*, including India south of the Himalayas, to South
China, and to Borneo and Java.

4.—*The Australian Region*, including Celebes and Lombok, Eastward to
Australia and the Pacific islands.

5.—*The Nearctic Region*, including Greenland, and North America, to
Northern Mexico.

6.—*The Neotropical Region*, including South America, the Antilles, and
Southern Mexico.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

This arrangement is based upon a detailed examination of the chief
genera and families of birds, and also very nearly represents the
distribution of mammals and of reptiles. Its regions are not, as in
other subsequently proposed and more artificial systems, controlled by
climate; for they range, in some instances, from the pole to the
tropics. It probably approaches more nearly than any other yet proposed
to that desideratum, a division of the earth into regions, founded on a
collation of the groups of forms indigenous to or typical of them, and
upon a selection of those peculiar to them; with a disregard of, or only
admitting with caution, any which, though common to and apparently
establishing connection between two or more regions, may have in fact
but little value for the purpose of such comparison; from the fact of
its being possible to account for their extended range by their
capability of easy transport from one region to another by common
natural agencies. <span id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_40)

Such an arrangement should be consistent with the retrospective
information afforded by palæontology; and, taking an extended view of
the subject, be not merely a catalogue

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

of the present, but also an index of the past. It should afford an
illustration of an existing phase of the distribution of animal life,
considered as the last of a long series of similar phases which have
successively resulted from changes in the disposition of land and water,
and from other controlling agencies, throughout all time. A
reconstruction of the areas respectively occupied by the sea and the
land at different geological periods will be possible, or at least
greatly facilitated, when a complete system of similar groupings,
illustrative of each successive period, has been compiled.

It is obvious that any great cosmical change, affecting to a wide extent
any of the regions, might determine a destruction of specific existence;
and this on a large scale, in comparison with the change which is always
progressing in a smaller degree in the different and isolated divisions.

The brief remarks which I have made on this subject are intended to
suggest, rather than to demonstrate—which could only be done by a
lengthy series of examples—the causes influencing specific existence and
its in many cases extreme frailty of tenure. And I shall now conclude by
citing from the works of Lyell and Wallace a short list of notable
species, now extinct, whose remains have been collected from late
Tertiary, and Post Tertiary deposits—that is to say, at a time
subsequent to the appearance of man. From other authors I have extracted
an enumeration of species which have become locally or entirely extinct
within the historic period.

These instances will, I think, be sufficient to show that, as similar
destructive causes must have been in action during pre-historic times,
it is probable that, besides those remarkable animals of which remains
have been discovered, many others which then existed may have perished
without leaving any trace of their existence. There is, consequently, a
possibility that some at least of the so-called myths respecting
extraordinary creatures, hitherto considered fabulous,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

may merely be distorted accounts—traditions—of species as yet
unrecognised by Science, which have actually existed, and that not
remotely, as man's congener.

<span id="img_fig09"></span>

[![FIG. 9.THE MAMMOTH. (After Jukes.)](tn/fig09.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig09.jpg)  
FIG. 9.—THE MAMMOTH. (After Jukes.)  

#### *Extinct Post Tertiary Mammalia*.

THE MAMMOTH.—Among other remarkable forms whose remains have been
discovered in those later deposits, in which geologists are generally
agreed that remains of man or traces of his handicraft have also been
recognised, there is one which stands out prominently both for its
magnitude and extensive range in time and space. Although the animal
itself is now entirely extinct, delineations by the hand of Palæolithic
man have been preserved, and even frozen carcases, with the flesh
uncorrupted and fit for food, have been occasionally discovered.

This is the mammoth, the *Elephas primigenius* of Blumenbach, a gigantic
elephant nearly a third taller than the largest modern species, and
twice its weight. Its body was

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

protected from the severity of the semi-arctic conditions under which it
flourished by a dense covering of reddish wool, and long black hair, and
its head was armed or ornamented with tusks exceeding twelve feet in
length, and curiously curved into three parts of a circle. Its ivory has
long been, and still is, a valuable article of commerce, more especially
in North-eastern Asia, and in Eschscholtz Bay in North America, near
Behring's straits, where entire skeletons are occasionally discovered,
and where even the nature of its food has been ascertained from the
undigested contents of its stomach.

There is a well-known case recorded of a specimen found (1799), frozen
and encased in ice, at the mouth of the Lena. It was sixteen feet long,
and the flesh was so well preserved that the Yakuts used it as food for
their dogs. But similar instances occurred previously, for we find the
illustrious savant and Emperor Kang Hi \[A.D. 1662 to 1723\] penning the
following note <span id="fr_41"></span>[\*](#fn_41) upon what could only
have been this species:—

The cold is extreme, and nearly continuous on the coasts of the northern
sea beyond Tai-Tong-Kiang. It is on this coast that the animal called
Fen Chou is found, the form of which resembles that of a rat, but which
equals an elephant in size. It lives in obscure caverns, and flies from
the light. There is obtained from it an ivory as white as that of the
elephant, but easier to work, and which will not split. Its flesh is
very cold and excellent for refreshing the blood. The ancient work
Chin-y-king speaks of this animal in these terms: 'There is in the
depths of the north a rat which weighs as much as a thousand pounds; its
flesh is very good for those who are heated.' The Tsée-Chou calls it
Tai-Chou and speaks of another species which is not so large. It

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

says that this is as big as a buffalo, buries itself like a mole, flies
the light, and remains nearly always under ground; it is said that it
would die if it saw. the light of the sun or even that of the moon."

<span id="img_fig10"></span>

[![FIG. 10.TOOTH OF THE MAMMOTH. (&lt;i&gt;After
Figuier&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig10.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig10.jpg)  
FIG. 10.—TOOTH OF THE MAMMOTH. (*After Figuier*.)  

It seems probable that discoveries of mammoth tusks formed in part the
basis for the story which Pliny tells in reference to fossil ivory. He
says <span id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_42):—"These animals \[elephants\]
are well aware that the only spoil that we are anxious to procure of
them is the part which forms their weapon of defence, by Juba called
their horns, but by Herodotus, a much older writer, as well as by
general usage, and more appropriately, their teeth. Hence it is that,
when these tusks have fallen off, either from accident or old age, they
bury them in the earth."

Nordenskjöld <span id="fr_43"></span>[†](#fn_43) states that the savages
with whom he came in contact frequently offered to him very fine mammoth
tusks, and tools made of mammoth ivory. He computes that since the
conquest of Siberia, useful tusks from more than twenty thousand animals
have been collected.

Mr. Boyd Dawkins <span id="fr_44"></span>[‡](#fn_44) in a very
exhaustive memoir on this animal, quotes an interesting notice of its
fossil ivory having

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

been brought for sale to Khiva. He derives <span
id="fr_45"></span>[\*](#fn_45) this account from an Arabian traveller,
Abou-el-Cassim, who lived in the middle of the tenth century.

Figuier <span id="fr_46"></span>[†](#fn_46) says: "New Siberia and the
Isle of Lachon are for the most part only an agglomeration of sand, of
ice, and of elephants' teeth. At every tempest the sea casts ashore new
quantities of mammoth's tusks, and the inhabitants of New Siberia carry
on a profitable commerce in this fossil ivory. Every year during the
summer innumerable fishermen's barks direct their course to this isle of
bones, and during winter immense caravans take the same route, all the
convoys drawn by dogs, returning charged with the tusks of the mammoth,
weighing each from one hundred and fifty to two hundred pounds. The
fossil ivory thus withdrawn from the frozen north is imported into China
and Europe."

In addition to its elimination by the thawing of the frozen grounds of
the north, remains of the mammoth are procured from bogs, alluvial
deposits, and from the destruction of submarine beds. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[‡](#fn_47) They are also found in cave deposits,
associated with the remains of other mammals, and with

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

flint implements. This creature appears to have been an object of the
chase with Palæolithic man.

Mr. Dawkins, reviewing all the discoveries, considers that its range, at
various periods, extended over the whole of Northern Europe, and as far
south as Spain; over Northern Asia, and North America down to the
Isthmus of Darien. Dr. Falconer believes it to have had an elastic
constitution, which enabled it to adapt itself to great change of
climate.

Murchison, De Verneuil, and Keyserling believed that this species, as
well as the woolly rhinoceros, belonged to the Tertiary fauna of
Northern Asia, though not appearing until the Quaternary period in
Europe.

Mr. Dawkins shows it to have been pre-glacial, glacial, and post-glacial
in Britain and in Europe, and, from its relation to the intermediate
species *Elephas armeniacus*, accepts it as the ancestor of the existing
Indian elephant. Its disappearance was rapid, but not in the opinion of
most geologists cataclysmic, as suggested by Mr. Howorth.

Another widely distributed species was the *Rhinoceros tichorhinus*—the
smooth-skinned rhinoceros—also called the woolly rhinoceros and the
Siberian rhinoceros, which had two horns, and, like the mammoth, was
covered with woolly hair. It attained a great size; a specimen, the
carcase of which was found by Pallas imbedded in frozen soil near Wilui,
in Siberia (1772), was eleven and a half feet in length. Its horns are
considered by some of the native tribes of northern Asia to have been
the talons of gigantic birds; and Ermann and Middendorf suppose that
their discovery may have originated the accounts by Herodotus of the
gold-bearing griffons and the arimaspi.

Its food, ascertained by Von Brandt, and others, from portions remaining
in the hollows of its teeth, consisted of leaves and needles of trees
still existing in Siberia. The range of this species northwards was as
extensive as that of

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the mammoth, but its remains have not yet been discovered south of the
Alps and Pyrenees.

The investigation, <span id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_48) made by M. E.
Lartet in 1860, of the contents of the Grotto of Aurignac, in the
department of the Haute Garonne, from which numerous human skeletons had
been previously removed in 1852, shows that this animal was included
among the species used as ordinary articles of food, or as exceptional
items at the funeral feasts of the Palæolithic troglodytes. In the
layers of charcoal and ashes immediately outside the entrance to the
grotto, and surrounding what is supposed to have been the hearth, the
bones of a young Rhinoceros tichorhinus were found, which had been split
open for the extraction of the marrow. Numerous other species had been
dealt with in the same manner; and all these having received this
treatment, and showing marks of the action of fire, had evidently been
carried to the cave for banqueting purposes. The remains of Herbivora
associated with those of this rhinoceros, consisted of bones of the
mammoth, the horse (*Equus caballus*), stag (*Cervus claphus*), elk
(*Megaceros hibernicus*), roebuck (*C. capreolus*), reindeer (*C.
tarandus*), auroch (*Bison europæus*.) Among carnivora were found
remains of *Ursus spelæus* (cave-bear), Ursus arctos? (brown bear),
*Meles taxus* (badger), *Putorius vulgaris* (polecat), *Hyæna spelæa*
(cave-hyæna), *Felis spelæa* (cave-lion), *Felis catus ferus* (wild
cat), *Canis lupus* (wolf), *Canis vulpis* (fox). Within the grotto were
also found remains of *Felis spelæa* (cave-lion) and *Sus scrofa* (pig).
The cave-bear, the fox, and indeed most of these, probably also formed
articles of diet, but the hyæna seems to have been a post attendant at
the feast, and to have rooted out and gnawed off the spongy parts of the
thrown-away bones after the departure of the company.

In the Pleistocene deposits at Würzburg, in Franconia,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

a human finger-bone occurs with bones of this species, and also of other
large mammalia, such as the mammoth, cave-bear, and the like.

And flint implements, and pointed javelin-heads made of reindeer horn,
are found associated with it in the vicinity of the old hearths
established by Palæolithic man in the cave called the Trou du Sureau, on
the river Malignée in Belgium.

In the cavern of Goyet, also in Belgium, there are five bone layers,
alternating with six beds of alluvial deposits, showing that the cave
had been inhabited by different species at various periods. The lion was
succeeded by the cave-bear, and this by hyænas; then Palæolithic man
became a tenant and has left his bones there, together with flint
implements and remains of numerous species, including those already
enumerated as his contemporaries.

THE SABRE-TOOTHED TIGER OR LION.—This species, *Machairodus* <span
id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_49) *latifrons* of Owen, was remarkable for
having long sabre-shaped canines. It belongs to an extinct genus, of
which four other species are known, characterised by the possession of
serrated teeth. The genus is known to be represented in the Auvergne
beds between the Eocene and Miocene, in the Miocene of Greece and India,
in the Pliocene of South America and Europe, and in the Pleistocene. Mr.
Dawkins believes that this species survived to post-glacial times. It is
one of the numerous animals whose remains have been found with traces of
man and flint implements in cave deposits at Kent's Hole, near Torquay,
and elsewhere.

THE CAVE-BEAR, *Ursus spelæus*, of Rosenmüller.—The appearance of this
species has been preserved to us in the drawing by Palæolithic man found
in the cave of Massat (Arieze).

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

It occurs in the Cromer Forest Bed, a deposit referred by Mr. Boyd
Dawkins to the early part of the Glacial period, and generally regarded
as transitional between the Pliocene and Quaternary. It is also found in
the caves of Perigaud, which are considered to belong to the reindeer
era of M. Lartet or the opening part of the Recent period, and numerous
discoveries of its remains at dates intermediate to these have been made
in Britain and in Europe. Carl Vogt, indeed, is of opinion that this
species is the progenitor of our living brown bear, *Ursus arctos*, and
Mr. Boyd Dawkins also says that those "who have compared the French,
German, and British specimens, gradually realize the fact that the
fossil remains of the bears form a graduated series, in which all the
variations that at first sight appear specific vanish away."

It has been identified by Mr. Busk among the associated mammalian bones
of the Brixham cave. Its remains are very abundant in the bone deposit
of the Trou de Sureau in Belgium, and in the cavern of Goyet, which it
tenanted alternately with the lion and hyæna, and, like them, appears to
have preyed on man and the larger mammalia.

Mr. Prestwich has obtained it in low-level deposits of river gravels in
the valleys of the north of France and south of England, and it has been
obtained from the Löss, a loamy, usually unstratified deposit, which is
extensively distributed over central Europe, in the valleys of the
Rhine, Rhone, Danube, and other great rivers. This deposit is considered
by Mr. Prestwich to be equivalent to other high-level gravels of the
Pleistocene period.

THE MASTODON.—The generic title Mastodon has been applied to a number of
species allied to the elephants, but distinguished from them by a
peculiar structure of the molar teeth; these are rectangular, and in
their upper surfaces exhibit a number of great conical tuberosities with
rounded points disposed in pairs, to the number of four or five,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

according to the species; whereas in the elephants they

are broad and uniform, and regularly marked with furrows of large
curvature. The mastodons, in addition to large tusks in the premaxillæ,
like those of the elephant, had also in most instances, a pair of
shorter ones in the mandible.

<span id="img_fig11"></span>

[![FIG. 11.MASTODON'S TOOTH (WORN). (&lt;i&gt;After
Figuier&lt;/i&gt;)](tn/fig11.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig11.jpg)  
FIG. 11.—MASTODON'S TOOTH (WORN). (*After Figuier*)  

Cuvier established the name Mastodon, <span
id="fr_50"></span>[\*](#fn_50) or teat-like toothed animals, for the
gigantic species from America which Buffon had already described under
the name of the animal or elephant of the Ohio.

<span id="img_fig12"></span>

[![FIG. 12.MASTODON'S TOOTH. (&lt;i&gt;After
Figuier&lt;/i&gt;)](tn/fig12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig12.jpg)  
FIG. 12.—MASTODON'S TOOTH. (*After Figuier*)  

The form first appears in the Upper Miocene of Europe, five species
being known, two of them from Pikermi, near Athens, and one, M.
angustidens, from the Miocene beds of

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Malta. Mastodon
remains have also been found in the beds of the Sivalik hills, and four
species of mastodon in all are known to have ranged over India during
those periods.

In Pliocene deposits we have abundant remains of *M. arvernensis*, and
*M. longirostris* from the Val d’Arno in Italy, and the *M. Borsoni*
from central France.

The *M. arvernensis* may be considered as a characteristic Pliocene
species in Italy, France, and Europe generally. In Britain it occurs in
the Norwich Crag and the Red Crag of Suffolk.

Species of mastodon occur in the Pliocene of La Plata, and of the
temperate regions of South America; on the Pampas, and in the Andes of
Chili.

The *Mastodon mirificus* of Leidy is the earliest known species in
America; this occurs in Pliocene deposits on the Niobrara and the Loup
fork, west of the Mississippi.

The remains of the *Mastodon americanus* of Cuvier occur abundantly in
the Post Pliocene deposits throughout the United States, but more
especially in the northern half; they are also found in Canada and Nova
Scotia.

<span id="img_fig13"></span>

[![FIG. 13.THE MASTODON.](tn/fig13.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig13.jpg)  
FIG. 13.—THE MASTODON.  

Perfect skeletons are occasionally procured from marshes, where the
animals had become mired. In life this species appears to have measured
from twelve to thirteen feet in

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

height and twenty-four to twenty-five feet in length, including seven
feet for the tusks. Undigested food found with its remains show that it
lived partly on spruce and fir-trees. A distinct species characterised
the Quaternary deposits of South America.

THE IRISH ELK.—The species (*Megaceros hibernicus*), commonly but
erroneously called the Irish Elk, was, as professor Owen <span
id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_51) has pointed out, a true deer, whose place
is between the fallow and reindeer.

Though now extinct, it survived the Palæolithic period, and may possibly
have existed down to historic times. Mr. Gosse adduces some very strong
testimony on this point, and is of opinion that its extinction cannot
have taken place more than a thousand years ago.

It had a flattened and expanded form of antler, with peculiarities
unknown among existing deer, and was, in comparison with these, of
gigantic size; the height to the summit of the antlers being from ten to
eleven feet in the largest individuals, and the span of the antlers, in
one case, over twelve feet.

Although its remains have been found most abundantly in Ireland, it was
widely distributed over Britain and middle Europe. It has been found in
peat swamps, lacustrine marls, bone caverns, fen deposits, and the
Cornish gravels. It has been obtained from the cavern of Goyet in
Belgium, and from the burial-place at Aurignac, in the department of the
Haute Garonne. Its known range in time is from the early part of the
Glacial period down to, possibly, historic periods.

The CAVE-HYÆNA—*Hyæna spelæa* of Goldfuss—is, like the cave-bear,
characteristic of Europe during the Palæolithic age. It has been found
in numerous caves in Britain, such as Kent's Hole, the Brixham cave, and
one near Wells in

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Somersetshire,
explored by Dawkins in 1859; in all of these the remains are associated
with those of man, or with his implements. This species is closely
related to the *H. crocuta* of Zimm, at present existing in South
Africa, and is by some geologists considered identical with it. It is,
however, larger.

It appears to have to some extent replaced the cave-bear in Britain; we
are also, doubtless, greatly indebted to it for some of the extensive
collections of bones in caverns, resulting from the carcases which it
had dragged thither, and imperfectly destroyed.

In a cave at Kirkdale, in the vale of Pickering, the bones of about
three hundred individuals—hyænas—were found mingled with the remains of
the mammoth, bear, rhinoceros, deer, cave-lion, brown bear, horse, hare,
and other species. Mr. Dawkins, <span id="fr_52"></span>[\*](#fn_52) in
describing it, says: "The pack of hyænas fell upon reindeer in the
winter, and at other times on horses and bisons, and were able to master
the hippopotamus, the lion, the slender-nosed rhinoceros, or the
straight-tusked elephant, and to carry their bones to their den, where
they were found by Dr. Buckland. The hyænas also inhabiting the
'Dukeries,' dragged back to their dens fragments of lion."

Notable Quaternary forms (now extinct) on the American continent are the
gigantic sloth-like animals *Megatherium*, which reached eighteen feet
in length, and *Mylodon*, one species of which (*M. robustus*) was
eleven feet in length; Armadillos, such as *Glyptodon*, with a total
length of nine feet; *Chlamydotherium*, as big as a rhinoceros; and
*Pachytherium*, equalling an ox.

In Australia we find marsupial forms as at the present day; but they
were gigantic in comparison with the latter. As for example, the
*Diprotodon*, which equalled in size a hippopotamus, and the
*Nototherium*, as large as a bullock.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

I may mention a few other species, the remains of which are associated
with some of those commented on in the last few pages; but which, as
they have undoubtedly continued in existence down to the present period,
are external to the present portion of my argument, and are either
treated of elsewhere, or need only to be referred to in a few words.

<span id="img_fig14"></span>

[![FIG. 14.MYLODON ROBUSTUS. (&lt;i&gt;After
Figuier&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig14.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig14.jpg)  
FIG. 14.—MYLODON ROBUSTUS. (*After Figuier*.)  

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It must also be
borne in mind that the linking together of species by the discovery of
intermediate graduated forms, is daily proceeding; so that some even of
those spoken of in greater detail may shortly be generally recognised,
as at present they are held by a few, to be identical with existing
forms.

The HIPPOPOTAMUS.—The *Hippopotamus major*, now considered identical
with the larger of the two African species—*H. amphibia*, has been found
associated with *E. antiquus* and *R. hemitæchus* of Falc in Durdham
Down and Kirkdale caves,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

and in those at Kent's Hole and Ravenscliff. It has also been found in
river gravels at Grays, Ilford, and elsewhere, in the lower part of the
river-border deposits of Amiens with flint implements, and in Quaternary
deposits on the continent of Europe.

THE CAVE-LION—*Felis spelæa*—is now considered to be merely a variety of
the African lion (*Felis leo*), although of larger size; it had a very
wide range over Britain and Europe during the Post Pliocene period, as
also did the leopard (*F. pardus*) and probably the lynx (*Lyncus*).

The REINDEER or CARIBOO—*Cervus tarandus*—which still exists, both
domesticated and wild, in northern Europe and America, is adapted for
northern latitudes. It formerly extended over Europe, and in the British
Isles probably .survived in the north of Scotland until the twelfth
century.

Its remains have been found in Pleistocene deposits in numerous
localities, but most abundantly in those which M. Lartet has assigned to
the period which he calls the Reindeer age.

Other Pleistocene mammals still existing, but whose range is much
restricted, are the musk ox (*Ovibos moschatus*), familiar to us, from
the accounts of arctic expeditions, as occurring in the circumpolar
regions of North America; the glutton (*Gulo luscus*), the auroch
(*Bison europæus*), the wild horse (*E. fossilis*), the arctic fox
(*Canis lagopus*), the bison (*Bison priscus*), the elk or moose (*Alces
malchis*), found in Norway and North America, the lemming, the lagomys
or tail-less hare, &c.

As examples of total extinction in late years, we may mention the dodo,
the solitaire, and species allied to them, in the islands of Mauritius,
Bourbon, and Reunion; the moa in New Zealand; the *Æpiornis* in
Madagascar; the great auk, *Alca impennis*, in northern seas, and the
*Rhytina Stelleri*, common once in the latitude of Behring's Straits,
and described by Steller in 1742.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

The Dodo, a native of the island of Mauritius, was about 50 lbs. in
weight, and covered with loose downy plumage, it

<span id="img_fig15"></span>

[![FIG. 15.SKELETON OF RHYTINA STELLERI. (&lt;i&gt;From&lt;/i&gt;
&lt;i&gt;The Voyage of the&lt;/i&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Vega&lt;/i&gt;)](tn/fig15.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig15.jpg)  
FIG. 15.—SKELETON OF RHYTINA STELLERI. (*From* “*The Voyage of the*
‘*Vega*’”)  

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

was unable to rise from the ground in consequence of the imperfect
development of its wings; it was minutely described by Sir Thomas
Herbert in 1634, and specimens of the living bird and of its skin were
brought to Europe. Its unwieldiness led to its speedy destruction by the
early voyagers.

<span id="img_fig16"></span>

[![FIG. 16.RHYTINA STELLERI. (From The Voyage of the
Vega.)](tn/fig16.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig16.jpg)  
FIG. 16.—RHYTINA STELLERI. (From “The Voyage of the ‘Vega.’”)  

The Solitaire was confined to the island of Mascaregue or Bourbon. It is
fully described by Francis Leguat, who, having fled from France into
Holland in 1689, to escape religious persecution consequent on the
revocation of the Edict of Nantes, engaged under the Marquis de Quesne
in an expedition for the purpose of settlement on that island. This bird
also speedily became extinct.

The Moa (*Dinornis giganteus*, Owen) reached from twelve to fourteen
feet in height, and survived for a long period after the migration of
the Maories to New Zealand. Bones of it have been found along with
charred wood, showing that it had been killed and eaten by the natives;
and its memory is preserved in many of their traditions, which also
record the existence of a much larger bird, a species of eagle or hawk,
which used to prey upon it. <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*](#fn_53)

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

Rapidly approaching total extinction are the several species of
*Apteryx* in the same country—remarkable birds with merely rudimentary
wings: as also the *Notornis*, a large Rail—at first, and for a long
time, only known in the fossil state, but of which a living specimen was
secured by Mr. Walter Mantell in 1849: and the *Kapapo* (*Strigops
habroptilus*) of G. R. Gray—a strange owl-faced nocturnal ground-parrot.

The *Æpyornis maximus* was almost as large as the Moa; of this numerous
fossil bones and a few eggs have been discovered, but there are not, I
believe, any traditions extant among the natives of Madagascar of its
having survived to a late period.

The Great Auk (*Alca impennis*) is now believed to be extinct. It
formerly occurred in the British Isles, but more abundantly in high
latitudes; and its remains occur in great numbers on the shores of
Iceland, Greenland, and Denmark, as also of Labrador and Newfoundland.

<span id="img_fig17"></span>

[![FIG. 17.RHYTINA STELLERI. (After &lt;i&gt;J. Fr.
Brandt&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig17.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig17.jpg)  
FIG. 17.—RHYTINA STELLERI. (After *J. Fr. Brandt*.)  

Steller's Sea-cow (*Rhytina Stelleri* of Cuvier) was a mammal allied to
the Manatees and Dugongs; it was discovered by Behring in 1768 on a
small island lying off the Kamtchatkan coast. It measured as much as
from twenty-eight to thirty-five feet in length, and was soon nearly
exterminated by Behring's party and other voyagers who visited the
island. The last one of which there is any record was killed in
1854. <span id="fr_54"></span>[\*](#fn_54)

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

To the above may be added the *Didunculus*, a species of ground-pigeon
peculiar to the Samoa Islands, and the *Nestor productus*, a parrot of
Norfolk Island. An extended list might be prepared, from fossil
evidences, of other species which were at one time associated with those
I have enumerated.

<span id="img_fig18"></span>

[![FIG. 18.RHYTINA STELLERI. (From &lt;i&gt;The Voyage of
the&lt;/i&gt; &lt;i&gt;Vega&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig18.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig18.jpg)  
FIG. 18.—RHYTINA STELLERI. (From “*The Voyage of the* ‘*Vega*.’”)  

In conclusion, I may point out that that excellent naturalist
Pliny <span id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_55) records the disappearance, in
his days, of certain species formerly known. He mentions the Incendiary,
the Clivia, and the Subis (species of birds), and states that there were
many other birds mentioned in the Etruscan ritual, which were no longer
to be found in his time. He also says that there had been a bird in
Sardinia resembling the crane, and called the Gromphæna, which was no
longer known even by the people of the country.

#### *Local Extinction*.

Of local extinction we may note in our own island the cases of the
beaver, the bear, the wolf, the wild cattle, the elk, the wild boar, the
bustard, and the capercailzie; of these the beaver survived in Wales and
Scotland until the time of Giraldus Cambrensis in 1188, and Pennant
notes indications of its former existence in the names of several
streams and lakes in Wales. It was not uncommon throughout the greater
part of Europe down to the Middle Ages.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

The bear, still common in Norway and the Pyrenees, is alluded to, as Mr.
Gosse points out, in the Welsh Triads, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[\*](#fn_56) which are supposed to have been compiled
in the seventh century. They say that "the Kymri, a Celtic tribe, first
inhabited Britain; before them were no men here, but only bears, wolves,
beavers, and oxen with high prominences." Mr. Gosse adds, The Roman
poets knew of its existence here. Martial speaks of the robber Laureolis
being exposed on the cross to the fangs of the Caledonian bear; and
Claudian alludes to British bears. The Emperor Claudius, on his return
to Rome after the conquest of this island, exhibited, as trophies,
combats of British bears in the Arena. In the Penitential of Archbishop
Egbert, said to have been compiled about A.D. 750, bears are mentioned
as inhabiting the English forests, and the city of Norwich is said to
have been required to furnish a bear annually to Edward the Confessor,
together with six dogs, no doubt for baiting him."

The wolf, though greatly reduced in numbers during the Heptarchy, when
Edgar laid an annual tribute of three hundred wolf-skins upon the Welsh,
still occurred in formidable numbers in England in 1281, and not
unfrequently until the reign of Henry VII. The last wolf was killed in
Scotland in the year 1743, and in Ireland in 1770. <span
id="fr_57"></span>[†](#fn_57)

The wild cattle are now only represented by the small herds in Chartley
Castle, Chillingham, and Cadgow parks; the spare survivors probably of
the species referred to by Herodotus when he speaks of "large ferocious
and fleet white bulls" which abounded in the country south of Thrace,
and continued in Poland, Lithuania, and Muscovy until the fifteenth
century, or perhaps of the Urus described by Cæsar as little inferior to
the elephant in size, and inhabiting the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hercynian forest,
and believed to be identical with the Bos primigenius found in a fossil
state in Britain.

The wild boar was once abundant in Scotland and England. The family of
Baird derives its heraldic crest from a grant of David I. of Scotland,
in recognition of his being saved from an infuriated boar which had
turned on him. In England only nobles and gentry were allowed to hunt
it, and the slaughter of one by an unauthorized person within the
demesnes of William the Conqueror was punished by the loss of both
eyes. <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_58)

The bustard, once abundant, is now extinct in Britain, so far as the
indigenous race is concerned. Occasionally a chance visitant from the
continent is seen; but there, also, its numbers have been greatly
diminished. It was common in Buffon's time in the plains of Poitou and
Champagne, though now extremely rare, and is still common in Eastern
Asia.

The capercailzie, or cock of the woods, after complete extinction, has
been reintroduced from Norway, and, under protection, is moderately
abundant in parts of Scotland.

In America, the process of extermination marches with the settlement of
the various states. W. J. J. Allen records the absolute disappearance of
the walrus from the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and of the moose, the elk, and
the Virginian deer, from many of the states in which they formerly
abounded. This also is true, to some extent, of the bear, the beaver,
the grey wolf, the panther, and the lynx.

The buffalo (Bos americanus) is being destroyed at the rate of two
hundred and fifty thousand annually, and it is estimated that the number
slain by hunters for their hides during the last forty years amounts to
four millions. It has disappeared in the eastern part of the continent
from many extensive tracts which it formerly inhabited.

Among the ocean whales, both the right and the sperm

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

have only been preserved from extinction by the fortunate discovery of
petroleum, which has reduced the value of their oil, and thus lessened
considerably the number of vessels equipped for the whale fishery.

In South Africa, elephants and all other large game are being steadily
exterminated within the several colonies.

In Australia, we find that the seals which thronged the islands of
Bass's Straits in countless thousands, at the period when Bass made his
explorations there, have utterly disappeared. The bulk of them were
destroyed by seal-hunters from Sydney within a few years after his
discovery. The lamentable records of the *Sydney Gazette* of that period
show this, for they detail the return to port, after a short cruise, of
schooners laden with from twelve to sixteen thousand skins each. The
result of this has been that for many years past the number of seals has
been limited to a few individuals, to be found on one or two isolated
rocks off Clarke's Island, and on Hogan's group.

The great sea-elephant, which, in Peron's time, still migrated for
breeding purposes from antarctic regions to the shores of King's Island,
where it is described by him as lining the long sandy beaches by
hundreds, has been almost unseen there since the date of his visit, and
its memory is only preserved in the names of Sea-Elephant Bay, Elephant
Rock, &c. which are still inscribed on our charts.

The introduction of the Dingo, by the Australian blacks in their
southward migration, is supposed to have caused the extinction of the
Thylacinus (*T. cynocephalus*), or striped Australian wolf, on the main
land of Australia, where it was once abundant; it is now only to be
found in the remote portions of the island of Tasmania. This destruction
of one species by another is paralleled in our own country by the
approaching extinction of the indigenous and now very rare black rat,
which has been almost entirely displaced by the fierce grey rat from
Norway.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

We learn from incidental passages in the *Bamboo Books* <span
id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_59) that the rhinoceros, which is now unknown
in China, formerly extended throughout that country. We read of King
Ch’aou, named Hĕa (B.C. 980), that " in his sixteenth year \[of reign\]
the king attacked Ts’oo, and in crossing the river Han met with a large
rhinoceros." And, again, of King E, named Sëĕ (B.C. 860), that "in his
sixth year, when hunting in the forest of Shay, he captured a rhinoceros
and carried it home." There is also mention made—though this is less
conclusive—that in the time of King Yiu, named Yeu (B.C. 313), the King
of Yueh sent Kung-sze Yu with a present of three hundred boats, five
million arrows, together with rhinoceros’ horns and elephants’ teeth.

Elephants are now unknown in China except in a domesticated state, but
they probably disputed its thick forest and jungly plains with the
Miaotsz, Lolos, and other tribes which held the country before its
present occupants. This may be inferred from the incidental references
to them in the Shan Hai King, a work reputed to be of great antiquity,
of which more mention will be made hereafter, and from evidence
contained in other ancient Chinese works which has been summarized by
Mr. Kingsmill <span id="fr_60"></span>[†](#fn_60) as follows:—

"The rhinoceros and elephant certainly lived in Honan B.C. 600. The
*Tso-chuen*, commenting on the C‘hun T‘siu of the second year of the
Duke Siuen (B.C. 605), describes the former as being in sufficient
abundance to supply skins for armour. The want, according to the popular
saying, was not of rhinoceroses to supply skins, but of courage to
animate the wearers. From the same authority (Duke Hi XIII., B.C. 636)
we learn that while T‘soo (Hukwang) produced ivory and rhinoceros’ skins
in abundance, Tsin, lying

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

north of the Yellow River, on the most elevated part of the Loess, was
dependent on the other for its supplies of those commodities. The
*Tribute of Yu* tells the same tale. Yang-chow and King (Kiangpeh and
Hukwang), we are told, sent tribute of ivory and rhinoceros’ hide, while
Liang (Shensi) sent the skins of foxes and bears. Going back to mythical
times, we find Mencius (III. ii. 9) telling how Chow Kung expelled from
Lu (Shantung) the elephants and rhinoceroses, the tigers and leopards."

Mr. Kingsmill even suggests that the species referred to were the
mammoth and the Siberian rhinoceros (*R. tichorhinus*).

M. Chabas <span id="fr_61"></span>[\*](#fn_61) publishes an Egyptian
inscription showing that the elephant existed in a feral state in the
Euphrates Valley in the time of Thothmes III. (16th century B.C.). The
inscription records a great hunting of elephants in the neighbourhood of
Nineveh.

Tigers still abound in Manchuria and Corea, their skins forming a
regular article of commerce in Vladivostock, Newchwang, and Seoul. They
are said to attain larger dimensions in these northern latitudes than
their southern congener, the better-known Bengal tiger. They are
generally extinct in China Proper; but Père David states that he has
seen them in the neighbourhood of Pekin, in Mongolia, and at Moupin, and
they are reported to have been seen near Amoy. Within the last few
years <span id="fr_62"></span>[†](#fn_62) a large specimen was killed by
Chinese soldiery within a few miles of the city of Ningpo; and it is
probable that at no distant date they ranged over the whole country from
Hindostan to Eastern Siberia, as they are incidentally referred to in
various Chinese works—the *Urh Yah* specially recording the capture of a
white tiger

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

in the time of the Emperor Süen of the Han dynasty, and of a black one,
in the fourth year of the reign of Yung Kia, in a netted surround in
Kien Ping Fu in the district of Tsz Kwei.

The tailed deer or Mi-lu (*Cervus Davidianus* of Milne Edwardes), which
Chinese literature <span id="fr_63"></span>[\*](#fn_63) indicates as
having once been of common occurrence throughout China, is now only to
be found in the Imperial hunting grounds south of Peking, where it is
restricted to an enclosure of fifty miles in circumference. It is
believed to exist no longer in a wild state, as no trace of it has been
found in any of the recent explorations of Asia. The *Ch‘un ts‘iu* (B.C.
676) states that this species appeared in the winter of that year, in
such numbers that it was chronicled in the records of Lu (Shantung), and
that in the following autumn it was followed by an inroad of "Yih,"
which Mr. Kingsmill believes to be the wolf.

There also appears reason to suppose that the ostrich had a much more
extended range than at present; for we find references in the
*Shi-Ki*, <span id="fr_64"></span>[†](#fn_64) or book of history of
Szema Tsien, to "large birds with eggs as big as water jars" as
inhabiting T‘iaou-chi, identified by Mr. Kingsmill as Sarangia or
Drangia; and, in speaking of Parthia, it says, "On the return of the
mission he sent envoys with it that they might see the extent and power
of China. He sent with them, as presents to the Emperor, eggs of the
great bird of the country, and a curiously deformed man from Samarkand."

The gigantic Chelonians which once abounded in India

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

and the Indian seas are now entirely extinct; but we have had little
difficulty in believing the accounts of their actual and late existence
contained in the works of Pliny and Ælian since the discovery of the
Colossochelys, described by Dr. Falconer, in the Upper Miocene deposits
of the Siwalik Hills in North-Western India. The shell of *Colossochelys
Atlas* (Falconer and Cautley) measured twelve feet, and the whole animal
nearly twenty.

Pliny, <span id="fr_65"></span>[\*](#fn_65) who published his work on
Natural History about A.D. 77, states that the turtles of the Indian Sea
are of such vast size that a single shell is sufficient to roof a
habitable cottage, and that among the islands of the Red Sea the
navigation is mostly carried on in boats formed from this shell.

Ælian, <span id="fr_66"></span>[†](#fn_66) about the middle of the third
century of our era, is more specific in his statement, and says that the
Indian river-tortoise is very large, and in size not less than a boat of
fair magnitude; also, in speaking of the Great Sea, in which is
Taprobana (Ceylon), he says: "There are very large tortoises generated
in this sea, the shell of which is large enough to make an entire roof;
for a single one reaches the length of fifteen cubits, so that not a few
people are able to live beneath it, and certainly secure themselves from
the vehement rays of the sun; they make a broad shade, and so resist
rain that they are preferable for this purpose to tiles, nor does the
rain beating against them sound otherwise than if it were falling on
tiles. Nor, indeed, do those who inhabit them have any necessity for
repairing them, as in the case of broken tiles, for the whole roof is
made out of a solid shell so that it has the appearance of a cavernous
or undermined rock, and of a natural roof."

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

El Edrisi, in his great geographical work, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[\*](#fn_67) completed A.D. 1154, speaks of them as
existing down to his day, but as his book is admitted to be a
compilation from all preceding geographical works, he may have been
simply quoting, without special acknowledgment, the statements given
above. He says, speaking of the Sea of Herkend (the Indian Ocean west of
Ceylon), "It contains turtles twenty cubits long, containing within them
as many as one thousand eggs." Large tortoises formerly inhabited the
Mascarene islands, but have been destroyed on all of them, with the
exception of the small uninhabited Aldabra islands, north of the
Seychelle group; and those formerly abundant on the Galapagos islands
are now represented by only a few survivors, and the species rapidly
approaches extinction.

I shall close this chapter with a reference to a creature which, if it
may not be entitled to be called "the dragon," may at least be
considered as first cousin to it. This is a lacertilian of large size,
at least twenty feet in length, panoplied with the most horrifying
armour, which roamed over the Australian continent during Pleistocene
times, and probably until the introduction of the aborigines.

Its remains have been described by Professor Owen in several
communications to the Royal Society, <span id="fr_68"></span>[†](#fn_68)
under the name of *Megalania prisca*. They were procured by Mr. G. F.
Bennett from the drift-beds of King's Creek, a tributary of the
Condamine River in Australia. It was associated with correspondingly
large marsupial mammals, now also extinct.

From the portions transmitted to him Professor Owen determined that it
presented in some respects a magnified resemblance of the miniature
existing lizard, *Moloch horridus*,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

found in Western Australia, <span id="fr_69"></span>[\*](#fn_69) of
which Dr. Gray remarks, "The external appearance of this lizard is the
most ferocious of any that I know." In Megalania the head was rendered
horrible and menacing by horns projecting from its sides, and from the
tip of the nose, which would be "as available against the attacks of
Thylacoleo as the buffalo's horns are against those of the South African
lion." The tail consisted of a series of annular segments armed with
horny spikes, represented by the less perfectly developed ones in the
existing species *Uromastix princeps* from Zanzibar, or in the
above-mentioned moloch. In regard to these the Professor says, "That the
horny sheaths of the above-described supports or cores arming the end of
the tail may have been applied to deliver blows upon an assailant, seems
not improbable, and this part of the organization of the great extinct
Australian dragon may be regarded, with the cranial horn, as parts of
both an offensive and defensive apparatus."

The gavial of the Ganges is reported to be a fish-eater only, and is
considered harmless to man. The Indian museums, however, have large
specimens, which are said to have been captured after they had destroyed
several human beings; and so we may imagine that this structurally
herbivorous lizard (the Megalania having a horny edentate upper jaw) may
have occasionally varied his diet, and have proved an importunate
neighbour to aboriginal encampments in which toothsome children
abounded, and that it may, in fact, have been one of the sources from
which the myth of the Bunyip, of which I shall speak hereafter, has been
derived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[43:\*](mm05.htm#fr_37) "It enters Europe early
in April, spreads over France, Britain, Denmark, and the south of
Sweden, which it reaches by the beginning of May. It does not enter
Brittany, the Channel Islands, or the western part of England, never
visiting Wales, except the extreme south of Glamorganshire, and rarely
extending farther north than Yorkshire."—A. R. Wallace, *Geographical
Distribution of Animals*, vol. i. p. 21. London, 1876.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[44:\*](mm05.htm#fr_38) *Bible Customs in Bible
Lands*. By H. J. Van Lennep, D.D. 1875. Quoted in *Nature*, March 24,
1881.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[45:\*](mm05.htm#fr_39) *Origin of Species*, C.
Darwin. 5th edit. 1869.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[49:\*](mm05.htm#fr_40) Thus Mr. Wallace
considers that the identity of the small fish, *Galaxias attenuatus*,
which occurs in the mountain streams of Tasmania, with one found in
those of New Zealand, the Falkland Islands, and the temperate regions of
South America, cannot be considered as demonstrating a land connection
between these places within the period of its specific existence. For
there is a possibility that its ova have been transported from one point
to another on floating ice; and for similar reasons fresh-water fish
generally are unsafe guides to a classification of zoological regions.
Mr. Darwin has shown (*Origin of Species*, and *Nature*, vol. xviii. p.
120 and vol. xxv. p. 529) that mollusca can be conveyed attached to or
entangled in the claws of migratory birds. Birds themselves are liable
to be blown great distances by gales of wind. Beetles and other flying
insects may be similarly transferred. Reptiles are occasionally conveyed
on floating logs and uprooted trees. Mammals alone appear to be really
trustworthy guides towards such a classification, from their being less
liable than the other classes to accidental dispersion.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[52:\*](mm05.htm#fr_41) *Mémoires concernant
l’histoire, &c. des Chinois, par les Missionaires de Pekin*, vol. iv. p.
481.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[53:\*](mm05.htm#fr_42) *The Natural History of
Pliny*, J. Bostock and H. T. Riley, book viii. chap iv.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[53:†](mm05.htm#fr_43) *The Voyage of the Vega*,
A. E. Nordenskjöld. London, 1881.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[53:‡](mm05.htm#fr_44) *On the Range of the
Mammoth in Space and Time*, by W. B. Dawkins, *Quart. Journ. Geol.
Soc.*, 1879, p. 138.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[54:\*](mm05.htm#fr_45) The notice is taken from
Les Peuples du Caucause, ou Voyage d’Abois-el-Cassim, par M. C.
D’Ohsson, p. 80, as follows:—"On trouve souvent dans la Boulgarie des os
(fossils) d’une grandeur prodigieuse. J’ai vu une dent qui avait deux
palmes de large sur quatre de long, et un crâne qui ressemblait à une
hutte (Arabe). On y déterre des dents semblables aux défenses
d’éléphants, blanche comme la neige et pesant jusqu’ â deux cents menus.
On ne sait pas à quel animal elles ont appartenu, mais on les transporte
dans le Khoragur (Kiva), où elles se vendent à grand prix. On en fait
des peignes, des vases, et d’autres objets, comme on façonne l’ivoire;
toute fois cette substance est plus dure que l’ivoire; jamais elle ne se
brise."

<span id="fn_46"></span>[54:†](mm05.htm#fr_46) *The World before the
Deluge*, L. Figuier. London, 1865.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[54:‡](mm05.htm#fr_47) According to Woodward,
over two thousand grinders were dredged up by the fishermen of
Happisburgh in the space of thirteen years; and other localities in and
about England are also noted.—Dana's *Manual of Geology*, p. 564.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[56:\*](mm05.htm#fr_48) Lyell, *Antiquity of
Man*, p. 185, 2nd edit., 1863.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[57:\*](mm05.htm#fr_49) Fr. μάχαιρα "a sword,"
and ὀδούς "a tooth."

<span id="fn_50"></span>[59:\*](mm05.htm#fr_50) From μαστός "a teat,"
and ὀδούς "a tooth."

<span id="fn_51"></span>[61:\*](mm05.htm#fr_51) *Palæontology*, R. Owen.
Edinburgh, 1860.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[62:\*](mm05.htm#fr_52) *The British Lion*, W.
Boyd Dawkins, Contemporary Review, 1882.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[66:\*](mm05.htm#fr_53) The Moa was associated
with other species also nearly or totally extinct: some belonging to the
same genus, others to those of *Papteryx*, of *Nestor*, and of
*Notornis*. One survivor of the latter was obtained by Mr. Gideon
Mantell, and described by my father, Mr. John Gould, in 1850. I believe
the Nestor is still, rarely, met with. Mr. Mantell is of opinion that
the Moa and his congeners continued in existence long after the advent
of the aboriginal Maori. Mr. Mantell discovered a gigantic fossil egg,
presumably that of the Moa.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[67:\*](mm05.htm#fr_54) A. E. Nordenskiöld, *The
Voyage of the* '*Vega*,' vol. i. p. 272, *et seq*. Loudon, 1881.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[68:\*](mm05.htm#fr_55) Pliny, *Nat. Hist.*, Bk.
x., chap. xvii., and Bk. xxx., chap. liii.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[69:\*](mm05.htm#fr_56) *The Romance of Natural
History*, by P. H. Gosse, 2nd Series, London 1875.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[69:†](mm05.htm#fr_57) *Pop. Sci. Monthly*,
October 1878.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[70:\*](mm05.htm#fr_58) *Excelsior*, vol. iii.
London, 1855.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[72:\*](mm05.htm#fr_59) *The Chinese Classics*,
vol. iii. p. 1, by James Legge, B.D.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[72:†](mm05.htm#fr_60) Inaugural Address by
President, T. W. Kingsmill, North China ranch of the Royal Asiatic
Society, 1877.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[73:\*](mm05.htm#fr_61) Chabas, *Études sur
l’Antiquité Historique, d’apres les sources Égyptiennes*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[73:†](mm05.htm#fr_62) Subsequently to 1874.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[74:\*](mm05.htm#fr_63) O. F. von Mollendorf,
*Journal* of North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, New
Series, No. 2, and T. W. Kingsmill, "The Border Lands of Geology and
History," *Journal* of North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society,
1877.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[74:†](mm05.htm#fr_64) "Intercourse of China
with Eastern Turkestan and the adjacent country in the second century
B.C.," T. W. Kingsmill, *Journal* of North China Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society, New Series, No. 14.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[75:\*](mm05.htm#fr_65) *The Natural History of
Pliny*. Translated by J. Bostock and H. T. Biley, 6 vols. Bohn, London,
1857.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[75:†](mm05.htm#fr_66) *Æliani de Natura
Animalium*, F. Jacobs. Jenæ, 1832.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[76:\*](mm05.htm#fr_67) *Géographie d’Edrisi,
traduite de l’Arabe en Français*, P. Amédée Jaubert, 2 vols. Paris,
1836.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[76:†](mm05.htm#fr_68) *Phil. Trans.*, vol.
cxlix. p. 43, 1859; vol. clxxi, p. 1,037, 1880; vol. clxxii. p. 547,
1881.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[77:\*](mm05.htm#fr_69) Description of some New
Species and Genera of Reptiles from Western Australia, discovered by
John Gould, Esq., *Annals and Magazine of Natural History*, vol. vii. p.
88, 1841.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Antiquity of Man](mm06)
