[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mm06)  [Next](mm08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1851709444/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mythical Monsters*, by Charles Gould, \[1886\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### THE DELUGE NOT A MYTH.

IF we assume that the antiquity of man is as great, or even
approximately as great, as Sir Charles Lyell and his followers affirm,
the question naturally arises, what has he been doing during those
countless ages, prior to historic times? what evidences has he afforded
of the possession of an intelligence superior to that of the brute
creation by which he has been surrounded? what great monuments of his
fancy and skill remain? or has the sea of time engulphed any that he
erected, in abysses so deep that not even the bleached masts project
from the surface, to testify to the existence of the good craft buried
below?

These questions have been only partially asked, and but slightly
answered. They will, however, assume greater proportions as the science
of archæology extends itself, and perhaps receive more definite replies
when fresh fields for investigation are thrown open in those portions of
the old world which Asiatic reserve has hitherto maintained inviolable
against scientific prospectors.

If man has existed for fifty thousand years, as some demand, or for two
hundred thousand, as others imagine, has his intelligence gone on
increasing [throughout](errata.htm#0.md) the period? and if so, in what
ratio? Are the terms of the series which involve the unknown quantity
stated with sufficient precision to enable us to determine whether his
development has been slow, gradual, and more or less uniform, as in
arithmetical, or gaining at a rapidly increasing rate, as in geometric
progression. Or, to pursue the simile, could it be more

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

accurately expressed by the equation to a curve which traces an
ascending and descending path, and, though controlled in reality by an
absolute law, appears to exhibit an unaccountable and capricious variety
of positive and negative phases, of *points d’arrêt*, nodes, and cusps.

These questions cannot yet be definitely answered; they may be proposed
and argued on, but for a time the result will doubtless be a variety of
opinions, without the possibility of solution by a competent arbiter.

For example, it is a matter of opinion whether the intelligence of the
present day is or is not of a higher order than that which animated the
*savans* of ancient Greece. It is probable that most would answer in the
affirmative, so far as the question pertains to the culture of the
masses only, but how will scholars decide, who are competent to compare
the works of our present poets, sculptors, dramatists, logicians,
philosophers, historians, and statesmen, with those of Homer, Pindar,
[Æschylus](errata.htm#1.md), Euripides, Herodotus, Aristotle, Euclid,
Phidias, Plato, Solon, and the like? Will they, in a word, consider the
champions of intellect of the present day so much more robust than their
competitors of three thousand years ago as to render them easy victors?
This would demonstrate a decided advance in human intelligence during
that period; but, if this is the case, how is it that all the great
schools and universities still cling to the reverential study of the old
masters, and have, until quite recently, almost ignored modern arts,
sciences, and languages.

We must remember that the ravages of time have put out of court many of
the witnesses for the one party to the suit, and that natural decay,
calamity, and wanton destruction <span id="fr_81"></span>[\*](#fn_81.md)

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

have obliterated the bulk of the philosophy of past ages. With the
exceptions of the application of steam, the employment of moveable type
in printing, <span id="fr_82"></span>[\*](#fn_82.md) and the utilization of
electricity, there are few arts and inventions which have not descended
to us from remote antiquity, lost, many of them, for a time, some of
them for ages, and then re-discovered and paraded as being, really and
truly, something new under the sun.

Neither must we forget the oratory and poetry, the master-pieces of
logical argument, the unequalled sculptures, and the exquisitely
proportioned architecture of Greece, or the thorough acquaintance with
mechanical principles and engineering skill evinced by the Egyptians, in
the construction of the pyramids, vast temples, canals <span
id="fr_83"></span>[†](#fn_83.md) and hydraulic works. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[‡](#fn_84.md)

Notice, also, the high condition of civilization possessed

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span id="img_fig22"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig22.jpg"><img src="tn/fig22.jpg" alt="FIG. 22.ROYAL DIADEM OF THE CHEN DYNASTY. (&lt;i&gt;From the San Li Tu&lt;/i&gt;.)" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
FIG. 22.—ROYAL DIADEM OF THE CHEN DYNASTY. (<em>From the San Li T’u</em>.)<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

by the Chinese four thousand years ago, their enlightened and humane
polity, their engineering works, <span id="fr_85"></span>[\*](#fn_85.md)
their provision for the proper administration of different departments
of the State, and their clear and intelligent documents. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[†](#fn_86.md)

In looking back upon these, I think we can hardly distinguish any such
deficiency of intellect, in comparison with ours, on the part of these
our historical predecessors as to indicate so rapid a change of
intelligence as would, if we were able to carry our comparison back for
another similar period, inevitably land us among a lot of savages
similar to

 

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span id="img_fig23"></span>

[![FIG. 23.VASE. HAN DYNASTY&lt;br&gt; B.C. 206 to A.D. 23.&lt;br&gt;
(From the &lt;i&gt;Poh Ku Tu&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig23.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig23.jpg.md)  
FIG. 23.—VASE. HAN DYNASTY  
B.C. 206 to A.D. 23.  
(From the *Poh Ku T’u*.)  

<span id="img_fig24"></span>

[![FIG. 24.CYATHUS OR CUP FOR&lt;br&gt; LIBATIONS. SHANG
DYNASTY,&lt;br&gt; B.C. 1766 to B.C. 1122.&lt;br&gt; (From the
&lt;i&gt;Poh Ku Tu&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig24.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig24.jpg.md)  
FIG. 24.—CYATHUS OR CUP FOR  
LIBATIONS. SHANG DYNASTY,  
B.C. 1766 to B.C. 1122.  
(From the *Poh Ku T’u*.)  

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

those who fringe the civilization of the present period. Intellectually
measured, the civilized men of eight or ten thousand years ago must, I
think, have been but little inferior to ourselves, and we should have to
peer very far back indeed before we reached a status or condition in
which the highest type of humanity was the congener of the cave lion,
disputing with him a miserable existence, shielded only from the
elements by an overhanging rock, or the fortuitous discovery of some
convenient cavern.

If this be so, we are forced back again to the consideration of the
questions with which this section opened; where are the evidences of
man's early intellectual superiority? are they limited to those deduced
from the discovery of certain stone implements of the early rude, and
later polished ages? and, if so, can we offer any feasible explanation
either of their non-existence or disappearance?

In the first place, it may be considered as admitted by archæologists
that no exact line can be drawn between the later of the two
stone-weapon epochs, the polished Neolithic stone epoch, and the
succeeding age of bronze. They are agreed that these overlap each other,
and that the rude hunters, who contented themselves with stone
implements of war and the chase, were coeval with people existing in
other places, acquainted with the metallurgical art, and therefore of a
high order of intelligence. The former are, in fact, brought within the
limit of historic times.

A similar inference might not unfairly be drawn with regard to those
numerous discoveries of proofs of the existence of ruder man, at still
earlier periods. The flint-headed arrow of the North American Indian,
and the stone hatchet of the Australian black-fellow exist to the
present day; and but a century or two back, would have been the sole
representatives of the constructive intelligence of humanity over nearly
one half the inhabited surface of the world. No philosopher, with these
alone to reason on, could have

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span id="img_fig25"></span>

[![FIG. 25.INCENSE BURNER (1). CHEN DYNASTY, B.C. 1122 to B.C.
255.&lt;br&gt; (From the &lt;i&gt;Poh Ku
Tu&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig25.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig25.jpg.md)  
FIG. 25.—INCENSE BURNER (1). CHEN DYNASTY, B.C. 1122 to B.C. 255.  
(From the *Poh Ku T’u*.)  

<span id="img_fig26"></span>

[![FIG. 26.TRIPOD OF THE SHANG DYNASTY. Probable date, B.C.
1649.&lt;br&gt; (From the &lt;i&gt;Poh Ku
Tu&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig26.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig26.jpg.md)  
FIG. 26.—TRIPOD OF THE SHANG DYNASTY. Probable date, B.C. 1649.  
(From the *Poh Ku T’u*.)  

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span id="img_fig27"></span>

[![FIG. 27.TRIPOD OF FU YIH, SHANG DYNASTY.&lt;br&gt; (From the
&lt;i&gt;Poh Ku Tu&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig27.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig27.jpg.md)  
FIG. 27.—TRIPOD OF FU YIH, SHANG DYNASTY.  
(From the *Poh Ku T’u*.)  

<span id="img_fig28"></span>

[![FIG. 28.TRIPOD OF KWAI WAN, CHEN DYNASTY, B.C. 1122 to B.C.
255&lt;br&gt; (From the &lt;i&gt;Poh Ku Tu&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig28.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig28.jpg.md)  
FIG. 28.—TRIPOD OF KWAI WAN, CHEN DYNASTY, B.C. 1122 to B.C. 255  
(From the *Poh Ku T’u*.)  

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

imagined the settled existence, busy industry, and superior intelligence
which animated the other half; and a parallel suggestive argument may be
supported by the discovery of human relics, implements, and artistic
delineations such as those of the hairy mammoth or the cave-bear. These
may possibly be the traces of an outlying savage who co-existed with a
far more highly-organized people elsewhere, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[\*](#fn_87.md) just as at the present day the Esquimaux,
who are by some geologists considered as the descendants of Palæolithic
man, co-exist with ourselves. They, like their reputed ancestors, have
great ability in carving on bone, &c.; and as an example of their
capacity not only to conceive in their own minds a

<span id="img_fig29"></span>

[![FIG. 29. (From Sir John Ross Second Voyage to the Arctic
Regions.)](tn/fig29.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig29.jpg.md)  
FIG. 29. (From Sir John Ross’ Second Voyage to the Arctic Regions.)  

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

correct notion of the relative bearings of localities, but also to
impart the idea lucidly to others, I annex a wood-cut of a chart drawn
by them, impromptu, at the request of Sir J. Ross, who, inferentially,
vouches for its accuracy.

There is but a little step between carving the figure of a mammoth or
horse, and using them as symbols. Multiply them, and you have the early
hieroglyphic written language of the Chinese and Egyptians. It is not an
unfair presumption that at no great distance, in time or space, either
some generations later among his own descendants, or so many nations’
distance among his coevals, the initiative faculty of the Palæolithic
savage was usefully applied to the communication of ideas, just as at a
much later date the Kououen symbolic language was developed or made use
of among the early Chinese. <span id="fr_88"></span>[\*](#fn_88.md)

Such is, necessarily, the first stage of any written language, and it
may, as I think, perhaps have occurred, been developed into higher
stages, culminated, and perished at many successive epochs during man's
existence, presuming it to have been so extended as the progress of
geology tends to affirm.

May not the meandering of the tide of civilization westward during the
last three thousand years, bearing on its crest fortune and empire, and
leaving in its hollow decay and oblivion, possibly be the sequel of many
successive waves which have preceded it in the past, rising, some
higher, some lower, as waves will.

In comparison with the vast epochs of which we treat how

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span id="img_fig30"></span>

[![FIG. 30.EARLY CHINESE HIEROGLYPHICS.](tn/fig30.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig30.jpg.md)  
FIG. 30.—EARLY CHINESE HIEROGLYPHICS.  

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span id="img_fig31"></span>

[![FIG. 31.EARLY CHINESE HIEROGLYPHICS.](tn/fig31.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig31.jpg.md)  
FIG. 31.—EARLY CHINESE HIEROGLYPHICS.  

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

near to us are Nineveh, Babylon, and Carthage! Yet the very sites of the
former two have become uncertain, and of the last we only know by the
presence of the few scattered ruins on the shores of the Mediterranean
Sea. Tyre, the vast entrepôt of commerce in the days of Solomon, was
stated, rightly or wrongly, by Benjamin of Tudela, to be but barely
discernible (in 1173) in ruins beneath the waves; and the glory of the
world, the temple of King Solomon, was represented at the same date by
two copper columns which had been carried off and preserved in Rome. It
is needless to quote the cases of Persia, Greece, and Rome, and of many
once famous cities, which have dissolved in ruin; except as assisting to
point the moral that conquest, which is always recurring, means to a
great extent obliteration, the victor having no sympathy with the
preservation of the time-honoured relics of the vanquished.

When decay and neglect are once initiated, the hand of man largely
assists the ravages of time. The peasant carts the marbles of an
emperor's palace to his lime-kiln, <span id="fr_89"></span>[\*](#fn_89.md)
or an Egyptian monarch strips the casing of a pyramid <span
id="fr_90"></span>[†](#fn_90.md) to furnish the material for a royal
residence.

Nor is it beyond the limits of possibility that the arrogant caprice of
some, perhaps Mongol, invader in the future, may level the imperishable
pyramids themselves for the purpose of constructing some defensive work,
or the gratification of an inordinate vanity.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

In later dates how many comfortable modern residences have been erected
from the pillage of mediæval abbey, keep, or castle? and how many fair
cities <span id="fr_91"></span>[\*](#fn_91.md) must have fallen to decay,
in Central and Eastern Asia, and how many numerous populations dwindled
to insignificance since the days when Ghenghis and Timour led forth
their conquering hordes, and Nadun could raise four hundred thousand
horsemen <span id="fr_92"></span>[†](#fn_92.md) to contest the victory with
Kublai Khan.

The unconscious ploughman in Britain has for centuries guided his share
above the remains of Roman villas, and the inhabitants of the later city
of Hissarlik were probably as ignorant that a series of lost and buried
cities lay below them, as they would have been incredulous that within a
thousand years their own existence would have passed from the memory of
man, and their re-discovery been due only to the tentative researches of
an enthusiastic admirer of Homer. Men live by books and bards longer
than by the works of their hands, and impalpable tradition often
survives the material vehicle which was destined to perpetuate it. The
name of Priam was still a household word when the site of his palace had
been long forgotten.

The vaster a city is, the more likely is it to be constructed upon the
site of its own grave, or, in other words, to occupy the broad valley of
some important river beneath whose gravels it is destined to be buried.

Perched on an eminence, and based on solid rock, it may escape
entombment, but more swiftly and more certainly will

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

it be destroyed by the elements, <span id="fr_93"></span>[\*](#fn_93.md)
and by the decomposition of its own material furnish the shroud for its
envelopment. <span id="fr_94"></span>[†](#fn_94.md) It is not altogether
surprising then that no older discoveries than those already quoted have
yet been made, for these would probably never have resulted if tradition
had not both stimulated and guided the fortunate explorer.

It is, therefore, no unfair inference that the remains of equally
important, but very much more ancient cities and memorials of
civilization may have hitherto entirely escaped our observation,
presuming that we can show some reasonable grounds for belief that,
subsequent to their completion, a catastrophe has occurred of
sufficiently universal a character to have obliterated entirely the
annals of the past, and to have left in the possession of its few
survivors but meagre and fragmentary recollections of all that had
preceded them.

Now this is precisely what the history and traditions of all nations
affirm to have occurred. However, as a variance of opinion exists as to
the credence which should be attached to these traditions, I shall,
before expressing my own views upon the subject, briefly epitomize those
entertained by two authors of sufficient eminence to warrant their being
selected as representatives of two widely opposite schools.

These gentlemen, to whom we are indebted for exhaustive papers, <span
id="fr_95"></span>[‡](#fn_95.md) embracing the pith of all the information
extant

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

upon the subject, have tapped the same sources of information, consulted
the same authorities, ranged their information in almost identical
order, argued from the same data, and arrived at diametrically opposite
conclusions.

Mr. Cheyne, following the lead of Continental mythologists, deduces that
the Deluge stories were on the whole propagated from several independent
centres, and adopts the theory of Schirrer and Gerland that they are
ether myths, without any historical foundation, which have been
transferred from the sky to the earth.

M. Lenormant, upon the other hand, eliminating from the inquiry the
great inundation of China in the reign of Yao, and some others, as
purely local events, concludes as the result of his researches that the
story of the Deluge "is a universal tradition among all branches of the
human race," with the one exception of the black. He further argues:
"Now a recollection thus precise and concordant cannot be a myth
voluntarily invented. No religious or cosmogenic myth presents this
character of universality. It must arise from the reminiscences of a
real and terrible event, so powerfully impressing the imagination of the
first ancestors of our race, as never to have been forgotten by their
descendants. This cataclysm must have occurred near the first cradle of
mankind and before the dispersion of families from which the different
races of men were to spring."

Lord Arundel of Wardour adopts a similar view in many respects to that
of M. Lenormant, but argues for the existence of a Deluge tradition in
Egypt, and the identity of the Deluge of Yu (in China) with the general
catastrophe of which the tradition is current in other countries.

The subject is in itself so inviting, and has so direct a bearing upon
the argument of this work that I propose to re-examine the same
materials and endeavour to show from them that the possible solutions of
the question have not yet been exhausted,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

We have as data:—

1\. *The Biblical account*.

2\. *That of Josephus*.

3\. *The Babylonian*.

4\. *The Hindu*.

5\. *The Chinese*.

6\. *The traditions of all nations in the northern hemisphere, and of
certain in the southern*.

It is unnecessary to travel in detail over the well-worn ground of the
myths and traditions prevalent among European nations, the presumed
identity of Noah with Saturn, Janus, and the like, or the Grecian
stories of Ogyges and Deucalion. Nor is anyone, I think, disposed to
dispute the identity of the cause originating the Deluge legends in
Persia and in India. How far these may have descended from independent
sources it is now difficult to determine, though it is more than
probable that their vitality is due to the written Semitic records. Nor
is it necessary to discuss any unimportant differences which may exist
between the text of Josephus and that of the Bible, which agree
sufficiently closely, but are mere abstracts (with the omission of many
important details) in comparison with the Chaldæan account. This may be
accounted for by their having been only derived from oral tradition
through the hands of Abraham. The Biblical narrative shows us that
Abraham left Chaldæa on a nomadic enterprise, just as a squatter leaves
the settled districts of Australia or America at the present day, and
strikes out with a small following and scanty herd to search for,
discover, and occupy new country; his destiny leading him, may be for a
few hundred, may be for a thousand miles. In such a train there is no
room for heavy baggage, and the stone tablets containing the detailed
history of the Deluge would equally with all the rest of such heavy
literature be left behind.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

The tradition, however reverenced and faithfully preserved at first,
would, under such circumstances, soon get mutilated and dwarfed. We may,
therefore, pass at once to the much more detailed accounts presented in
the text of Berosus, and in the more ancient Chaldæan tablets deciphered
by the late Mr. G. Smith from the collation of three separate copies.

The account by Berosus (see Appendix) was taken from the sacred books of
Babylon, and is, therefore, of less value than the last-mentioned as
being second-hand. The leading incidents in his narrative are similar to
those contained in that of Genesis, but it terminates with the vanishing
of Xisuthros (Noah) with his wife, daughter, and the pilot, after they
had descended from the vessel and sacrificed to the gods, and with the
return of his followers to Babylon. They restored it, and disinterred
the writings left (by the pious obedience of Xisuthros) in Shurippak,
the city of the Sun.

The great majority of mythologists appear to agree in assigning a much
earlier date to the Deluge, than that which has hitherto been generally
accepted as the soundest interpretation of the chronological evidence
afforded by the Bible.

I have never had the advantage of finding the arguments on which this
opinion is based, formulated in association, although, as incidentally
referred to by various authors, they appear to be mainly deduced from
the references made, both by sacred and profane writers, to large
populations and important cities existing subsequently to the Deluge,
but at so early a date, as to imply the necessity of a very long
interval indeed between the general annihilation caused by the
catastrophe, and the attainment of so high a pitch of civilization and
so numerous a population as their existence implies.

Philologists at the same time declare that a similar inference may be
drawn from the vast periods requisite for the divergence

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

of different languages from the parent stock, <span
id="fr_96"></span>[\*](#fn_96.md) while the testimony of the monuments and
sculptures of ancient Egypt assures us that race distinction of as
marked a type as occurs at the present day existed at so early a
date <span id="fr_97"></span>[†](#fn_97.md) as to preclude the possibility
of the derivation of present nations from the descendants of Noah within
the limited period usually allowed.

These difficulties vanish, if we consider the Biblical and Chaldean
narratives as records of a local catastrophe, of vast extent perhaps,
and resulting in general but not total destruction, whose sphere may
have embraced the greater portion of Western Asia, and perhaps Europe;
but which, while wrecking the great centres of northern civilization,
did not extend southwards to Africa and Egypt. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[‡](#fn_98.md) The Deluge legends indigenous in Mexico at
the date of the Spanish conquest, combining the Biblical incidents of
the despatch of birds from a vessel with the conception of four
consecutive ages terminating in general destruction, and corresponding
with the four ages or Yugas of India, supply in themselves the testimony
of their probable origin from Asia. The cataclysm which caused what is
called the Deluge may or may not have extended to America, probably not.
In a future page

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I shall enumerate
a few of the resemblances between the inhabitants of the New World and
of the Old indicative of their community of origin.

I refer the reader to M. Lenormant's valuable essay <span
id="fr_99"></span>[\*](#fn_99.md) for his critical notice on the dual
composition of the account in Genesis, derived as it appears to be from
two documents, one of which has been called the Elohistic and the other
the Jehovistic account, and for his comparison of it with the Chaldean
narrative exhumed by the late Mr. George Smith from the Royal Library of
Nineveh, the original of which is probably of anterior date to Moses,
and nearly contemporaneous with Abraham.

I transcribe from M. Lenormant the text of the Chaldean narrative,
because there are points in it which have not yet been commented on, and
which, as it appears to me, assist in the solution of the Deluge story:—

I will reveal to thee, O Izdhubar, the history of my preservation and
tell to thee the decision of the gods.

The town of Shurippak, a town which thou knowest, is situated on the
Euphrates. It was ancient, and in it \[men did not honour\] the gods.
\[I alone, I was\] their servant, to the great gods—\[The gods took
counsel on the appeal of\] Anu—\[a deluge was proposed by\] Bel—\[and
approved by Nabon, Nergal and\] Adar.

And the god \[Ea,\] the immutable lord,—repeated this command in a
dream.—I listened to the decree of fate that he announced, and he said
to me:—"Man of Shurippak, son of Ubaratutu—thou, build a vessel and
finish it \[quickly\].—By a \[deluge\] I will destroy substance and
life.—Cause thou to go up into the vessel the substance of all that has
life.—The vessel thou shalt build—600 cubits shall be the measure of its
length—and 60 cubits the amount of its breadth and of its
height—\[Launch it\] thus on the ocean and cover it with a roof."—I
understood, and I said to Ea, my lord:—"\[The vessel\] that thou
commandest me to build thus,—\[when\] I shall do it—young and old
\[shall laugh at me\]."—\[Ea opened his mouth and\] spoke.—He said to
me, his servant:—"\[If they laugh at thee\] thou shalt say to them:
\[Shall be punished\] he who has insulted me, \[for the protection of
the gods\] is over me. . . . . like to caverns . . . . . . . . I will
exercise my judgment

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

on that which is on high and that which is below . . . . . . . Close the
vessel . . . .—. . . . At a given moment that I shall cause thee to
know,—enter into it, and draw the door of the ship towards thee.—Within
it, thy grains, thy furniture, thy provisions,—thy riches, thy
men-servants, and thy maid-servants, and thy young people—the cattle of
the field and the wild beasts of the plain that I will assemble—and that
I will send thee, shall be kept behind thy door."—Khasisatra opened his
mouth and spoke;—he said to Ea, his lord:—"No one has made \[such a\]
ship.—On the prow I will fix . . . .—I shall see . . . . and the vessel
. . . .—the vessel thou commandest me to build \[thus\]—which in . . .
. <span id="fr_100"></span>[\*](#fn_100.md)

On the fifth day \[the two sides of the bark\] were raised.—In its
covering fourteen in all were its rafters—fourteen in all did it count
above.—I placed its roof and I covered it.—I embarked in it on the sixth
day; I divided its floors on the seventh;—I divided the interior
compartments on the eighth. I stopped up the chinks through which the
water entered in;—I visited the chinks and added what was wanting.—I
poured on the exterior three times 3,600 measures of asphalte,—and three
times 3,600 measures of asphalte within.—Three times 3,600 men, porters,
brought on their heads the chests of provisions.—I kept 3,600 chests for
the nourishment of my family,—and the mariners divided amongst
themselves twice 3,600 chests.—For \[provisioning\] I had oxen slain;—I
instituted \[rations\] for each day.—In \[anticipation of the need of\]
drinks, of barrels and of wine—\[I collected in quantity\] like to the
waters of a river, \[of provisions\] in quantity like to the dust of the
earth.—\[To arrange them in\] the chests I set my hand to. . . . . of
the sun . . . . the vessel was completed.—. . . . strong and—I had
carried above and below the furniture of the ship.—\[This lading filled
the two-thirds.\]

All that I possessed I gathered together; all I possessed of silver I
gathered together; all that I possessed of gold I gathered—all that I
possessed of the substance of life of every kind I gathered together.—I
made all ascend into the vessel; my servants male and female,—the cattle
of the fields, the wild beasts of the plains, and the sons of the
people, I made them all ascend.

Shamash (the sun) made the moment determined, and—he announced it in
these terms:—"In the evening I will cause it to rain abundantly from
heaven; enter into the vessel and close the door."—The fixed moment had
arrived, which he announced in these terms: "In the evening I will cause
it to rain abundantly from heaven."—When the evening of that day
arrived, I was afraid,—I entered into the vessel and shut my door.—In
shutting the vessel, to Buzurshadirabi, the pilot,—I confided this
dwelling with all that it contained.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

Mu-sheri-ina-namari <span id="fr_101"></span>[\*](#fn_101.md)—rose from the
foundations of heaven in a black cloud;—Ramman <span
id="fr_102"></span>[†](#fn_102.md) thundered in the midst of the cloud—and
Nabon and Sharru marched before;—they marched, devastating the mountain
and the plain;—Nergal <span id="fr_103"></span>[‡](#fn_103.md) the
powerful, dragged chastisements after him;—Adar <span
id="fr_104"></span>[§](#fn_104.md) advanced, overthrowing before him;—the
archangels of the abyss brought destruction,—in their terrors they
agitated the earth.—The inundation of Barman swelled up to the sky,—and
\[the earth\] became without lustre, was changed into a desert.

They broke . . . . of the surface of the \[earth like . . . . ;—\[they
destroyed\] the living beings of the surface of the earth.—The terrible
\[Deluge\] on men swelled up to \[heaven\].—The brother no longer saw
his brother; men no longer knew each other. In heaven—the gods became
afraid of the waterspout, and—sought a refuge; they mounted up to the
heaven of Anu. <span id="fr_105"></span>[\*\*](#fn_105.md)—The gods were
stretched out motionless, pressing one against another like dogs.—Ishtar
wailed like a child,—the great goddess pronounced her discourse: Here is
humanity returned into mud, and—this is the misfortune that I have
announced in the presence of the gods. So I announced the misfortune in
the presence of the gods,—for the evil I announced the terrible
\[chastisement\] of men who are mine.—I am the mother who gave birth to
men, and—like to the race of fishes, there they are filling the sea;—and
the gods by reason of that—which the archangels of the abyss are doing,
weep with me."—The gods on their seats were seated in tears,—and they
held their lips closed, \[revolving\] future things.

Six days and as many nights passed; the wind, the waterspout, and the
diluvian rain were in all their strength. At the approach of the seventh
day the diluvian rain grew weaker, the terrible waterspout—. which had
assailed after the fashion of an earthquake—grew calm, the sea inclined
to dry up, and the wind and the waterspout came to an end. I looked at
the sea, attentively observing—and the whole of humanity had returned to
mud; like unto sea-weeds the corpses floated. I opened the window, and
the light smote on my face. I was seized with sadness; I sat down and I
wept;—and my tears came over my face.

I looked at the regions bounding the sea; towards the twelve points of
the horizon; not any continent.—The vessel was borne above the land of
Nizir,—the mountain of Nizir arrested the vessel, and did not permit it
to pass over.—A day and a second day the mountain of Nizir arrested the
vessel, and did not permit it to pass over;—the third and

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

fourth day the mountain of Nizir arrested the vessel, and did not permit
it to pass over;—the fifth and sixth day the mountain of Nizir arrested
the vessel, and did not permit it to pass over.—At the approach of the
seventh day, I sent out and loosed a dove. The dove went, turned,
and—found no place to light on, and it came back. I sent out and loosed
a swallow; the swallow went, turned, and—found no place to light on, and
it came back. I sent out and loosed a raven; the raven went, and saw the
corpses on the waters; it ate, rested, turned, and came not back.

I then sent out (what was in the vessel) towards the four winds, and I
offered a sacrifice. I raised the pile of my burnt-offering on the peak
of the mountain; seven by seven I disposed the measured vases, <span
id="fr_106"></span>[\*](#fn_106.md)—and beneath I spread rushes, cedar, and
juniper wood. The gods were seized with the desire of it,—the gods were
seized with a benevolent desire of it;—and the gods assembled like flies
above the master of the sacrifice. From afar, in approaching, the great
goddess raised the great zones that Aim has made for their glory (the
gods’). <span id="fr_107"></span>[†](#fn_107.md) These gods, luminous
crystal before me, I will never leave them; in that day I prayed that I
might never leave them. "Let the gods come to my sacrificial pile!—but
never may Bel come to my sacrificial pile! for be did nut master
himself, and he has made the waterspout for the Deluge, and he has
numbered my men for the pit."

From far, in drawing near, Bel—saw the vessel, and Bel stopped;—he was
filled with anger against the gods and the celestial archangels: "No one
shall come out alive! No man shall be preserved from the abyss!"—Adar
opened his mouth and said; he said to the warrior Bel:—"What other than
Ea should have formed this resolution?—for Ea possesses knowledge and
\[he foresees\] all."—Ea opened his mouth and spake; he said to the
warrior Bel:—"O thou, herald of the gods, warrior,—as thou didst not
master thyself, thou hast made the waterspout of the deluge.—Let the
sinner carry the weight of his sins, the blasphemer the weight of his
blasphemy.—Please thyself with this good pleasure, and it shall never be
infringed; faith in it never \[shall be violated\].—Instead of thy
making a new deluge, let hymnal; appear and reduce the number of men;
instead of thy making a new deluge, let there be famine, and let the
earth be \[devastated\];—instead of thy making a new deluge, let
Dibbara <span id="fr_108"></span>[‡](#fn_108.md) appear, and let men be
\[mown down\].—I have not revealed the decision of the great gods;—it is
Khasisatra who interpreted a dream and comprehended what the gods had
decided."

Then, when his resolve was arrested, Bel entered into the vessel.—He

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

took my hand and made me rise.—He made my wife rise, and made her place
herself at my side.—He turned around us and stopped short; he approached
our group.—"Until now Khasisatra has made part of perishable
humanity;—but lo, now, Khasisatra and his wife are going to be carried
away to live like the gods,—and Khasisatra will reside afar at the mouth
of the rivers."—They carried me away and established me in a remote
place at the mouth of the streams.

This narrative agrees with the Biblical one in ascribing the inundation
to a deluge of rain; but adds further details which connect it with
intense atmospheric disturbance, similar to that which would be produced
by a series of cyclones, or typhoons, of unusual severity and duration.

The intense gloom, the deluge of rain, terrific violence of wind, and
the havoc both on sea and land, which accompany the normal cyclones
occurring annually on the eastern coast of China, and elsewhere, and
lasting but a few hours in any one locality, can hardly be credited,
except by those who have experienced them. They are, however, sufficient
to render explicable the general devastation and loss of life which
would result from the duration of typhoons, or analogous tempests, of
abnormal intensity, for even the limited period of six days and nights
allotted in the text above, and much more so for that of one hundred and
fifty days assigned to it in the Biblical account.

As illustrating this I may refer to a few calamities of recent date,
which, though of trivial importance in comparison with the stupendous
event under our consideration, bring home to us the terribly devastating
power latent in the elements.

In Bengal, a cyclone on October 31, 1876, laid under water three
thousand and ninety-three square miles, and destroyed two hundred and
fifteen thousand lives.

A typhoon which raged in Canton, Hongkong, and Macao on September 22,
1874, besides much other destruction, destroyed several thousand people
in Macao and the adjacent villages, the number of corpses in the town
being so numerous that they had to be gathered in heaps and burnt with
kerosene,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

the population, without the Chinese who refused to lend assistance,
being insufficient to bury them.

A tornado in Canton, on April 11, 1878, destroyed, in the course of a
few minutes, two thousand houses and ten thousand lives.

In view of these few historical facts, which might be greatly
supplemented, there appears to my mind to be no difficulty in believing
that the continuance, during even only six days and six nights, of
extraordinarily violent circular storms over a given area, would,
especially if accompanied by so-called tidal or earthquake waves, be
sufficient to wreck all sea-going and coasting craft, all river boats,
inundate every country embraced within it to a very great extent,
submerge each metropolis, city, or village, situate either in the deltas
of rivers, or higher up their course, sap, unroof, batter down, and
destroy all dwellings on the highlands, level forests, destroy all
domestic animals, sweep away all cultivated soil, or bury it beneath an
enormous thickness of *débris*, tear away the soil from the declivities
of hills and mountains, destroy all shelter, and hence, by exposure,
most of those wretched human beings who might have escaped drowning on
the lower levels. The few survivors would with difficulty escape
starvation, or death from subsequent exposure to the deadly malaria
which would be liberated by the rooting up of the accumulated *débris*
of centuries. This latter supposition appears to me to be directly
indicated by the passage towards the end of the extract referring to
famine, and to the devastation of the earth by Dibbara (the god of
epidemics).

It is noticeable that in this account there is no suggestion of complete
immersion, Khasisatra simply says there is not any continent (*i.e.* all
the hill ranges within sight would stand out from the inundation like
islands), while he speaks of his vessel being arrested by the mountain
of Nizir, which must consequently have been above the surface of the
water.

Neither is there any such close limitation of the number

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

of persons preserved, as in the Biblical story, for Khasisatra took with
him his men-servants, maid-servants, and his young people, while the
version transmitted by Berosus (see Appendix to this Chapter), states
that Xisuthros embarked his wife, children, and his intimate friends,
and that these latter subsequently founded numerous cities, built
temples, and restored Babylon.

We have thus a fair nucleus for starting a fresh population in the
Euphrates valley, which may have received accessions from the gradual
concentration of scattered survivors, and from the enterprise of
maritime adventurers from the African coast and elsewhere, possibly also
nomads from the north, east, and west may have swelled the numbers, and
a polyglot community have been established, which subsequently, through
race distinctions, jealousies, and incompatibility of language, became
again dismembered, as recorded in the history of the attempted erection
of the Tower of Babel.

Confining our attention for the moment to this one locality, we may
imagine that the young population would not be deterred by any
apprehension of physical danger from re-inhabiting such of the old
cities as remained recognizable; since we see that men do not hesitate
to recommence the building of cities overthrown by earthquake shocks
almost before the last tremblings are over; or, as in the case of
Herculaneum and Pompeii, within the range of volcanoes which may have
already repeatedly vomited destroying floods of lava. Yet, in this
instance, they would probably invest the calamity with a supernatural
horror, and regard it, as the text expresses it, as a chastisement from
the gods for their impiety. If this were so, the very memory of such
cities would soon be lost, and with it all the treasures of art and
literature which they contained. <span id="fr_109"></span>[\*](#fn_109.md)

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

The Hindu account is taken from the *S´atapatha-Brâhmana*, a work of
considerable antiquity, being one of a series which Professor Max Müller
believes to have been written eight hundred years before Christ. A
literal translation of the legend, as given in this venerable work, is
as follows:—

"To Manu in the morning they brought water for washing, just as they
bring it for washing the hands. As he was using the water, a fish came
into his hand. This (fish) said to him, 'Preserve me, and I will save
thee.' (Manu said), 'From what wilt thou preserve me?' (The fish
replied), 'A flood will carry away all these creatures; from that I will
preserve thee.' (Manu said), 'How is thy preservation (to be effected)?'
(The fish replied), 'As long as we are small, there is great danger of
our destruction; fish even devours fish: at first preserve me in a jar.
When I grow too big for that, cut a trench, and preserve me in that.
When I outgrow that, carry me to the sea; then I shall be beyond (the
reach of) danger.' Soon it became a great fish; it increased greatly.
(The fish said), 'In so many years the flood will come; make a ship and
worship me. On the rising of the flood enter the ship, then I will
preserve thee.' Having preserved the fish he brought it to the sea. In
the same year indicated by the fish (Manu) made a ship and worshipped
the fish. When the flood rose he entered the ship; the fish swam near
him: he attached the cable of the ship to his (the fish's) horn. By this
means the fish carried him over the northern mountain (Himalayas). (The
fish said),

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'I have preserved
thee: fasten the ship to a tree. But lest the water cut thee off whilst
thou art on the mountain, as fast as the water subsides thou wilt
descend with it.' Accordingly he descended (with the water); hence this
became 'Manu's Descent' from the northern mountain. The flood had
carried away all those creatures, Manu alone was left. He being desirous
of offspring performed a sacred rite; there also he offered a
*pâka*-sacrifice. With clarified butter, coagulated milk, whey, and
curds, he made an offering to the waters. In a year a female was
produced; and she arose unctuous from the moisture, with clarified
butter under her feet. Mitra and Varuna came to her; and said to her,
'Who art thou?' (She said), 'The daughter of Manu.' (They said), 'Say
(thou art) our (daughter).' 'No,' she replied, 'I am verily (the
daughter) of him who begot me.' They desired a share in her; she agreed
and did not agree. She went on and came to Manu. Manu said to her, 'Who
art thou?' 'Thy daughter,' she replied. 'How, revered one, art thou my
daughter?' (She replied), 'The offerings which thou hast cast upon the
waters,—clarified butter, coagulated milk, whey, and curds,—from them
thou hast generated me. I am a blessing. Do thou introduce me into the
sacrifice. If thou wilt introduce me into the sacrifice, thou wilt be
(blessed) with abundance of offspring and cattle. Whatever blessing thou
shalt ask through me, will all be given to thee.' Thus he introduced her
in the middle of the sacrifice; for the middle of the sacrifice is that
which comes between the final and the introductory prayers. He, desirous
of offspring, meditating and toiling, went with her. By her he begot
this (offspring), which is (called) 'The offspring of Manu.'"

The correspondence of this legend with the Biblical and the other
accounts is remarkable. We have the announcement of the Deluge, the
construction of a ship, the preservation therein of a representative
man, the settlement of

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

the vessel on a mountain, the gradual subsidence of the water, and the
subsequent re-peopling of the world by the man thus preserved. The very
scene of the cataclysm is in singular agreement with the other accounts;
for the flood is said to carry Manu "over the northern mountain." This
places the scene of the Deluge in Central Asia, beyond the Himalaya
mountains, and it proves that the legend embodies a genuine tradition
brought by the progenitors of the Hindus from their primæval home,
whence also radiated the Semitic and Sinitic branches of mankind.

 

There has been much discussion as to whether the great inundation which
occurred in China during the reign of Yao is identical with that of
Genesis or not. The close proximity of date lends a strong support to
the assumption, and the supposition that the scene of the Biblical
Deluge was local in its origin, but possibly widespread in its results,
further favours the view.

As the rise of the Nile at Cairo is the only intimation which the
inhabitants of Lower Egypt have of the tropical rains of Central Africa,
so the inundation of the countries adjacent to the head waters of the
great rivers of China may alone have informed the inhabitants of that
country of serious elemental disturbances, only reaching, and in a
modified form, their western frontier; and it may well have been that
the deluge which caused a national annihilation in Western Asia was only
a national calamity in the eastern portion of it.

This view is strengthened if we consider that Chinese history has no
record of any deluge prior to this, which could hardly have been the
case had the Chinese migrated from their parent stock subsequent to an
event of such importance; assuming that it had occurred, as there seems
valid reason to suppose, within the limits of written history. The
anachronism between the two dates assigned by Chinese authors (2297
B.C.)

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

and the Jewish historian's calculation (2104 B.C.) is only one hundred
and ninety-three years, and this is not so great but that we may
anticipate its being explained at some future date. Strauchius’
computation of 2293 B.C. for the date of the Biblical deluge is within
four years, and Ussher's (2349-2348) within fifty-one of the Chinese
one. The reason for supposing the deluge of Yao to be historically true,
will be inferred from the arguments borrowed from Mr. Legge on the
subject of the *Shu-king*, in another portion of this volume. It is
detailed in the great Chinese work on history, the
*T‘ung-këen-kang-muh*, by Choo He, of which De Mailla's *History of
China* professes to be a translation.

This states that the inundation happened in the sixty-first year of the
reign of Yao (2297 B.C.), and that the waters of the Yellow River
mingled with those of the Ho-hi-ho and the Yangtsze, ruining all the
agricultural country, which was converted into one vast sea.

But neither in the Bamboo Books nor in the Shu-king do we find that any
local phenomena of importance occurred, with the exception of the
inundation. In fact, the first work is singularly silent on the subject,
and simply says that in his sixty-first year Yao ordered K‘wan of Ts‘ung
to regulate the Ho, and degraded him in his sixty-ninth for being unable
to effect it, as we learn elsewhere.

The Shu is more explicit. The Emperor, consulting one of his chief
officials on the calamity, says: "O chief of the four mountains,
destructive in their overflow are the waters of the inundation. In their
vast extent they embrace the mountains and overtop the hills,
threatening the heavens with their floods, so that the inferior people
groan and murmur."

According to De Mailla's translation, K‘wan laboured uselessly for nine
years, the whole country was overrun with briars and brushwood, the
people had almost forgotten the art of cultivating the ground—they were
without the necessary

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

seeds—and wild animals and birds destroyed all their attempts at
agriculture.

In this extremity Yao consulted Shun, his subsequent successor, who
recommended the appointment of Yu, the son of K‘wan, in his father's
place.

Yu was more successful, and describes his labours as follows:—

“The inundating waters seemed to assail the heavens, and in their vast
extent embraced the mountains and overtopped the hills, so that people
were bewildered and overwhelmed. I mounted my four conveyances, <span
id="fr_110"></span>[\*](#fn_110.md) and all along the hills hewed down the
woods, at the same time, along with Yih, showing the multitudes how to
get flesh to eat.

"I also opened passages for the streams throughout the nine provinces,
and conducted them to the sea. I deepened, moreover, the channels and
canals, and conducted them to the streams, at the same time, along with
Tseih, sowing *grain*, and showing the multitudes how to procure the
food of toil *in addition* to flesh meat."

Yu's success is simply chronicled in the Bamboo Books as, "In his
seventy-fifth year Yu, the Superintendent of Works, regulated the Ho."

There was a legend extant in China in the times of Pinto, which he gives
in his book, of the original Chinese having migrated from a region in
the West, and, following the course of the Ho in boats, finally settling
in the country adjacent to Pekin. That some such event took place is not
unlikely. Its acceptance would explain much that is difficult.

The pioneers, pushing through a country infested with

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

hostile aborigines, who would immediately after their passage close up
the road of communication behind them—pioneers who may have been
fugitives from their kindred through political commotions, or expelled
by successful enemies—would have a further barrier against return, even
were they disposed to attempt it, in the strong opposing current which
had borne them safely to their new homes.

It is probable that such a journey would form an entirely new departure
for their history, and that a few generations later it would resemble a
nebulous chronological zone, on the far side of which could be dimly
seen myths of persons and events representing in reality the history of
the not very remote ancestors from whom they had become separated. The
early arrivals would have been too much occupied with establishing
themselves in their new dominions to be able to give much attention to
keeping records or preserving other than the most utilitarian branches
of knowledge which they had brought with them. The volumes of their
ancestors were probably, like the clay tablets of the royal library of
Babylon, not of a portable nature, at all events to fugitives, whose
knowledge would, therefore, be rather of a practical than of a
cultivated nature, and this would soon become limited for a while to
their chiefs and religious instructors, the exigencies of a colony
menaced with danger prohibiting any general acquisition or extension of
learning.

In this way we can account for the community of the fables relating r.to
the remote antiquity of the Chinese with those of Chaldean and Indian
mythology, and with the highly civilized administration and astrological
knowledge possessed by Yao and Shun as herediton of Fuh Hi, &c.

We can account for their possession of accurate delineations of the
dragon, which would form an important decoration of the standards and
robes of ceremony which were

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

companions of their flight, while their descriptions of the animal and
its qualities would have already entered into the realms of fanciful
exaggeration and myth.

The dragon of Yao and Shun's time, and of Yu's time was, in my opinion,
an aquatic creature, an alligator; but the dragon of their ancestors was
a land lizard, which may even have existed down to the time of the great
cataclysm which we call the Deluge, and the memory of which is best
preserved in the Chinese drawings which have been handed down from
remote antiquity, and have travelled from the great Central Asian
centre, which was once alike its habitat and that of their ancestors.
Its history may perhaps become evolved when the great store of book
knowledge contained in the cuneiform tablets, representing the culture
of the other branch of their great ethnological family, has been more
extensively explored.

Geologists of the present day have a great objection to the bringing in
of cataclysms to account for any considerable natural changes, but this
one I conceive to have been of so stupendous a nature as to have been
quite capable of both extinguishing a species and confusing the
recollection of it. The mere fact of the story of the dragon having
survived such a period argues greatly, in my mind, for the reality of
its previous existence.

Extending our consideration, we are brought face to face with another
very important fact, namely, that a large proportion of the human race
content themselves with ephemeral structures. Thus, for example, the
Chinese neither have now, nor at any time have had, any great
architectural works.

The finest building in China is a reproduction, on a large scale, of the
tent; and the wooden construction is always imitated where the materials
are stone or marble. The supports, often magnificent logs, brought, at
great expense, specially from the Straits, represent tent-poles; and the
roof has always the peaked ends and the curves that recall the

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

drooping canvas of the marquee. Architecture evidently died early; it
never had life enough to assimilate the new material which it found when
it migrated into China Proper. The yamen is a slightly glorified
cottage; the temple is an improved yamen. Sculpture is equally neglected
in this (æsthetically) benighted country. The human form is as dignified
and sightly, to Chinese eyes at least, in China as in the West; but it
never seems to have occurred, throughout so many hundreds of years, to
any Chinaman to perpetuate it in marble or bronze, or to beautify a city
with statues of its deities or great men." <span
id="fr_111"></span>[\*](#fn_111.md)

What holds good of the Chinese now, probably holds good of their
ancestors and the race from which they parted company in Central Asia
five thousand years ago, when they pierced their way eastwards through
the savage aborigines of Thibet and Mongolia, pushing aside tribes which
closed in again behind them, so as to intercept their return or
communication with their mother country—a country which may have been
equally careless of elaborating stupendous and permanent works of
architecture such as other nations glory in possessing, and which, like
the pyramids of Egypt and of Central America, stand forth for thousands
of years as landmarks of the past.

We must, therefore, not be surprised if we do not immediately discover
the vestiges of the people of ten, fifteen, or twenty thousand years
ago. With an ephemeral architecture (which, as we have seen, is all that
a highly populous and long civilized race actually possess), the sites
of vast cities may have become entirely lost to recollection in a few
thousands of years from natural decay, and how much more so would this
be the case if, as we may reasonably argue, minor cataclysms have
intervened, such as local inundations, earthquakes, deposition of
volcanic ashes from even distant

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

sources, the spread of sandy deserts, destruction of life by
exceptionally deadly pestilence, by miasma, or by the outpour of
sulphurous fumes.

We have shown in another chapter how the process of extinction of
species continues to the present day, and from the nature of this
process we may deduce that the number of species which became extinct
during the four or five thousand years preceding the era of exact
history must have been considerable.

The less remarkable of these would expire unnoticed; and only those
distinguished by their size, ferocity, and dangerous qualities, or by
some striking peculiarity, would leave their impress on the mythology of
their habitat. Their exact history would be lost as the cities of their
epoch crumbled away, and during the passage through dark ages of the
people of their period and their descendants, and by conquest or
catastrophes such as we have referred to elsewhere; while the slow
dispersion which appears to have obtained among all nations would render
the record of their qualities the more confused as the myth which
embalmed it spread in circling waves farther and farther from its
original centre.

Amongst the most fell destroyer both of species and of their history
must have been the widespread, although not universal, inundation known
as the Biblical Deluge; a deluge which we think the evidence given in
the foregoing pages, and gathered from divers nations, justifies us in
believing to have really taken place, and not to be, as mythologists
claim, a mere ether myth. As to its date, allowance being made for
trifling errors, there is no reason for disputing the computation of
Jewish chronology, especially as that is closely confirmed by the
entirely independent testimony of Chinese history.

This interposes a vast barrier between us and the knowledge of the past,
a barrier round which we pass for a short

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

distance at either end when we study the history of the two great
streams of nations which have diverged from a common centre, the Chinese
towards the East, the Accadian Chaldæans and Semites towards the West; a
barrier which we may hope to surmount when we are able to discover and
explore the lost cities of that common centre, with the treasures of art
and literature which they must undoubtedly possess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[102:\*](mm07.htm#fr_81.md) Such as the destruction
of the Alexandrine Library on three distinct occasions, (1) upon the
conquest of Alexandria by Julius Cæsar, B.C. 48; (2) in A.D. 390; and,
(3) by Amrou, the general of the Caliph Omar, in 640, who ordered it to
be burnt, and so supplied the baths with fuel for <span id="page_103">p.
103</span> six months. Again, the destruction of all Chinese books by
order of Tsin Shi Hwang-ti, the founder of the Imperial branch of the
Tsin dynasty, and the first Emperor of United China; the only exceptions
allowed being those relating to medicine, divination, and husbandry.
This took place in the year 213 B.C.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[103:\*](mm07.htm#fr_82.md) The Chinese have used
composite blocks (wood engraved blocks with many characters, analogous
to our stereotype plates) from an early period. May not the brick-clay
tablets preserved in the Imperial Library at Babylon have been used for
striking off impressions on some plastic material, just as rubbings may
be taken from the stone drums in China: may not the cylinders with
inscribed characters have been used in some way or other as
printing-rollers for propagating knowledge or proclamations?

<span id="fn_83"></span>[103:†](mm07.htm#fr_83.md) As, for example, the old
canal from the Nile to the Red Sea, in reference to which Herodotus says
(*Euterpe*, 158), "Neco was the son of Psammitichus, and became King of
Egypt: he first set about the canal that leads to the Red Sea, which
Darius the Persian afterwards completed. Its length is a voyage of four
days, and in width it was dug so that two triremes might sail rowed
abreast. The water is drawn into it from the Nile, and it enters it a
little above the city Bubastis, passes near the Arabian city Patumos,
and reaches to the Red Sea." In the digging of which one hundred and
twenty thousand Egyptians perished in the reign of Neco.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[103:‡](mm07.htm#fr_84.md) The
[so-called](errata.htm#2.md) tanks at Aden, reservoirs constructed one
below the <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> other, in a gorge near the
cantonments, are as perfect now as they were when they left the hand of
the contractor or royal engineer in the time of Moses.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[104:\*](mm07.htm#fr_85.md) In the 29th year of the
Emperor Kwei \[B.C. 1559\] they chiselled through mountains and
tunnelled hills, according to the Bamboo Books.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[104:†](mm07.htm#fr_86.md) An interesting line of
investigation might be opened up as to the origin of inventions and the
date of their migrations. The Chinese claim the priority of many
discoveries, such as chess, printing, issue of bank-notes, sinking of
artesian wells, gunpowder, suspension bridges, the mariner's compass,
&c. &c. I extract two remarkable wood-cuts from the San Li T'u, one
appended here showing the origin of our college cap; the other, in the
chapter on the Unicorn, appearing to illustrate the fable of the Sphynx.

I also give a series of engravings, reduced facsimiles of those
contained in a celebrated Chinese work on antiquities, showing the
gradual evolution of the so-called Grecian pattern or scroll
ornamentation, and origination of some of the Greek forms of tripods.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[109:\*](mm07.htm#fr_87.md) "The old Troglodytes,
pile villagers, and bog people, prove to be quite a respectable society.
They have heads so large that many a living person would be only too
happy to possess such."—A. Mitchell, The Past in the Present, Edinburgh,
1880."

<span id="fn_88"></span>[110:\*](mm07.htm#fr_88.md) I have given in the
annexed plates a few examples of the early hieroglyphics on which the
modern Chinese system of writing is based, selected from a limited
number collected by the early Jesuit fathers in China, and contained in
the *Mémoirs concernant l’Histoire, &c. des Chinois, par les
Missionaires de Pekin*, vol. i., Paris, 1776. The modern Chinese
characters conveying the same idea are attached, and their derivation
from the pictorial hieroglyphics, by modification or contraction, is in
nearly all cases obvious.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[113:\*](mm07.htm#fr_89.md) "The Porcelain Tower of
Nankin, once one of the seven wonders of the world, can now only be
found piecemeal in walls of peasants’ huts."—Gutzlaff, *Hist. China*,
vol. i. p. 372.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[113:†](mm07.htm#fr_90.md) The outer casing of the
pyramid of Cheops, which Herodotus (Euterpe, 125) states to have still
exhibited in his time an inscription, telling how much was expended (one
thousand six hundred talents of silver) in radishes, onions, and garlic
for the workmen, has entirely disappeared; as also, almost completely,
the marble casing of the adjacent pyramid of Sen-Saophis. According to
tradition the missing marbles in each instance were taken to build
palaces with in Cairo.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[114:\*](mm07.htm#fr_91.md) "The work of
destruction was carried on methodically. From the Caspian Sea to the
Indus, the Mongols ruined, within four years, more than four centuries
of continuous labour have since restored. The most flourishing cities
became a mass of ruins: Samarkand, Bokhara, Nizabour, Balkh, and
Kandahar shared in the same destruction."—Gutzlaff, Hist. China, vol. i.
p. 358.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[114:†](mm07.htm#fr_92.md) "An army of 700,000
Mongols met half the number of Mahommedans."—*Ibid*. p. 357.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[115:\*](mm07.htm#fr_93.md) Those interested in the
subject may read with great advantage the section on dynamical geology
in Dana's valuable manual. He points out the large amount of wear
accomplished by wind carrying sand in arid regions, by seeds falling in
some crevice, and bursting rocks open through the action of the roots
developed from their sprouting, to say nothing of the more ordinarily
recognized destructive agencies of frost and rain, carbonic acid
resulting from vegetable decomposition, &c.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[115:†](mm07.htm#fr_94.md) Darwin, in *Vegetable
Mould and Earth-worms*, has shown that earthworms play a considerable
part in burying old buildings, even to a depth of several feet.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[115:‡](mm07.htm#fr_95.md) Rev. T. K. Cheyne,
Article "Deluge," *Encyclopædia Britannica*, 1877. François Lenormant,
"The Deluge, its Traditions in Ancient Histories," *Contemporary
Review*, Nov., 1879.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[119:\*](mm07.htm#fr_96.md) Bunsen estimates that
20,000 years were requisite for the formation of the Chinese language,
This, however, is not conceded by other philologists.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[119:†](mm07.htm#fr_97.md) Rawlinson quotes the
African type on the Egyptian sculptures as being identical with that of
the negro of the present day.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[119:‡](mm07.htm#fr_98.md) "While the tradition of
the Deluge holds so considerable a place in the legendary memories of
all branches of the Aryan race, the monuments and original texts of
Egypt, with their many cosmogenic speculations, have not afforded one,
even distant, allusion to this cataclysm. When the Greeks told the
Egyptian priests of the Deluge of Deucalion, their reply was that they
had been preserved from it as well as from the conflagration produced by
Phaeton; they even added that the Hellenes were childish in attaching so
much importance to that event, as there had been several local
catastrophes resembling it."—Lenormant, *Contemporary Review*, November
1879.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[120:\*](mm07.htm#fr_99.md) François Lenormant,
"The Deluge; its Traditions in Ancient Histories," *Contemporary
Review*, vol. xxxvi. p. 465.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[121:\*](mm07.htm#fr_100.md) Here several verses
are wanting.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[122:\*](mm07.htm#fr_101.md) " The water of the
twilight at break of day," one of the personifications of rain.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[122:†](mm07.htm#fr_102.md) The god of thunder.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[122:‡](mm07.htm#fr_103.md) The god of war and
death.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[122:§](mm07.htm#fr_104.md) The Chaldæo-Assyrian
Hercules.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[122:\*\*](mm07.htm#fr_105.md) The superior heaven
of the fixed stars.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[123:\*](mm07.htm#fr_106.md) Vases of the measure
called in Hebrew *Seäh*. This relates to a detail of the ritualistic
prescriptions for sacrifice.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[123:†](mm07.htm#fr_107.md) These metaphorical
expressions appear to designate the rainbow.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[123:‡](mm07.htm#fr_108.md) The god of epidemics.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[126:\*](mm07.htm#fr_109.md) It is probably as
much from a superstitious sentiment as upon merely physical grounds that
many of the deserted cities in Asia have <span id="page_127">p.
127</span> been abandoned; while, as a noticeable instance, we may quote
Gour, the ruined capital of Bengal, which is computed to have extended
from fifteen to twenty miles along the bank of the river, and three in
depth. The native tradition is that it was struck by the wrath of the
gods in the form of an epidemic which slew the whole population. Another
case is the reputed presence of a ruined city, in the vicinity of the
populous city of Nanking, and at some distance from the right bank of
the river Yangtsze, of which the walls only remain, and of the history
of which those in the vicinity profess to have lost all record.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[131:\*](mm07.htm#fr_110.md) *i.e.* (according to
the Historical Records) a carriage to travel along the dry land, a boat
to travel along the water, a sledge to travel through miry places, and,
by using spikes, to travel on the hills.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[134:\*](mm07.htm#fr_111.md) Balfour, *North China
Daily News*, Feb. 11, 1881.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. On the Translation of Myths Between the Old and the
New World](mm08.md)
