[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mm14)  [Next](mm16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1851709444/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mythical Monsters*, by Charles Gould, \[1886\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

# APPENDICES.

### APPENDIX I.

#### THE DELUGE TRADITION ACCORDING TO BEROSUS. <span id="fr_319"></span>[\*](#fn_317.md)

“Obartés Elbaratutu being dead, his son Xisuthros (Khasisatra) reigned
eighteen sares (64,800 years). It was under him that the great Deluge
took place, the history of which is told in the sacred documents as
follows: Cronos (Ea) appeared to him in his sleep, and announced that on
the fifteenth of the month of Daisios—the Assyrian month Sivan—a little
before the summer (solstice) all men should perish by a flood. He
therefore commanded him to take the beginning, the middle, and the end
of whatever was consigned to writing, and to bury it in the city of the
Sun, at Sippara; then to build a vessel and to enter it with his family
and dearest friends; to place in this vessel provisions to eat and
drink, and to cause animals, birds, and quadrupeds to enter it; lastly,
to prepare everything for navigation. And when Xisuthros inquired in
what direction he should steer his bark, he was answered 'Toward the
gods,' and enjoined to pray that good might come of it for men.

“Xisuthros obeyed, and constructed a vessel five stadia long and five
broad; he collected all that had been prescribed to him, and embarked
his wife, his children, and his intimate friends.

“The Deluge having come, and soon going down, Xisuthros loosed some of
the birds. These, finding no food nor place to alight on, returned to
the ship. A few days later Xisuthros again let them free, but they
returned again to the vessel, their feet full of mud. Finally, loosed
the third time, the birds came no more back.

“Then Xisuthros understood that the earth was bare. He made an

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

opening in the roof of the ship, and saw that it had grounded on the top
of a mountain. He then descended with his wife, his daughter, and his
pilot, who worshipped the earth, raised an altar, and there sacrificed
to the gods; at the same moment he vanished with those who accompanied
him.

“Meanwhile those who had remained in the vessel, not seeing Xisuthros
return, descended too, and began to seek him, calling him by his name.
They saw Xisuthros no more; but a voice from heaven was heard commanding
them piety towards the gods; that he, indeed, was receiving the reward
of his piety in being carried away to dwell thenceforth in the midst of
the gods, and that his wife, his daughter, and the pilot of the ship
shared the same honour. The voice further said that they were to return
to Babylon, and, conformably to the decrees of fate, disinter the
writings buried at Sippara, in order to transmit them to men. It added
that the country in which they found themselves was Armenia. These,
then, having heard the voice, sacrificed to the gods and returned on
foot to Babylon. Of the vessel of Xisuthros, which had finally landed in
Armenia, a portion is still to be found in the Gordyan mountains in
Armenia, and pilgrims bring thence asphalte that they have scraped from
its fragments. It is used to keep off the influence of witchcraft. As to
the companions of Xisuthros, they came to Babylon, disinterred the
writings left at Sippara, founded numerous cities, built temples, and
restored Babylon.”

 

The large amount of work done by the few followers of Xisuthros, seems
very surprising, but easily accounted for if we take the version of the
Deluge given by Nicolaus Damascenus (a philosopher and historian of the
age of Augustus, and a friend of Herod the Great).

"He mentions that there is a large mountain in Armenia, which stands
above the country of the Minyæ, called Baris. To this it was said that
many people betook themselves in the time of the Deluge, and were saved.
And there is a tradition of one person in particular floating in an ark,
and arriving at the summit of the mountain." <span
id="fr_320"></span>[\*](#fn_318.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_317"></span>[375:\*](mm15.htm#fr_319.md) Berosus lived in the
time of Alexander the Great, or about B.C. 330-260, or 300 years after
the Jews were carried captive to Babylon.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[376:\*](mm15.htm#fr_320.md) *Encyclopædia
Britannica*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II. The Dragon](mm16.md)
