[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mm19)  [Next](mm21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1851709444/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mythical Monsters*, by Charles Gould, \[1886\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

### APPENDIX VI.

#### EXTRACTS FROM "SOCIAL LIFE OF THE CHINESE,"

BY JUSTUS DOOLITTLE.

Ch. II., p. 264.

“The dragon holds a remarkable position in the history and government of
China. It also enjoys an ominous eminence in the affections of the
Chinese people. It is frequently represented as the great benefactor of
mankind. It is the dragon which causes the clouds to form and the rain
to fall. The Chinese delight in praising its wonderful properties and
powers. It is the venerated symbol of good.

“The Emperor appropriates to himself the use of the true dragon, the one
which has five claws on each of its four feet. On his dress of state is
embroidered a likeness of the dragon. His throne is styled 'the dragon's
seat.' His bedstead is the 'dragon's bedstead.' His countenance is 'the
dragon's face.' His eyes are 'the dragon's eyes.' His beard is 'the
dragon's beard.'

“The true dragon, it is affirmed, never renders itself visible to mortal
vision wholly at once. If its head is seen, its tail is obscured or
hidden. If it exposes its tail to the eyes of man, it is careful to keep
its head out of sight. It is always accompanied by or enshrouded in,
clouds, when it becomes visible in any of its parts. Water-spouts are
believed by some Chinese to be occasioned by the ascent and descent of
the dragon. Fishermen and residents on the border of the ocean are
reported to catch occasional glimpses of the dragon ascending from the
water and descending to it.

“It is represented as having scales, and without ears; from its forehead
two horns project upwards. Its organ of hearing seems to be located in
these horns, for it is asserted that it hears through them. It is
regarded as the king of fishes.

Proclamations emanating directly from the Emperor, and published on
yellow paper, sometimes have the likenesses of two dragons facing each
other, and grasping or playing with a pearl, of which the dragon is
believed to be very fond.

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

##### Ch. II. p. 338.

“The sagacious geomancer is also careful to observe the mountain or hill
on the right and left sides of the spot for a lucky grave. The left-hand
side is called the black dragon; the right-hand side is called the white
tiger. The lucky prospects, in a Chinese sense, on the hills situated to
the left, should clearly surpass the prospects of the hills on the
right. And the reason for this is manifest, for the *black dragon* is
naturally weaker than the *white tiger*.

##### Ch. I. p. 275.

“The common belief is that the dragon and the tiger always fight when
they meet; and that when the dragon moves, the clouds will ascend and
rain will soon fall.

“Hence, in a time of drought, if the bones of a tiger should be let down
into this well called the 'dragon's well,' and kept there for three days
at the most, there will, it is sagely affirmed, most likely be rain
soon.

“The tiger's bones are used to stir up or excite the dragon.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix VII. Extracts From the “Pan Tsaou Kang Mu.”](mm21.md)
