[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mm20)  [Next](mm22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1851709444/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mythical Monsters*, by Charles Gould, \[1886\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

### APPENDIX VII.

#### EXTRACTS FROM THE "PAN TSAOU KANG MU."

THE KIAO-LUNG. (The four-footed coiled Dragon. The Iguanodon.  
—*Eitel*.)

This animal, according to Shi Chan, belongs to the dragon family. Its
eye-brows are crossed, hence its name signifies "the crossed reptile."
The scaled variety is called the *Kiao-Lung*, the winged the
*Ying-Lung*. The horned kind are called *K‘iu*, the hornless kind *Li*.
In Indian books it is called *Kwan-P‘i-Lo*.

Shi Chan, quoting from the *Kwan Cheu Ki*, says: “The Iguanodon (?) is
more than twelve feet long; it resembles a snake, it has four feet, and
is broad like a shield. It has a small head and a slender neck, the
latter being covered with numerous protuberances. The front of its
breast is of a red colour, its back is variegated with green, and its
sides as if embroidered. Its tail is composed of fleshy rings; the
larger ones are several. Its eggs are also large. It can induce fish to
fly, but if a turtle is present they will not do so.

“The Emperor Chao, of the Han, when fishing in the river Wéi, caught a
white Iguanodon. It resembled a snake, but was without scales. Its head
was composed of soft flesh, and tusks issued from the mouth. The Emperor
ordered his ministers to get it preserved. its flesh is delicious; bones
green, flesh red.”

From the above it may be seen the Iguanodon is edible.

##### THE CROCODILE.

"The *T’o Fish*, we call it the Earth Dragon, and have correctly written
the character. It resembles the dragon, its voice is terrible,

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

and its length is a *ch’ang* (a hundred and forty-one English inches).
When it breathes it forms clouds, which condense into rain. Being a
dragon, the term 'fish' should be done away with."

Shi Chan says the *T’o* character in appearance resembles the head, the
belly, and the tail. One author says that an animal, which is identified
with the crocodile, is found in the lagoons and marshes of the Southern
Sea, at no fixed time. Its skin is made into drums. It is very tenacious
of life. Before it can be flayed quantities of boiling water have to be
poured down its throat. Another author states that the crocodile is of a
sleepy disposition, with the eyes (nearly) always shut. It is of immense
strength. It frequently dashes itself against the river bank. Men dig
them out of their caves. If a hundred men dig them out, a hundred men
will be required to pull them out; but if one man dig, one man may pull
them out; but the event in either case is very uncertain. Another author
states that recently there were found in the lakes and estuaries many
animals resembling lizards and pangolins in appearance, which utter
dreadful cries during the night, to the great terror of sailors. Shi
Chan says crocodiles’ dens are very deep, and that bamboo ropes are
baited in order to catch him; after he has swallowed the bait he is
gradually pulled out. He flies zigzag, but cannot fly upwards. His roar
is like a drum's, and he responds to the striking of the watches of the
night, which is called the crocodile drum, or the crocodile watch. The
common people, when they hear it, predict rain. The nape of the neck is
bright and glistening, more brilliant than those of fish. It lays a
large number of eggs, as many as a hundred, which it sometimes eats. The
people of the South appreciate the flesh, and use it at marriage
festivities. One author states that the crocodile has twelve different
varieties of delicious flesh; but the tail, like serpent's flesh, is
very poisonous. The crocodile's flesh cures quite a host of diseases.

##### THE JĂN SHÉ, or SOUTHERN SNAKE. (*Mai-Teu-Shé* = closed up (concealed) head snake.)

Shi Chan says: "This snake is a reptile (having a wriggling motion). Its
body is immense, and its motion is wrig-wriggling (*jăn-jăn*) <span
id="fr_321"></span>[\*](#fn_319) and slow; hence its name, *Jăn-Shé*.
Another author says its scales have hair like moustaches (*jăn*). It
lives in Kwangtung and Kwangsi (literally, South of the Hills). Those
that do not lift their head are the true kind; in this way they were
called the 'Concealed Head Snake.'"

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

Sung quotes T’ao Hung King to the effect that its habitat is in Tsinngan
(Fukien), and also Su Kung, who says that it is found in Kwéicheu and
Kwangcheu, towards the south, at Kaocheu and Hoün. At several places in
the south of the Hills they are still found. Hung King says the large
ones (in their coils?) are several fathoms in circumference. Those that
walk without raising their heads are the genuine ones. Those that
conceal their heads are not genuine. Its fat and gall can be mixed
together. The large ones are more than a foot in diameter and more than
twelve feet long. It is a snake, but it is short and bulky. Su Kung
remarks that its form resembles a mullet's and its head a crocodile's.
Its tail is round and without scales. It is very tenacious of life. The
natives cut up its flesh into slices, and esteem it as a great delicacy.
Another says: When steeped in vinegar the slices curl round the
chop-sticks, and cannot be released; but when the chop-sticks are made
of grass stems (*mong’tso*), then it is practicable.

Another says: "This snake is a hundred and forty-four feet long; it
often swallows a deer. When the deer is completely digested, then it
coils round a tree, when the bones of the deer in the stomach protrude
through the interstices of the scales. . . . If a woman's dress is
thrown towards it, it will coil round and will not stir."

Shi Chan, quoting " The Wonderful Records," says: "The boa is sixty to
seventy feet long, and four to five feet in circumference; the smaller
ones from thirty-six to forty-eight feet long. Their bodies are striped
like a piece of embroidery. In spring and summer it frequents the
recesses of forests, waiting for the deer, to devour them. When the deer
is digested the boa becomes fat. Someone says that it will eat a deer
every year."

Another author says: "The boa, when it devours a deer or wild boar,
begins with the hind legs. The poisonous breath of the boa comes in
contact with the horns; these fall off. The galls, the smaller they are
the better they are." Another says: "Boas abound in Wang Cheu (Kwangsi).
The large ones are more than a hundred and forty feet long. They devour
deer, reducing the horns and bones to a pulp. The natives use the
dolishos and rattans to fill up the entrance to its den. The snake, when
it smells them, becomes torpid. They then dig him out. Its flesh is a
great delicacy. Its skin may be made into a drum, and for ornamenting
swords, and for making musical instruments."

The *Yü Hăng Chi* says: "Rustic soldiers in Kwangsi, when capturing
boas, stick flowers in their heads, which when the snake observes, it
cannot move. They then come up to it and cut off its head. They then
wait till it exhausts itself by its jumping about and dies. They then
take it home and feast on it." Compare Ælian \[*De Naturâ Animalium*,
lib. vi, chap. xxi.\]: "They hung before the mouth of the Dragon's den a

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

piece of stuff flowered with gold, which attracted the eyes of the
beast, till by the sound of soft music they lulled him to sleep, and
then cut off his head."

The *Shan Hai Sing* says: "The *Pa* snake can eat an elephant, the bones
of which, after three years, are got rid of. Gentlemen that eat of this
snake will be proof against consumption." Kwoh P’oh, in his commentary,
says the boa of to-day is identical with the *Pa* snake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_319"></span>[395:\*](mm21.htm#fr_321) *Jăn-jăn* means a
gradual but imperceptible advance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix VIII. Extract From the “Yuen Keen Lei Han.”](mm22)
