[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mm21)  [Next](mm23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1851709444/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mythical Monsters*, by Charles Gould, \[1886\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

### APPENDIX VIII.

#### EXTRACT FROM THE "YUEN KEEN LEI HAN."

THE DRAGON.—CHAP. I.

The *Shwoh Win* says: "The dragon is the chief of scaly reptiles: in the
spring he mounts the heavens, in the autumn he frequents the streams.
This is favourable." Again, "When the dragon walks he is called *sah*,
when he flies he is a *yao*."

The *Kwang Ya* says: “When he has scales he is a *Kiao*, <span
id="fr_322"></span>[\*](#fn_320) when he has wings a *Ying-Lung*, <span
id="fr_323"></span>[†](#fn_321) when horns a *Kiu-Lung*, <span
id="fr_324"></span>[‡](#fn_322) without horns a *Chih-Lung*.

The *Ming Wuh Kiai* of the *Odes* says the dragon has horns at five
hundred years, at one thousand years he is a *Ying-Lung*.

The *P‘i Ya Kwang Yao* says: "The dragon has eighty-one scales. This is
nine times nine, nine is the *yang* (male principle). The dragon is
produced from an egg, in which he is enfolded." Again, it says that the
*Néi Tien* says: "Dragon-fire comes in contact with moisture and there
is smoke, with water and it is consumed (*i.e.* a man may extinguish it
with water)."

The *Fang Yen* says: "Before the dragon has ascended to heaven he is a
*P‘an* <span id="fr_325"></span>[§](#fn_323) *Lung*." The *Yih King*
says: "When his clouds move the rain falls, and the various things put
forth their forms at the time he rides upon the six dragons and ascends
the heavens." "The first nine: The hidden dragon is inactive. The
diagram indicates that the subtile ether is below. The second nine: When
the dragon is seen in the

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

fields it is profitable to meet the great man. The diagram indicates
that virtue is extended. Fifth nine: The flying dragon appears in the
heavens: The diagram indicates the great man creates." Again, "The
dragons contend in the wilds, their blood is azure and yellow." Again,
"Thunder is a dragon."

The Yuen-Ming-Pao section of the *Ch‘un ts‘iu* says: "The dragons begin
to speak, *yin* and *yang* <span id="fr_326"></span>[\*](#fn_324) are
commingled"; thence, it is said, the dragon ascends and clouds are
multiplied. The *Yih King*, in all the diagrams, clearly says: "The
summer winds arise and the dragon mounts the skies."

In the *Yuen-Shăn-K‘i* of the *Hiao King* it is said: "Virtue approaches
the fountains and the yellow dragon appears. It is the Prince's image."

In the "*Tso-K‘i*" of the *Hiao King* it is said: "The Emperor is
filial, the heavenly dragon bears the plans and the earthly tortoise
issues a book." The *Ho-t‘u* says: "Yellow gold after one thousand years
produces a yellow dragon, azure gold after one thousand years, the azure
dragon; red and white dragon is also thus. Black gold after one thousand
years produces the black dragon."

The *Twan-ying-t‘u* says: "The yellow dragon is the chief of the four
dragons, the true beauty of the four regions. He can be large or small,
obscure or manifest, short or long, alive or dead; the king cannot drain
the pool and catch him. His intelligence and virtue are unfathomable;
moreover he ensures the peaceful air, and sports in the pools." Again,
it says: "The yellow dragon does not go in company, and does not live in
herds, He certainly waits for the wind and rain, and disports himself in
the azure air. He wanders in the wilds beyond the heavens. He goes and
comes, fulfilling the decree; at the proper seasons if there is
perfection he comes forth, if not he remains (unseen)."

The *Shi Ki* says: "The bright moon pearl is concealed in the oyster,
the dragon is there."

Books of the after Wei dynasty say, "Persia has three pools." They
narrate that a dragon lives in the largest, his wife in the second, and
his child in the third. If travellers sacrifice, they can pass; if they
do not sacrifice they encounter many storms of wind and rain.

Lü-lan asserts that Confucius said, "The dragon feeds in the pure
(water) and disports in the clear (water)."

Sun-k‘ing-tsz says: "The accumulated waters form the streams, the
*Kiao-Lung* is brought forth." Han-Féi-shwoh-nan says: "Now as the
dragon is a reptile he can be brought under control and ridden. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[†](#fn_325) But below his throat are tremendous
scales, projecting a foot. If a man should come in contact with them he
would be killed."

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

Kwan-tsz says: "The dragon's skin has five colours, and he moves like a
spirit; he wishes to be small and he becomes like a silkworm; great, and
he fills all below heaven; he desires to rise, and he reaches the ether;
he desires to sink, and he enters the deep fountains. The times of his
changing are not fixed, his rising and descending are undetermined; he
is called a god (or spirit)."

Hwai-nan-tsz says: "The dragon ascends and the brilliant clouds follow."
Again, he says: "This Kiao-Lung is hidden in the streams, and his eggs
are opened at the mound. The male cries above and the female cries
below, and he changes; his form and essence are of the most exalted
(kind). Man cannot see the dragon when he flies aloft. He ascends, and
wind and rain escort him."

The *Tihing P‘ien* says: "Wings beautiful grow for the flying dragon;
hair soft like that of a calf on the *ying* dragon; scales only for the
*Kiao-Lung*. Only in pools is found the *Sien-Lung*." Chang-hang said:
"How the *Ts‘ang-Lung* meets the summer and aspires to the clouds, and
shakes his scales, accomplishing the season. He passes the winter in the
muddy water, and, concealed, he escapes harm." Pan-ku, answering Pin-hi,
said: "The *Ying-Lung* hides in the lakes and pools. Fish and turtle
contemn him, and he does not observe it. He can exert his skill and
intelligence, and suddenly the clear sky appears. For this reason the
*Ying-Lung*, now crouching in the mud, now flying in the heavens,
appears to be divine."

Lun-hang says, "When the dragon is small, all the fish are small; this
is divine."

Pao-pòh-tz says <span id="fr_328"></span>[\*](#fn_326): "There are
self-existent dragons and there are worms which are changed into
dragons." Again, he says: "Among the hills the *Ch‘ău day*, called the
rain master, is a dragon." Hwai-nan-tsz said: "The *Chuh-Lung* is north
of the goose gate concealed in the Wei-Ü mountain." The *Shan-hai-king*
says the god of the Chung-shan is called *Chuh-Lung*. When he opens his
eyes it is day, when he shuts his eyes it is night. His body is three
thousand *li* long.

The *Shui-king-chu* says: "The *Yulung* considers the autumn days as
night. But the dragon descends in the autumn and hibernates in the deep
pools; how then can he say that autumn is night?" It also says: "There
is a divine dragon in the vermilion pools at Kiao-chew. Whenever there
was a drought, the village people obstructed the upper tributaries of
the pool, and many fish died; the dragon became enraged at such times,
and caused much rain."

The *Kwah-ti-t‘u* says: "At the dragon pool there is a hill with four
lofty sides, and within them is a pool seven hundred li square; a herd
of dragons live there, and feed upon the many different kinds of trees.

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is beyond
Hwui-ki forty-five thousand *li*." Again, it says: "If you do not ride
on a dragon you cannot reach the weak waters <span
id="fr_329"></span>[\*](#fn_327) of the Kwan-lun hill."

The *Poh-Wuh-Chi* says: "If you soak the dragon's flesh in an acid (and
eat it), you can write essays." Again, it says: "The Tiao-sheh is in
form like a dragon, but smaller. It likes danger; hence it is appointed
to guard decayed timber." Again, it says: "The dragon lays three eggs.
The first is *Ki-tiao*. He goes ashore and cohabits with the deer or
deposits his semen at the water's edge, where it becomes attached to
passing boats or floating wood and branches. It appears like a walnut,
it is called *Tsz-chao* flower, and constitutes what is mentioned in the
*Tao-ch‘u* as dragon-salt." Again, it says: "Below the dragon-gate every
year in the third month of spring, yellow carps, two <span
id="fr_330"></span>[†](#fn_328) fish, come from the sea, and all the
streams, with speed to the contest. But seventy-one can ascend the
dragon-gate in a year; when the first one ascends the dragon-gate there
is wind and rain. It is followed by fire which burns his tail, and then
he is a dragon."

The *Shih-I-Ki* says: "East of the hills of Fang-chang there is a dragon
plain where there are dragon skins and bones like a mountain: spread out
they would cover one thousand five hundred acres. To meet him when he
sloughs his bones is like the birth of a dragon. Or it is said the
dragons constantly wrangle at this place. It is enriched with blood like
flowing water."

The *Shuh-I-Ki* says: "In the Funning district there are the isles where
the dragons are buried. Fu-loo says the dragons shed their bones at
these isles, the water now contains many dragon-bones, in these
mountains, hills, peaks, and gorges. The dragons make the wind and rain.
There are dragons’ bones everywhere, whether in the deep or shallow
places; there are many in the ground. Teeth, horns, vertebral columns,
feet, it seems as though they are everywhere. The largest measure one
hundred feet or exceed one hundred feet. The smallest are two feet or
three or four inches. The bones are everywhere. Constantly when looking
for anything they are seen." Again, it says: "It is told of the Kuh
mountains in Ki-cheu that when the dragon is a thousand years old, he
enters the mountains and casts his bones. Now there is a dragon hill,
from the midst of the hill issues the dragon's brains."

The *K‘ié-Lan* Records at Loh-yang <span id="fr_331"></span>[‡](#fn_329)
say: "You cannot trust the hills in the west. They are too cold. There
is snow both winter and summer. In the hills there is a pool where a bad
dragon lives; long ago some merchants rested near the pool, until the
dragon became enraged, abused, and killed them. A priest, <span
id="fr_332"></span>[§](#fn_330)Pan-T‘o, heard of it, and, leaving his
seat to the pupils, went to the kingdom of Wuchang to

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

learn the Po-lo-man incantations; he mastered them in four years, and
returned to his seat. He went to the pool and invoked the dragon. The
dragon was transformed into a man, repented, and followed the king. The
king then removed." Again, it says: "To the west of the kingdom of
Wuchang there is a pool in which the dragon prince dwells. There is a
monastery on the banks of the pool, in which there are more than fifty
priests. Whenever the dragon prince does anything marvellous, the king
comes and beseeches him, using gold, precious stones, pearls, and
valuables, throwing them into the pool. Afterwards they are cast up and
the priests gather them. This monastery relies upon the dragon for food
and clothing and the means to assist people. Its name is 'Dragon Prince
Monastery.'"

The *Ts‘i-ti* records say there is a well in the city of Ch‘áng-ping at
the brambles; when the water is disturbed a spiritual dragon comes and
goes. So the city is called the dragon city.

The *Shi-San-Tsin* records say Ho-li has also the name Dragon Gate.
Great fish collect below it, in number one thousand. They cannot ascend.
If one ascends it is a dragon. Those which do not ascend are fish. Hence
it is called the "Pao-sai-lung-man. (Great carp ascend the dragon gate
and become dragons; those which do not ascend prick the forehead and
strike the cheek.)" Again, it says: "The Lung-sheu mountains are sixty
*li* long; the head enters the Wei waters, the tail extends to the Fan
streams. This head is two hundred feet high; his tail descends gradually
to a height of fifty or sixty feet. It is said that long ago a strange
dragon came out from south of the mountains to drink the Wei waters. The
road he travelled became mountain. Hence the name."

The *Kiao-Cheu-Ki* says: "In Kiao-chi at Fung-ki-hien there is a dyke
with a dragon gate; the water is one hundred fathoms deep. Great fish
ascend this gate and become dragons. Those which cannot pass, strike the
cheek and puncture the forehead, until the blood flows. This water is
continually like the Vermilion pool."

The annals of Hwa-yang say: "Only at Wu-ch‘ing district does the earth
meet the gate of heaven; the dragon which mounts to heaven and does not
reach it, falls dead to this place, hence when excavating you find
dragon-bones."

The *I-Tung-Chi* says: "Twenty *li* west of Lin-fung-hien is a stone
dragon, among the cliffs is a rock like a dragon. In a year of drought
wash it, and it rains." Again, it says: "At Yen-T‘ang there is a pond
called Smoky Pond; it is north-east of the city ten *li*. Its depth has
never been ascertained. It is reported that long ago a man caught a
white eel, and was about to cook it, when an old man said, 'This is the
dragon of the river Siang; I fear calamity will follow.' The man was
angry, and, regarding the words as vain, proceeded. The next day the
whole village was submerged."

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

The *Kwoh-Shi-Pu* says: "At the time of the spring rains the carp
springs through the dragon gate and becomes transformed. At the present
time, in Fan-cheu of Shansi, there is a cave in the mountains; in it are
many cast bones and horns of dragons. They are collected for medicine,
and are of five colours. It is recorded in the Chw‘en that north of the
Wu-t'ai hills, below the terrace, is Azure Dragon Pool, about one-third
of an acre in extent. The Buddhist books say five hundred evil dragons
are confined (here). Whenever it is mid-day a thick mist gradually
arises. A pure priest and candidates for the priesthood may see it. If a
nun or females approach then there is great thunder, lightning, and
tempest. If they come near the pool, he certainly will belch forth
poisonous breath and they will die at once. Foreigners say that in
Piolosz there is a spiritual dragon which goes and comes among the
granaries. When a servant comes for rice the dragon vanishes. If the
servant comes constantly for rice the dragon does not suffer it. If
there is no rice in the granaries, the servant worships the dragon, and
the granaries are filled."

*Yuin-Chu-Tsih* records: "If one sees a dragon's egg in the lake or
river there will certainly be a flood."

The *Nan-Pu-Sin-Shu* says: "The dragon's disposition is ferocious, and
he fears bees’-wax, loves jade, and the King-ts‘ing delight to eat the
flesh of cooked sparrows. For this reason men who eat sparrows do not
cross the sea."

The *Pah-mung-so-yen* says: "The perverse dragon, when rain is wanted,
sneaks away into old trees or into the beams of houses. The thunder god
pulls him out."

*Wu-ch‘ăn-tsah-ch‘ao* says: "There is a great dragon which sloughed his
skin on the brink of the Great Lake. Insects come out from his scaly
armour. Instantly they are transformed into dragon-flies of a red
colour. If men gather them they get fever and ague. If men nowadays see
these red dragon-flies they call them dragon-armour, also dragons’
grandsons, and are unwilling to hurt them."

*Pi-shu-suh-hwa* says: "In Suh-chan and Hang-cheu the twentieth day of
the fifth month is called the day of the separation of the dragons.
Therefore, in the fifth and sixth months, whenever there is thunder, and
the clouds crowd together, if they see a tail bent down, and stretching
to earth from among the clouds, moving like a serpent, they say, 'The
dragon is suspended.'"

Tsu-tz say: "The spiritual dragon leaves the water and dwells in the dry
place, and the mole, crickets, and ants annoy him."

Kung Sun Hung replied to Tung Fang Shoh, saying: "Before the dragon has
ascended he is of a sort with fish and turtles; after he has ascended
the heavens his scales cannot be seen."

Siu Tsung Yuen answered an inquirer, saying: "The *Kiao-Lung* ascends to
the heavenly fountain. He pervades the six regions (North,

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> South, East, West,
Above, Below). He moistens all things. Shrimps and the leech cannot
depart one foot from the water."

The *Shwoh-Wan* says: "The *Kiao* belongs to the dragon species. When a
fish attains three thousand six hundred \[years?\] it becomes a *Kiao*;
on attaining this much the dragon flies away." Again, it says:
"\[Dragons\] without horns are *Kiao*."

The *P’i-Ya* says: "The *Kiao's* bones are green, and they can bring
their heads and tails together and constrict anything; hence they are
called *Kiao*. A popular name for them is 'the horse's lasso.'" Another
author says the *Kiao's* tail has fleshy rings; they are able to
compress any creature, and then tear it with the head.

The *Shuh-I-Ki* says the eye-brows of a *Kiao* unite, and their uniting
is a proof that it is a *Kiao*.

The *Siang-Shu* (Book of Physiognomy) says that when the eye-brows unite
the epithet *Kiao* is applied, because the *Kiao Shăn* has crossed
eye-brows.

The *Yueh-kiu* (Divisions of Seasons) says that the season of autumn is
unfavourable to the *Kiao*.

The *Kia-Yü* (Family Discourses) says that if a stream contains fish,
then no *Kiao* will stay in it.

Hwai-nan-tsze says that no two *Kiao* will dwell in one pool.

The *Shan-Hai-King* says the *Kiao* is like a dragon and snake, with a
small head and fine neck. The neck has white ornamentations on it. The
girth (?) is five cubits; the eggs of the capacity of three catties; and
it can swallow a man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[398:\*](mm22.htm#fr_322) Defined by Williams
"as the dragon of morasses and thickets, which has scales and no horn,
corresponding very nearly to the fossil iguanodon." *Vide* the
description (ante) from the *Pan-Tsaou-Kang-mu*, &c.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[398:†](mm22.htm#fr_323) *Ying*—correct, true.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[398:‡](mm22.htm#fr_324) According to Williams,
this is a young dragon without a horn, although others, as in the text,
say with one.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[398:§](mm22.htm#fr_325) *P’an*—to curl up, to
coil.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[399:\*](mm22.htm#fr_326) The male and female
principle.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[399:†](mm22.htm#fr_327) See the notices in the
body of the work from the *Shan Hai King*.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[400:\*](mm22.htm#fr_328) See the description
of the dragon from the *P’au-Tsaou-Kang-mu*.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[401:\*](mm22.htm#fr_329) Waters of such
specific gravity that even a feather would sink.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[401:†](mm22.htm#fr_330) Probably a pair from
each stream.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[401:‡](mm22.htm#fr_331) In Foh-kien.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[401:§](mm22.htm#fr_332) Probably equivalent to
"abbot."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix IX. Appendix to the Chapter on the Sea-Serpent](mm23)
