<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1000)  [Next](j1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### PREFACE.

IT was an almost isolated incident in Greek literary history <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0), when Pythagoras claimed to remember his
previous lives. Heracleides Ponticus relates that he professed to have
been once born as Æthalides, the son of Hermes, and to have then
obtained as a boon from his father ζῶντα καὶ τελευτῶντα μνήμην ἔχειν τῶν
συμβαινόντων <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1). Consequently he
remembered the Trojan war, where, as Euphorbus, he was wounded by
Menelaus, and, as Pythagoras, he could still recognise the shield which
Menelaus had hung up in the temple of Apollo at Branchidæ; and similarly
he remembered his subsequent birth as Hermotimus, and then as Pyrrhus, a
fisherman of Delos. But in India this recollection of previous lives is
a common feature in the histories of the saints and heroes of sacred
tradition; and it is especially mentioned by Manu <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) as the effect of a self-denying and pious
life. The doctrine of Metempsychosis, since the later Vedic period, has
played such an important part in the history Of the national character
and religious ideas that we need not be surprised to find that Buddhist
literature from the earliest times (although giving a theory of its own
to explain the transmigration) has always included the ages of the past
as an authentic background to the founder's historical life as Gautama.
Jātaka legends occur even in the Canonical Piṭakas; thus the
Sukha-vihāri Jātaka and the Tittira Jātaka, which are respectively the
10th and the 37th in this volume, are found in the Culla Vagga, vii. 1
and vi. 6, and similarly the Khandhavatta Jātaka, which will be given in
the next volume, is found in the Culla Vagga v. 6; and there are several
other examples. So too one of the minor books of the Sutta Piṭaka (the
Cariyā Piṭaka) consists of 35 Jātakas told in verse; and ten at least

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

of these can be identified in the volumes of our present collection
already published; and probably several of the others will be traced
when it is all printed. The Sutta and Vinaya Piṭakas are generally
accepted as at least older than the Council of Vesāli (380 B.C.?); and
thus Jātaka legends must have been always recognised in Buddhist
literature.

This conclusion is confirmed by the fact that Jātaka scenes are found
sculptured in the carvings on the railings round the relic shrines of
Sanchi and Amaravati and especially those of Bharhut, where the titles
of several Jātakas are clearly inscribed over some of the carvings.
These bas-reliefs prove that the birth-legends were widely known in the
third century B.C. and were then considered as part of the sacred
history of the religion. Fah-hian, when he visited Ceylon, (400 A.D.),
saw at Abhayagiri "representations of the 500 bodily forms which the
Bodhisatta assumed during his successive births <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)," and he particularly mentions his births as
Sou-to-nou, a bright flash of light, the king of the elephants, and an
antelope <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4). These legends were also
continually introduced into the religious discourses <span
id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5) which were delivered by the various teachers
in the course of their wanderings, whether to magnify the glory of the
Buddha or to illustrate Buddhist doctrines and precepts by appropriate
examples, somewhat in the same way as mediæval preachers in Europe used
to enliven their sermons by introducing fables and popular tales to
rouse the flagging attention of their hearers <span
id="fr_6"></span>[4](#fn_6).

It is quite uncertain when these various birth-stories were put together
in a systematic form such as we find in our present Jātaka collection.
At first they were probably handed down orally, but their growing
popularity would ensure that their kernel, at any rate, would ere long
be committed to some more permanent form. In fact there is a singular
parallel to this in the 'Gesta Romanorum', which was compiled by an
uncertain author in the 14th century and contains nearly 200 fables and
stories told to illustrate various virtues and vices, many of them
winding up with a religious application.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

Some of the birth-stories are evidently Buddhistic and entirely depend
for their point on some custom or idea peculiar to Buddhism; but many
are pieces of folk-lore which have floated about the world for ages as
the stray waifs of literature and are liable everywhere to be
appropriated by any casual claimant. The same stories may thus, in the
course of their long wanderings, come to be recognised under widely
different aspects, as when they are used by Boccaccio or Poggio merely
as merry tales, or by some Welsh bard to embellish king Arthur's
legendary glories, or by some Buddhist *samaṇa* or mediæval friar to add
point to his discourse. Chaucer unwittingly puts a Jātaka story into the
mouth of his Pardonere when he tells his tale of 'the ryotoures three';
and another appears in Herodotus as the popular explanation of the
sudden rise of the Alcmæonidæ through Megacles' marriage with
Cleisthenes' daughter and the rejection of his rival Hippocleides.

The Pāli work, entitled 'the Jātaka', the first volume of which is now
presented to the reader in an English form, contains 550 Jātakas or
Birth-stories, which are arranged in 22 *nipātas* or books. This
division is roughly founded on the number of verses (gāthās) which are
quoted in each story; thus the first book contains 150 stories, each of
which only quotes one verse, the second 100, each of which quotes two,
the third and fourth 50 each, which respectively quote 3 and 4, and so
on to the twenty-first with 5 stories, each of which quotes 80 verses,
and the twenty-second with 10 stories, each quoting a still larger
number. Each story opens with a preface called the *paccuppannavatthu*
or 'story of the present', which relates the particular circumstances in
the Buddha's life which led him to tell the birth-story and thus reveal
some event in the long series of his previous existences as a
*bodhisatta* or a being destined to attain Buddha-ship. At the end there
is always given a short summary, where the Buddha identifies the
different actors in the story in their present births at the time of his
discourse,--it being an essential condition of the book that the Buddha
possesses the same power as that which Pythagoras claimed but with a far
more extensive range, since he could remember all the past events in
every being's previous existences as well as in his own. Every story is
also illustrated by one or more *gāthās* which are uttered by the Buddha
while still a Bodhisatta and so playing his part in the narrative; but
sometimes the verses are put into his mouth as the Buddha, when they are
called *abhisambuddha-gāthā*.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

Some of these stanzas are found in the canonical book called the
Dhammapada; and many of the Jātaka stories are given in the old
Commentary on that book but with varying details, and sometimes
associated with verses which are not given in our present Jātaka text.
This might seem to imply that there is not necessarily a strict
connexion between any particular story and the verses which may be
quoted as its moral; but in most cases an apposite stanza would of
course soon assert a prescriptive right to any narrative which it seemed
specially to illustrate. The language of the gāthās is much more archaic
than that of the stories; and it certainly seems more probable to
suppose that they are the older kernel of the work, and that thus in its
original form the Jātaka, like the Cariyā-piṭaka, consisted only of
these verses. It is quite true that they are generally unintelligible
without the story, but such is continually the case with proverbial
sayings; the traditional commentary passes by word of mouth in a varying
form along with the adage, as in the well-known οὐ φροντὶς Ἱπποκλείδῃ or
our own 'Hobson's choice', until some author writes it down in a
crystallised form <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7). Occasionally the
same birth-story is repeated elsewhere in a somewhat varied form and
with different verses attached to it; and we sometimes find the phrase
*iti vitthāretabbam* <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8), which seems to
imply that the narrator is to amplify the details at his discretion.

The native tradition in Ceylon is that the original Jātaka Book
consisted of the *gāthās* alone, and that a commentary on these,
containing the stories which they were intended to illustrate, was
written in very early times in Singhalese. This was translated into Pāli
about 430 A.D. by Buddhaghosa, who translated so many of the early
Singhalese commentaries into Pāli; and after this the Singhalese
original was lost, The accuracy of this tradition has been discussed by
Professor Rhys Davids in the Introduction to the first volume of his
'Buddhist Birth Stories' <span id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9); and we may
safely adopt his conclusion, that if the prose commentary was not
composed by Buddhaghosa, it was composed not long afterwards; and as in
any case it was merely a redaction of materials

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

handed down from very early times in the Buddhist community, it is not a
question of much importance except for Pāli literary history. The
*gāthās* are undoubtedly old, and they necessarily imply the previous
existence of the stories, though not perhaps in the exact words in which
we now possess them.

The Jātakas are preceded in the Pāli text by a long Introduction, the
Nidāna-kathā, which gives the Buddha's previous history both before his
last birth, and also during his last existence until he attained the
state of a Buddha <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10). This has been
translated by Professor Rhys Davids, but as it has no direct connexion
with the rest of the work, we have omitted it in our translation, which
commences with the first Birth-story.

We have translated the quasi historical introductions which always
precede the different birth-stories, as they are an essential part of
the plan of the original work,--since they link each tale with some
special incident in the Buddha's life, which tradition venerates as the
occasion when he is supposed to have recalled the forgotten scene of a
long past existence to his contemporaries. But it is an interesting
question for future investigation how far they contain any historical
data. They appear at first sight to harmonise with the framework of the
Piṭakas; but I confess that I have no confidence in their historical
credibility,--they seem to me rather the laboured invention of a later
age, like the legendary history of the early centuries of ancient Rome.
But this question will be more easily settled, when we have made further
progress in the translation.

The Jātakas themselves are of course interesting as specimens of
Buddhist literature; but their foremost interest to us consists in their
relation to folk-lore and the light which they often throw on those
popular stories which illustrate so vividly the ideas and superstitions
of the early times of civilisation. In this respect they possess a
special value, as, although much of their matter is peculiar to
Buddhism, they contain embedded with it an unrivalled collection of
Folk-lore. They are also full of interest as giving a vivid picture of
the social life and customs of ancient India. Such books as
Lieutenant-Colonel Sleeman's 'Rambles' or Mr Grierson's 'Bihār Peasant
Life' illustrate them at every turn. They form in fact an ever-shifting
panorama of the village life such as Fah-hian and Hiouen-thsang saw it
in the old days before the Muhammadan

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

conquest, when Hindu institutions and native rule prevailed in every
province throughout the land. Like all collections of early popular
tales they are full of violence and craft, and betray a low opinion of
woman; but outbursts of nobler feeling are not wanting, to relieve the
darker colours.

Professor Rhys Davids first commenced a translation of the Jātaka in
1880, but other engagements obliged him to discontinue it after one
volume had appeared, containing the Nidānakathā and 40 stories. The
present translation has been undertaken by a band of friends who hope,
by each being responsible for a definite portion, to complete the whole
within a reasonable time. We are in fact a guild of Jātaka translators,
*çreshṭhi pūrvā vayaṃ çreṇiḥ*; but, although we have adopted some common
principles of translation and aim at a certain general uniformity in our
technical terms and in transliteration, we have agreed to leave each
individual translator, within certain limits, a free hand in his own
work. The Editor only exercises a general superintendence, in
consultation with the two resident translators, Mr Francis and Mr Neil.

Mr R. Chalmers of Oriel College, Oxford, has translated in the present
volume the first volume of Prof. Fausböll's edition of the Pāli text
(five volumes of which have already appeared). The second volume will be
translated by Mr W. H. D. Rouse, late fellow of Christ's College,
Cambridge, who will also be responsible for the fourth; the third will
be translated by Mr H. T. Francis, Under-Librarian of the University
Library at Cambridge, and late fellow of Gonville and Caius College, and
Mr R. A. Neil, fellow and assistant-tutor of Pembroke College, who hope
also to undertake the fifth <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11).

E. B. COWELL.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:1](j1001.htm#fr_0) But compare the account
of Aristeas of Proconnesus in Hdt. iv. 14, 15.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vii:2](j1001.htm#fr_1) Diogenes Laert. viii. 1.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[vii:3](j1001.htm#fr_2) iv. 148.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[viii:1](j1001.htm#fr_3) Beal's transl. p. 157.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[viii:2](j1001.htm#fr_4) Hiouen-thsang twice
refers to Jātakas, *Julien*, i. 137, 197.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[viii:3](j1001.htm#fr_5) See Prof. M. M. Künté's
paper, *Journ. R. A. S. Ceylon*, viii. 123.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[viii:4](j1001.htm#fr_6) In the curious
description of the Buddhist grove in the Harsha-carita, viii., Bāṇa
mentions owls "which repeated the Bodhisattva's Jātakas, having gained
illumination by continually hearing them recited."

<span id="fn_7"></span>[x:1](j1001.htm#fr_7) We have an interesting
illustration of the proverbial character of some of the Jātaka stories
in the Sāṇkhya Aphorisms, iv. 11, "he who is without hope is happy like
Piṅgalā," which finds its explanation in Jāt. 330. It is also referred
to in the Mahābh. xii. 6520.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[x:2](j1001.htm#fr_8) As *e.g.* Fausböll, iii. p.
495. Cf. *Divyāvad*. p. 377, 1.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[x:3](j1001.htm#fr_9) See also several papers in
the eighth volume of the *Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the R. A.
Society*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xi:1](j1001.htm#fr_10) This latter portion
partly corresponds to the well-known *Lalita-vistara* of the Northern
Buddhists.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xii:1](j1001.htm#fr_11) A complete index will
be given at the end of the last volume.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](j1002)

</div>
