<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1011)  [Next](j1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j009"></span>

### No. 9.

### MAKHĀDEVA-JĀTAKA.

"*Lo! these grey hairs*."--This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana about the Great Renunciation, which has already been related in
the Nidāna-Kathā <span id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42).

On this occasion the Brethren sat praising the Renunciation of the Lord
of Wisdom. Entering the Hall of Truth and seating himself on the
Buddha-seat, the Master thus addressed the Brethren:--"What is your
theme, Brethren, as you sit here in conclave?"

"It is naught else, sir, than the praise of your own Renunciation."
"Brethren," rejoined the Master, "not only in these latter days has the
Tathāgata <span id="fr_43"></span>[3](#fn_43) made a Renunciation; in
bygone days too he similarly renounced the world."

The Brethren asked the Blessed One for an explanation of this. The
Blessed One made clear what had been concealed from them by re-birth.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

Once on a time in Mithilā in the realm of Videha there was a king named
Makhādeva, who was righteous and ruled righteously. For successive
periods of eighty-four thousand years he had respectively amused himself
as prince, ruled as viceroy, and reigned as king. All these long years
had he lived, when one day he said to his barber,--"Tell me, friend
barber, when you see any grey hairs in my head." So one day, years and
years after, \[138\] the barber did find among the raven locks of the
king a single grey hair, and he told the king so. "Pull it out, my
friend," said the king; "and lay it in my palm." The barber accordingly
plucked the hair out with his golden tongs, and laid it in the king's
hand. The king had at that time still eighty-four thousand years more to
live; but nevertheless at the sight of that one grey hair he was filled
with deep emotion. He seemed to see the King of Death standing over him,
or to be cooped within a blazing but of leaves. "Foolish Makhādeva!" he
cried; "grey hairs have come upon you before you have been able to rid
yourself of depravities." And as he thought and thought about the
appearance of his grey hair, he grew aflame within; the sweat rolled
down from his body; whilst his raiment oppressed him and seemed
intolerable. "This very day," thought he, "will I renounce the world for
the Brother's life."

To his barber he gave the grant of a village, which yielded a hundred
thousand pieces of money. He sent for his eldest son and said to him,
"My son, grey hairs are come upon me, and I am become old. I have had my
fill of human joys, and fain would taste the joys divine; the time for
my renunciation has come. Take the sovereignty upon yourself; as for me,
I will take up my abode in the pleasaunce called Makhādeva's
Mango-grove, and there tread the ascetic's path."

As he was thus bent on leading the Brother's life, his ministers drew
near and said, "What is the reason, sire, why you adopt the Brother's
life?"

Taking the grey hair in his hand, the king repeated this stanza to his
ministers:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Lo, these grey hairs that on my head appear  
Are Death's own messengers that come to rob  
My life. ’Tis time I turned from worldly things,  
And in the hermit's path sought saving peace.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[139\] And after
these words, he renounced his sovereignty that self-same day and became
a recluse. Dwelling in that very Mango-grove of Makhādeva, he there
during eighty-four thousand years fostered the Four Perfect States
within himself, and, dying with insight full and unbroken, was reborn in
the Realm of Brahma. Passing thence, he became a king again in Mithilā,
under the name of Nimi, and after uniting his scattered family, once
more became a hermit in that same

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mango-grove,
winning the Four Perfect States and passing thence once more to the
Realm of Brahma.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

After repeating his statement that he had similarly renounced the world
in bygone days, the Master at the end of his lesson preached the Four
Truths. Some entered the First Path, some the Second, and some the
Third. Having told the two stories, the Master shewed the connexion
between them and identified the Birth, by saying:--"In those days Ānanda
was the barber, Rāhula the son, and I myself King Makhādeva."

\[*Note*. See *Majjhima-Nikāya*, Sutta No. 83 of which is entitled the
Makhādeva Sutta. According to Léon Feer (J. As. 1876, p. 516) the
Bigandet MS. calls this the Devadūta-jātaka. Bigandet in his *Life or
Legend of Gaudama* (p. 408) gives a version of this Jātaka, in which the
king is named Minggadewa, and in which the doings of King Nemi (= Nimi
above) are given in great detail. See Upham's *Mahāvansi*, vol. i. p.
14, and the 'Nemy' Jātaka referred to by him as the 544th Jātaka. See
also *Cariyū-Piṭaka*, p. 76, and Plate XLVIII. (2) of the *Stūpa of
Bharhut*, where the name is carved Magha-deva, a spelling which is
retained in modern Burmese manuscripts of the Majjhima Sutta from which
this Jātaka was manifestly compiled.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[30:2](j1012.htm#fr_42) See p. 61 et seqq. of
Vol. i. of Fausböll's text for this account of how Prince Siddhattha,
the future Buddha, renounced the world for the Truth.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[30:3](j1012.htm#fr_43) The meaning of this
frequently recurring title of the Buddha is far from clear, and the
obscurity is deepened by the elaborate gloss of Buddhaghosa at pp. 59-68
of the Sumaṅgala-vilāsinī, where eight different interpretations are
given. Perhaps the word may mean 'He who has trod the path which the
earlier Buddhas trod'; but there is much to be said for the view put
forward on p. 82 of Vol. XIII. of the *Sacred Books of the East*, that
the meaning is 'He who has arrived there,' *i.e.* at emancipation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 10. Sukhavihāri-Jātaka](j1013)

</div>
