<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1031)  [Next](j1033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span id="an_j029"></span>

### No. 29.

### KAṆHA-JĀTAKA.

"*With heavy loads*."--This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about the Double Miracle, which, together with the Descent
from Heaven, will be related in the Thirteenth Book, in the
Sarabhamiga-jātaka <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74).

After he had performed the Double Miracle and had made a stay in Heaven,
the All-knowing Buddha descended at the city of Saṁkassa on the day of
the Great Pavāraṇā <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75) Festival, and
thence passed with a large following to Jetavana.

Gathering together in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren sat praising the
virtues of the Master, saying, "Sirs, peerless is the Buddha; none may
bear the yoke borne by the Buddha. The Six teachers, though they
protested so often that they, and they only, would perform miracles, yet
not a single miracle did they work. O! how peerless is the Master!"

Entering the Hall and asking the theme which the Brethren were
discussing in conclave \[194\], the Master was informed that their theme
was no other than his own virtues. "Brethren," said the Master, "who
shall now bear the yoke borne by me? Even in bygone days, when I came to
life as an animal, I was unmatched." And, so saying, he told this story
of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
came to life as a bull. And while he was still a young calf, his owners,
who had been lodging with an old woman, made him over to her in
settlement of their reckoning. She reared him like her own child,
feeding him on rice-gruel and rice and on other good cheer. The name he
became known by was "Granny's Blackie." Growing up, he used to range
about with the other cattle of the village, and was as black as jet. The
village urchins used to catch hold of his horns and ears and dewlaps,
and have a ride; or they would hold on to his tail in play, and mount on
his back.

One day he thought to himself, "My mother is very poor; she has
painfully reared me, as if I were her own child. What if I were to earn
some money to ease her hard lot?" Thenceforth he was always looking out
for a job. Now, one day a young merchant at the head of a caravan came
with five hundred waggons to a ford the bottom of which was so rough
that his oxen could not pull the waggons through. And even when he took
out the five hundred pairs of oxen and yoked the lot together to form
one team, they could not get a single cart by itself across the river.
Close

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

by that ford the Bodhisatta was about with the other cattle of the
village, And the young merchant, being a judge of cattle, ran his eye
over the herd to see whether among them there was a thorough-bred bull
who could pull the waggons across. When his eye fell on the Bodhisatta,
he felt sure *he* would do; and, to find out the Bodhisatta's owner, he
said to the herdsmen, "Who owns this animal? If I could yoke him on and
get my waggons across, I would pay for his services." Said they, "Take
him and harness him, then; he has got no master hereabouts."

But when the young merchant slipped a cord \[195\] through the
Bodhisatta's nose and tried to lead him off, the bull would not budge.
For, we are told, the Bodhisatta would not go till his pay was fixed.
Understanding his meaning, the merchant said, "Master, if you will pull
these five hundred waggons across, I will pay you two coins per cart, or
a thousand coins in all."

It now required no force to get the Bodhisatta to come. Away he went,
and the men harnessed him to the carts. The first he dragged over with a
single pull, and landed it high and dry; and in like manner he dealt
with the whole string of waggons.

The young merchant tied round the Bodhisatta's neck a bundle containing
five hundred coins, or at the rate of only *one* for each cart. Thought
the Bodhisatta to himself, "This fellow is not paying we according to
contract! I won't let him move on!" So he stood across the path of the
foremost waggon and blocked the way. And try as they would, they could
not get him out of the way. "I suppose he knows I've paid him short,"
thought the merchant; and he wrapped up a thousand coins in a bundle,
which he tied round the Bodhisatta's neck, saying, "Here's your pay for
pulling the waggons across." And away went the Bodhisatta with the
thousand pieces of money to his "mother."

"What's that round the neck of Granny's Blackie?" cried the children of
the village, running up to him. But the Bodhisatta made at them from
afar and made them scamper off, so that he reached his "mother" all
right. Not but what he appeared fagged out, with his eyes bloodshot,
from dragging all those five hundred waggons over the river. The pious
woman, finding a thousand pieces of money round his neck, cried out,
"Where did you get this, my child?" Learning from the herdsmen what had
happened, she exclaimed, "Have I any wish to live on your earnings, my
child? Why did you go through all this fatigue?" So saying, she washed
the Bodhisatta with warm water and rubbed him all over with oil; she
gave him drink and regaled him with due victuals. And when her life
closed, she passed away, with the Bodhisatta, to fare according to her
deserts.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

When he had ended this lesson to shew that the Buddha was unmatched in
the past as then, he shewed the connexion by uttering, as Buddha, this
stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[196\] With heavy loads to carry, with bad roads,  
       They harness 'Blackie'; *he* soon draws the load.

</div>

After his lesson to shew that only 'Blackie' could draw the load, he
shewed the connexion, and identified the Birth by saying, "Uppala-Vaṇṇā
was the old woman of those days, and I myself 'Granny's Blackie.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[73:1](j1032.htm#fr_74) No. 483.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[73:2](j1032.htm#fr_75) The festival at the end
of the rainy season (*Mahāvagga* IV. 1).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 30. Muṇika-Jātaka](j1033)

</div>
