<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1032)  [Next](j1034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j030"></span>

### No. 30.

### MUṆIKA-JĀTAKA.

"*Then envy not poor Muṇika*."--This story was told by the Master while
at Jetavana about being seduced by a plump young woman, as will be
related in the Thirteenth Book in the Culla-Nārada-Kassapa-jātaka <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76).

Then the Master asked that Brother, saying, "Is it true, Brother, as
they say, that you are passion-test?" "It is true, sir," was the reply.
"Brother," said the Master, "she is your bane; even in bygone days, you
met your end and were made into a relish for the company on her
marriage-day." And so saying, he told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
came to life as an ox, named Big Red, on the squire's estate in a
certain hamlet. And he had a younger brother who was known as Little
Red. There were only these two brothers to do all the draught-work of
the family. Also, the squire had an only daughter, whose hand was asked
in marriage for his son by a gentleman of the town. And the parents of
the girl, with a view to furnishing dainty fare \[197\] for the wedding
guests, began to fatten up a pig named Muṇika.

Observing this, Little Red said to his brother, "All the loads that have
to be drawn for this household are drawn by you and me, my brother; but
all they give us for our pains is sorry grass and straw to eat. Yet here
is the pig being victualled on rice! What can be the reason why he
should be treated to such fare?"

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Said his brother, "My dear Little Red, envy him not; for the pig eats
the food of death. It is but to furnish a relish for the guests at their
daughter's wedding, that the family are feeding up the pig. Wait but a
little time and the guests will be coining. Then will you see that pig
lugged out of his quarters by the legs, killed, and in process of
conversion into curry." And so saying, he repeated this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Then envy not poor Muṇika; ’tis death  
He eats. Contented munch your frugal chaff,--  
The pledge and guarantee of length of days.

</div>

Not long afterwards the guests did arrive; and Muṇika was killed and
cooked into all manner of dishes. Said the Bodhisatta to Little Red,
"Did you see Muṇika, dear brother?" "I have indeed seen, brother, the
outcome of Muṇika's feasting. Better a hundred, nay a thousand, times
than such food is ours, though it be but grass, straw, and chaff;--for
our fare harms us not, and is a pledge that our lives will not be cut
short."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When he had ended his lesson to the effect that the Brother had thus in
bygone days been brought to his doom by that young woman and had been
made into a relish for the company \[198\], he preached the Truths, at
the close whereof the passion-tost Brother reached the First Path of
Salvation. Also the Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth
by saying, "The passion-tost Brother was the pig Muṇika of those days,
the young woman is the same in both cases, Ānanda was Little Red, and I
myself Big Red."

\[*Note*. See hereon Benfey's *Pañca-Tantra*, page 228, where the
migrations of this popular story are traced. See also Jātakas Nos. 286
and 477.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[75:1](j1033.htm#fr_76) No. 477.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 31. Kulāvaka-Jātaka](j1034)

</div>
