<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1066)  [Next](j1068) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j064"></span>

### No. 64.

### DURĀJĀNA-JĀTAKA.

"*Think’st thou*."--This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about a lay-brother. Tradition says that there dwelt at Sāvatthi a
lay-brother, who was stablished in the Three Gems and the Five
Commandments, a devout lover of the Buddha, the Doctrine and the
Brotherhood. But his wife was a sinful and wicked woman. On days when
she did wrong, she was as meek as a slave-girl bought for a hundred
pieces; whilst on days when she did not do

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

wrong, she played my lady, passionate and tyrannical. The husband could
not make her out. She worried him so much that he did not go to wait on
the Buddha.

One day he went with perfumes and flowers, and had taken his seat after
due salutation, when the Master said to him:--"Pray how comes it,
lay-brother, that seven or eight days have gone by without your coming
to wait upon the Buddha?" "My wife, sir, is one day like a slave-girl
bought for a hundred pieces, while another day finds her like a
passionate and tyrannical mistress. I cannot make her out; and it is
because she has worried me so that I have not been to wait upon the
Buddha."

Now, when he heard these words, the Master said, "Why, lay-brother, you
have already been told by the wise and good of bygone days that it is
hard to understand the nature of women." And he went on to add "but his
previous existences have come to be confused in his mind, so that he
cannot remember." And so saying, he told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
came to be a teacher of world-wide fame, with five hundred young
brahmins studying under him. \[300\] One of these pupils was a young
brahmin from a foreign land, who fell in love with a woman and made her
his wife. Though he continued to live on in Benares, be failed two or
three times in his attendance on the master. For, you should know, his
wife was a sinful and wicked woman, who was as meek as a slave on days
when she had done wrong, but on days when she had not done wrong, played
my lady, passionate and tyrannical. Her husband could not make her out
at all; and so worried and harassed by her was he that he absented
himself from waiting on the Master. Now, some seven or eight days later
he renewed his attendances, and was asked by the Bodhisatta why he had
not been seen of late.

"Master, my wife is the cause," said he. And he told the Bodhisatta how
she was meek one day like a slave-girl, and tyrannical the next; how he
could not make her out at all, and how he had been so worried and
harassed by her shifting moods that he had stayed away.

"Precisely so, young brahmin," said the Bodhisatta; "on days when they
have done wrong, women humble themselves before their husbands and
become as meek and submissive as a slave-girl; but on days when they
have not done wrong, then they become stiff-necked and insubordinate to
their lords. After this manner are women sinful and wicked; and their
nature is hard to know. No heed should be paid either to their likes or
to their dislikes." And so saying, the Bodhisatta repeated for the
edification of his pupil this Stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Think’st thou a woman loves thee?--be not glad.  
Think’st thou she loves thee not?--forbear to grieve.  
Unknowable, uncertain as the path  
Of fishes in the water, women prove.

</div>

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

\[301\] Such was the Bodhisatta's instruction to his pupil, who
thenceforward paid no heed to his wife's caprices. And she, hearing that
her misconduct had come to the ears of the Bodhisatta, ceased from that
time forward from her naughtiness.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

So too this lay-brother's wife said to herself, "The Perfect Buddha
himself knows, they tell me, of my misconduct," and thenceforth she
sinned no more.

His lesson ended, the Master preached the Truths, at the close whereof
the lay-brother won the Fruit of the First Path. Then the Master shewed
the connexion and identified the Birth by saying--"This husband and wife
were also the husband and wife of those days, and I myself the teacher."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 65. Anabhirati-Jātaka](j1068)

</div>
