<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1069)  [Next](j1071.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j067"></span>

### No. 67.

### UCCHAṄGA-JĀTAKA.

"*A son's an easy find*."--This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a certain country-woman.

For it fell out once in Kosala that three men were ploughing on the
outskirts of a certain forest, and that robbers plundered folk in that
forest and made their escape. \[307\] The victims came, in the course of
a fruitless search for the rascals, to where the three men were
ploughing. "Here are the forest robbers,

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

disguised as husbandmen," they cried, and hauled the trio off as
prisoners to the King of Kosala. Now time after time there came to the
king's palace a woman who with loud lamentations begged for "wherewith
to be covered." Hearing her cry, the king ordered a shift to be given
her; but she refused it, saying this was not what she meant. So the
king's servants came back to his majesty and said that what the woman
wanted was not clothes but a husband <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_120.md). Then the king had the woman brought
into his presence and asked her whether she really did mean a husband.

"Yes, sire," she answered; "for a husband is a woman's real covering,
and she that lacks a husband--even though she be clad in garments
costing a thousand pieces--goes bare and naked indeed."

(And to enforce this truth, the following Sutta should be recited
here:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Like kingless kingdoms, like a stream run dry,  
So bare and naked is a woman seen,  
Who, having brothers ten, yet lacks a mate.)

</div>

Pleased with the woman's answer, the king asked what relation the three
prisoners were to her. And she said that one was her husband, one her
brother, and one her son. "Well, to mark my favour," said the king, "I
give you one of the three. Which will you take?" "Sire," was her answer,
"if I live, I can get another husband and another son; but as my parents
are dead, I can never get another brother. So give me my brother, Sire."
Pleased with the woman, the king set all three men at liberty; and thus
this one woman was the means of saving three persons from peril.

When the matter came to the knowledge of the Brotherhood, they were
lauding the woman in the Hall of Truth, when the Master entered.
Learning on enquiry what was the subject of their talk, he said, "This
is not the first time, Brethren, that this woman has saved those three
from peril; she did the same in days gone by." And, so saying, he told
this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, three men were
ploughing on the outskirts of a forest, and everything came to pass as
above.

Being asked by the king which of the three she would take, the woman
said, "Cannot your majesty give me all three?" "No," said the king, "I
cannot." \[308\] "Well, if I cannot have all three, give me my brother."
"Take your husband or your son," said the king. "What matters a
brother?" "The two former I can readily replace," answered the woman,
"but a brother never." And so saying, she repeated this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A son 's an easy find; of husbands too  
An ample choice throngs public ways. But where  
Will all my pains another brother find?

</div>

"She is quite right," said the king, well-pleased. And he bade all three
men be fetched from the prison and given over to the woman. She took
them all three and went her way.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

"So you see, Brethren," said the Master, "that this same woman once
before saved these same three men from peril." His lesson ended, he made
the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "The woman and the
three men of to-day were also the woman and men of those bygone days;
and I was then the king."

\[*Note*.--Cf. for the idea of the verse Herodotus 118-120, Sophocles
*Antigone* 909-912; and see this passage discussed in the *Indian
Antiquary* for December, 1881.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[165:1](j1070.htm#fr_121.md) Cf. 'femme couverte.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 68. Sāketa-Jātaka](j1071.md)

</div>
