<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1085)  [Next](j1087) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j083"></span>

### No. 83.

### KĀLAKAṆṆI-JĀTAKA. \[364\]

"*A friend is he*."--This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a friend of Anātha-piṇḍika's. Tradition says that the
two had made mud-pies together, and had gone to the same school; but, as
years went by, the friend, whose name was 'Curse,' sank into great
distress and could not make a living anyhow. So he came to the rich man,
who was kind to him, and paid him to look after all his property; and
the poor friend was employed under Anātha-piṇḍika and did all his
business for him. After he had gone up to the rich man's It was a common
thing to hear in the house--"Stand up, Curse," or "Sit down, Curse," or
"Have your dinner, Curse."

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

One day the Treasurer's friends and acquaintances called on him and
said, "Lord Treasurer, don't let this sort of thing go on in your house.
It's enough to scare an ogre to hear such ill-omened observations
as--'Stand up, Curse,' or 'Sit down, Curse,' or 'Have your dinner,
Curse.' The man is not your social equal; he's a miserable wretch,
dogged by misfortune. Why have anything to do with him?" "Not so,"
replied Anātha-piṇḍika; "a name only serves to denote a man, and the
wise do not measure a man by his name; nor is it proper to wax
superstitious about mere sounds. Never will I throw over, for his mere
name's sake, the friend with whom I made mud-pies as a child." And he
rejected their advice.

One day the great man departed to visit a village of which he was
headman, leaving the other in charge of the house. Hearing of his
departure certain robbers made up their mind to break into the house;
and, arming themselves to the teeth, they surrounded it in the
night-time. But 'Curse' had a suspicion that burglars might be expected,
and was sitting up for them. And when he knew that they had come, he ran
about as if to rouse his people, bidding one sound the conch, another
beat the drum, till he had the whole house full of noise, as though be
were rousing a whole army of servants. Said the robbers, "The house is
not so empty as we were told; the master must be at home." Flinging away
their stones, clubs and other weapons, away they bolted for their lives.
Next day great alarm was caused by the sight of all the discarded
weapons lying round the house; and Curse was lauded to the skies by such
praises as this:--"If the house had not been patrolled by one so wise as
this man, the robbers would have simply walked in at their own pleasure
and have plundered the house. The Treasurer owes this stroke of good
luck to his staunch friend." And the moment the merchant came back from
his village they hastened to tell him the whole story. "Ah," said he,
"this is the trusty guardian of my house whom you wanted me to get rid
of. If I had taken your advice and got rid of him; I should be a beggar
to-day. It's not the name but the heart within that makes the man." So
saying he raised his wages. And thinking that here was a good story
\[365\] to tell, off he went to the Master and gave him a complete
account of it all, right through. "This is not the first time, sir,"
said the Master, "that a friend named Curse has saved his friend's
wealth from robbers; the like happened in bygone days as well." Then, at
Anātha-piṇḍika's request, he told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
was a Treasurer of great renown; and he had a friend whose name was
Curse, and so on as in the foregoing story. When on his return from his
zemindary the Bodhisatta heard what had happened he said to his friends,
"If I had taken your advice and got rid of my trusty friend, I should
have been a beggar to-day." And he repeated this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A friend is he that seven steps will go  
To help us <span id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_144); twelve attest the
comrade true.  
A fortnight or a month's tried loyalty  
Makes kindred, longer time a second self.  
--Then how shall I, who all these years have known  
My friend, be wise in driving Curse away?

</div>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Ānanda was
the Curse of those days, and I myself the Treasurer of Benares."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[210:1](j1086.htm#fr_145) See Griffith's "Old
Indian Poetry," p. 27; and Pānini's rule, v. 2. 22.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 84. Atthassadvāra-Jātaka](j1087)

</div>
