<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1100)  [Next](j1102.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span id="an_j098"></span>

### No. 98.

### KŪṬAVĀṆIJA-JĀTAKA.

\[404\] "*Wise rightly, Wisest wrongly*."--This story was told by the
Master while at Jetavana, about a cheating merchant. There were two
merchants in partnership at Sāvatthi, we are told, who travelled with
their merchandise and came back with the proceeds. And the cheating
merchant thought to himself, "My partner has been badly fed and badly
lodged for so many days past that he will die of indigestion now he has
got home again and can feast to his heart's content on dainties
manifold. My plan is to divide what we have made into three portions,
giving one to his orphans and keeping two for myself." And with this
object he made some excuse day by day for putting off the division of
the profits.

Finding that it was in vain to press for a division, the honest partner
went to the Master at the monastery, made his salutation, and was
received kindly. "It is a very long time," said the Buddha, "since you
came last to see me." And hereupon the merchant told the Master what had
befallen him.

"This is not the first time, lay-follower," said the Master, "that this
man has been a cheating merchant; he was no less a cheat in times past.
As he tries to defraud you now, so did he try to defraud the wise and
good of other days." So saying, at the merchant's request, the Master
told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born into a merchant's family and on name-day was named 'Wise.' When
he grew up he entered into partnership with another merchant named
'Wisest,' and traded with him. And these two took five hundred waggons
of merchandise from Benares to the country-districts, where they
disposed of their wares, returning afterwards with the proceeds to the
city. When the time for dividing came, Wisest said, "I must have a
double share." "Why so?" asked Wise. "Because while you are only Wise, I
am Wisest. And Wise ought to have only one share to Wisest's two." "But
we both had an equal interest in the stock-in-trade and in the oxen and
waggons. Why should you have two shares?" "Because I am Wisest." And so
they talked away till they fell to quarrelling.

"Ah!" thought Wisest, "I have a plan." And he made his father hide in
\[405\] a hollow tree, enjoining the old man to say, when the two came,
"Wisest should have a double portion." This arranged, he went to the
Bodhisatta and proposed to him to refer the claim for a double share to
the competent decision of the Tree-Sprite. Then he made his appeal in
these words: "Lord Tree-Sprite, decide our cause!" Hereupon the father,
who was hidden in the tree, in a changed voice asked them to state the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

case. The cheat addressed the tree as follows: "Lord, here stands Wise,
and here stand I Wisest. We have been partners in trade. Declare what
share each should receive."

"Wise should receive one share, and Wisest two," was the response.

Hearing this decision, the Bodhisatta resolved to find out whether it
was indeed a Tree-Sprite or not. So he filled the hollow trunk with
straw and set it on fire. And Wisest's father was half roasted by the
rising flames and clambered up by clutching hold of a bough. Falling to
the ground, he uttered this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Wise rightly, Wisest wrongly got his name;  
Through Wisest, I'm nigh roasted in the flame.

</div>

Then the two merchants made an equal division and each took half, and at
their deaths passed away to fare according to their deserts.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

"Thus you see," said the Master, "that your partner was as great a cheat
in past times as now." Having ended his story, he identified the Birth
by saying, "The cheating merchant of to-day was the cheating merchant in
the story, and I the honest merchant named Wise."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 99. Parosahassa-Jātaka](j1102.md)

</div>
