<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1115)  [Next](j1117) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span id="an_j113"></span>

### No. 113.

### SIGĀLA-JĀTAKA.

"*The drunken jackal*."--This story was told by the Master while at the
Bamboo-grove, about Devadatta. The Brethren had assembled \[425\] in the
Hall of Truth and were telling how Devadatta had gone to Gayāsīsa with
five hundred followers, whom he was leading into error by declaring that
the Truth was manifest in him "and not in the ascetic Gotama"; and how
by his lies he was breaking up the Brotherhood; and how he kept two
fast-days a week. And as they sate there talking of the wickedness of
Devadatta, the Master entered and was told the subject of their
conversation. "Brethren," said he, "Devadatta was as great a liar in
past times as he is now." So saying, he told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born a Tree-sprite in a cemetery grove. In those days a festival was
proclaimed in Benares, and the people resolved to sacrifice to the
ogres. So they strewed fish and meat about courtyards, and streets, and
other places, and set out great pots of strong drink. At midnight a
jackal came into the town by the sewer, and regaled himself on the meat
and liquor. Crawling into some bushes, he was fast asleep when morning
dawned. Waking up and seeing it was broad daylight, he know that he
could not make his way back at that hour with safety. So he lay down
quietly near the roadside where he could not be seen, till at last he
saw a solitary brahmin on his way to rinse his mouth in the tank. Then
the jackal thought to himself, "Brahmins are a greedy lot. I must so
play on his greediness as to get him to carry me out of the city in his
waist-cloth under his outer robe." So, with a human voice, he cried
"Brahmin."

"Who calls me?" said the brahmin, turning round. "I, brahmin." "What
for?" "I have two hundred gold pieces, brahmin; and if you will hide me
in your waist-cloth under your outer robe and so get me out of the city
without my being seen, you shall have them all."

Closing with the offer, the greedy brahmin hid the jackal and carried
the beast a little way out of the city. "What place is this, brahmin?"
said the jackal. "Oh, it's such and such a place," said the brahmin. "Go
on a bit further," said the jackal and kept urging the brahmin on always
a little further, till at last the cremation-park was reached. \[426\]
"Put me down here," said the jackal; and the brahmin did so. "Spread
your robe out on the ground, brahmin." And the greedy brahmin did so.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

"And now dig up this tree by the roots," said he, and while the brahmin
was at work he walked on to the robe, and dunged and staled on it in
five places,--the four corners and the middle. This done, he made off
into the wood.

Hereon the Bodhisatta, standing in the fork of the tree, uttered this
stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The drunken jackal, brahmin, cheats thy trust!  
Thou ’lt find not here a hundred cowry-shells,  
Far less thy quest, two hundred coins of gold.

</div>

And when he had repeated these verses, the Bodhisatta said to the
brahmin, "Go now and wash your robe and bathe, and go about your
business." So saying, he vanished from sight, and the brahmin did as he
was bidden, and departed very mortified at having been so tricked.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta
was the jackal of those days, and I the Tree-sprite."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 114. Mitacinti-Jātaka](j1117)

</div>
