<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1110)  [Next](j1112.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j108"></span>

### No. 108.

### BĀHIYA-JĀTAKA.

"*Learn thou betimes*."--This story was told by the Master, while he was
dwelling in the Gabled Chamber at the Great Grove near Vesāli, about a
Licchavi, a pious prince who had embraced the Truth. He had invited the
Brotherhood with the Buddha at their head to his house, and there had
shewn great bounty towards them. Now his wife was a very fat woman,
almost bloated in appearance, and she was badly dressed.

Thanking the King for his hospitality, the Master returned to the
monastery and, after a discourse to the Brethren, retired to his
perfumed chamber.

Assembled in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren expressed their surprise
that a man like this Licchavi prince should have such a fat
badly-dressed woman for his wife, and be so fond of her. Entering the
Hall and hearing what they were discussing, the Master said, "Brethren,
as now, so in former times he was fond of a fat woman." Then, at their
request, he told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[421\] Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was one of his courtiers. And a fat and badly-dressed country
woman, who worked for hire, was passing near the courtyard of the
palace, when pressing need for an occasion came upon her. Bending down
with her raiment decently gathered round her, she accomplished her
purpose, and was erect again in a trice.

The King chanced to be looking out on to the courtyard through a window
at the time and saw this. Thought he, "A woman who could manage this
with so much decency must enjoy good health. She would be sure to be
cleanly in her house; and a son born into a cleanly house would be sure
to grow up cleanly and virtuous. I will make her my queen-consort." And
accordingly the King, first assuring himself that she

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

was not another's, sent for her and made her his queen. And she became
very near and dear to him. Not long afterwards a son was born, and this
son became an Universal Monarch.

Observing her fortunes, the Bodhisatta took occasion to say to the King,
"Sire, why should not care be taken duly to fulfil all proper
observances, when this excellent woman by her modesty and decency in
relieving nature won your majesty's favour and rose to such fortune?"
And he went on to utter this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Learn thou betimes, though headstrong folk there be;  
The rustic pleased the King by modesty.

</div>

Thus did the Great Being commend the virtues of those who devoted
themselves to the study of proper observances.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[422\] His story ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The
husband and wife of to-day were also the husband and wife of those
times, and I the wise courtier."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 109. Kuṇḍakapūva-Jātaka](j1112.md)

</div>
