<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1121)  [Next](j1123) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span id="an_j119"></span>

### No. 119.

### AKĀLARĀVI-JĀTAKA.

"*No parents trained*."--This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a Brother who used to be noisy at wrong seasons. He is
said to have come of a good Sāvatthi family and to have given up the
world for the Truth, but to have neglected his duties and despised
instruction. He never took count of the hours for duties, for ministry
or for reciting the texts. Throughout the three watches of the night, as
well as the hours of waking, he was never quiet;--so that the other
Brethren could not get a wink of sleep. Accordingly, the Brethren in the
Hall of Truth censured his conduct. Entering the Hall and learning on
enquiry what they were talking about, the Master said, "Brethren, as
now, so in past times, this Brother was noisy out of season, and for his
unseasonable conduct was strangled." So saying he told this story of the
past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[436\] Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a northern brahmin family, and when he grew up,
learned all knowledge and became a teacher of world-wide fame with five
hundred young brahmins studying under him. Now these young brahmins had
a cock who crowed betimes and roused them to their studies. And this
cock died. So they looked all about for another, and one of their
number, when picking up firewood in the cemetery-grove, saw a cock there
which he brought home and kept in a coop. But, as this second cock had
been bred in a cemetery, he had no knowledge of times and seasons, and
used to crow casually,--at midnight as well as at daybreak. Roused by
his crowing at midnight, the young brahmins fell to their studies; by
dawn they were tired out and could not for sleepiness keep their
attention on the subject; and when he fell a-crowing in broad day they
did not get a chance of quiet for repeating their lesson. And 'as it was
the cock's crowing both at midnight and by day which had brought their
studies to a standstill, they took the bird and wrung his neck. Then
they told their teacher that they had killed the cock that crowed in and
out of season.

Said their teacher, for their edification, "It was his bad bringing up
that brought this cock to his end." So saying, he uttered this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

No parents trained, no teacher taught this bird:  
Both in and out of season was he heard.

</div>

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

Such was the Bodhisatta's teaching on the matter; and when he had lived
his allotted time on earth, he passed away to fare according to his
deserts.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth as follows,--"This
Brother was the cock of those times, who did not know when not to crow;
my disciples were the young brahmins; and I their teacher."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 120. Bandhanamokkha-Jātaka](j1123)

</div>
