<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1138)  [Next](j1140) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j136"></span>

### No. 136.

### SUVAṆṆAHAṀSA-JĀTAKA.

"*Contented be*."--This story was told by the Master about a Sister
named Fat Nandā.

A lay-brother at Sāvatthi had offered the Sisterhood a supply of garlic,
and, sending for his bailiff; had given orders that, if they should
come, each Sister was to receive two or three handfuls. After that they
made a practice \[475\] of coming

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

to his house or field for their garlic. Now one holiday the supply of
garlic in the house ran out, and the Sister Fat Nandā, coming with
others to the house, was told, when she said she wanted some garlic,
that there was none left in the house, it had all been used up out of
hand, and that she must go to the field for it. So away to the field she
went and carried off an excessive amount of garlic. The bailiff grew
angry and remarked what a greedy lot these Sisters were! This piqued the
more moderate Sisters; and the Brethren too were piqued at the taunt
when the Sisters repeated it to them, and they told the Blessed One.
Rebuking the greed of Fat Nandā, the Master said, "Brethren, a greedy
person is harsh and unkind even to the mother who bore him; a greedy
person cannot convert the unconverted, or make the converted grow in
grace, or cause alms to come in, or save them when come in; whereas the
moderate person can do all these things." In such wise did the Master
point the moral, ending by saying, "Brethren, as Fat Nandā is greedy
now, so she was greedy in times gone by." And thereupon he told the
following story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a Brahmin, and growing up was married to a bride of
his own rank, who bore him three daughters named Nandā, Nanda-vatī and
Sundari-nandā. The Bodhisatta dying, they were taken in by neighbours
and friends, whilst he was born again into the world as a golden mallard
endowed with consciousness of its former existences. Growing up, the
bird viewed its own magnificent size and golden plumage, and remembered
that previously it had been a human being. Discovering that his wife and
daughters were living on the charity of others, the mallard bethought
him of his plumage like hammered and beaten gold and how by giving them
a golden feather at a time he could enable his wife and daughters to
live in comfort. So away he flew to where they dwelt and alighted on the
top of the central beam of the roof. Seeing the Bodhisatta, \[476\] the
wife and girls asked where he had come from; and he told them that he
was their father who had died and been born a golden mallard, and that
he had come to visit them and put an end to their miserable necessity of
working for hire. "You shall have my feathers," said he, "one by one,
and they will sell for enough to keep you all in ease and comfort." So
saying, he gave them one of his feathers and departed. And from time to
time he returned to give them another feather, and with the proceeds of
their sale these brahmin-women grew prosperous and quite well-to-do. But
one day the mother said to her daughters, "There's no trusting animals,
my children. Who's to say your father might not go away one of these
days and never come back again? Let us use our time and pluck him clean
next time he comes, so as to make sure of all his feathers." Thinking
this would pain him, the daughters refused. The mother in her greed
called the golden mallard to her one day when he came, and then took him
with both hands and plucked him. Now the Bodhisatta's feathers had this
property that if

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

they were plucked out against his wish, they ceased to be golden and
became like a crane's feathers. And now the poor bird, though he
stretched his wings, could not fly, and the woman flung him into a
barrel and gave him food there. As time went on his feathers grew again
(though they were plain white ones now), and he flew away to his own
abode and never came back again.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

At the close of this story the Master said, "Thus you see, Brethren, how
Fat Nandā was as greedy in times past as she is now. And her greed then
lost her the gold in the same way as her greed now will lose her the
garlic. Observe, moreover, how her greed has deprived the whole
Sisterhood of their supply of garlic, and learn therefrom to be moderate
in your desires and to be content with what is given you, however small
that may be." So saying, he uttered this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Contented be, nor itch for further store.  
They seized the swan--but had its gold no more.

</div>

So saying, the Master soundly rebuked the erring Sister and laid down
the precept that any Sister who should eat garlic would have to do
penance. Then, \[477\] making the connexion, he said, "Fat Nandā was the
brahmin's wife of the story, her three sisters were the brahmin's three
daughters, and I myself the golden mallard."

\[*Note*. The story occurs at pp. 258-9 of Vol. IV. of the Vinaya. Cf.
*La poule aux œufs d’or* in La Fontaine (v. 13) &c.\]

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 137. Babbu-Jātaka](j1140)

</div>
