<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1146)  [Next](j1148.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j144"></span>

### No. 144.

### NAṄGUṬṬHA-JĀTAKA.

"*Vile Jātaveda*."--This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
touching the false austerity of the Ājīvikas, or naked ascetics.
Tradition tells us that behind Jetavana they used to practise false
austerities <span id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_203.md). A number of the
Brethren seeing them there painfully squatting on their heels, swinging
in the air like bats, reclining on thorns, scorching themselves with
five fires, and so forth in

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

their various false austerities,--were moved to ask the Blessed One
whether any good resulted therefrom. "None whatsoever," answered the
Master. "In days gone by, the wise and good went into the forest with
their birth-fire, thinking to profit by such austerities; but, finding
themselves no better for all their sacrifices to Fire and for all
similar practices, straightway doused the birth-fire with water till it
went out. By an act of Meditation the Knowledges and Attainments were
gained and a title won to the Brahma Realm." So saying he told this
story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[494\] Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a brahmin in the North country, and on the day of
his birth his parents lit a birth-fire.

In his sixteenth year they addressed him thus, "Son, on the day of your
birth we lit a birth-fire for you. Now therefore choose. If you wish to
lead a family life, learn the Three Vedas; but if you wish to attain to
the Brahma Realm, take your fire with you into the forest and there tend
it, so as to win Mahā-Brahmā's favour and hereafter to enter into the
Brahma Realm."

Telling his parents that a family life had no charms for him, he went
into the forest and dwelt in a hermitage tending his fire. An ox was
given him as a fee one day in a border-village, and when he had driven
it home to his hermitage, the thought came to him to sacrifice a cow to
the Lord of Fire. But finding that he had no salt, and feeling that the
Lord of Fire could not eat his meat-offering without it, he resolved to
go back and bring a supply from the village for the purpose. So he tied
up the ox and set off again to the village.

While he was gone, a band of hunters came up and, seeing the ox, killed
it and cooked themselves a dinner. And what they did not eat they
carried off, leaving only the tail and hide and the shanks. Finding only
these sorry remains on his return, the brahmin exclaimed, "As this Lord
of Fire cannot so much as look after his own, how shall he look after
me? It is a waste of time to serve him, bringing neither good nor
profit." Having thus lost all desire to worship Fire, he said--"My Lord
of Fire, if you cannot manage to protect yourself, how shall you protect
me? The meat being gone, you must make shift to fare on this offal." So
saying, he threw on the fire the tail and the rest of the robbers'
leavings and uttered this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Vile Jātaveda <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_204.md), here's the tail for
you;  
And think yourself in luck to get so much! \[495\]  
The prime meat's gone; put up with tail to-day.

</div>

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

So saying the Great Being put the fire out with water and departed to
become a recluse. And he won the Knowledges and Attainments, and ensured
his re-birth in the Brahma Realm.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "I was the
ascetic who in those days quenched the fire."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_203"></span>[307:1](j1147.htm#fr_204) See (*e.g.*.md)
*Majjhima Nikāya*, pp. 77-8, for a catalogue of ascetic austerities, to
which early Buddhism was strongly opposed.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[308:1](j1147.htm#fr_205.md) See No.
[35](j1038.htm#an_j035), [p. 90](j1038.htm#page_90.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 145. Rādha-Jātaka](j1148.md)

</div>
