<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1141)  [Next](j1143) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j139"></span>

### No. 139.

### UBHATOBHAṬṬHA-JĀTAKA.

"*His blinding and her beating*."--This story the Master told while at
the Bamboo Grove, about Devadatta. We hear that the Brethren, meeting
together in the Hall of Truth, spoke one with another, saying that even
as a torch from a pyre, charred at both ends and bedunged in the middle,
does not serve as wood either in forest-tree or village-hearth, so
Devadatta by giving up the world to follow this saving faith had only
achieved a twofold shortcoming and failure, seeing that he had missed
the comforts of a-lay life yet had fallen short of his vocation as a
Brother.

Entering the Hall, the Master asked and was told what the Brethren were
talking of together. "Yes, Brethren," said he, "and so too in days gone
by Devadatta came to just such another two-fold failure." So saying, he
told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in-Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born a Tree-Sprite, and there was a certain village where

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

line-fishermen dwelt in those days. And one of these fishermen taking
his tackle went off with his little boy, and cast his hook into the most
likely waters known to his fellow-fishermen. Now \[483\] a snag caught
his hook and the fisherman could not pull it up. "What a fine fish!"
thought he. "I'd better send my boy off home to my wife and tell her to
get up a quarrel and keep the others at home, so that there'll be none
to want to go shares in my prize." Accordingly he told the lad to run
off home and tell his mother what a big fish he had hooked and how she
was to engage the neighbours' attention. Then, fearing his line might
break, he flung off his coat and dashed into the water to secure his
prize. But as he groped about for the fish, he struck against the snag
and put out both his eyes. Moreover a robber stole his clothes from the
hank. In an agony of pain, with his hands pressed to his blinded eyes,
he clambered out trembling in every limb and tried to find his clothes.

Meantime his wife, to occupy the neighbours by a quarrel on purpose, had
tricked herself out with a palm-leaf behind one ear, and had blacked one
eye with soot from the saucepan. In this guise, nursing a dog, she came
out to call on her neighbours. "Bless me, you've gone mad," said one
woman to her. "Not mad at all," retorted the fisherman's wife; "you
abuse me without cause with your slanderous tongue. Come your ways with
me to the zemindar and I'll have you fined eight pieces <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_196) for slander."

So with angry words they went off to the zemindar. But when the matter
was gone into, it was the fisherman's wife who was fined; and she was
tied up and beaten to make her pay the fine. Now when the Tree-Sprite
saw how misfortune had befallen both the wife in the village and the
husband in the forest, he stood in the fork of his tree and exclaimed,
"Ah fisherman, both in the water and on land thy labour is in vain, and
twofold is thy failure." So saying he uttered this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

His blinding, and her beating, clearly show  
A twofold failure and a twofold woe <span
id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_197).

</div>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[484\] His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying,
"Devadatta was the fisherman of those days, and I the Tree-Sprite."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_196"></span>[299:1](j1142.htm#fr_197) The Pāli word here,
as in No. [137](j1140.htm#an_j137), is *kahāpaṇa*. But there it is shewn
by the context to be a golden coin; whereas here the poverty of the
fisher-folk supports the view that the coin was of copper, as commonly.
The fact seems to be that the word *kahāpaṇa*, like some other names of
Indian coins, primarily indicated a weight of any coined metal,--whether
gold, silver or copper.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[299:2](j1142.htm#fr_198) Cf. *Dhammapada*,
page 147.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 140. Kāka-Jātaka](j1143)

</div>
