[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mosy16)  [Next](mosy18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641437X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Migration of Symbols*, by Goblet d'Alviella, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### III. <span class="smallcaps">The Transformations of the Trisula.</span>

I have already referred to the importance of the Trident in the
symbolism of Hinduism where, under the name *trisula* (*tri* three, and
*sula* point, spear, or pale) it occurs amongst the most important
attributes of Siva. This emblem exhibits no peculiarity of form here; it
might as well figure in the hands of Hades, or of Poseidon. This is not
the case, however, with respect to the Buddhist *trisula* or, at least,
the symbol which bears this name amongst the Buddhists.

The *trisula* of the Buddhists, termed also *vardhamana*, "a crescent,"
may be described, in its

<span id="img_fig142"></span> ![FIG. 142. THE TRISULA.](img/fig142.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 142. The
Trisula</span>.</span>

simplest form, as an omicron surmounted by an *omega*.

It is, however, rarely met with under such a simple form. The upper arc
of the *omicron*, or rather of the disk, is nearly always flanked by two
small circles, or by two horizontal strokes which often assume the
appearance of two leaves or small wings (fig. 143 *et seq.*). The points
of the *omega* change into *fleurons;* the disk itself rests on a staff
or pedestal, and from its lower arc fall two spires similar to serpents’
tails, the ends of which are sometimes curved upwards ([fig.
143](#img_fig143)), and sometimes downwards ([fig. 154](#img_fig154)).

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

At times the *trisula* appears to have only an ornamentive significance.
Thus we see it crowning balustrades and porticoes, adorning
sword-scabbards,

<span id="img_fig143"></span> ![FIG. 143. TRISULA OF AMARAVATI. Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. xviii. (new series), fig.
1.)](img/fig143.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 143. Trisula of
Amaravati.</span>  
*Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*, vol. xviii. (new series), fig.
1.)</span>

and forming necklace-pendants and ear-rings. <span
id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_452) But in most cases it unquestionably
discharges the function of a symbol, and even of a religious symbol.
Engraved on numerous coins by the side of religious emblems and images,
it stands at the beginning and end of votive inscriptions in the caves
of Western India. <span id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_453) The sculptures

<span id="img_fig144"></span> ![FIG. 144. TRISULA ON BLAZING PILLAR.
(FERGUSSON. Tree and Serpent Worship, pl. lxxi.)](img/fig144.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 144. Trisula on Blazing
Pillar.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Fergusson</span>. *Tree and Serpent Worship*,
pl. lxxi.)</span>

of the bas-reliefs exhibit it, in turn, on the staff of banners, on the
back of an elephant, on an altar where homage is paid to it, and,
lastly, on a pillar from which flames emerge (fig. 144). At

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bharhut it occurs
above the throne of Buddha. At Amaravati it is one of the signs cut on
the sole of the Master's feet. <span id="fr_454"></span>[1](#fn_454)

The oldest representations of the *trisula* are found—in conjunction
with the principal symbols of Buddhism, the *swastika*, the *stupa*, the
Sacred Tree, and so forth—on the coins of Krananda, <span
id="fr_455"></span>[2](#fn_455) a native sovereign contemporary with
Alexander or the earliest Seleucid kings.

<span id="img_fig154"></span> ![FIG. 145. COIN OF
KRANANDA.](img/fig154.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 145. Coin of
Krananda.</span></span>

Nevertheless the *trisula* was far from being solely used by the
Buddhists. In caves it is sometimes placed near symbols of the solar
worship, and on the coins of the Indo-Scythic princes it is not only
struck beside images of the Hindu god Siva but, what at first surprises
us, beside those of Greek divinities, such as Zeus; <span
id="fr_456"></span>[3](#fn_456) it is, moreover, possible that it became
a mere monetary sign, as often happens with religious symbols used in
coinage.

Among the Jains, who have so many affinities

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

with Buddhism, the twenty-fourth and last of the *Tirthankaras* or
legendary saints of the sect has the *vardhamana* as a symbol; this
personage even bears, according to Colebrook, the surname of
*Trisula*. <span id="fr_457"></span>[1](#fn_457)

It may be wondered, at first sight, that the innumerable texts left by
Buddhism give us no positive information with regard to the meaning and
origin of the *trisula*. Few symbols have given rise, in our own times,
to more varied explanations.

Some have seen therein the monogram of Buddha; <span
id="fr_458"></span>[2](#fn_458) others the symbol of the dharma, the
Law, which sums up the doctrine of Buddhism; <span
id="fr_459"></span>[3](#fn_459) others again a representation of the
*tri-ratna*, the threefold jewel formed by Buddha, his Law, and his
Church. <span id="fr_460"></span>[4](#fn_460) There are those who have
discovered in the *trisula* the juxtaposition of the dharma *chakra*,
the "Wheel of the Law" to the ancient letter <span
id="img_24000"></span> ![](img/24000.jpg), *y*, which itself is said to
stand for the mystic formula *ye dharma*. <span
id="fr_461"></span>[5](#fn_461) Some scholars think they recognize in it
the combination of five letters symbolizing respectively intelligence
(*ma*) and the four component elements of matter, air (*ya*), fire
(*ra*), water (*va*), and earth (*la*). <span
id="fr_462"></span>[6](#fn_462)

Eugene Burnouf thought he found therein the *vardhamana kaya*, "the
Propitious One," one of the sixty-five signs which, according to
Buddhist

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

tradition, adorn the impression of Buddha's foot. <span
id="fr_463"></span>[1](#fn_463)

Finally, according to some writers, we must seek its origins amongst the
less abstract images of the naturalistic forms of worship which preceded
Buddhism.—M. Kern, laying stress on the actual meaning of *vardhamana*,
the present participle of a verb signifying "to grow or increase," makes
it the image of the "horned moon," and sees in the central protuberance
of the *trisula* the nose with which we ourselves sometimes adorn the
representation of the lunar crescent <span id="img_24100"></span>
![](img/24100.jpg). <span id="fr_464"></span>[2](#fn_464) Edward Thomas
seeks therein "an ideal combination of the sun and moon;" the alteration
of the primitive form would, according to him, be due to a modification
in the forms of worship, or to the overthrowing of the sovereigns termed
Lunar by a Solar dynasty. <span id="fr_465"></span>[3](#fn_465)

Mr. Burgess recognizes therein an image of the Thunderbolt; <span
id="fr_466"></span>[4](#fn_466) Sir George Birdwood, a phallic emblem,
or else the Tree of Life; <span id="fr_467"></span>[5](#fn_467) Mr.
Monier Williams, "the Two Feet of Vishnu, with a star or embossment in
the middle." <span id="fr_468"></span>[6](#fn_468)

Lastly, M. Beal takes it for the superposition of the Flame on the
Lotus-flower, and M. Senart, of the Trident on the Wheel. <span
id="fr_469"></span>[7](#fn_469)

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

Among all these more or less contradictory opinions the interpretation
of M. Senart is not only the simplest and most rational, but it is also
strictly confirmed by the evidence of the monuments. There are many
*trisulas* in which the upper part of the figure is separated from the
Disk, some again in which it assumes distinctly angular forms <span
id="img_24200"></span> ![](img/24200.jpg), instead of the rounded shape
of the *omega*, ω; there are others, finally, in which it becomes beyond
doubt a Trident, as amongst the sculptures of Buddha Gaya and of
Boro-Budur. <span id="fr_470"></span>[1](#fn_470)

The Trident superposed upon the Disk is also met with upon the coins of
the anonymous prince

<span id="img_fig146"></span> ![FIG. 146. SCULPTURE OF BUDDHA GAYÂ.
(Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (new series), pl. ii., No.
37.)](img/fig146.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 146. Sculpture of
Buddha Gayâ.</span>  
(*Numismatic Chronicle*, vol. xx. (new series), pl. ii., No. 37.)</span>

known by his title of *Basileus Sôter Megas*, and on those of several
native kings. <span id="fr_471"></span>[2](#fn_471)

The only point on which I have some doubt is when M. Senart puts forward
the Trident as the original feature, and, so to speak, the primitive
nucleus of the Hindu *trisula*,—which would make it, at least in its
origin, an essentially Sivait symbol, destined to represent the flash of
the lightning.—As for myself, I should be more inclined to seek this
nucleus in the Disk, and, consequently, to connect the *trisula* with
the solar symbols.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

From the most remote times the worship of the sun was widely spread
throughout India, and, as nearly everywhere else, the sun was first of
all represented there by a Disk, as may be seen from the sculptures of
the ancient caves, and the ingots used for bartering before the
introduction of coins properly so-called. <span
id="fr_472"></span>[1](#fn_472) At a later date the Disk became a Wheel,
and the Buddhists, who applied so many solar images and symbols to their
form of worship, made it the *Wheel of the Law*, "formed of a thousand
spokes darting out a thousand rays."

The secondary character of the *omega* (or Trident) in the *trisula*
plainly follows from certain figures brought into view by Edward Thomas
in

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span id="img_fig147"></span> <img src="img/fig147.jpg" alt="FIG. 147. ANCIENT COIN." /></p>
<p><span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 147. Ancient Coin.</span></span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span id="img_fig148"></span> <img src="img/fig148.jpg" alt="FIG. 148. CAVE OF BAJA." /></p>
<p><span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 148. Cave of Baja.</span></span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td colspan="2" data-valign="top" width="655"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td colspan="2" data-valign="top" width="655"><p><span class="small">(<em>Numismatic Chronicle</em>, vol. xx. (new series), pl. ii., figs. 39 and 40.)</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

his valuable work on the solar symbols of India. These are circles drawn
between four *omegas*. One of these circles exhibits four arrows
radiating from the circle between the crescents.

These figures indicate clearly the function of the Trident in the
*trisula*. Doubtlessly, in the hands of Siva—as formerly in the hands of
Neptune, and, at a still earlier period, in those of the Assyrian god of
the air and the storm—the Trident must symbolize the flash of the
lightning. But may it not be questioned whether, considered apart, it
should

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

not be held to be, in a wider sense, the image of a Three-tongued Flame,
and, consequently, when coupled with the Disk, an emblem of fire, or of
solar radiation?

Among the sculptures of Boro-Budur, in the island of Java, the Trident,
which in some religious scenes is exhibited above the Disk, or Rosette,
is replaced at times by a Three-pointed Flame. <span
id="fr_473"></span>[1](#fn_473) Eug. Burnouf had already noticed, in the
coloured representations of the Buddhas of Nepaul, that the headdress of
the Master exhibits a ball terminating above in a kind of flame, and
that on many Singhalese statues this flame takes the shape of "a kind of
lyre or trident." <span id="fr_474"></span>[2](#fn_474) Finally,
according to Mr. Beal, the *trisula* personifies, amongst the Buddhists
of the north, the heaven of pure flame superposed upon the heaven of the
sun. <span id="fr_475"></span>[3](#fn_475)

The *trisula* is then certainly a Hindu symbol. It seems, however, to
have felt, at an early date, the influence of the Caduceus. Perhaps even
it was in order to approach the latter in appearance that the primitive
Trident of the Hindu symbol assumed the rounded forms of the *omega* and
placed itself in direct contact with the Disk.

Those who have some hesitation in admitting the possibility of
discovering in a complex symbol the traces of a double antecedent—as we
find in a child the characteristic features of both its parents—need
only cast a glance over the following picture whose contents I have
taken from the coinage and figured monuments of India.

I wish to call especial attention to the figures d and e. They resemble
one another so closely that writers commonly rank the former as a
*trisula* 

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

when they find it on the coins of certain Indo-Scythic princes. Yet
there is no doubt but that it is directly connected with the Caduceus.
Moreover,

<span id="img_fig149"></span> ![FIG. 149. CADUCEI AND
TRISULAS.](img/fig149.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 149. Caducei and
Trisulas.</span></span> <span id="fr_476"></span>[1](#fn_476)

Fergusson himself has written with respect to the *trisula:*—"It bears a
singular resemblance to the sign of the planet Mercury, or to the
Caduceus of the god who bears this name." <span
id="fr_477"></span>[2](#fn_477)

It is also representations of serpents intertwined, closely allied to
the Caduceus, which supply us with the earliest type of the lower
appendages, in the shape of spires, observed in the *trisulas* of Sanchi
and Amaravati ([fig. 143](#img_fig143) and [154](#img_fig154)).

On the other hand, the most complex forms of the *trisula* exhibit an
unquestionable likeness to

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

some types of the Winged Globe which have been observed in Asia Minor,
Mesopotamia and Persia.

In both figures the centre is occupied by a Disk which is sometimes
converted into the Wheel, or the Lotus-flower. Does not the upper part
of the *trisula*, which I have termed the *omega*, recall the horns of
the Mesopotamian emblem, if we only take into consideration the knob
between the horns caused by the upper arc of the disk ([fig.
150](#img_fig150));

<span id="img_fig150"></span> ![FIG. 150. CYLINDER OF CHALCEDON.
(LAJARD. Culte de Mithra, pl. lii., fig. 2.)](img/fig150.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 150. Cylinder of
Chalcedon.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Lajard</span>. *Culte de Mithra*, pl. lii.,
fig. 2.)</span>

or else the projection caused by the tuft of plumes which surmounts the
disk of certain Winged Globes ([fig. 151](#img_fig151))?

<span id="img_fig151"></span> ![FIG. 151. COIN OF THE SATRAPS OF TARSUS.
(LAJARD. Culte de Mithra, pl. lxiv.)](img/fig151.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 151. Coin of the
Satraps of Tarsus.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Lajard</span>. *Culte de Mithra*, pl.
lxiv.)</span>

The shaft, frequently conical, on which some *trisulas* rest, takes the
place of the fan-shaped tail, and the spires traced on both sides of
this support correspond with the lines, ending in a loop, which descend
on either side of the tail in the ornithomorphic Disks of Western Asia.

In order to account for this likeness, I will venture on the hypothesis
that these forms of the *trisula* must have been subjected, during their
development, to the plastic influence of the ancient Egyptian symbol
which had come to India by way of Assyria and Persia.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

The time is past when, dazzled by the sudden discovery of Vedic
literature, and fascinated also by the verification of our relationship
to the Aryan races of Asia, we turned towards India to seek them the
universal source of symbols and dogmas, myths and gods. Since we caught
a glimpse of the great antiquity of the civilizations which had reached
their prime on the borders of the Euphrates and the Nile at a period
when the ancestors of the Aryans were still wandering over the
table-lands of Central Asia, we are far more inclined to locate in
Mesopotamia, or even in Egypt, the earliest artistic centres which shed
their light over the ancient world, from the Mediterranean to the Indian
Ocean.

On the other hand, India, up to the Mahometan conquest, did not live in
the isolated condition to which historians were long pleased to relegate
it. Sir George Birdwood goes, perhaps, a little too far when he asserts,
in a general manner, that nearly all the symbols of India are of
Mesopotamian origin. <span id="fr_478"></span>[1](#fn_478) But it is
none the less an established fact now, that the products of western art
and symbolism must have made their way to the valley of the Indus before
the appearance of the oldest stone monuments on which ancient India has
left us a vestige of its beliefs. <span id="fr_479"></span>[2](#fn_479)

Without taking into consideration the intercourse which is supposed to
have existed between the dwellers on the banks of the Indus and the most
ancient empires of the Euphrates and the Nile, and without laying stress
either on the factories which the Phœnicians are said to have
established in southern India, I will recall to mind that Darius I

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

had annexed the valley of the Indus, and the actual province of the
Punjab, about the end of the seventh century B.C. <span
id="fr_480"></span>[1](#fn_480) Such competent authorities as James
Fergusson and General Cunningham have shown that India borrowed its
earliest style of architecture from the Persians, <span
id="fr_481"></span>[2](#fn_481) and in the north-east of the peninsula
there have been repeatedly found products of Persian art which date back
to Darius and his successors—especially cylinders and coins bearing the
Winged Circle. <span id="fr_482"></span>[3](#fn_482) It was in one of
these finds that one of the coins of Tarsus containing a Winged Circle
so nearly allied to the *trisula* was found ([fig. 151](#img_fig151)).

It seems to be now generally admitted that the Indian alphabets are of
Semitic origin. <span id="fr_483"></span>[4](#fn_483) Why then should
religious symbols not have followed the same paths as the symbols of
language and the creations of art?

In the centuries following the expedition of Alexander, it was Greek, or
rather Græco-Asiatic art which influenced the development of Indian
architecture and sculpture. Coins show us first of all sovereigns of
Greek origin, who Hellenize Bactria, the Cabul country, and the valley
of the Indus as far as the Ganges basin; then Scythic and Parthian
princes who maintain, until the second century of our era, the language
and traditions of this civilization imported from the West.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For more than two
centuries the Greek Pantheon alone supplies images for the coins of
western India. At most a few Buddhist emblems occur here and there; the
*Bô* tree and the *stupa* under Agathocles, and the Wheel under
Menander. From the time of Gondophares the representation of Siva
alternates with that of Poseidon; yet the type of the two divinities
remains so similar that on some coins it is difficult to decide if it is
the Greek or the Hindu god. <span id="fr_484"></span>[1](#fn_484)

At the same time, however, there occurs in India a veritable invasion of
Iranian divinities. Mr. Percy Gardner and M. James Darmesteter, the
former through investigating the coins of the British Museum, and the
latter through the study of Persian traditions in the Hindu epic poem,
came simultaneously to the somewhat startling conclusion that western
India, after being Hellenised under the Indo-Bactrians, had been largely
Iranised under the Indo-Scythians. <span id="fr_485"></span>[2](#fn_485)
On the coins of the latter not only do Zeus, Pallas, Helios, Selene,
Poseidon, Herakles, and Serapis alternate with Mithras, Mao, and Atar,
as well as with Siva, Lukshmi, and even Buddha, but also the classic
forms of the Thunderbolt, the Caduceus and the Cornucopia occur side by
side with the Buddhist *trisula* and Wheel as well as with the Sivait
Trident and bull.

India has always been the favourite home of religious syncretism; but at
no period of its history did it open its portals to so many different
forms of worship—even under Akbar, that great Mogul who was willing to
combine in a single religion the beliefs of the Mahometans, the Hindus,
the Parsees, the Jews and the Christians.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

How could symbols have escaped an impulse which carried away the gods
themselves? At any rate Buddhism would have been unfaithful to the
spirit of its whole symbolism if, when acquainted with the emblems by
which neighbouring religions represented their great solar divinity, or
even their supreme god, it had not sought to appropriate them, either by
adopting them as they stood with a new signification, or oftener by
assimilating them, through slight linear alterations, with one or other
of its favourite symbols.

It is, as we have seen, among the sculptures of Amaravati that the
*trisula* assumes the form most closely allied to the ornithomorphic
Disk. Now, nowhere else has the general influence of Græco-Asiatic art
over native architecture and sculpture been verified in a more obvious
manner. Already in the year 645 of our era the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen
Thsang likened the sanctuary of Amaravati to the palaces of the Tahia,
*i.e.*, the inhabitants of Bactria. <span
id="fr_486"></span>[1](#fn_486) The same fact has been recorded in our
own times by James Fergusson: "There is," he writes, "so much of what is
Greek, or rather Bactrian, in the architectural details of Amaravati
that this monument must belong to a period nearer to the Christian era
than the character of the inscriptions would lead one to suppose." And
the eminent archæologist adds that the study of these sculptures seems
to him destined to elucidate especially the interesting question of the
intercourse, and even of the exchange of thought, between east and
west. <span id="fr_487"></span>[2](#fn_487)

The Winged Circle and the Caduceus are not,

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

moreover, the only factors which have reacted upon the genesis, or at
least the development, of the *trisula*.

In an interesting paper, read in 1886 before the *Royal Asiatic
Society*, Mr. Robert Sewell was perhaps the first to seek to the west of
the Indus, and even in Egypt, the origins of the *trisula*, which he
connects with the Scarab. The birthplace of a symbol is one thing; the
origin of the figures which may have influenced its development is
something very different. With this reservation, however, I must admit
that there is nothing farfetched in this parallel, especially if,
following

<span id="img_fig152"></span> ![FIG. 152. (Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, vol. xviii. (new series), fig. 13.)](img/fig152.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 152.</span>  
(*Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*, vol. xviii. (new series), fig.
13.)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mr. Sewell's
example, we interpose between the two figures the type of the Scarab
with raised wings and bent legs which surmounts certain Assyrian
columns.

But in Egypt itself, as M. Perrot shows, the flying Scarab borrowed the
outlines of the Winged Globe, <span id="fr_488"></span>[1](#fn_488) by
which fact, according to our theory, its resemblance to the *trisula* is
sufficiently explained. It must be observed, moreover, that several of

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

these Assyrian Scarabs hold between their fore-legs the Disk adorned
with the *uræi*. <span id="fr_489"></span>[1](#fn_489)

It may be noticed, by the way, that among the Egyptians the Trident
already occurs in conjunction with the Winged Globe, at least in the
texts. The inscription of Edfu, which relates how Horus was transformed
into a Winged Globe in order to fight the armies of Set, gives him as a
weapon a three-pointed spear. <span id="fr_490"></span>[2](#fn_490)

On a number of monuments the Disk of the *trisula* changes into a
Rosette, imitating an expanded lotus-blossom, as on the gate of Sanchi.
The same monument further exhibits Lotuses at the ends of two stalks
which spring from the basis of the central *fleuron;* finally, the two
extreme points of the *omega* take a shape which suggests the calyx of a
flower. We have already shown the solar character of the Lotus in the
symbolism of the Hindus. <span id="fr_491"></span>[3](#fn_491) In the
*trisula* the transformation of the Disk into a Lotus is therefore the
equivalent, the plastic rendering of the transformation which, among the
Buddhists, substituted the *padma mani*, or "Jewel of the Lotus," for
the *sûra mani*, or "Jewel of the Sun"; whence the well-known
formula:—*Om! mani padme*, "Oh! the Jewel in the Lotus!" <span
id="fr_492"></span>[4](#fn_492)

Elsewhere the *trisula* seems to reproduce the Sivait emblem of the
*lingam* between two serpents standing erect. This figure, which when
superposed upon the Disk has perhaps a doubly phallic

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

import, certainly seems quite foreign to the original doctrine of
Buddhism. Yet here again the Buddhists have shown themselves to be
masters in the art of adapting the symbols of other religions. M.
Gustave Lebon, in his *Voyage au Népaul*, quotes a characteristic
instance of the fanciful interpretations with the help of which Buddhism
brings about or justifies these adaptations. "The *linga*," he writes,
"is likewise adopted by the Buddhists of Nepaul as an emblem of the
Lotus in which Adi-Buddha manifested himself, in the shape of a flame,
at the beginning of the world." <span id="fr_493"></span>[1](#fn_493)

It ought to be mentioned that, in the opinion of some writers, such as
Ch. Lenormant and Baron de Witte, the Caduceus among the Greeks
symbolized the combination of the two sexes in the

<span id="img_fig153"></span> ![FIG. 153. CADUCEUS ON AN AMPHORA. (From
the Elite des monuments céramographiques, vol. iii., pl.
xci.)](img/fig153.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 153. Caduceus on an
Amphora.</span> <span id="fr_494"></span>[2](#fn_494)  
(From the *Elite des monuments céramographiques*, vol. iii., pl.
xci.)</span>

same individual, hermaphrodism in fact, <span
id="fr_495"></span>[3](#fn_495)—and in the valuable publication of those
two archæologists upon the *Elite des monuments céramographiques de la
Grèce* we find a variety of the Caduceus where a vertical projection,
similar to the representation of the phallus, springs from the centre of
the Crescent, which in this case is somewhat separated from the Disk.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

On the coins of the Sunga dynasty the *lingam* placed between the
serpents becomes the headdress of Buddha; the Disk stands for the
Master's head, and the lateral appendages of the *trisula* are
represented by two projections which stretch out horizontally on either
side of this head. <span id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_496)

The *trisula* is thus seen to be converted into an anthropoid figure. A
transformation of the same kind, but still more accentuated, is
observable in the three famous idols of Puri which General Cunningham
long ago proved to be three ancient *trisulas* (figs. [154](#img_fig154)
and [155](#img_fig155)). <span id="fr_497"></span>[2](#fn_497)

<span id="img_fig154"></span> ![FIG. 154. TRISULA OF SANCHI. (Musée des
moulages, Brussels.)](img/fig154.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 154. Trisula of
Sanchi.</span>  
(*Musée des moulages*, Brussels.)</span>

These emblems were doubtlessly a great object of popular veneration at
the period when Puri was a Buddhist sanctuary. When Brahminism came to
establish itself there it contented itself with changing them, by means
of a few slight alterations, into the image of Vishnu, or rather
Jaganath, and his brother and sister. In thus appropriating the old
solar symbol, still discernible in

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

spite of its successive alterations, Vishnu, moreover, did nothing but
recover what belonged to him, since he is, in Hinduism, pre-eminently
the solar divinity.

Finally, the *trisula*, whose plasticity is only equalled by its power
of absorption, borrows forms from the vegetable kingdom with the same
freedom as from the human physiognomy. M. Rousselet points out the
resemblance of the mystic symbol of the Buddhists to the *kalpavriksh*
or Tree of Knowledge which the Jainas represented

<span id="img_fig155"></span> ![FIG. 155. IDOL OF JAGANNATH. (ROUSSELET.
L’Inde des Rajahs, p. 517.)](img/fig155.jpg)  
FIG. 155. IDOL OF JAGANNATH. (ROUSSELET. L’Inde des Rajahs, p. 517.)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 155. Idol Of
Jagannath.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Rousselet</span>. L’Inde des Rajahs, p.
517.)</span>

by a stem with three branches on the mitre of the *Tîrthankaras*
sculptured on the caves of Gwalior. <span
id="fr_498"></span>[1](#fn_498) A similar combination is observable on
coins of the Sunga dynasty, where the upper part of the *trisula*,
forming the head-dress of Buddha, is transformed into a regular crown of
branches. <span id="fr_499"></span>[2](#fn_499) On other monuments the
stem on which the *trisula* rests becomes the trunk of a tree whose
branches are laden with conventional fruits and interlaced with
necklaces of jewels. <span id="fr_500"></span>[3](#fn_500)

This vegetalization of the *trisula*, or, properly

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

speaking, of the Trident which surmounts it, is nowhere more evident
than among the sculptures of Boro-Budur, where it literally merges into
the *Bô* tree through a series of gradual transformations. "The shape of
the points of the *trisula*," M. Ch. Leemans writes in his able
commentary upon the *Atlas* published under the patronage of the Dutch
government, "may sometimes

<span id="img_fig156"></span> ![FIG. 156. TRIDENT OF SIVA. (MOOR. Hindu
Pantheon, pl. xlii.)](img/fig156.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 156. Trident of
Siva.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Moor</span>. *Hindu Pantheon*, pl.
xlii.)</span>

have been derived from that of a flame, or else from the calyx of a
flower, or again from a symbolic tree." <span
id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_501) The same observation applies

<span id="img_fig157"></span> ![FIG. 157. EGYPTIAN
LOTUS.](img/fig157.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 157. Egyptian
Lotus.</span></span>

moreover to the Trident of Siva, which at times exhibits the forms of a
lotus calyx depicted in the Egyptian manner ([fig. 157](#img_fig157)).

Perhaps other transformations of the *trisula* might still be found at
Boro-Budur. I will restrict myself to pointing out a detail which is not
without interest: the same Disk which, when transformed into a most
complicated ornament, is.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

sometimes crowned by a Trident, is also met with between two
serpents—which brings us back to the origin of the Winged Circle—the
Globe of Egypt with the *uræi*.

<span id="img_fig158"></span> ![FIG. 158. BAS-RELIEFS OF BORO-BUDUR.
(Boro-Boedoer, Atlas, pl. cccxvi. and ccclxx.)](img/fig158.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 158. Bas-Reliefs of
Boro-Budur.</span> <span id="fr_502"></span>[1](#fn_502)  
(*Boro-Boedoer*, Atlas, pl. cccxvi. and ccclxx.)</span>

Moreover this ornament, between which and certain forms of the *trisula*
the transition is easily traced, commonly surmounts the entrance to the
pagodas depicted in the bas-reliefs—in exactly the same manner as the
Winged Globe adorns the lintel of the temples in Egypt and Phœnicia.

<span id="img_fig159"></span> ![FIG. 159. BAS-RELIEFS OF BORO-BUDUR.
(Boro-Boedoer, Atlas, pl. cclxxxiii., No. 105.)](img/fig159.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 159. Bas-Reliefs of
Boro-Budur.</span>  
(*Boro-Boedoer*, Atlas, pl. cclxxxiii., No. 105.)</span>

It is proper to point out that in the West there are some figures which
exhibit an odd resemblance to the *trisula*. Such is, in the first
place, the Cyprian image to which I have drawn attention ([fig.
114](mosy15.htm#img_fig114)), as presenting to our view a combination

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

of the Sacred Tree and the Winged Globe. The upper volutes with the
flowered projection bisecting the centre of the arc recall the three
points of the *trisula* with their central *fleuron*. The pair of
volutes whose lower parts are bent downward on both sides of the base,
suggest the ophidian appendages which, in the Buddhist symbol, descend
on either side of the pedestal. Lastly in both cases, the middle part of
the figures shows two leaves which by their position, as well as by
their shape, suggest two small wings.

Mr. William Simpson, an English artist, well known on account of his
archæological work in connection with the monuments of India, has

<span id="img_fig160"></span> ![FIG. 160. THUNDERBOLT OF
ELIS.](img/fig160.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 160. Thunderbolt of
Elis.</span></span>

pointed out the resemblance of the *trisula* to some representations of
the Thunderbolt graven on coins of Elis which date from the fifth
century B.C. <span id="fr_503"></span>[1](#fn_503)

<span id="img_fig161"></span> ![FIG. 161. SCULPTURE OF
BORO-BUDUR.](img/fig161.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 161. Sculpture of
Boro-Budur.</span></span>

This Thunderbolt especially resembles a somewhat enigmatical figure
sculptured among the bas-reliefs of Boro-Budur, where, to all
appearance, it plays the part of a *trisula*. <span
id="fr_504"></span>[2](#fn_504)

On the whole, there would be nothing remarkable

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

in these similarities, since the Thunderbolt and the *trisula*, as we
have just seen, are both a development of the Trident.

What is more singular is to find a kind of *trisula* engraved on the
flank of a lamb which adorns the serpent-shaped scroll on a pastoral
staff dating from the Middle Ages. <span id="fr_505"></span>[1](#fn_505)

Have we here an exchange or a mere coincidence? This is a question which
I will not venture to decide, although nothing is wanting in the
Christian symbol to make of it a real *trisula*, neither the Disk, nor
the central point imitating a *fleur-de-lis*, nor the rounded projection
of the two lateral points.

 

After all, if we have been able to find the antecedents, and, so to
speak, the factors of the *trisula*, and even its probable signification
in the creeds which preceded Buddhism, we have not learned much as to
the meaning of this symbol in the religion which made most use of it.
The fact is, that here the plastic figures cannot make up for the
silence of the written monuments. So long as symbols remain images and
are applicable to concrete objects, or physical phenomena, it is not
impossible to discover the meaning which they in all probability bore.
But when, having entered upon what may be called their derived or
secondary phase, they become signs and express abstract ideas—which is
nearly always the case in Buddhism—the field of interpretation becomes,
so to speak, unlimited for critics, as sometimes also for the faithful.

The proper signification of the *trisula* remains then in the
suppositive stage, although the purpose of its transformations does not
always escape us. The issue of some hitherto unpublished text

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

can alone reveal to us the general and authentic meaning of this symbol,
before which millions of our fellow-creatures have bowed down, but whose
name we do not even know with any degree of certainty.

My purpose, moreover, was less to solve a problem whose solution has so
far escaped the most competent minds, than to trace the transformations
of the *trisula* in the course of its plastic development, and to show
once again with what ease symbols of most dissimilar origin merge into
one another as soon as, in their form, or in their meaning, there occur
points of contact which are sufficient to facilitate this transition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[238:1](mosy17.htm#fr_452) <span
class="smallcaps">A. Cunningham</span>. *The Stupa of Barhut*. London,
1879, pl. xlix., fig. 10; pl. 1., figs. 5 and 6.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[238:2](mosy17.htm#fr_453) <span
class="smallcaps">Eug. Burnouf</span>. *Le Lotus de la Bonne Loi*, p.
626.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[239:1](mosy17.htm#fr_454) <span
class="smallcaps">A. Cunningham</span>. *The Stupa of Bharhut*, and
<span class="smallcaps">J. Fergusson</span>. *Tree and Serpent Worship*,
1st vol., with plates. London, 1868, *passim.*—*Cf*. engraving of our
[frontispiece](mosy00.htm#img_pl01).

<span id="fn_455"></span>[239:2](mosy17.htm#fr_455) Edward Thomas has
maintained that Krananda was identical with the Xandrames of Diodorus
(*Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*. London, vol. i., new series, p.
477, *On the identity of Xandrames and Krananda*), which would make this
coin earlier than the year 317 B.C.—Wilson, on his side, makes Xandrames
to be Chandragupta, the ancestor of Asoka (Introduction to the
translation of the Mûdrarakshasa. *The Theatre of the Hindus*, vol. ii.,
131, 132).

<span id="fn_456"></span>[239:3](mosy17.htm#fr_456) <span
class="smallcaps">Percy Gardner</span>. *Coins in the British Museum*.
*Greek and Scythic Kings of India and Bactria*, pp. 106 and 107.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[240:1](mosy17.htm#fr_457) <span
class="smallcaps">Colebrook</span>. *Observations on the Jainas*, in the
*Asiatic Researches*. London, 1809, vol. vii., p. 306.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[240:2](mosy17.htm#fr_458) <span
class="smallcaps">J. Fergusson</span>. *Description of the Amaravati
Tope*, in the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*. London (vol. iii.
of new series, p. 162).

<span id="fn_459"></span>[240:3](mosy17.htm#fr_459) <span
class="smallcaps">Edw. Thomas</span>, in vol. iv. (new series) of the
*Numismatic Chronicle*, p. 282, foot-note.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[240:4](mosy17.htm#fr_460) <span
class="smallcaps">A. Cunningham</span>. *The Stupa of Barhut*, p. III.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[240:5](mosy17.htm#fr_461) <span
class="smallcaps">F. Pincott</span>. *The Tri-Ratna*, in the *Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society*. London, vol. xix. (new series), p. 242.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[240:6](mosy17.htm#fr_462) <span
class="smallcaps">A. Cunningham</span>. *The Topes of Central India*, in
the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*. London (vol. xiii., 1st
series), p. 114.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[241:1](mosy17.htm#fr_463) <span
class="smallcaps">Eug. Burnouf</span>. *Le Lotus de la Bonne Loi*.
Paris, 1852, p. 627.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[241:2](mosy17.htm#fr_464) <span
class="smallcaps">Kern</span>. *Der Buddhismus*, German translation by
Jacobi. Leipzig, 1884, vol. ii., pp. 241–242.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[241:3](mosy17.htm#fr_465) <span
class="smallcaps">Edw. Thomas</span>. *On the identity of Xandrames and
Krananda*, in the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*. London, vol.
i. (new series), pp. 483–484.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[241:4](mosy17.htm#fr_466) <span
class="smallcaps">Burgess</span>. *Archæological Report on Elura*.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[241:5](mosy17.htm#fr_467) <span
class="smallcaps">Sir George Birdwood</span>, in the *Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society*. London, vol. xviii. (new series), p. 407.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[241:6](mosy17.htm#fr_468) Quoted by Mr. Greg.
*Archæologia*. London, 1885, vol. xlviii., p. 320.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[241:7](mosy17.htm#fr_469) <span
class="smallcaps">S. Beal</span>. *A Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from
the East*. London, 1871, p. 11.—<span class="smallcaps">E.
Senart</span>, *Essai sur la légende du Bouddha* in vol. vi. of the
*Journal Asiatique*. Paris, 1875, p. 184.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[242:1](mosy17.htm#fr_470) *Boro-Boedoer op het
eiland Java*. Leyden, 1873, Atlas, pl. cccxvi.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[242:2](mosy17.htm#fr_471) <span
class="smallcaps">Percy Gardner</span>. *Op. cit.*, pl. xxiv., figs.
1–6. See also <span class="smallcaps">Senart</span>. *Journal
Asiatique*. Paris, 1875, vol. vi., p. 185.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[243:1](mosy17.htm#fr_472) <span
class="smallcaps">Edward Thomas</span>. *The earliest Indian Coinage*,
in vol. iv. (new series) of the *Numismatic Chronicle*, p. 271. See also
his article in vol. xx. of same series, *The Indian Swastika*.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[244:1](mosy17.htm#fr_473) *Boro-Boudour op het
eiland Java*. Atlas, pl. cclxxx., fig. 100.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[244:2](mosy17.htm#fr_474) <span
class="smallcaps">E. Burnouf</span>. *Le Lotus de la Bonne Loi*, p. 539

<span id="fn_475"></span>[244:3](mosy17.htm#fr_475) <span
class="smallcaps">S. Beal</span>. *A Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from
the Chinese*, p. 11.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[245:1](mosy17.htm#fr_476) *a*, Coin of
Sophytes (<span class="smallcaps">Percy Gardner</span>, pl. i., fig. 3).

*b*, Ancient ingot (*Numismatic Chronicle*, vol. iv., new series, pl.
xi., fig. 28).

*c*, Old coin (*Numismatic Chronicle*, vol. iv., new series, pl. xi.,
fig. 16).

*d*, Coin of Azes (<span class="smallcaps">Percy Gardner</span>, pl.
XX., fig. 2).

*e*, Coin of Krananda (*Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*, vol. i.,
new series, p. 475).

*f*, On a sculptured altar at Sanchi (<span
class="smallcaps">Fergusson</span>. *Tree and Serpent Worship*, Atlas,
pl. xxv., fig. 3).

*g*, On the pole of a standard at Sanchi (<span
class="smallcaps">Cunningham</span>. *The Bhilsa Topes*, pl. xxxii.,
fig. 8).

*h*, On the pole of a standard of Sanchi (<span
class="smallcaps">Fergusson</span>. *Tree and Serpent Worship*, pl.
xxxviii., fig. 1).

*i*, On the handle of an ivory instrument (<span
class="smallcaps">Cunningham</span>. *Archæological Survey of India*,
vol. x., pl. ii., fig. 5).

<span id="fn_477"></span>[245:2](mosy17.htm#fr_477) *Tree and Serpent
Worship*, p. 116.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[247:1](mosy17.htm#fr_478) *Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society*. London, 1886, vol. xviii. (new series), p. 407.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[247:2](mosy17.htm#fr_479) <span
class="smallcaps">G. Rawlinson</span>. *The Five Great Monarchies* of
the East. London, 1862, vol. i., p. 101.—<span class="smallcaps">A. H.
Sayce</span>. *Religion of the ancient Babylonians*. London, 1887, pp.
137–138.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[248:1](mosy17.htm#fr_480) <span
class="smallcaps">G. Maspero</span>. *Histoire ancienne des peuples de
l’Orient*. Paris, 1886, p. 618.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[248:2](mosy17.htm#fr_481) <span
class="smallcaps">J. Fergusson</span>. *Tree and Serpent Worship*, p.
94.—<span class="smallcaps">A. Cunningham</span>. *Archæological Survey
of India*, vol. v., Append. A.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[248:3](mosy17.htm#fr_482) *Relics of ancient
Persia*, in the *Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*.
Calcutta, 1881, 1st part, p. 151; 1883, 1st part, pp. 64 and 261.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[248:4](mosy17.htm#fr_483) See upon this
question the summing up of Mr. Cust in the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society*. London, 1884, vol. xvi. (new series), p. 325; also an article
by M. Halévy in the *Journal Asiatique*. Paris, 1885, vol. ii.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[249:1](mosy17.htm#fr_484) <span
class="smallcaps">Percy Gardner</span>. *Coins of Greek and Scythic
Kings in India*, p. lviii.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[249:2](mosy17.htm#fr_485) <span
class="smallcaps">Percy Gardner</span>. *Id*., § iv.—<span
class="smallcaps">J. Darmesteter</span>, in the *Journal Asiatique*.
Paris, July-August, 1887.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[250:1](mosy17.htm#fr_486) For the
identification of the Tahia with the Bactrians, see <span
class="smallcaps">Percy Gardner</span>. *Op. cit.*, p. xxxi.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[250:2](mosy17.htm#fr_487) *Description of the
Amaravati Tope*, in vol. iii. (new series) of the *Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society*. London.—The gates of Sanchi seem to date from the
first years of our era although the tope itself is older by several
centuries (<span class="smallcaps">Rousselet</span>, *L’Inde des
Rajahs*, p. 513).

<span id="fn_488"></span>[251:1](mosy17.htm#fr_488) See <span
class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>. *Histoire de l’Art dans l’antiquité*,
vol. i., p. 811.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[252:1](mosy17.htm#fr_489) See <span
class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>. *Histoire de l’Art dans l’antiquité*,
vol. ii., p. 399.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[252:2](mosy17.htm#fr_490) H. BRUGSCH. *Die
Sage von der geflügelten Sonnenscheibe, in the Abhandlungen der
königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen*, vol. xiv.
(1868–1869), p. 201.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[252:3](mosy17.htm#fr_491) S. BEAL. *A Catena
of Buddhist Scriptures*, p. 11.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[252:4](mosy17.htm#fr_492) It must be observed,
however, that the Disk is already found closely associated with the
Lotus-flower in the symbolism of Asia Minor. (See the Histoire de *l’Art
dans l’antiquité*, by MM. Perrot and Chipiez, vol. iii., fig. 509.)

<span id="fn_493"></span>[253:1](mosy17.htm#fr_493) In the Tour du Monde
for 1886 (vol. li., p. 266)—At Bôrô-Boudour the Sivait *linga* has
become a representation of the dâgoba (<span class="smallcaps">C.
Leemans</span>, *Boro-Boedoer*, p. 452).

<span id="fn_494"></span>[253:2](mosy17.htm#fr_494) *Cf*. the form of
the *trisula* on the pillar of the sun at Buddha Gaya (our illustration,
[fig. 146](#img_fig146)).

<span id="fn_495"></span>[253:3](mosy17.htm#fr_495) *Elite des monuments
céramographiques de la Grèce*. Paris, 1868, vol. iii., p. 197.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[254:1](mosy17.htm#fr_496) <span
class="smallcaps">A. Rivett Carnac</span>. Coins of the Sunga or Mitra
dynasty, in the Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol.
xliv., 1st part, pl. vii. and viii.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[254:2](mosy17.htm#fr_497) The Topes of Central
India, in the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*. London (vol. iii.
of 1st series). General Cunningham adds that these rude figures are
likewise used in native calendars to represent Vishnu in his *avatar* of
Buddha.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[255:1](mosy17.htm#fr_498) <span
class="smallcaps">Rousselet</span>. *L’Inde des Rajahs*, p. 370.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[255:2](mosy17.htm#fr_499) <span
class="smallcaps">Rivett Carnac</span>. *Loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_500"></span>[255:3](mosy17.htm#fr_500) <span
class="smallcaps">F. Pincott</span>. *The Tri-Ratna*, vol. xix. (new
series) of the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*. London, p. 243.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[256:1](mosy17.htm#fr_501) *Boro-Boedoer*, p.
455 of commentary.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[257:1](mosy17.htm#fr_502) See also same Atlas,
pl. ccxxxvi., 11; cclxxxviii., 114; and especially ccxlviii., 36, where
this subject rests on the apex of a triangle which corresponds with the
pennated tail of the Mesopotamian globes.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[258:1](mosy17.htm#fr_503) *The Trisula Symbol*
in the *Journal of the Roy. As. Soc.* for 1890, vol. xxii. (new series),
p. 306.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[258:2](mosy17.htm#fr_504) *Boro-Boedoer*, vol.
iii., pl. ccxlvi., fig. 35.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[259:1](mosy17.htm#fr_505) *Cf*. CAHIER et
MARTIN. *Mélanges d’archéologie*, vol. iv. fig. 58.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](mosy18)
