[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mosy00)  [Next](mosy02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641437X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Migration of Symbols*, by Goblet d'Alviella, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

<span class="smallcaps">Those</span> familiar with the delightful papers
contributed in recent years by the Count Goblet d’Alviella to the
*Bulletin de l’Académie royale de Belgique* on "le Triçûla, ou
Vardhamâna des Bouddhistes," "l’histoire du Globe Ailée," "la Croix
Gammée ou Svastika," "les Arbres Paradisiaques," and other allusive
types of the ancient religions of the Old World, warmly welcomed the
publication, at Paris, in 1892, of his collective work on *La Migration
des Symboles*, setting forth on a more systematic plan, and with fuller
references to original authorities and illustrations from authentic
examples, the matured and permanent results of the learned and
accomplished author's examination of the enigmatic subject of which he
is now everywhere recognized as the greatest living exponent. It had
been treated by others in a similar comprehensive spirit, but never
before in the same thoroughly scientific manner; and thus, while the
writings of Dupuis and Creuzer have, in spite of their immense
erudition, but served to discredit it, and are already obsolete, the
Count Goblet d’Alviella, by pursuing his investigations on a severely
inductive basis, at once, and, so to say, single handed, raised the
inquiry to its proper position as a department of archæological
research, producing a work destined to exert an abiding influence on the
whole future of the study of symbolism, and also, I would fain hope, on
that of the decorative designs of the artistic industries of the West.
One, indeed, of Messrs.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Archibald
Constable and Company's special objects in publishing the present
English translation of the Count Goblet d’Alviella's alluring book has
been to bring it within the reach of the Schools of Art throughout the
United Kingdom: the other being to make it as widely accessible as
possible to archæological students in India, where so much of the
symbolism of antiquity still survives as a quickening religious and
æsthetic force, permeating the entire mass of the Hindu
populations,—like that idealizing thread of scarlet which runs through
the ropes used in the British Royal Navy, "from the strongest to the
weakest,"—elevating it by the constantly felt presence of the unseen
realities of human life, and the diffusion throughout it of a popular
spiritual culture; and where, consequently, the clues to the mystery of
so many historical emblems may be successfully followed up on every
hand, even among the humblest and the most illiterate.

Of course, the way had been prepared for the Count Goblet d’Alviella by
the remarkable discoveries made during the passing generation of the
rich remains of ancient art in Egypt, Phœnicia, Mesopotamia, Syria,
Phrygia, and Greece, and by the wide interest created on the continent
of Europe in the ancient arts of India by the French International
Exhibition of 1878. All this the Count Goblet d’Alviella frankly and
generously acknowledges; but none the less is his merit in having
applied the true Baconian principles of observation and comparison to
the classification of the bewildering mass of materials thus placed at
his disposal, and elaborating therefrom, in the laborious processes of
his most patient analysis, a volume that will always remain the l*ocus
classicus* on the various transcendental types constituting the
materials of its seductive theme.

The general conclusion arrived at by the Count

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Goblet d’Alviella
is, as the superscription of the volume indicates, that the religious
symbols common to the different historical races of mankind have not
originated independently among them, but have, for the most part, been
carried from one to the other, in the course of their migrations,
conquests, and commerce; and his specific achievement is to have
demonstrated the fact by an overwhelming induction of ancient and modern
instances. The imprint of "the Feet of Buddha" on the title-page further
indicates the Count Goblet d’Alviella's tentative opinion that the more
notable of these symbols were carried over the world in the footsteps of
Buddhism, or rather of that commerce of the East and West with Babylonia
and Egypt, promoted by Nebuchadnezzar III. and Psammetichus I.,
respectively, out of which, through the internationalization of
Hinduism, Buddhism arose in India, as later on, under the influence of
the continued intercourse thus initiated between the countries of the
Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, Christianity and Islam were
successively developed from Judaism.

One of the most remarkable instances of the migration of a symbolical
type is that afforded by the *triskelion* \["tripes"\], or, as we more
familiarly know it, "the Three Legs of Man." It first appears on the
coins of Lycia, *circa* B.C. 480; and then on those of Sicily, where it
was adopted by Agathocles, B.C. 317–7, but not as a symbol of the
Morning, Mid-day and Afternoon Sun \[the "Three Steps of Vishnu"\], but
of the "three-sided," or rather "three-ended," or "three-pointed"
\["triquetrous"\], land of Trin-akria, *i.e.*, "Three Capes," the
ancient name of Sicily; and, finally, from the seventeenth century, on
the coins of the Isle of Man; where, as Mr. John Newton has shown, in
the *Athenæum* of the 10th of September, 1892, it was introduced by
Alexander III. of Scotland, when,

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

in 1266, that prince took over the island from the Norwegians; he having
become familiar with the device at the English Court of Henry III.
\[1216–72\], who for a short time was the nominal sovereign of
Sicily. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) The *triskelion* of Lycia is
made up of three cocks’ heads, a proof added to that presented by the
cock sculptured on the "Harpy Monument" at Xanthus, that in the fifth
century B. C. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) this exclusively Indian
bird had already reached the Mediterranean Sea. But on the coins of
Sicily and the Isle of Man the *triskelion* consists of three human legs
of an identical type, excepting that those of the latter island are
spurred. This form of *triskelion* is borne on the armorial coats of
several old English families, and

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

it was in all probability first introduced throughout this country
between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries by Crusaders returning
from the East by way of Sicily.

The *triskelion* is but a modification of the *gammadion*, or
"*fylfot*-cross," a type formally identical with the *swastika* of the
Hindus. The latter was long ago suspected by Edward Thomas to be a sun
symbol; but this was not positively proved until Percy Gardner found a
coin of the ancient city of Mesembria, struck with a *gammadion* bearing
within its opened centre an image of the sun,—"Mes-embria" meaning the
city of the "Mid-day" sun, this name being stamped on some of its coins
by the decisive legend <span id="img__01100"></span>
![](img/_01100.jpg). Such a discovery makes one of the "fairy tales of
science," and inspires the sequestered student of "the days of old, the
years of ancient times," with the perennial enthusiasm that is the true
end and highest recreation of all labour. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

The *gammadion* or *swastika*, for we may now absolutely identify them,
has travelled farther afield than any other sacred type of antiquity;
and from Iceland, which it reached in the ninth century A.D., and Thibet
and Japan, between the third and eighth, and China, Persia, North
Africa, France, Germany, Scandinavia, and the British Isles, between the
second century A.D. and the second B.C., and India <span
id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) and Sicily between the

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

third and fourth centuries B.C., and Asia Minor and Greece between the
sixth and twelfth centuries B.C., the Count Goblet d’Alviella traces it
back on the monuments to the Troad, some time anterior to the thirteenth
century B.C.

Then there is the strange eventful history of the migration of the
imperial type of the "Double-headed Eagle." It is now borne on the arms
of Austria and Russia; and as a form of the *Garuda* bird \[*cf*: the
Assyrian Nisroch, and Etruscan Tuchulcha\] is to be found everywhere in
Southern India,—on the temple sculptures, in wood carvings, on
embroidered, printed, and woven cloths, and on amulets. Also the
cherubim guarding the "Tree of Life," on the modern Syrian amulet
presented by me to the Count Goblet d’Alviella, and figured by him at
page 249 of his original volume, and page [202](mosy14.htm#page_202) of
the present translation, are distinctly modelled on the traditional type
of the "Double-headed Eagle." It first appears on the so-called Hittite
sculptures at Eyuk, the ancient Pteria, in Phrygia. In 1217 it is seen
on the coins and standards of the Turkman conquerors of Asia Minor; and
H. de Hell, in his *Voyage en Turquie et en Perse*, reproduces \[Plate
XII.\] a variant of it from the walls of their old fortress at Diarbekr.
Now it was in 1227–28 that the Emperor Frederick II. set out on the
sixth Crusade, landing at Acre on September 7th in the latter year, and
being crowned King in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem on
March 18th, 1229; and within thirty years from these dates we find the
type struck on the coins of the Flemish princes, Otho, Count of
Gueldres,

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arnold, Count of
Looz, Robert de Thourette, Bishop of Liège, and others. In 1345 it for
the first time replaced the Single-headed Eagle on the armorial bearings
of the Holy Roman Empire, represented, since 1806, by the dual state
known, since 1868, as the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. It first appeared
as the cognizance of the Russian Empire in 1497, on a seal of Ivan
\[John\] III. \[1462–1505\], the first of the Grand Dukes of Moscow who
took the title of Czar of Muscovy, ten years after his marriage \[1472\]
with Sophia, niece of the last Byzantine Cæsar, Constantine Palæologus.

The "Winged Globe," "the Sun of Righteousness with healing on its wings"
of Malachi iv. 2, is another sacred type that has wandered under various
modifications into every part of the Old World, until it appears over
the doors of the Secretary of State's rooms at the India Office, reduced
to a meaningless circle, with two appended flowing ribbons, representing
the two *uræus* snakes of the original Egyptian "Winged Globe," the
*urim-thummim* jewel, attached to the divining zodiacal "breastplate of
Aaron." <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

One of the most unexpected results of the critical study of these
symbols is the establishment of their essential paucity. They undergo,
alike by

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

devolution and evolution, and a sort of ceaseless interfusion also,
infinite permutations of both type and meaning, but in their earliest
monumental forms they are found to be remarkably few.

They were at first but the obvious ideographs of the phenomena of nature
that made the deepest religious impression on archaic man, such as the
outstretched heavens above him, and the outspread earth beneath; both of
which he naturally divided into four quarters, the east "fronting" him
as he watched anxiously for the returning sun, the south on his "right"
hand, the west "backing" him, and the north on his "left" hand; and this
four-fold heaven and earth he signified by a circle, or a square,
divided cross-ways; from which he was led to conceive of a "heavenly
garden," watered by four rivers, and of a foursquare "heavenly city"
with its four went ways; and gradually to model more and more in their
similitude the four-square cities of antiquity, and those four-square
well watered "paradises" \["far—*i.e.*, heavenly—country"\], the ground
plans of which yet survive in every part of India. Then came the
observation of the daily renewed miracle of the phenomena of vegetable,
animal, and human reproduction, expressed at first, as still in India,
by the most directly realistic types, and afterwards by the lotus bud
and flower, the date palm, and other conspicuously phallic flowers and
trees: and that the symbolical "Tree of Life" of the Chaldæans,
Assyrians and Babylonians, is indeed but a conventional representation
of the date palm is sufficiently proved by the description given of the
adorning of King Solomon's temple in 1 Kings, vii. 29–35:—"And he carved
all the walls . . . round about with carved figures of cherubims and
palm trees \[*tamar*, the 'date palm'\]. . . . And for the entering of
the oracle he made doors of olive tree . . . and he carved upon them
carvings of

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold,
and spread gold upon the cherubims and upon the palm trees. . . . And
the two doors of fir tree . . . he carved thereon cherubims and palm
trees and open flowers:" and, again, of the adorning of the visionary
temple of Ezekiel, chapter xli. 18:—"And it was made with cherubims and
palm trees, so that a palm tree was between a cherub and a cherub;" and
chapter xl. 26:—"And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the
arches \["propylons," *toruns* or *gopuras* of the four cardinal
points\] thereof were before them, and it had palm trees, one on this
side, and another on that, upon the posts thereof." These are exact
descriptions of the architectural decoration of the temples and palaces
of Nineveh and Babylon, and they should satisfy anyone of, at least, the
proximate botanical source of the Sacred Tree of the "Nineveh marbles."
The Syrian brasses which have recently become articles of regular import
into Europe, however, place the question beyond dispute. The so-called
Saibis, the people who make these articles, call themselves *mando
Yahya*, or "disciples of St. John," and are generally referred to by
western writers as "Christians of St. John," and Mendæans. By their
neighbours they are called *sabiun*, literally, "washers," *i.e.*, in
the ritualistic sense, "Baptists." They are, and they are not,
confoundable with the Sabæans,—not the people of that name in ancient
South Arabia, but the Chaldæan worshippers of the "Host \[*saba*\] of
Heaven." <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) The Saibis of Mahomet were
not idolaters in any form, but their modern representatives combine with
pseudo-Christian and pseudo-Zoroastrian doctrines, the whole remaining
body of ancient Chaldæan astrolatry; and how this carne

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

about is a matter of the utmost importance to the students of the
history of the arts of the East, and of their applied symbolism. The
Saibis of Mahomet's time were recognized by him as believers in a
revealed religion, and were always treated by his followers with
toleration. But their sword was unsparing against the still surviving
star worshippers of Syria and Mesopotamia, and particularly against the
handicraftsmen among them, who, in their several ritualistic arts,
perpetuated the familiar "types" and "motives" of the obsolescent
idolatry of Nineveh and Babylon. These Sabæans of the Haran and Valley
of the Tigris and Euphrates, to escape extermination, sheltered
themselves under the name of the Saibis, and introduced all their own
pagan practices among the latter sect, which is now really idolatrous.
Its members are nearly all artizans, and most of the metal-work from the
neighbourhood of Mosul, and Damascus, and Hillah, sold in Alexandria and
Cairo, and now largely imported into Paris and London, is fabricated by
these "Saibis." The "Tree of Life" appears everywhere on their brass
dishes and bowls, and on a dish presented to me by the Count Goblet
d’Alviella, and figured in his original volume and in the present
translation on [Plate V.](mosy11.htm#img_pl05), letter *l*, the Sacred
Tree is realistically rendered by the date palm. The conventional "Tree
of Life," under the name of *satarvan* is an object of still living
adoration among them, and as its worship has been traditionally handed
down by them from the remotest Chaldæan period, the dish figured by the
Count Goblet d’Alviella conclusively proves, so it seems to me, that the
ancient Mesopotamian "Tree of Life"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Encinctured with a twine of leaves,"</span>

</div>

was indeed none other than the date palm of "the

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

waters of Babylon,"—associated, at times, with the half mythical *homa*
plant of the Iranian Aryas, the *soma* of the Vedic Hindus, as the
source of the earliest intoxicating sap known in Persia and India. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) In *The Industrial Arts of India* \[Chapman

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

and Hall, 1880\], I traced this type through all its marvellous
metamorphoses in the arts of the ancient Greeks and Romans, and of the
Islamite Saracens, and the mediæval and modern Europeans; and that it
was received by the latter not only through the intermediation of the
Greeks and Romans and Arabs, and as modified by them, but also, at
different unascertained dates, in its crude forms directly from
Mesopotamia and Syria, is suggested by a silver coin of Ceolwlf II.,
King of Mercia, A.D. 874, bearing on its reverse a nine-branched "Tree
of Life," standing among the "Host of Heaven," or "Host of God," between
two cherubim, or other acolytes, the whole overshadowed by the "Winged
Globe," with wings as of palm branches, and the globe marked like a
face. The coin is figured \[580\] in Edward Hawkins’ *Silver Coins of
England* \[Quaritch, 1887\], and its reverse type is there described as
follows:—"Two figures seated, holding a globe between them; above
Victory with expanded wings; unique."

But beside the sun and moon the others of "the seven planets" of the
ancient astronomers came slowly into the observation of archaic man, and
the whole universe was perceived to be full of moving life, and was now
symbolized by a "Holy Mountain," with its cosmical palm, deep rooted in
the earth, the "Garden of Eden" of the Semitic races, and lifting up its
laden branches of clustered dates to the highest heavens; and again by a
"Virgin Mother." Everywhere he saw creative force in operation, and
everywhere adopted the most homely and personal implements of that force
as the visible and material symbols of the invisible and spiritual
Creator, or Creators, in whose express image he postulated that the
worlds were made. It was in this ingenuous unaffected spirit that the
Semite nations named their phallic stone, or phallic tree, *beth-El*,
the "house of God," or simply *El*,

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

the Godhead's self. Ashtoreth was symbolized by the phallic *Cupressus
sempervirens*, one of the original "arbores vitæ" \[*asherim*\] of
Anterior Asia; and from it are derived not only the pyramidal images of
the goddess in Phœnician sculptures, but the stiff cypress-like
representations on the talismanic jewelry of Southern Europe of the
Blessed Virgin Mary; to whom we have also consecrated, since the
sixteenth century, the American "Arbor Vitæ," *Thuja occidentale*. It is
under the impulse of the same naïve and artless temper of mind that the
Hindus everywhere set up the *lingam*, and the *yoni*, and combined
*lingam* and *yoni* images, and bow down to them and worship them as the
supreme symbols of creative deity; and the inability of English people,
and of Europeans generally, to enter into their mental disposition in
this matter is a most pertinent illustration of that ubiquitous
antagonism between Eastern and Western ideas, or between the ancient
pagan world still left to us in Southern and Eastern Asia and the modern
world of Christendom and Islam, which constitutes one of the greatest
difficulties besetting British rule in India.

Only three years ago I recorded in the *Times* <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) the flogging, by order of the Police
Magistrate of Black Town, Madras, of a Hindu boy "for exhibiting an
indecent figure in public view." What he had explicitly done was to set
up, in accordance with universal custom, a phallic image before a house
that was in course of erection by a Mr. K. Streevanasa, who was first
tried under the indictment, but was acquitted, he, the owner, not having
been the person who had actually exhibited the image. It is the fact
that the image referred to is often very naturally fashioned in Southern
India, a most fortunate fact in relation to the

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

history of art; but even so it conveys no more idea of indecency to a
Hindu, than do the words "fascination," "testimony" \[*cf*. Genesis
xxiv., 2, 3, 9; xxxii., 2 5; and xlvii., 29\], "Lord and Lady" \[*Arum
sps:*\], "orchid," *et-cætera*, to ourselves. It has indeed for the
Hindus a significance of the highest sanctity, of which only the
remotest trace remains in the words "fascination" and "testimony," and
of which there is no trace in the word "orchid" or "orchis," the
"testiculus" of the Romans, unless possibly through its Greek synonym
σατύριον. The image was indeed set up before Mr. Streevanasa's house as
a symbol of the Deity in whose strength alone can any work of man be
surely established, and as a devout and public acknowledgment that, in
the words of the Hebrew Psalmist:—"Except the Lord build the house they
labour in vain that build it." The pillars Jachin and Boaz set up by
king Solomon before the porch of his temple at Jerusalem \[1 Kings vii.,
21\] had exactly the same significance, and their restorations by
Chipiez and Perrot, although they disclose none of the offensive realism
sometimes observed in similar phallic presentments in the Madras
Presidency, are not nearly so severely conventional as those to be
everywhere seen in Northern and Western India. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) The ultimate

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

artistic form of the symbol, as I have been able to trace it, step by
step, from India to Greece and Italy, is the conventional "Tree of
Life," or "Symbolical Tree," guarded by affronted beasts or cherubim,
that is, "the Two Witnesses." <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

At every page we have similar exemplifications of "the long results of
time," <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10) worked out with rare

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

scholarship, conscientiousness, and enthusiasm, and with that lucidity
of literary expression for which the Count Goblet d’Alviella is
distinguished. His book is, therefore, likely to be as welcome to the
general reader as to the specialist in archæology. I wish, however, to
emphatically recommend it to the earnest attention of the students of
ornamental art, for it is a book which, like Husenbeth's *Emblems of the
Saints in Art*, should ever be with them. Beauty in decoration ought not
to be sacrificed to symbolism, but it is always enhanced by being
symbolical; while to employ

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

these sacred ancient types irrespective of their significance is to make
nonsense of an artistic composition, and is, in reality, as distressing
a solecism as the use of fine words by pretentious people ignorant of
their etymological derivation and full meaning.

I am in no way responsible for the present translation; but having read
it through from beginning to end I have found that, although it cannot
be said to in any degree reflect the literary quality of the original
French, it is perfectly accurate, and this is what would above all else
be desired of the translation of so strictly a scientific work as *La
Migration des Symboles*, alike by its English readers, and its
author,—who, I have, in conclusion, to gratefully add, has been good
enough to completely revise the text where it has occasionally been
found necessary to adapt it to the discoveries made since the first
publication of the Count Goblet d’Alviella's profoundly fascinating
volume.

<span class="smallcaps">George Birdwood</span>.

<span class="small">7, <span class="smallcaps">Apsley Terrace, Acton,
Near London</span>, W.  
        *Saturday*, 7*th* *July*, 1894.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[x:1](mosy01.htm#fr_0) Cæsar, *De Bello Gallico*,
v. 13, describes Britannia as: "Insula natura triquetra;" and one of the
coins of Edward I. has the king's head in a triangle, such as is seen on
the Irish money of the time, but here its symbolism, if there be any, is
probably Christian: yet some coins of Henry III. have the Persian sun
and moon, "Crescent and Star," above the king's head. Beside the
instances of the classical triskelion given by the Count Goblet
D’Alviella, I may here add that it occurs on the shield of Memnon in the
scene of his contest with Achilles, painted, in black, on an archaic
Attic vase, figured in James Millengen's *Peintures antiques et inédites
des vases grecs* \[Rome, 1813\]; and that a similar triquetrous
cognizance, resembling a triple-headed hammer, is seen on the shield of
one of the warriors in the well-known sea fight painted by Aristonophos,
in the seventh century B.C., on a crater from Cervetri \[Cære, Agylla\],
now in the Museo Etrusco Capitolino, Rome.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[x:2](mosy01.htm#fr_1) We find the cock also
blazoned on the shield of one of the young men assisting Herakles in
capturing the herd of Geryones, as the myth is painted by Euphronios on
a cylex by Chachrylion, now in the Munich Pinakothek; and two cocks
fighting furiously in the scene representing Amphiaraus with Euriphyle
and her child \[Alcmaeon\] on another Attic vase of the same period, now
in the Berlin Antiquarium; and if the Corinthian vase painted, in black,
with fighting heroes, of whom one bears a cock on his shield, figured in
the *Monuments inediti dell’ Institute Correspondenza Archæologica*
\[Rome\], is correctly dated by Arthur Schneider \[*Der troische
Sagenkreis*, Leipzig, 1886\], the Indian cock was familiarly known in
Greece even so early as the seventh century B.C.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:1](mosy01.htm#fr_2) "Das Beste, was wir von
der Geschichte haben, is der Enthusiasmus, den sie erregt."—<span
class="smallcaps">Goethe</span>.

"Omnia quæ gerebam ad aliquam animi mei partem pertinebunt."—<span
class="smallcaps">Cicero</span>.

This last is a distinct reflection of the Buddhist doctrine of *karma*,
with the hope of immortality for a difference.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:2](mosy01.htm#fr_3) At the close of Chapter
III. the Count Goblet d’Alviella would seem to imply that the *swastika*
had now almost disappeared from the symbolism of India. But this is by
no means the case. It is universally found worked into the mats, and
cotton rugs, and finer textile fabrics of Assam; and in Western India
always appears on the wooden ladles used in <span id="page_xii">p.
xii</span> the worship of Agni, and at the head of every Hindu invoice
of goods and book of accounts. The fact of its being carved on the
ladles with which the libations of *ghi* \[clarified butter\] are
offered to Agni is surely some proof of at least a congenital connection
between the *swastika* and the *arani*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiii:1](mosy01.htm#fr_4) See my remarks on the
"Breastplate of Aaron," in the *Journal of the Society of Arts* for
March 18th, 1887; and with reference to "the Hand of Providence"
sometimes associated with the Winged Globe, see my letters on "*The
tughra of the Turks*" in the *Journal of the Society of Arts* for
September 4th and 25th and October 9th, 1891. This "Hand" is represented
on the reverse of some of the coins of Eadweard the Elder, A.D. 901–25,
appearing out of a cloud in the formula of benediction; and again on a
"St. Peter's coin" of the same period, A.D. 900–50, but so rudely that
numismatists have never yet identified it, and, indeed, it is only
identifiable by the representation on others of these "St. Peter's
coins" of the bow \[with an arrow here\] seen in the Hand associated
with the Winged Globe of the Persians.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xv:1](mosy01.htm#fr_5) The name of the Joktanite
Sabæans is spelt with the letter *samech*, and that of the Cushite
Sabæans with a *sin*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xvii:1](mosy01.htm#fr_6) It is difficult to
determine the ultimate botanical source of the *homa* of the ancient
Persians, the *soma* of the Hindus. The proximate source of *homa* in
Persia was the vine, and, later, the date palm. In India the plants
identified with the *soma* plant are *Sarcostemma brevistigma*, and
other species of *Sarcostemma*, but it may be questioned whether these
plants were the ultimate sources of the Vedic *soma* juice, or the
Indian substitutes for the grape and date palm. The Parsis of Bombay
import from Persia as *homa* the stems of the jointed fir, *Ephedra
vulgaris*, and they use also the twigs of the spurge-wort, *Euphorbia
Neriifolia*. It has been argued against the identification of any
*Sarcostemma* as the source of *homa* or *soma* that the juice of no
Asclepiad could be voluntarily drunken as an intoxicant by man; but in
Western India an intoxicating beverage, called *bar*, is prepared from
the juice of *Calotropis gigantea*, and drunk with relish by the hill
people about Mahabaleshwur; and we know from Pliny, xiv. 19, that the
ancients made intoxicating drinks from the juice of all sorts of
unlikely plants. Beside this the *homa* or *soma* twigs may have been
added, like hops, merely as an adjuvant to the intoxicant prepared with
it. They were gathered by moonlight, and carried home in carts drawn by
rams, and mixed, after fermentation, and straining through a sieve of
goat's hair, with barley wort and *ghi* \[or clarified butter\]; and the
enjoyment of the brew was sacramental:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"We've quaff’d the *soma* bright,  
And are immortal grown;  
We've entered into light,  
And all the gods have known."

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As a libation to
Agni, *soma* is now superseded in India by *ghi*.

*Soma* means not only the juice of the *soma* plant, *Sarcostemma
brevistigma*, and Siva, as identified with its intoxicating juice, but
the moon, as in *somvara*, Monday, which gave its name to the *soma*
plant and juice. *Soma-yaga* is the rite, in Vedic times the sacrificial
rite, in the celebration of which *soma* was drunk; *soma-yagi* and
*soma-devi* are the celebrants of the rite; *soma-pa* are "*soma*
drinkers," *i.e.*, Brahmans; *soma-varga-tili* are a caste of oil
millers, the members of which worship Siva as *Soma;* and *soma-vati*,
the ceremony observed by the women of Maharashtra by circumambulating
the sacred fig-tree \[*Urostigma religiosum*\] whenever the new moon
falls on a Monday.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xix:1](mosy01.htm#fr_7) Of Sept. 3rd, 1891.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xx:1](mosy01.htm#fr_8) These closely resemble
the *omphalos* of Apollo Pythius at Delphi, which, as we learn from the
accounts of Pausanias \[X. 16\] and Strabo \[IX. iii. 6\], and various
Greek coins and fictile paintings, was simply a *beth-El* or *lingam*.
In the same way in India "the navel of Vishnu" is identical with "the
*lingam* of Siva;" and it is a Brahmanical saying that "those who think
they differ err." On the marble bas-relief from Sparta, figured in the
*Mittheilungen der Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts in Athen* \[vol.
xiii. plate xii.\], and on a stater of Cyzicus, figured by Canon
Greenwell in the *Numismatic Chronicle* \[3rd series, vol. viii., plate
i., No. 23\], the Pythian *omphalos* is represented between two eagles,
of which Strabo relates: "A fable, referred to by Pindar, was invented,
according to which two eagles or, as others say, two crows, set free by
<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> Jupiter, one from the east, the other
from the west, alighted together at Delphi. In the temple is seen a sort
of navel wrapped in bands, surmounted by figures representing the birds
of the fable."

These "bands" are none other than the rosaries and garlands with which
the *lingam* in India is hung on high Saivite holidays, while the
"supporters" of the naturalistic *lingams* to be sometimes seen in
Southern India leave no doubt as to the significance of the "two eagles"
or "two crows," which in the Spartan bas-relief point as clearly as
these Southern Indian *lingams* to the ultimate origin of the symbolical
"Tree of Life":—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

                       "The Tree of Life,  
The middle tree, and highest there that grew,"

</div>

Delphi itself providing the counterpart of the *yoni*, \[δελφύς, *cf*.:
ἀδελφός, ὁμογάστριος, ἐκ νηδύος\], the ultimate "Garden of Eden."

In the scene of the murder of Neoptolemos, figured in red on an amphora
of the fourth century B.C., found at Ruvo in Apulia, and now in the
Caputi Collection, the elaborately garlanded *omphalos* is represented
rising up from an eight-divided base, closely resembling the
eight-petalled "Lotus Throne" of some of the Saivite combined *lingam
yoni* images: the *yoni* and the symbolical Lotus being in India one and
the same matrical emblem.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxi:1](mosy01.htm#fr_9) One of the most
interesting of the Mediæval Christian Trees of Life was the "Arbor
Perindex," known also as the *arbre de Judée*. The legend was that it
grew in India, and typified the Catholic Roman Church, the doves, cooing
among its branches, being the Congregation of the Faithful, and the
Serpent, which sought to entice them away from their healing habitation,
to destroy them, "that ancient worm the Devil." Not the least
interesting point in connection with this Tree of Life is its name,
"Arbor Perindex," *parinda* being the Hindustani and Persian for "bird."

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxi:2](mosy01.htm#fr_10) The reader will have
understood from the first that the Count Goblet d’Alviella here treats
of symbols only after they <span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>have
become historical, and indeed monumental, and that the symbolism of
pantomime, the gesture language of primæval, and primitive or savage
man, which survives among civilized men in the current formulæ of
salutation and clerical benediction, in thumb "biting" and pointing,
making "long-noses," *et cætera*, is beyond the sphere of his work; as
is also the symbolism of colours, numbers, and purely geometrical
figures, such as the Pythagorean talisman, known by the various names of
*pentalpha*, Signum Solomonis, Fuga Dæmonorum, Druid's Foot, pentangle,
*et cætera*. <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11) A very piquant form of
the archaic, and probably primitive, or, it may even be, primæval
practices in which the Greek word symbol originated still widely
survives in India; where, when "our Mr. Thomas Atkins" arranges a tryst
with a casual Indian sweetheart, the latter breaks a piece of pottery in
two with him, each keeping the fragment left in their respective right
hands, to be fitted together again when they next meet,—and thus make
sure that they are the same couple as met before. In this simple
*súm-bolon*, or "tally," we have the actual *chirs-aelychoth*, or "sherd
of good fellowship," of the Phœnicians, corresponding with the "tessera
hospitalis" of the Romans. When I was at school at Plymouth fifty years
ago the boys in pledging themselves to any secrecy invariably did so by
holding a potsherd between them. If it was a very dark and direful
conspiracy to which we bound ourselves we spat on the sherd.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxi:\*](mosy01.htm#fr_11) It is sometimes
identified with the Scutum Davidis, which appears to me to rather be the
figure formed by the intersection of two equilateral triangles, one of
the symbols of supreme Deity. It is also sometimes denominated the
"pentacle," a symbolical headdress, the form of which I have never been
able to accurately determine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Postscriptum](mosy02)
