[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [Tanakh
Index](index.md)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Viewing Biblical Hebrew Unicode

A high-quality Hebrew font such as SBL Hebrew (SBL\_Hbrw.ttf) or [EZRA
SIL](https://www.sil.org/computing/fonts/silhebruni/.md) \[External Site\]
(SILEOT.ttf) should be installed to view Unicode Biblical Hebrew.
SBL\_Hbrw.ttf can be downloaded [below](#download.md).

Another font which has reasonably complete support for the Unicode range
used in the Tanach is the [Code 2000 shareware
font](https://home.att.net/~jameskass/.md) \[External Site\]. This font,
when used in conjunction with Internet Explorer, gives good results;
however this is not the case with some versions of Netscape.

SBL Hebrew works best with Netscape 7.1, Mozilla 1.6, or Mozilla Firefox
0.8. Internet Explorer 6+ can be used if necessary, however.

For any browser running on Microsoft operating systems the quality of
the display for either font depends on an elusive "Unicode Script
Processor" file, usp10.dll. Obsolete versions of this file render
accents on top of each other and produce very ugly text. One version of
this file is provided by Microsoft with its systems, however, the file
is not updated by "Service Packs" or "Hotfix" updates. With much work,
an up-to-date version can be obtained by joining the Microsoft "MSVolt"
workgroup. Install the usp10.dll file by placing it in the same
directory as your browser's executable file, i.e. firefox.exe,
IEXPLORE.EXE, mozilla.exe, or Netscp.exe.

Occasionally, a combination of Unicode characters will not be rendered
properly. When this happens, a dotted circle is drawn. This is not
necessarily an error in the XML file.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="download"></span>

The SBL Hebrew font file may be freely distributed for non-commercial
purposes in accordance with the following license. Do not install the
font unless you are willing to accept the license terms.

The SBL Hebrew font file is copyrighted software (© 2003), the
intellectual property of Tiro Typeworks, Vancouver BC, Canada. SBL
Hebrew is a trademark of the Society of Biblical Literature, Atlanta GA,
USA.

[Click here to download SBL\_Hbrw.ttf](SBL_Hbrw.ttf.md) *161,880 bytes*

This font is compatible with Windows XP and 2000. To install the font,
download the font to a location on your hard drive, open the 'Fonts' in
the Control Panel, and run 'File \| Add Font'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### End User License Agreement (EULA)

1\. The digitally encoded machine readable font software for producing
the typefaces licensed to you is the property of Tiro Typeworks. It is
licensed to you for use under the terms of this end user license
agreement. If you have any questions about this license agreement, or
have a need to use the font software in a way not covered by this
agreement, please write to license@tiro.com.

2\. You may use this font software free of charge for all non-commercial
purposes. If you wish to obtain a license for commercial use of this
font software, please contact the Society of Biblical Literature at
sblexec@sbl-site.org, or write to license@tiro.com. Fees for commercial
licenses are at the individual discretion of the Society of Biblical
Literature and Tiro Typeworks.

3\. You may redistribute this font software free of charge as long as
the software is unmodified, all copyright and trademark notices are
intact, and the font contains or is accompanied by a copy of this
license agreement. You may not charge any fee for the distribution of
this font software or alter the terms of this license agreement.

4\. You may decompile and modify this font software for non-commercial
and personal use by you as an individual or internal use within your
organisation. Tiro Typeworks maintains copyright to all derivative fonts
in any format. You may not delete, edit or add to copyright, trademark
or license information in the font. You may not change the embedding
bit. You may not redistribute any modified version of the font software,
either free of charge or for a fee. Copies of modified fonts should be
submitted to Tiro Typeworks (license@tiro.com) and to the Society of
Biblical Literature (sblexec@sbl-site.org), along with any relevant
documentation. Tiro Typeworks reserves the right to incorporate any such
changes into its own fonts.

5\. You may embed the font software in non-commercial electronic
documents, including but not limited to web pages and e-books. Font
embedding must respect the embedding bit in the font, which must not be
changed. The embedding bit for this font software is set to 'Editable
Embedding', meaning that documents containing this font software may be
viewed, printed and edited, but the embedded font may not be installed
on the recipient user s system.

6\. All other rights are reserved by Tiro Typeworks, except as otherwise
designated in contract between Tiro Typeworks and the Society of
Biblical Literature.

7\. Neither Tiro Typeworks not the Society of Biblical Literature
warrant the performance or results you may obtain by using this font
software. Excepting any warranty, condition, representation or term that
cannot or may not be excluded or limited by law applicable to you in
your jurisdiction, Tiro Typeworks and the Society of Biblical Literature
make no warranties, conditions, representations, or terms (express or
implied whether by statute, common law, custom, usage or otherwise) as
to any matter including, without limitation, noninfringement of third
party rights, merchantability, integration, satisfactory quality, or
fitness for any particular purpose.

8\. Neither Tiro Typeworks nor the Society of Biblical Literature accept
any liability for injury, death, financial loss or damage to person or
property (including computer hardware, software or data) resulting from
the use of this font software.

9\. The act of installing this font software on any computer system
constitutes acceptance of the terms of this license agreement, without
exception.
