[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut07)  [Next](hut09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### V.

### Naxkekōsnadūwûl. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28)--Two-neck.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

Owl used to kill deer by driving them into the river and then sitting
between their horns until they landed. When he had the meat dressed and
packed up ready to carry home, Two-neck used to come along and carry it
off for himself. One day Coyote came to Owl' s house and said, "Why have
you no venison?" "Something always takes it away from us," said Owl. "I
will kill him," said Coyote.

The next morning when Owl landed with his deer, Coyote was sitting in
the brush ready to fight. As soon as the load was ready Two-neck came
along as usual. Coyote, from his place in the brush, saw what sort he
was and decided not to come out. Then Two-neck said, "Come lift the load
onto my back." As Owl was lifting it up he suddenly pushed it back
toward the ground. "What are you doing?" said Two-neck. "Well, what am I
doing?" said Owl. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) When Two-neck had
carried it off, Owl came to the place where Coyote had been lying in
wait. He was not there. When Owl got back to his house he found Coyote
sitting with his legs stretched each side of the fire. "Don't you
remember? I told you he was a terrible fellow," said Owl. "Well, I will
kill him to-morrow," said Coyote. The following morning Owl brought
another deer to land. When the load was ready, Two-neck came along.
Coyote was watching ready to fight. "Come lift the load on my back,"
said Two-neck. As Owl was lifting it up he jerked it back. Coyote jumped
out and struck the monster where his neck was crotched. The heads fell
off but jumped back again. Coyote slashed him all over with his knife
but could not kill him. Then he ran to the river and got a sedge and
whipped him with that. Two-neck, cut everywhere, died.

Owl and Coyote carried the meat home. When they had eaten, Coyote said,
"Well, I am going to walk down the river a way." "Very well," said Owl.
As Coyote was walking along he saw a woman coming towards him. When he
met her he saw she was

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

dressed all in white. On looking closer be was surprised to see that her
dress was of deer fat. He killed her on the spot for the sake of her
dress which he ate. The woman was Frog. Coyote walked on till he came to
a house, which he entered. Several boys were sitting there. "Where are
they all gone?" asked Coyote. "This morning the old man went up the
valley and has not come back yet. After awhile the old woman went after
him, Didn't you meet her?" they said. "No," said Coyote. Then they came
up to him and smelled of him. "You have her odor about you," they said.
Then they attacked him and there was a fight. Over and over again he
pushed them into the fire only to see them jump out again. When he was
nearly dead with the exertion, they said, "You can't kill us, our hearts
hang in a row there in the smoke-hole." Then Coyote jumped up, got their
hearts, and threw them in the fire. The boys fell back dead. A great
quantity of venison was stored in the house and Coyote stayed until he
had eaten it all. Then be went back to see Owl for whom he had killed so
many.

When he got to the house be was surprised to see grass growing all over
the roof. He went in and sat down. After a little he heard a noise
outside. "That is right," said Coyote, looking toward the door through
which he fancied someone was about to come in. Finally he went out and
looked around. No one was to be seen. Then looking up toward the
hillside he saw a dead tree. Owl was climbing up this tree carrying
something with him. When he got up with it, his wife began to boil some
venison. Holding out a piece Owl said," Take it, Coyote, eat it." "Come
down," said Coyote, but they would not. Then Coyote tried to shoot them,
but he could not hit them. After that he tried to burn the tree by
building a fire at its base, but the fire would not burn. All the time
the Owls kept saying, "Here, Coyote, take this, eat it." They were only
fooling him. Finally Coyote said, "Owls you may become since you have
treated me so badly." Then they turned into Owls. It happened this way:
Coyote thought he had been away only one night but he had really stayed
away a whole year. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) The Owls did not
recognize him as their benefactor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[162:1](hut08.htm#fr_28) Told at Hupa, June
1902, by Oscar Brown.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[167:1](hut08.htm#fr_29) Owl pretends he is
absent minded.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[168:1](hut08.htm#fr_30) Compare [p.
149](hut05.htm#page_149).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Litcūwdiñ yadeLtse.--At Sand-place They Lived](hut09)
