[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut17)  [Next](hut19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

# RELATING TO DANCES AND FEASTS.

## XV.

### The Young Man who Threw Himself with the Arrow. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

At Kintcū*w*h*w*ikût grew a Kīxûnai. By one side of him grew a son and
by the other side grew an arrow. This arrow was to fly with. When he
threw it he stuck to it. He delighted in throwing himself to the
mountains standing there. The young man watched him and was surprised to
see what he did. He picked the arrow up and saw that he too stuck to it.
He thought, "I am going to do as he does." When the sun was down he
thought, "I wish you would go to sleep quickly." Then the old man went
to sleep. The young man picked up the arrow and did as the father had
done the day before. He threw it and stuck to it. It came down with him
on Tsetitmilakût. There it stood sticking up. Then he thought, "This
must be the way he has been doing. "And again he threw it with himself.
At Xōwûñkût it came down. Here where it came down was to be the place
for the dance. Then he threw it with himself. It came down on the
sweat-house door which was made of red obsidian.

Then the father told the son, "There across to the south is hanging a
blanket made of rows of [woodpecker](errata.htm#3) heads. There is no
way to get it for a crane watching near will give warning." "I wish I
might go there. What if the crane sitting beside it does see me?" the
boy thought. The next day the boy threw himself and came down on
Tsetitmilakût. He threw himself again and came down on other mountains.
From there he threw again and came down near the place where the blanket
was hanging. He took it down. The crane did not see him. Still unseen by
the crane he threw himself, carrying along the blanket. When he lit with
the

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

arrow on a certain mountain he heard the crane cry out. From there he
threw himself to Tsetitmilakût. Then he threw himself and came down at
Kintcū*w*h*w*ikût.

When his father came out in the morning he saw the blanket hanging
there. The one who used to live across the ocean to the south heard
about it. "Hi," he thought, "that which he has done is good." And the
Kīxûnai who used to live there said, "It will be my blanket. "No," he
said, "I am the one who will own it," Here from the north across the
ocean, Yīmantūwiñyai came and said, "It will be my blanket." "I am the
one", he told him, "it will be my blanket." For several days
Yīmantūwiñyai watched trying to get it, but in vain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[202:1](hut18.htm#fr_45) Told at Pupa, December
1901, by Senaxon, whose Hupa name is Takilkyū. He has for many years
been the priest of the northern division of the Hupa. He has charge of
the Spring Dance, the Jumping Dance, the Acorn Feast, and the Tcexōltcwe
rocks on the river bank above TakimiLdiñ. He shares the control of the
White Deer-skin Dance with the priest of the southern division. Since
the death of his only son, in 1899, he has refused to assist in any of
these ceremonials, which have been nearly discontinued in consequence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. The Scabby Young Man](hut19)
