[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](hut18)  [Next](hut20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

# XVI.

### The Scabby Young Man. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md)

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

At Kintcū*w*h*w*ikût there grew ten Kīxûnai and one woman. One of the
brothers who was covered with scabs lay next to the steps in the
sweat-house where the others stepped over him with their dirty feet.
Once the head-man of the family commanded him to feather arrow-shafts.
"Here across the river toward the south hangs a blanket made of
woodpecker scalps in rows," he said. "The man who stands in the middle
of the dance always wears that blanket." "Very well, let us go," said
the brother who was covered with scabs.

They found ten men lying there a little way from each other. Right in
the middle was hanging the blanket. The scabby brother stepping over
them took the blanket down. The man lying on the outside first
discovered what had [happened](errata.htm#4.md). "He has taken the blanket
away from us," he cried. Then the scabby one in whose hand lies the
arrow <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md) threw himself with it. The
arrow came down on the west side of the Trinity river south of Medildiñ.
Those who were pursuing him came there. He threw himself with it again.
This time it came down at Tsemita. Again he threw it landing opposite
Miskût. From there he threw himself with it to Kainoñadiñ. Then he threw
the arrow with himself back to Estciñ. Those who were following him fell
behind. He threw it again coming down at Tseyediñ. The next time he
threw it landed with him at [NiLûtkalai](errata.htm#5.md). Then without
special reason he threw it to Yidaxomiñwatciñ. Having succeeded in
taking away the blanket he put it into a storage basket.

After a time two maidens came to marry him from the shore of the eastern
world. "They have come to marry you," said the sister to the scabby
brother. The stranger women made soup for them of dentalia meat. The
scabby brother was the only one who could eat it. Then he went with them
along the ridge from Kintcū*w*h*w*ikût toward the east. Before they left
one of the

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

women told his sister that when the feathers on his head-dress
disappeared behind the crest of the mountain she might know he had
reached the eastern world.

When they came to the shore of the body of water which separates the
eastern world from this, one of his wives cautioned him to step into the
canoe with care. The canoe, which had come to ferry them across, was
made of black obsidian, on which ordinarily one would slip and hurt
himself. So many woman were making soup by the water's edge that the
ground was white with their hats, as if dough had been spread over it.
The women laughed at him as he walked along. His quiver looked as badly
as he. When he was yet a long way off he heard someone calling him
son-in-law. He heard himself called that way ten times.

When he came to the house of his wives he went in. They made soup and
brought him ten baskets full. He ate it all. "Ye! he will be the one,"
they thought. When the meal was over the men went into the sweat-house.
After the scabby one had finished sweating he went out to swim. Then
someone said to him, "You can't find sweat-house wood around here.
Northeast from here is the only sweat-house wood." It was Mink who told
him this. Then they two went there after it. The scabby one took a Tan
oak and split it to its roots with his hands. Then he split it up and
made ten bundles of it. They went back each carrying five bundles. When
they were near the village they put the wood down. Having tied them all
together, Mink lifted them all onto the back of the scabby man. "Put
them down carefully wherever you take them," he said. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md)

Then the scabby fellow smoked himself. When he was through he went to
the river to swim. He came to the surface of the water way down stream.
How beautiful his hair looked! There were so many women making soup by
the riverside that the steam of the cooking settled over the place like
a fog. One of the woman said, "That fellow who came here from
Kintcū*w*h*w*ikût and married is drowned." "Your husband is drowned,"
she told one of the wives. When he had come up from the river,

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

now no longer scabby, he swept the sweat-house. "Come," said Mink to
him, "let us go into the house. Tomorrow there will be shinny-playing."

The next day Mink took the stranger along to the game and handed him a
shinny stick. When the one who had been scabby pressed down on it to
test it, it broke. Mink gave him another which broke also. "Well, let it
go," said the guest and drew from his arm a shinny stick of
blue-stone. <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md) "They will make a wall
come between you and the goal," his companion told him. He sent the
balls right through the wall. They played until night. Having won, Mink
and the man from Kintcū*w*h*w*ikût went home. "He will stay here,"
thought the father of the wives. The next day the one who had been
scabby concluded to return to his brothers and sister. When he got back
to Kintcū*w*h*w*ikût he said to his sister, "Let us go to the eastern
world." He gave to each of his brothers a woodpecker headdress. The
brother and the sister went away. They are there now.

This along-the-river-dance is his. "In the Indian world they will do
this way," he said. "There will be one man and one woman who will fix
the dancing place. My body will come to the mind of the man who will do
that."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[207:1](hut19.htm#fr_46.md) Told at Hupa, December
1901, by McCann.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[212:1](hut19.htm#fr_47.md) See [p.
205](hut18.htm#page_205.md).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[213:1](hut19.htm#fr_48.md) Compare [p.
148](hut05.htm#page_148.md).

<span id="fn_49"></span>[214:1](hut19.htm#fr_49.md) Compare pp.
[147](hut05.htm#page_147) and [149](hut05.htm#page_149.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. The Passing of the Kīxûnai](hut20.md)
