[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](hut12)  [Next](hut14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

# X.

### Tōdiñ KeïtLō. <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md)--By the River She Made Baskets.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

A young woman, a virgin, who lived at Kintcū*w*h*w*ikût used to make
baskets by the riverside. After a time she became pregnant. She wondered
about her condition for she had not even seen a man. She gave birth to a
girl and took proper care of it. When the child was quite large the
mother made baskets by the river again. She became pregnant a second
time. This time she gave birth to a boy. She hated it and never took
care of it. The girl tended her little brother. After a time the mother
was to be married and started to her husband's house taking the little
girl with her. She dropped the boy, baby-basket and all, down a steep
bank by the trail.

"Come along," she said to the girl. "No," she said. She cried for her
brother but the mother went off and left them both. The sister, seizing
the baby-basket by the bail, dragged it up the hill and back into the
house. When at night they lay down to sleep the girl said, "I wish when
we wake up in the morning we would be lying in a blanket and something
to eat would be by our heads." When they woke in the morning they found
themselves covered with a blanket and food was lying by their heads.
They always did that way. When the boy became large his sister said, "I
wish, my brother, when we wake up tomorrow morning a string of dentalia
would lie at our heads." In the morning it was there.

They always made wishes that way and they afterwards came to pass. After
a time he began to run about. One night the sister said, "I wish when we
wake up in the morning we would find a bow and arrows at our heads." In
the morning there they were. Then they went hunting and he killed birds.
Finally he became a man and killed deer. The girl was now a woman. They
filled their house with dried meat. Then the boy fished and they dried
the fish and stored them away. When their house would hold no more they
made cribs of hazel. They filled ten of these with provisions. All this
time they saw nothing of their mother. One night the girl had a dream.
The next morning,

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

the young man, who now slept in a sweat-house, came in and said, "I
dreamed there will be a famine." "I, too, dreamed that," said the
sister. For several years there was a famine. The people about began to
starve.

One morning the sister thought she heard someone moving outside. She
looked out and saw a woman who said, "Here take your brother." She took
it and carried it in. Then she took in another and another until she had
taken in ten children which had been born to her mother. Last of all the
husband came in. "I have come back," said the mother, "these your
brothers were about to starve." "Poor things," thought the girl, "I had
better hurry and feed them." She fed the smallest one and told the
others to eat as fast as they could. She was afraid of the young man,
her brother.

When he came back at night he brought in a deer. "I am glad my boy,"
said the woman, "for I am going to eat." He did not even look at her,
but turned around and went out. All the next day he stayed in the
sweat-house without food. The following evening the girl went to the
sweat-house entrance and said, "Come and eat." "No," he said, "gather up
your things. I have found our father; he has come for us. Soon he will
push a stick under our house." The girl went back to the house and made
a quantity of soup that they might all have plenty to eat. When the rest
were asleep she emptied down some acorns and buried some salmon under
the earthen floor. At midnight the father pushed a stick under both the
house and sweat-house and they went of their own accord under the
water. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) There their father, a water
sprite, <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40.md) lived.

The next morning when the others woke up they saw they were lying
without a house to cover them. The woman looked about but saw nothing
left. Then she began to dig in the wood-room where she found acorns and
salmon buried. She knew her daughter had done that for her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[189:1](hut13.htm#fr_38.md) Told at Hupa, July
1901, by Mary Marshall.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[194:1](hut13.htm#fr_39.md) For another instance of
this singular method of house-moving see [p. 149](hut05.htm#page_149.md).

<span id="fn_40"></span>[194:2](hut13.htm#fr_40.md) This sprite's name is
Xaslinme Kûntcūwiltcwil, "Riffle in young man." He lives in the riffle
below the Miskût ford and has a love song which the Hupa men sing to win
the hearts of the maidens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. The Cause of the Lunar Eclipse](hut14.md)
