[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut26)  [Next](hut28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

# XXIV.

### Formula of the Spring Dance. <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61)

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

Everybody sang a song. One of them sang a song. The cloud of disease
went back a little way. He stopped and another sang a song. It went back
a little way. While he was singing it went farther back. Again one of
them sang a song and it went back a little way. Three of them had sung.
"Come, you sing." When he had sung he saw it had gone back a little way.
Four had sung. When he had finished that song another one sang. And when
he looked he saw it had gone back a little way. He found out it would do
that way. Six had sung. Again another one sang. Seven had sung. It had
gone back a little way, it was afraid of that one's singing. "A little
way it has gone back," he said. Again another sang. Eight had sung.
Again another one sang. Nine had sung. He was surprised to see it had
gone back a little way.

The sticks of wood were leaning up. Then when the tenth on had sung he
put the stick in the fire and leaned the bark around it. Then they sang
another song and danced, circling around the fire. The ceremony lasted
ten days. Five days the priest built the fire and five days they danced.
He carefully avoided saying anything wrong. When they stopped after ten
days, he looked. He was surprised to see that the sickness which had
been in the world had gone. It had melted away. "This way it will be
when Indians become. If they sing this way it will be afraid. If they
dance around the fire this way the people will live happily again."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[234:1](hut27.htm#fr_61) Told at Hupa, December
1901, by Senaxon.

This formula is repeated by the priest while he collects the bark used
for the fire of the dance. He goes alone, or with a virgin, to the
mountainside west of the TakimiLdiñ, setting out in the middle of the
afternoon and returning after dark.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV. Origin of the KinaLdûñ Dance](hut28)
