[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut28)  [Next](hut30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

# XXVI.

### Directions and Formula for the Brush Dance. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64)

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

Directions and Formula for the Brush Dance.

I always get up at dawn. I go to the south corner of the house and rap
and call <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65), then I do the same at the
north corner, and last at the west corner. I do this to notify the
people of the under-world that they must give back the soul of the sick
person who is to be treated.

THE FORMULA.

In the middle of the world there lived a woman with her granddaughter.
After a time the granddaughter became pregnant. "Hei," exclaimed the
grandmother, "it looks as if the Indians were about to appear," she
said. "Their smoke in everywhere." The baby contracted some sort of
sickness from its mother before its birth. The child was born.

"What shall we steam the baby with," thought the grandmother. "You must
go out and try to find the medicine," she told the granddaughter. She
went out and looked over the world. She was surprised to see something
standing toward the southeast. Then she saw it was the herb, and going
to it she dug it out. It was wild ginger. Placing it in a basket she put
it under the baby and steamed it with it. It was then evening. At dawn
she noticed the baby was feeling around in her armpit.

The old woman went out. When it was light she was surprised to see pitch
sticks lying there. She carried two of them into the house. Having
lighted them in the fire she waved them over the baby. When it was broad
daylight she stopped. "Hei," she thought, "Indians are soon to come. It
may be their babies will take sick from them. They will think about us.
With what shall we make them think about us?" "Oh, yes," she

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

thought, "one night will intervene between the dances. That is the way
they will do. There will not be one medicine only," she thought.

Then she told her granddaughter again, "Go out and look for an herb."
She went out again to look for it. She looked everywhere in vain. As she
looked toward the east she saw Mount Shasta standing there. She started
toward it and when she came near she saw a basket-cup floating at its
base. She looked into the cup but saw nothing in it. There was not even
a leaf which she could put into the baby's mouth.

She walked along after it. She turned her eyes away and when she looked
again the cup was gone. She saw it floating by Ki*t*ōkût. She looked
into it but there was nothing there. "I wonder why I can't find the
medicine which I am to put into the baby's mouth?" she thought.

Again she missed the cup. She saw it floating by Kilaigyadiñ. It had
floated by her. When she came where it was, she looked into it again.
She looked away again and it was gone. She found it floating by Bluff
creek. She went to it and looked into it. Again it disappeared and
reappeared in a fog above Weitchpec. "Where am I to find that medicine?"
she thought.

When she looked away again it was floating around below Weitchpec. She
looked into it but there was no medicine in it. Again she looked away
and the cup floated down the middle of the river. She saw it a little
above Tcexōltcwediñ below the rock that stands in the water. Again she
looked into it in vain. The cup did the same thing again. It went down
the middle of the river and she followed it. Below Cappel it stopped
until she came up and looked into it. There was nothing in it. It did
that way again. It floated right down the middle of the river. She went
after it. She was surprised to find it at Pecwan creek. She came up and
looked into it. There was nothing in it. "Where am I going to find that
medicine?" she thought. And then it did that again. It floated right
down the middle of the river. She went after it. When she came to the
mouth of the Klamath river she saw it floating across to the north.
"Hei!" she thought. When she turned her head slowly about, the tears
fell. "How can I find that medicine?" she thought.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

When she looked for it again it floated back. Then she went along the
shore toward the south. The cup came back and floated along beside her.
South of Redwood creek she came down to the beach. The cup floated back
to her. She went along again and the cup floated after her. At
Fresh-water Lagoon she again came down to the beach. She saw the cup was
floating across the ocean toward the west, but it came back to her as if
it had been shot from a bow. She looked into it. There was nothing in
it.

She was surprised to see a house standing in the distance toward the
east. "I will go there," she thought. She went to the house and went in.
She saw an old woman sitting there. "You can't find that medicine
anywhere," the old woman told her. " Day before yesterday it came into
my head. This is what they said of you, 'This way her child does. In
vain she will look for it.' There in the corner stands your cup." Then
the old woman took the cup and held it up to the sky. Something fell
into it. <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) She was holding it up
pointing crosswise. She gave it to her saying, "Take it along and put it
into your baby's mouth."

DIRECTIONS.

When I get through speaking I bathe the child with the medicine. In the
morning I bathe it all over. I always leave the medicine there.

In the woods I always set up two forked sticks on each side. Then I
placed the pitch sticks crosswise on them. I put four stones along side.
I put pitch sticks and incense root on these stones. When there are good
coals I put the incense roots into the fire. I always put the stones
back from the fire. I do not drop the forked sticks just anyway, I
always lay them down carefully. I tie up the pitch sticks.

I do not have my face white (unpainted). I have my face painted black. I
paint my wrists, my shoulders, my ankles, my thighs, and my breast. I
tie up my hair with tseûk. <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67) I do not

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

wear dirty things. I wear only good things. I take along all the
utensils, I do not leave any of them for the one over whom I wave the
fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[241:1](hut29.htm#fr_64) Told at Hupa, December
1901, by the wife of McCann who is the only person living that has
performed the ceremony.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[248:1](hut29.htm#fr_65) The noise made consists
of one or several knocks on the wall with the hand and the call
"ha ha ha." This is to notify the people of Tcindintax, the world below,
that they must give back the spirit of the sick. To make sure the
omission was not accidental, the attention of the narrator was called to
the fact that she had mentioned only three of the world-quarters. She
volunteered no information as to why the fourth had been omitted. The
world of the dead is underground toward the west. It is likely the east
is not associated with the dead. The Hupa are never slavish adherers to
the world-quarters.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[250:1](hut29.htm#fr_66) It was the bark of the
yellow pine, *Pinus ponderosa*, which fell into cup.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[250:2](hut29.htm#fr_67) Tseûk are the ribbons
of mink fur with which the clubs of hair are wound. These tseûk are
sometimes covered with woodpecker scalps. See Life and Culture of the
Hupa, p. 20 and Pl. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII. Formula for the Eel Medicine](hut30)
