[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](hut21)  [Next](hut23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

# XIX.

### Formula of the Jumping Dance. <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md)

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

When that Indian was becoming a Kīxûnai he worked making kiseaqōt. He
worked on them every day. He finished one each day without eating, so
quickly he made them. They did not see him any longer. They thought he
was dead.

Then after a while he came back. "I just came back to tell you what it
is they will do up the river on the bank. That will be the place for
eating the acorn soup. The pipe will lie buried there. That dance too
will be held here. The way they do over in the Kīxûnai world; that way
they will make the dance here. In the way of the Kīxûnai world they will
dance." He, the priest, must not talk about the wind that blows from the
south. He must talk about the ten winds which blow down from the world
above. These will blow down here. Ye winds which never blow in the
Indian world, blow down here. People will live to old age if they blow
on them. He always pounds incense and scatters it there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[226:1](hut22.htm#fr_55.md) Told at Hupa, November
1901, by Senaxon.

This formula is repeated by the priest while preparing the ground where
the dancers stand in the Jumping Dance at TakimiLdiñ. He is assisted in
this work by a woman. The stones and sticks are removed. The priest then
strews the powdered roots of *Leptotaenia Californica* over the ground
on which the dancers are to stand. The formula is repeated as the root
is scattered. The priest does not drink water during the ten days of the
dance. He omits the customary daily bath in the river or otherwise it
will rain. He fasts each day of the dance until the ceremony is
completed for the day. He stripes his body with charred Leptotaenia root
beginning at his wrists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. Daily Prayer of the Priest at the Jumping Dance](hut23.md)
