[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](hut41)  [Next](hut43.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

# XXXIX.

### Formula of Medicine to Shorten Period of Exclusion after Menstruation. <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md)

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

A body of water came into existence here to the southeast of us. The
deer frequent that water in bands. From the east the does come and stand
in the water all night. Here to the southeast from us the deer come down
the hill. They go into the water and stand. The water covers their
ankles, but soon, when the dawn has come, their droolings have filled
the pond.

After the dawn comes, deer yet gray come from the northeast in bands and
go among the Lōdaitc. They go into the water. From the ocean's border at
the north, black deer come and go into the water. From the ocean's edge
to the south the white deer come and go into the water.

Dentalia crawl in their armpits. The pond is filled with their spit. In
the morning one side of the pond is full of dentalia's spit. As far as
the water reaches, the dentalia crawl.

She always thinks, "It is dentalia's spit I have bathed in. Whoever eats
the food which I leave, his body will be liked in this manner." <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md)

She charred a shelled acorn, the next morning, and marked a cross with
it on her right arm. "This way it will be," she

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

thought. "He will hunt deer without harm if he does eat what I leave.
Anyhow she will go into the house," she thought. "He, who eats what I
leave, will kill deer the same as ever," she thought. "This way it will
be. She will ask me for the water. She will pick out the stones and make
a pond. She will think about the pond which lies southeast from here.
The miñkilen will rub herself with it. Her body will become another
one."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[310:1](hut42.htm#fr_84.md) Told at Hupa, December
1901, by Emma Lewis.

The night of the eighth day after the beginning of the menstrual period
the woman makes a small pool by the river. After repeating the formula
she bathes, throwing the water over her right shoulder and then over her
left, repeating the operation once. The next morning she makes a cross
on her arms half way between the elbow and the shoulder with a burned
acorn. After this has been done she may return to the xonta with the
rest of the family.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[312:1](hut42.htm#fr_85.md) If the water which
consists of the saliva of deer and dentalia likes his body he will, of
course, have luck in hunting and gambling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XL. Formula of Medicine for Going in Dangerous Places with a
Canoe](hut43.md)
