[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut45)  [Next](hut47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

# XLIII.

### Formula of a Deer Medicine. <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

The Kīxûnai lived at Southfork. One lived farther down the river on the
other (east) side at Taikyû*w*welsilkûtciñ.

Up the river on the west side there was nothing but dogs and their
barking. The dogs made the noise when they drove the deer into the
river. When the people ate, the steam of the cooking venison was like a
fog spreading over the country. The one who lived down river on the
other side thought, "I wish something could be done with them. Who will
make medicine so they will not see deer any longer? That one will be the
smartest." The one who lived below on the east side did what they do in
the Indian world. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) Then he went up
across the river and put his face in at the doors of the Kīxûnai's
houses. He did it because his body was bad. The next morning when they
started out to hunt they had to coax the dogs out. Some of the dogs lay
in the house. All day it was quiet. There was no chasing of the deer by
the dogs. Until night the Kīxûnai lay there. They were so worn out they
could not get up. None of the Kīxûnai could make medicine. When the sun
had gone down the one who lived down river on the east side made
medicine and then went up to the village on the west side. He made
enough for all, both the Kīxûnai and their dogs. "Rub yourselves with my
medicine," he told them, "and the dogs beside." The next morning when
they went out the dogs barked wonderfully. There was nothing but
barking. "I am the one they must tell about," he thought. "They must not
tell about these Kīxûnai. I am the one they must tell about. They did
not make this medicine."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[321:1](hut46.htm#fr_91) Told at Hupa, November
1901, by Senaxon. This formula was told with xv as connected with the
White Deer-skin Dance. It seems clear from its form that it is a hunting
medicine. The venerable priest was questioned about its connection at
another time without definitely settling the matter. If it is really a
formula of the White Deer-skin Dance, then that dance, held as it is at
the end of the period of cohabitation, purifies the people for the
hunting season.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[323:1](hut46.htm#fr_92) The Hupa formerly did
not cohabitate at all during the season for hunting. It is believed that
the man himself who has cohabitated will not have luck in hunting, and
that his bad luck will be communicated to those with whom he mingles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIV. Formula of Medicine for Making Baskets](hut47)
