[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws01)  [Next](cws03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

"*Unto the godly there ariseth up light in the darkness*."--Ps. cxii, 4.

IN his Preface to the First Edition of this book, Edward Maitland has
dealt so fully and so ably with the subjects of the source and method of
these Illuminations, and the nature and import of the revelation
contained in them, that there is little, if anything, that can with
advantage be added under these heads; but there were some matters
connected with them the account of which he reserved for later
publication, and these he related (shortly) in *The Story of the New
Gospel of Interpretation*, which was published in 1893, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) and (fully) in his great and final work,
*The Life of Anna Kingsford*, which was published in 1896. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) These two biographies are my authority for
the following additional information which cannot fail to interest all
who read this book. They also contain further of "the store of similar
treasures" (to these Illuminations) left by Anna Kingsford (including
her conversations with her Genius) to which reference is made in the
Preface to the First Edition. I have not thought it advisable to alter
the character of this book by incorporating herein any new or additional
matter, although of a nature entitling it to be classed with these
Illuminations. My object has been to leave it, so far as the
Illuminations are concerned, as Edward Maitland left it. Nothing,
therefore, has been added to, and nothing has been omitted from, the
Illuminations as recorded in the original edition of *Clothed with the
Sun*.

In *The Life of Anna Kingsford*, Edward Maitland says that they had
manufactured for them expressly "a volume, large, handsome, of superfine
paper, with lock and key, and bearing on the cover a solid brass
pentagram <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)--symbol of man
perfected"--for containing a record, which they had been instructed to

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

make, of "the Scriptures" which had been and were then being imparted to
them; and, he adds, "In this book Mary <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)
was to write, in her boldest and most picturesque hand, the chapters
received by her. And I secretly indulged in anticipations of the time
when the book would form one of the most precious possessions of the
Church of the Future, as a relic of the seeress and scribe of the New
Gospel of Interpretation, and one to look on which the Faithful of the
ages to come would make pilgrimage from afar, regarding it with the
veneration that now would be accorded to the originals of their own
Scriptures, written by the hands of the revelators themselves. The
writing was duly commenced, but was destined never to be completed, the
requisite health, strength, and leisure not being vouchsafed. And it
accordingly stopped short at its initial pages. And only when the record
was ultimately made in print was it possible to observe the directions
given." <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4)

Regarding this "record," the selection and order of the chapters
containing the lesser mysteries was left to their own judgment, but as
to the order of the chapters containing the greater mysteries they
received the following instructions: "Put all that relates to the
Seventh Sphere at the end of the book. Write the Apostles' Creed the
first in the book, putting all the past tenses in the present. The Creed
contains the spiritual history of the Sons of God, and the mysteries of
the kingdom of the Seven Spheres. Follow it with the Lord's Prayer. But
before all put, on a single page, I AM." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5) Although the special record remained
uncompleted, they were, nevertheless, except in the cases below
mentioned, careful to keep a written record (which they regarded as of
priceless value) of all the Illuminations they received, and no change,
even of a word, was ever made therein <span id="fr_6"></span>[4](#fn_6)
and many of them were by Edward Maitland committed to memory. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[5](#fn_7)

Knowing the value of their Illuminations, which were "derived directly
from celestial sources, the hierarchy of the Church Invisible in the
holy heavens," <span id="fr_8"></span>[6](#fn_8) they were well aware of
the

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

devices likely to be contrived by their invisible foes--the astrals--to
bring about the loss or destruction of their written records: and--to
show the great care they took of them--in the latter part of 1878, when
they were travelling from Paris to London, and when duplicate copies of
some only--and that a minority--of them had been made by Edward
Maitland, he carried the unduplicated copies in a wallet which he would
not on any account unstrap from off his shoulder while en route: and
this plan was continued to be practised to the end, and "no loss was
ever sustained." <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) And this was not the
only risk they had to guard against, for in the following year they were
warned: "The air is filled with the haters of the mysteries. . . . Fire
and Sword and War are against you; you walk in the midst of commotion;
and your life is in peril every hour until the words be
completed." <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10) Later, Anna Kingsford,
being lucid, said that her Genius was present, and that he considered it
advisable for them to have in their keeping "a duplicate copy of the
communications" received by them. <span id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11)
Although, as stated, no loss of any of their records was ever sustained,
it must not be understood that none of Anna Kingsford's Illuminations
were ever lost, for on several occasions, when she was not well (and
those who have read *The Life of Anna Kingsford* will know what terrible
and frequent sufferings she endured through ill-health), she omitted to
commit Illuminations received by her to writing, "so that some were
lost." <span id="fr_12"></span>[4](#fn_12) And, on her death-bed, she
from time to time received "Illuminations which she described
rapturously as being most glorious, confirming and amplifying all that
she had been taught, and disclosing vista after vista of the divinest
truth and beauty beyond," but she was then too weak to retain the
particulars so as to tell Edward Maitland, or to write them down. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[5](#fn_13)

Anna Kingsford passed away, in her forty-second year, on the 22nd
February 1888. Some seven months after her death, Edward Maitland, being
their in communication with her, asked whether she approved of his
intention to publish a book "containing all her Illuminations," when
"an, answer was given emphatically in the affirmative, with an
instruction to add

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

explanatory notes stating their source and significance." <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) The outcome of this communication was the
publication, in the next following year, of *Clothed with the Sun*, and
during the preparation of the notes and appendices, some of which dealt
with matters of the utmost profundity, Edward Maitland "was conscious of
assistance from Anna Kingsford, not verbally and audibly, but by means
of enhancement of perception and judgment." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15) The subjoined passage, from *The Life of
Anna Kingsford*, relating to its publication is of considerable
interest. Edward Maitland says: "The book of her Illuminations was all
in type, and the first sheet of the final revise had been sent to me,
without my having been able to find a title to please me; and in default
of it the printer had begun to set up a portion of the sub-title at the
top of the left-hand page. I was in despair. Titles had always been a
strong point with me, and now I found myself at a loss with the book I
esteemed above all others. Meanwhile I felt absolutely convinced that
there was in the world a title to suit it, and one only, yet I could not
hit on it, and the printer was waiting! 'I must have it!' I exclaimed to
myself. 'Where and what is it?' Another instant and it was flashed upon
me, and proved to be one of the most familiar of Bible phrases, and so
absolutely appropriate that I marvelled greatly at my failure to see it
before. It was 'Clothed with the Sun,' an Apocalyptic expression which
we had recognised as denoting the Soul under full illumination of the
Spirit <span id="fr_16"></span>[3](#fn_16) and having full perception of
Divine Truth. Another instant and there were similarly flashed on me
full instructions for the binding and cover. The front was to have on it
the central part of the design which Mary had drawn for *The Perfect
Way*, <span id="fr_17"></span>[4](#fn_17) the figure of the woman
standing in the sun, and the back cover to have a monogram of the
initials of her mundane name, also invented and drawn by herself. This
was a butterfly feeding on a twig, so disposed as to make the letters A.
K. and representing occultly the soul feeding on the tree of life, and
the colour was to be that of the 'blood-red ray of the innermost sphere,
where Wisdom and Love are One.' So absolute and supreme

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

was my satisfaction that I gave no thought to the possible source of the
suggestion, but only wondered at my failure to think of it
sooner.'" <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)

Three days later, Edward Maitland was visited by a clairvoyant friend, a
lady who knew nothing whatever of his book or of his design to publish
one. On taking her seat and becoming lucid, he says, "she at once began
to smile as at some exquisitely pleasant circumstance, and then, before
I had time to question her as to the cause of her hilarity, she
exclaimed: 'This is most curious, to see how you two think the same
thing so exactly at the same moment that it is impossible to say who
thought it first. . . . I have to tell you that your friend who calls
herself Mary is here, and she bids me tell you that she sees you are
very much pleased with the title of your new book, and that you think it
is your own. But it is not. She gave it to you. She not only acquiesces
in it, she claims it.'" <span id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19)

The arrangement observed in recording the Illuminations contained in
this book follows the directions, to which I have referred, that were
given to Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland when seeking advice as to
the order to be observed in the record they had been instructed to make
of the Scriptures imparted to them <span id="fr_20"></span>[3](#fn_20);
and "they were one and all received exactly as they are printed, without
the change of a single word." <span id="fr_21"></span>[4](#fn_21)

Speaking of those wondrous chapters in the second part of this book
headed each by a letter of the Greek alphabet, Anna Kingsford affirmed
them to be "the *ipsissima verba* of the Gods," some of them being the
original rituals in the sacred mysteries of antiquity which were used in
the composition of the Bible. <span id="fr_22"></span>[5](#fn_22) Edward
Maitland, also, referring to these chapters, said that they were "the
sources from which the Bible-writers largely derived both their doctrine
and their diction," <span id="fr_23"></span>[6](#fn_23) and they both
recognised in them "the destined Scriptures of the future, so long
promised and at length vouchsafed in interpretation of the Scriptures of
the past." <span id="fr_24"></span>[7](#fn_24) They were chapters which
no one having the smallest perception of the Divine could read

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

"without at once recognising both a doctrine and a diction which
transcended mortal knowledge and skill, and which evidently and avowedly
proceed directly from the high heavens." <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) And it is even so: "God has a few of us
whom he whispers in the ear," and one of these--perhaps the
foremost--was for some time known as Anna Kingsford. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26) The day will come, and may not be far
distant, when the Church, no longer fallen, and ignorant of the source
and signification of its dogmas, but risen and rejoicing in the light of
the spiritual consciousness, will thank God for and bless the Divine
Soul who, in days of impiety, unbelief, and idolatry, came on a mission
to restore to mankind the Divine Gnosis that had been so long lost. What
of this part (for it was part only) of her mission she
accomplished, <span id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27) this book is a
witness, and how and under what conditions she accomplished it, Edward
Maitland's Preface to the First Edition and the books subsequently
written by him, to which I have referred, fully and accurately relate.
One thing is certain: wheresoever the New Gospel of Interpretation shall
be preached, throughout the whole world, "that also which this woman
(soul) hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her"--for these
Illuminations were given, not for the few only, but for the many, yea,
for the spiritual enlightenment and upliftment of the world. It is
through souls such as Anna Kingsford's that "God stooping shews
sufficient of His light for us i' the dark to rise by." We read that, at
the close of his life, David--"the man who was raised on high . . . and
the sweet psalmist of Israel"--said:

"The Spirit of the Lord spake in me  
And His word was upon my tongue." <span id="fr_28"></span>[4](#fn_28)

And thus it was with Anna Kingsford. <span id="fr_29"></span>[5](#fn_29)

Neither must Edward Maitland's part in this great work be overlooked,
for it was his loving care, help, sympathy and assistance, and his
"restraining influence," that enabled Anna Kingsford to recover so much,
and but for which she "would, never have shewn the life she possessed
interiorly," she would

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

have become "dissipated in expansiveness"--so great was her "expansive
energy." <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30). And it is to him that we
owe, not only the preservation of Anna Kingsford's Illuminations, but
also that priceless record of their lives as contained in his magnum
opus, *The Life of Anna Kingsford*. He passed away, at the end of his
seventy-third year, on 2nd October 1897.

A few clerical errors in the previous edition have been corrected, and I
have added one or two footnotes which I trust will be found helpful.

SAMUEL HOPGOOD HART.

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xi:1](cws02.htm#fr_0) A third edition of this
book (now out of print) was published in 1905, under the title of *The
Story of Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland and of the New Gospel of
Interpretation*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xi:2](cws02.htm#fr_1) A third and enlarged
edition of *The Life of Anna Kingsford* was published in 1913, and all
references herein are to this last edition.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:3](cws02.htm#fr_2) Probably a printer's error
for "hexagram," which is the. symbol of man perfected.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xii:1](cws02.htm#fr_3) "Mary" was the initiation
name given to Anna Kingsford by her Illuminators.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xii:2](cws02.htm#fr_4) *Life of Anna Kingsford*,
vol. i, p. 314.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xii:3](cws02.htm#fr_5) *Ibid.*, Vol. i, p. 315.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xii:4](cws02.htm#fr_6) *Story of Anna Kingsford
and Edward Maitland*, p. 163.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xii:5](cws02.htm#fr_7) *Life of Anna Kingsford*,
vol. ii, p. 12.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xii:6](cws02.htm#fr_8) *Ibid.*, vol. ii, p. 16.
Notwithstanding their derivation, be it noted, they were by Anna
Kingsford and Edward Maitland "judged entirely by their own intrinsic
merits" (*Story of Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland*, p. 84).

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xiii:1](cws02.htm#fr_9) *Life of Anna
Kingsford*, vol. i, p. 295

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xiii:2](cws02.htm#fr_10) *Ibid.*, vol. i, p.
318.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xiii:3](cws02.htm#fr_11) *Ibid.*, vol. i, p.
398.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xiii:4](cws02.htm#fr_12) *Ibid.*, vol. i, p.
361.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xiii:5](cws02.htm#fr_13) *Ibid.*, vol. ii, p.
360.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xiv:1](cws02.htm#fr_14) *Life of Anna
Kingsford*, vol. ii, pp. 413-414.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xiv:2](cws02.htm#fr_15) Ibid., Vol. ii. p. 419.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xiv:3](cws02.htm#fr_16) See Preface to First
Edition.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xiv:4](cws02.htm#fr_17) *The Perfect Way, or
the Finding of Christ*, which comprised nine Lectures on Esoteric
Christianity given by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland in 1881, was
first published in 1882. The present (fifth) edition, with additions,
was published in 1923.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xv:1](cws02.htm#fr_18) Life of Anna Kingsford,
vol. ii, p. 424.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xv:2](cws02.htm#fr_19) *Ibid.*, vol. ii, p.
425.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xv:3](cws02.htm#fr_20) *Ibid.*, vol. i, p. 314.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xv:4](cws02.htm#fr_21) E. M. Letter in *Light*,
1894, p. 419.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xv:5](cws02.htm#fr_22) E. M. Art. in *Light*,
1893, p. 104.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xv:6](cws02.htm#fr_23) Letter in *Light*, 1894,
p. 419.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xv:7](cws02.htm#fr_24) *Life of Anna
Kingsford*, vol. i, p. 284, See also p. 283.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xvi:1](cws02.htm#fr_25) E. M. Letter in
*Light*, 1896, p. 154.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xvi:2](cws02.htm#fr_26) See Part I of
Illumination "Concerning the Powers of the Air," *post*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xvi:3](cws02.htm#fr_27) See Illumination "
Concerning the Three Veils between Man and: God," *post*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xvi:4](cws02.htm#fr_28) 2 Sam. xxiii, 1-2.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xvi:5](cws02.htm#fr_29) Note the reference, in
the *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, pp. 172-173, to Esther and Mary
Magdalen as "types'' of the Woman who should come to bring to the New
Church "the balm of good tidings."

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xvii:1](cws02.htm#fr_30) Life of Anna
Kingsford, vol. i, p. 351, and vol. ii, p. 410.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface To The First Edition](cws03)
