[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws18)  [Next](cws20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

### No. XV

#### CONCERNING THE "POWERS OF THE AIR" <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md)

##### PART I

I SAW last night in my sleep my genius clothed with a red flame and
standing in a dark place. He held in his hand a cup, into which he bade
me look. I did so, and as I looked a mist gathered in the cup like a
cloud; and I saw in the cloud spirits wrestling with each other. Then
the cup seemed to widen, until it became a great table upon which scenes
and words were written. And I saw the vapour filled with astral spirits,
ephemeral, flame-like, chimerical; and upon the mist which enveloped and
swept around them was written, "The Powers of the Air."

And I said to my genius, "Are these the spirits which control mediums?"
And he said, "Do not use that word *Medium*; for it is misleading. These
are the powers which affect and influence *Sensitives*. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81.md) They do not control, for they have no
force. They are light as vapour. See!" Then he breathed on the table,
and they were dispersed on all sides like smoke. And I said, "Whence do
these spirits come, and what is their origin and nature?" And he
answered,--"They are Reflects. They have no real entity in themselves.
They resemble mists which rise from the damp earth of low-lying lands,
and which the heat of the sun disperses. Again, they are like vapours in
high altitudes, upon which if a man's shadow falls he beholds himself as
a giant. For these spirits invariably flatter and magnify a man to
himself. And this is a sign whereby you may know them. They tell one
that he is a king; another, that he is a Christ; another, that he is the
wisest of mortals, and the like. For, being born of the fluids of the
body, they are unspiritual and live *of* the body."

"Do they, then," I asked, "come from within the man?"

"All things," he replied, "come from within. A man's foes are they of
his own household."

"And how," I asked, "may we discern the astrals from the higher
spirits?"

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

"I have told you of one sign;--they are flattering spirits. Now I will
tell you of another. They always depreciate woman. And they do this
because their deadliest foe is the Intuition. And these, too, are their
signs. Is there anything strong? they will make it weak. Is there
anything wise? they will make it foolish. Is there anything sublime?
they will distort and travesty it. And this they do because they are
exhalations of matter, and have no spiritual nature. Hence they pursue
and persecute the Woman continually, sending after her a flood of
eloquence like a torrent to sweep her away. But it shall be in vain. For
God shall carry her to His throne, and she shall tread on the necks of
them.

"Therefore the high Gods will give through a woman the interpretation
which alone can save the world. A woman shall open the gates of the
kingdom to mankind, because intuition only can redeem. Between the woman
and the astrals there is always enmity; for they seek to destroy her and
her office, and to put themselves in her place. They are the delusive
shapes who tempted the saints of old with exceeding beauty and wiles of
love, and great show of affection and flattery. Oh, beware of them when
they flatter, for they spread a net for thy soul."

"Am I, then," I asked, "in danger from them? Am I, too, a Sensitive?"
And he said,--

"No, you are a Poet. And in that is your strength and your salvation.
Poets are the children of the Sun, and the Sun illumines them. No poet
can be vain or self-exalted; for he knows that he speaks only the words
of God. 'I sing,' he says, 'because I must.' Learn a truth which is
known only to the Sons of God. The Spirit within you is divine. It is
God. When you prophesy and when you sing, it is the Spirit within you
which gives you utterance. It is the 'New Wine of Dionysos.' By this
Spirit your body is enlightened, as a lamp by the flame within it. Now,
the flame is not the oil, for the oil may be there without the light.
Yet the flame cannot be there without the oil. Your body, then, is the
lamp-case into which the oil is poured. And this--the oil--is your soul,
a fine and combustible fluid. And the flame is the divine Spirit, which
is not born of the oil, but is conveyed to it by the hand of God. You
may quench this Spirit utterly, and thenceforward you will have no
immortality; but when the lamp-case breaks, the oil will be spilt on the
earth, and a few fumes will for a time arise from it, and then it will
expend itself and leave at last no trace. Some oils are finer and more
spontaneous than

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

others. The finest is that of the soul of the poet. And in such a medium
the flame of God's Spirit burns more clearly, and powerfully, and
brightly, so that sometimes mortal eyes can hardly endure its
brightness. Of such a one the soul is filled with holy raptures. He sees
as no other man sees, and the atmosphere about him is enkindled. His
soul becomes transmuted into flame; and when the lamp of his body is
shattered, his flame mounts and soars, and is united to the Divine Fire.
Can such a one, think you, be vainglorious, or self-exalted, and lifted
up? Oh, no, he is one with God, and knows that without God he is
nothing. I tell no man that he is a reincarnation of Moses, of Elias, or
of Christ. But I tell him that he may have the Spirit of these if, like
them, he be humble and self-abased, and obedient to the Divine Word.

"Do not, then, seek after 'controls.' Keep your temple for the Lord God
of Hosts; and turn out of it the money-changers, the dove-sellers, and
the dealers in curious arts, yea, with a scourge of cords if need be."

##### PART 2 <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82.md)

"The astral existences, although they are not intelligent personalities,
are frequently the media of intelligent ideas, and operate as means of
communication between intelligent personalities. Ideas, words,
sentences, whole systems of philosophy, may be borne in on the
consciousness by means of the currents of magnetic force, as solid
bodies are conveyed on a stream, though water is no intelligent agent.
The minutest cell is an entity, for it has the power of
self-propagation, which the astral has not. It is an imprint only, a
shadow, a reflect, an echo.

"The atmosphere with which a man surrounds himself--his soul's
respiration--affects the astral fluid. Reverberations of his own ideas
come back to him. His soul's breath colours and savours what a sensitive
conveys to him. But he may also meet with contradictions, with a
systematic presentation of doctrine or of counsels at variance with his
own personal views, through his mind not being sufficiently positive to
control all the manifestations of the electric agent. The influence of
the medium, moreover, through which the words come, interposes. Or, as
is often the case, a magnetic battery of thought has overcharged the
element and imparted to it a certain current. Thus, new doctrines

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

are "in the air," and spread like wildfire. One or two strongly positive
minds give the initiative; and the impulse flies through the whole mass
of latent light, correspondingly influencing all who are in relation
with it.

"In man the astral fluid becomes transformed into human life at the
moment of conception. It is the envelope of the soul, and constitutes
the sideral body, which, in its turn, is the generator of the external
body. The internal man--he who ultimately is immortal--consists of soul
and spirit. The sideral phantom and the outer body are perishable, save
when they undergo transmutation during the tenancy of the soul and
spirit. Hence the sideral body, being the generator of sense, is the
"Tempter," which--inclining to matter--gives matter the precedence over
spirit. Of time and of sense, it beguiles the intuitive part of man. In
this way spirit and matter represent, respectively, good and evil. For,
in the day that thou givest thyself over to matter, thou becomest liable
to extinction."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[43:1](cws19.htm#fr_80.md) London, November 17,
1880. See *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. i, pp. 391-393.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[43:2](cws19.htm#fr_81.md) That this is not
intended to be an exhaustive account of the experiences of Sensitives
will be seen from Nos. XXXIX, XL, and XLVI.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[45:1](cws19.htm#fr_82.md) Referred to in *Life of
Anna Kingsford*, vol. i, pp. 400-402.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XVI: Concerning The Devil And Devils](cws20.md)
