[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws13)  [Next](cws15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. X

#### CONCERNING THE PROPHECY OF THE VISION OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR <span id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64)

THE King Nebuchadnezzar is mystically identical with king Assuerus, in
that each alike denotes the spirit of the latter age, that, namely, of
mere Intellectualism, as distinguished from and opposed to
Intuitionalism. And both narratives, as well also as that of the Deluge
and of the book of Esther, are prophecies which now are beginning to
have their accomplishment on a scale greater than ever before. For, the
image shown to the king in his dream represents the various systems of
thought and belief which find favour with the world. Of these the
intellectual philosophy which rests upon the basis of a science merely
physical is the head, and is symbolised by the gold. And this rightly,
so far as concerns the intellect; for it is indeed king of kings, and
all the children of men, the beasts of the field, and the birds of the
air, are given into its hands. This is to say, all the activities of
society, its learning, its industry, and its art, are made subordinate
to the intellect. The breast and arms of the image are of silver. This
is the domain of morality and sentiment, which under the reign of the
mere intellect hold a subordinate place. Belonging to the region of the
heart, it is feminine; and implying the intuition, which is of the
woman, and her assigned inferiority, it is of silver. The thighs and the
belly are of brass, and this kingdom is said to rule over the whole
world. By this is meant the universality under a regime wholly

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

animal and non-moral, of falsehood, cruelty, impurity, blasphemy, and
all those deprivations of the true humanity, which characterise an age
of materialism. The iron, of which the legs are made, represents force,
and denotes the negation of love, and the consequent prevalence of might
over right, and the universal rule of selfishness. By the mingling of
iron and clay in the feet is implied the weakness and instability of the
whole structure, the clay representing matter, which is made the
foundation of the system instead of spirit, which alone is stable and
enduring.

The Stone cut out without hands, which destroys this image, and becomes
a great mountain filling the whole earth, is that "Stone of the
Philosophers," a perfected spirit, and the true gospel of the inner
knowledge which appertains thereto. This it is which smites the age upon
its feet, or fundamental basis, its materialistic hypothesis. And with
the demonstration of the falseness of its doctrine, now being made to
the world, shall fall the whole fabric of society, with its empire of
force, its exaltation of the masculine mode of the mind, its subjection
of women, its torture of animals, and its oppression of the poor. With
its clay, its iron, its brass, its silver, and its gold, all swept away
as chaff by the wind, the true knowledge and spirit of understanding,
which are of the intuition, shall usher in the kingdom of God, and the
"stone," become a mountain, shall fill the whole earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[22:2](cws14.htm#fr_64) London, February 22,
1881. Received in sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XI: Concerning The Prophecy Of The Time Of The End](cws15)
