[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws15)  [Next](cws17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XII

#### CONCERNING THE SOUL: ITS ORIGIN, NATURE, AND POTENTIALITIES <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70.md)

THE Soul, in its first beginning, is not something added to the body,
but is generated in the body by the polarisation of the astral elements.
Once generated, it enters and passes through many bodies, until finally
perfected.

As there are two of the outer, so also of the inner. The two of the
inner are spirit and soul. In the translation of the Scriptures the word
spirit is often used where soul is meant. For only the man created in
God's own image is a living soul, that is, a soul which has the Spirit
superadded to it. <span id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71.md)

The clearest understanding may be obtained of the soul by defining it as
the divine idea. Before anything can exist outwardly and materially, the
idea of it must subsist in the Divine

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Mind. The soul, therefore, may be understood to be divine and
everlasting in its nature. But the soul does not act directly upon
matter. It is put forth by the Divine Mind; but the body is put forth by
the sideral or fiery body. As the spirit on the celestial plane is the
parent of the soul, so the fire on the material plane begets the body.

The soul, being in its nature eternal, passes from one form to another
until, in its highest stage, it polarises sufficiently to receive the
spirit. It is in all organised things. Nothing of an organic nature
exists without a soul. It is the individual, and it perishes if
abandoned of the spirit.

As already said, at the moment when the soul appears in any hitherto
inorganic entity, it is by means of the convergence of the magnetic
poles of the constituent molecules of that entity. The focusing of these
poles gives rise to a circular magnetic current, and an electric
combustion is the result. This vital spark is organic life, or the soul.
This spontaneous combustion, or generation, is not a new creation; for
nothing can be either added to or withdrawn from the universe. It is but
a new condition of the one substance. The soul is to the material organ
what the tune is to the musical instrument. The tune subsists in the
mind of the composer (God), before the keys or strings of the instrument
can give it expression. But unless for this expression it could not
become manifest to sense. This tune can be played on many instruments,
and transferred from one to another. We are thus brought to the great
facts, the immortality of the soul, its transmigrations, and the
metempsychosis.

The process of incarnation, and the method by which the soul takes new
forms, are in this wise. When two persons ally themselves in the flesh
and beget a child, the moment of impregnation is usually--though not
invariably--the moment which attaches a soul to the newly conceived
body. Hence, much depends upon the influences, astral and magnetic,
under which impregnation and conception take place. The pregnant woman
is the centre of a whirl of magnetic forces, and she attracts within her
sphere a soul whose previous conduct and odic condition correspond
either to her own or to the magnetic influences under which she
conceives. This soul, if the pregnancy continues and progresses, remains
attached to her sphere, but does not enter the embryo until the time of
quickening, when it usually takes possession of the body, and continues
to inhabit it until the time of delivery. A pregnant woman is swayed not
by her own will alone, but as

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

often by the will of the soul newly attached to her sphere; and the
opposition and cross-magnetisms of these two wills often occasion many
strange and seemingly unaccountable whims, alternations of character,
and longings, on the part of the woman. Sometimes, however, the moment
of impregnation or conception passes without attracting any soul, and
the woman may even carry a false conception for some time, in which
cases abortion occurs. There are innumerable accidents which may happen
in this regard. Or, the soul, which has been attracted to her, may,
under new influences, be withdrawn from her sphere, and from the embryo
which, having quickened, may consume away; or, the soul originally drawn
to her orbit may be replaced later by another, and so forth. Some
clairvoyant women have been conscious of the soul attached to them, and
have seen it, at times as a beautiful infant, at times in other shapes.
Children begotten by ardent and mutual love are usually the best and
healthiest, spiritually and physically, because the radical moment is
seized by love, when the astral and magnetic influences are strongest
and most ardent, and they attract the strongest and noblest souls.

For you to understand yet more clearly and fully the origin and nature
of the soul, whence it comes, and how it passes from one body to
another, you must know that the plane on which the celestials and the
creatures touch each other is the astral plane. The substance of all
created things is the begetter alike of body and soul. The soul, as I
have said, is formed by polarisation of the elements of the astral body,
and it is a gradual process; but when once formed it is art entity
capable of passing from one body to another. Imagine the magnetic forces
of innumerable elements directed and focused to one centre, and streams
of electric power passing along all their convergent poles to that
centre. Imagine these streams so focused as to create a fire in that
central part,--a kind of crystallisation of magnetic force. This is the
soul. This is the sacred fire of Hestia or Vesta, which burns
continually. The body and person may fall away and disappear: but the
soul, once begotten, is immortal until its perverse will extinguish it.
For the fire of the soul, or central hearth, must be kept alive by the
higher air or Divine Breath, if it is to endure for ever. It must
converge, not diverge. If it diverge it will be dissipated. The end of
progress is unity; the end of degradation is division. The soul,
therefore, which ascends, tends more and more to union with the Divine.

And this is the manner thereof. Conceive of God as of a vast

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

spiritual body constituted of many individual elements, but all these
elements as having one will, and therefore being one. This condition of
oneness with the Divine Will and Being constitutes the celestial
Nirvâna. Again, conceive of the degraded soul as dividing more and more
until at length it is scattered into many, and ceases to be as an
individual, being, as. it were, split and broken up, and dispersed into
many pieces. This is the Nirvâna of the Amen, or annihilation of the
individual. <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md)

"And whence," you inquire," is the supply of new souls for the continual
increase of the world's population?" Souls, as you know, work up from
animals and plants; for it is in the lowest forms of organic life that
the soul is first engendered. Formerly the way of escape for human souls
was more open and the path clearer, because, although ignorance of
intellectual things abounded among the poorer sort, yet the knowledge of
divine things and the light of faith were stronger and purer. Wherefore
the souls of those ages of the world, not being enchained to earth as
they now are, were enabled to pass more quickly through their avatârs,
and but few incarnations sufficed where now many are necessary.

For in these days the ignorance of the mind is weighted by materialism
instead of being lightened by faith. It is sunk to earth by love of the
body and by atheism, and excessive care for the things of sense. And
being crushed thereby, it lingers long in the atmosphere of earth,
seeking many fresh lodgments, and so multiplies bodies.

And, furthermore, you must not conceive of Creation, or the
putting-forth of things, as an act once accomplished and then ended. For
the celestial Olympus, is continually creating and continually becoming.
God never ceases giving of God for God's creatures. This also is the
mystery of the divine incarnation and oblation. The celestial substance
is continually individualising itself that it may build itself up into
one perfect individual. Thus is the circle of life accomplished, and
thus its ends meet the one with the other.

You have asked me--"How, if the planet consist of body, perisoul, soul,
and spirit, can there be born of it entities which are not like it
fourfold, but threefold or even twofold, as are minerals and severed
parts of bodies, things made by art, and the like." I answer you that
your error lies in looking on the planet as a thing apart from its
offspring. Certainly, the planet is fourfold, and

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

certainly also its offspring is fourfold. But of its offspring some lie
in the astral region only, and are but twofold; and some in the watery
region, and are but threefold, and some lie in the human region, and are
fourfold. The body and perisoul are the metallic and gaseous envelope of
the planet. The organic region composes its soul, and the human region
its spirit, or divine part. For when it was but metallic, it had no
soul. When it was but organic, it had no spirit. But when man was made
in the image of God, then was its spirit breathed into its soul. Now,
the metals have no soul; therefore they are not individuals. And not
being individuals, they cannot transmigrate. But the plants and animals
have souls. They are individuals, and do transmigrate and progress. And
man has also a spirit; and so long as he is man--that is, truly
human--he cannot re-descend into the body of an animal, or of any
creature in the sphere beneath him, since that would be an indignity to
the spirit. But if he lose his spirit, and become again animal, he may
descend, yea, he may become altogether gross and horrible, and a
creeping and detestable thing, begotten of filth and corruption. This is
the end of persistently evil men. For God is not the God of creeping
things, but Baal Zebub <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) is their God.
And there were none of these in the Age of Gold: neither shall there be
any when the earth is fully purged. O Men! your exceeding wickedness is
the creator of your evil beasts; yea, your filthy torments are your own
sons and abominable progenitors!

Remember that there is but one substance. Body, sideral body, soul, and
spirit, all these are one in their essence. And the first three are
differentialities of polarisation. The fourth is God's Self. When the
Gods put forth the world, they put forth substance with its three
potentialities, but all three in the condition of odic light. I have
called the substantial light sometimes the sideral body, sometimes the
perisoul; and this because it is both. For it is that which makes, that
which becomes. It is fire, or the human spirit (not the divine), out of
which and by which earth and water are generated. It is the fiery
manifestation of soul, the magnetic factor of the body. It is space; it
is substance; it is foundation. So that from it proceed the gases and
the minerals, which are soulless, and also the organic world, which hath
a soul. But man it could not make. For man is fourfold and of the divine
ether or upper air, which is the province of Zeus, Father of Gods and
men.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

The outer envelope of the macrocosm and microcosm alike, which is
represented by Demeter, is in reality not elemental at all, but is a
compound of the other three elements. Her fertility is due to the
"water," and her transmuting or chemical power to the fire. This water
is the soul or protoplasma, which is put forth by Deity and constitutes
the individual. Nor are you to look on fire as a true element. For fire
is to the body what spirit is to the soul. As the soul is without the
divine life until vivified by the spirit, so the body, or matter, is
without physical life in the absence of fire. No matter is really "dead
matter," for the fire-element is in all matter. But matter would be
"dead" (that is, would cease to exist as matter) if motion were
suspended--which is, if there were no fire. For, as wherever there is
motion there is heat, and consequently fire, and motion is the
*condition* of matter, so without fire would be no matter.

The soul is not astral fluid, but is manifest by means of the astral
fluid; for the soul itself is, like the idea, invisible and intangible.
You will see the meaning best by following out the genesis of any
particular action. The stroke of the pen on paper is the phenomenon;
that is the outer body. The action which produces the stroke is the
astral body, and, though physical, is not a thing, but a transition or
medium between the result (the stroke) and its cause (the idea). The
idea manifested in the act is not physical, but mental, and is the soul
of the act. But even this is not the first cause. For the idea is put
forth by the will, and this is the spirit. Thus, you will an idea as God
wills the macrocosm. The real body (or immediate result) is the astral
body; while the phenomenal body (or ultimate form) is the effect of
motion and heat. If you could arrest motion, you would have as the
result fire, and thereby would convert Demeter into Hephaistos. But fire
itself also is material, since it is visible to the outer sense, as is
the earth-body. But it has many degrees of subtlety. The astral or odic
substance, therefore, is not the soul itself, but is the medium or
manifestor of the soul, as the act is of the idea. If, however, the
phrase misleads you, it is better to modify it, as thus:--

The act is the *condition* of the idea, in the same way as fire or
incandescence is the condition of any given object. Light is of spirit,
heat is of matter. Water is the result of the operation of Wisdom the
Mother, or oxygen, and justice the Father, or hydrogen. Air is the
result of the mixture, not combination, of wisdom and force. Those two
are properly elements. They

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

are soul and spirit. But Earth is not, properly speaking, an element at
all. She is the result of the water and the fire, and her rocks and
strata are either watery or igneous. She is water and air fused and
crystallised. Fire also, the real maker of the body, is a mode and
condition, and not a true element. See, then, that the only real and
true and permanent elements are air and water, spirit and soul, will and
idea, divine and substantial, father and mother; and out of these all
the elements of earth are made by the aid of the condition of matter,
which is, interchangeably, beat and motion.

Wisdom, justice, and Force, or oxygen, hydrogen, and azoth, are the
three out of which the two true elements are produced. But water is a
combination, air is a mixture. Wherefore the only two real entities,
water and air, are unreal to the phenomenal; while the untrue elements,
earth and fire, or body and electric fluid, are real in the phenomenal.

Souls are re-incarnated hundreds and thousands of times, but not the
*person* (which implies the body), for the body perishes. These things
were known to the Gnostics, Therapeutæ, Essenes, and to Jesus; and the
doctrine is embodied in the parable of the Talents, as thus
explained:--Into the soul of the individual is breathed the Spirit of
God, divine, pure, and without blemish. It is God. And the individual
has, in his earth-life, to nourish that Spirit, and feed it as a flame
with oil. When you put oil into a lamp, the. essence passes into and
becomes flame. So is it with the soul of him who nourishes the Spirit.
It grows gradually pure, and becomes the Spirit. By this means the
Spirit becomes the richer. And, as in the parable of the Talents, where
God has given five talents, man pays back ten; or he returns nothing,
and perishes.

When a soul has once become regenerate, it returns to the body only by
its own free will, and as a Redeemer or Messenger. Such a one regains in
the flesh the memory of his past. Regeneration or transmutation may take
place in an instant; but it is rarely a sudden thing, and it is best
that it come gradually, so that the "Marriage" of the Spirit be only
after a prolonged engagement.

The doctrine of "Counterparts," so familiar to certain classes of
"Spiritualists," is a travesty, due to delusive spirits, of the
"Marriage of Regeneration."

Regeneration does not affect the interior man only. A regenerate person
may have his body such that no wounds will cause death.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

When a person dies, a portion of the soul remains
unconsumed,--untransmuted, that is, into spirit. The soul is fluid, and
between it and vapour is this analogy. When there is a large quantity of
vapour in a small space it becomes condensed, and is thick and gross.
But when a portion is removed, the rest becomes refined, and is rarer
and purer. So it is with the soul. By the transmutation of a portion of
its material the rest becomes finer, rarer, and purer, and continues to
do so more and more until--after many incarnations, made good use
of--the whole of the soul is absorbed into the Divine Spirit, and
becomes one with God, making God so much the richer for the usury. This
is the celestial Nirvâna. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) But,
though becoming pure Spirit, or God, the individual retains his
individuality; so that instead of all being merged in the One, the One
becomes Many. Thus has God become millions. We, too, are legion, and
therein resemble God. God is multitudes and nations, and kingdoms, and
tongues. And the sound of God is as the sound of many waters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[27:2](cws16.htm#fr_70.md) London. Spoken in trance
at different times in 1880 and 1881. Referred to in *Life of Anna
Kingsford*, vol. i, pp. 394, 413-414, 421-423.    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[27:3](cws16.htm#fr_71.md) Spirit, being the
substance of all things, is in all things, but does not become *the*
Spirit until, from being diffuse and abstract, it becomes, by
Polarisation, concentrate and formulate,--from heat becoming flame. E.
M.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[30:1](cws16.htm#fr_72.md) See Appendix, note A.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[31:1](cws16.htm#fr_73.md) Impurity, or the active
principle in putrefaction and corruption.    E. M.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[34:1](cws16.htm#fr_74.md) See Appendix, note A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XIII: Concerning Persephone, Or The Soul's Descent Into
Matter](cws17.md)
