[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws16)  [Next](cws18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XIII

#### CONCERNING PERSEPHONE, OR THE SOUL'S DESCENT INTO MATTER <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75)

I SEE God under two modes, one static or passive, the other dynamic or
active. As the former, God is original Life, Will, Power. As the latter,
God is the Holy Spirit. And the Spirit and the Substance of God are one.
At first there is perfect rest. Then comes a movement of rotation round
itself, and Substance becomes first ether, and at length matter. Every
ultimate particle of matter moves in ether, as do the planets, and has
two poles, that is in the intercellular ether. Their rotation is
intensely rapid; it makes me giddy to look; and by this movement comes
creation. This is accomplished in six periods, and then there is Rest,
and the whole is re-absorbed. Wherefore there is an incessant
Putting-Forth for six "days," and a recurring Sabbath of Rest.

The more rapid the movement of the particles of his body, the more
material is the man. Hence the object of the saint is to attain perfect
quiescence, and thereby union with the Divine

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

\[paragraph continues\] One. The "Philosopher's Stone" signifies in one
aspect perfect quiescence, or the re-absorption of matter into spirit
through the absence of motion.

Thus the rigidity we know as matter is caused by the incessant intense
movement of spirit. This truth, for the Greeks, is represented by
Demeter, who is all that is in motion and solid. And whereas motion is
begotten of the Holy Spirit in time, her parents are Rhea and Saturn.
Rhea is "the mother" of the Gods, and is the same as Nox, the original
Darkness or Invisible Light of Divinity prior to manifestation in
creation. And Persephone, or Proserpine, is the daughter of Demeter or
Motion--or that which makes visible--by Ether. Persephone is the liquid
or psychic part of man, which consists both of his true soul and his
"fiery" or magnetic perisoul. And the story of the stealing of
Persephone, or rape of Proserpine, relates to the "fixing of the
volatile," whereby the astral part becomes coagulated into the material.
Belonging thus, half to the body, or lower world, and half to the
heavens and upper world, and thus linking the two together, she is said
to spend six months of the year in Hades and six on Olympus. And she
would be updrawn altogether to the latter, but that as the consequence
of her eating a pomegranate, which--like the apple of Eve--is the symbol
of illusion or matter, she is fixed in the lower world or body, whence
her mother, Demeter, seeks to withdraw her.

You are to understand, further, that this descent of Persephone into
Hades comes about not only through the continued motion of the particles
of the soul, but also through their depolarisation from the central and
Divine Will. The body ought to be in such a state that the man can
indraw and re-absorb it. But Persephone, through following her own will,
reversed the poles of her constituent substance, and caused this to
become fixed. Whenever, as was the case with Jesus, the man is in union
with the central will of his system, he has power to indraw and
re-absorb his body. And one of the purposes of the Gospel story of the
water being changed into wine, was to typify this transmutation. Animals
never have this power, as they have no divine spirit, and, therefore, no
central will, to polarise. Man has it only by the Spirit's descent into
him. The eating of the pomegranate implies the reversal of the poles,
and the illusion whereby the outer becomes the inner, and the individual
polarises outwardly instead of centrally, and, so, becomes fixed and
material.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[34:2](cws17.htm#fr_75) London, March 23, 1881.
Spoken in trance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XIV: Concerning The Genius Or Daimon](cws18)
