[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws11)  [Next](cws13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. VIII

#### CONCERNING THE PROPHECY OF THE DELUGE <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59)

WHEN reading this morning the work of Eliphas Levi on "Magic," I came
upon the following sentence:--"In the Zohar, one of the chief books of
the holy Kabbala, it is written, 'The Magic Serpent, son of the Sun, was
about to devour the World, when the Sea, daughter of the Moon, put her
foot on his head and crushed him.'"

At this instant a writing was presented to my spiritual

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

eyes, in which I read the following explanation of the Deluge of Noah:--

"'The Flood came,' says the Scripture, 'and swept away the wicked.' The
Flood, therefore, is not the wickedness itself, as some have supposed,
but that which destroyed wickedness, and bore the righteous unharmed on
its bosom. The Flood is Aphrodite the Sea-queen and Maria the Star of
the Sea; or, as the name signifies, Sea-salt, or Bitterness of the Deep.
'The Woman shall crush the head of the Serpent.' Maria, the God-woman,
or feminine presentation of the supreme power and goodness, delivers
mankind and destroys evildoers. She is the Water of Regeneration; the
Sea through which, as Paul the Mystic says, we must all pass. She was in
the beginning, because she is God, and the Spirit of God, or Divine
Cloud, dwelt upon her. 'We all passed through the Sea and through the
Cloud.' Jesus the Saviour went down into her, and received in her His
chrism, while at the same time the Divine Hermes overshadowed Him.

"Maria the Sea is the water mystically appointed for the washing away of
Sin. Therefore as the Flood she purifies the world, and bears on her
immaculate breast the Ark of the Divine Covenant which contains the
Elect." <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60)

And when I had read this, it was impressed on my mind as a prophecy
having special significance for the present age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[19:1](cws12.htm#fr_59) Paris, September 28,
1878. Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, pp. 279-280.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[20:1](cws12.htm#fr_60) Like Eve, Maria and the
Sea are mystical synonyms for the Soul, which is called "Bitterness of
the Deep" because--consisting of the universal substance--she attains
her perfection through painful experience. Concerning Hermes, see Part
II, Nos. XII and XIII (6).    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. IX: Concerning the Prophecy of the Book of Esther](cws13)
