[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws27)  [Next](cws29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXIV

#### CONCERNING THE MAN REGENERATE <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107)

YOU have been told that Jesus and those like him came back voluntarily
and were born under conditions different from the ordinary, in that they
had accomplished some degrees of their regeneration. These degrees are
twelve in all, and constitute twelve labours, twelve gates, or twelve
pearls, all of which are of equal value. Jesus was born regenerate in
certain degrees, and the whole were completed only after his
"resurrection," during the retirement which ended in his "ascension."
The last degrees are the most difficult. There are four for the soul,
four for the perisoul (or astral), and four for the body, this being the
last. And it was this that Paul was so anxious to accomplish, but failed
to do. With some the body is never redeemed; but this does not hinder
the "divine marriage" of the soul and spirit. This marriage facilitates
the redemption of the body, but may take place without it.

There are four zones or divisions in the astral light, and the reflect
of Jesus is in the highest only, and cannot be seen by those who have
access only to the lower; and not being strengthened by the shadow of
the body of Jesus, it has become fainter, until now it is hardly
perceptible. This is because his body was indrawn. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108)

Jesus had a great advantage in his birth, owing partly to his own
regenerate condition, and partly to that of his parents. Owing to the
purity of his mother's blood, she is said to have come of a priestly
family. For the same reason his father is said to have come of a royal
descent, for the terms "Tribe of Levi" and "House of David" have a
mystic meaning. <span id="fr_109"></span>[4](#fn_109)

The sanctity of any particular Christ is dependent upon the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

advance made by him previously to his birth. Jesus had in this respect
an advantage over Buddha. He was regenerate in more degrees, and he had
no sexual relations as had Buddha. The Twelve Labours refer each to some
concupiscence, which is depicted under the figure of a ravenous bird,
horse, or some other animal which requires to be subdued. And Jesus had
previously accomplished the Labour denoting that particular kind of
concupiscence.

Now, of men some must needs be satisfied first intellectually.

These are regenerate first in the mind; and afterwards they attain to
the kingdom.

But some begin from within; and these are the most blessed. For they
seek the kingdom first, and the rest is added to them afterwards.

These last begin the Great Work in the heart, by means of the affection.
And the grace of love attracts the Holy Spirit, and transmutes them from
glory to glory, so that the reason, or mind, is suddenly enlightened by
the inner reason; and with such the work of regeneration is
instantaneous--"in the twinkling of an eye." These are of the type of
the woman.

But others--and these are of the masculine type--must perform their work
more laboriously; for in them the mind is first illuminated. They pass
from without inwards; from the circumference to the centre. And this is
but a difference of method, not of ultimates; for the Reason is the heir
of all things.

With these the Great Work is a slow process; but their gold is one in
kind with that of the first. For when at last the divine marriage
consummates their labours, the mind and the body are already redeemed,
and beyond the power of death, because they have already the power.

But with those who are regenerate first within, there is suffering of
the body, and often death. For two opposing currents meet with violence,
and the result may be the rending apart of body and spirit. But yet
their death is not as the death of the unregenerate. Because in the very
shock of it transmutation takes place: matter, that is, is sublimated,
and the man needs no further incarnation. He is free, for he has
conquered matter. Wherefore the bond is severed between him and the
earthly, and he will return to the earthly no more.

He who is regenerate first in the body and mind, usually lives long,
even beyond the limit of mortal life, and absorbs in that

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

period his entire astral being, and often even his body. Thus did Enoch,
thus Elias, and some others. I do not name them. And Jesus remained to
do this also. For he would leave nothing undone, being in the end Lord
of the kingdom, the power, and the glory.

But when he arose from the dead, not having seen corruption, nor fallen
under the dominion of death, there remained to him one degree of
regeneration to be accomplished-he was not yet "ascended."

For there were then but the eleven; because the twelfth--Judas"--was
imperfect. And because of this Judas, Jesus fell under the power of the
cross.

\[For Judas was the type of his own weakness; since the flesh, not being
wholly regenerate, was, in that unfulfilled degree, weak.

And the regeneration of his body not being complete before his
crucifixion, his flesh-will still warred against his spirit-will, and he
could still find room to say, "Not my will, but Thine be done."

The Martyrs who followed his teaching were braver in the face of death
than Jesus, though their pains were, for the most part of them, far
sharper.

Tender women, maidens, and youths went fearless and smiling to the stake
or the rack, without tear or sigh; but Jesus shrank and wept piteously
at the foot of his cross.

Yet a man may be victor in the spirit though his body remain unredeemed.
For this redemption of the body--when fully accomplished--is
transmutation, and its beginning is the At-one-ment of the will of the
flesh with the will of the spirit.\]

But when Jesus completed his regeneration, then there were again twelve.

But until Jesus, no man ever attained these twelve degrees and the
divine marriage from within. Hitherto the taking of the kingdom had been
from without, by violence and labour, after the manner of the
Patriarchs.

Now, these twelve degrees are fourfold for almost every part of man;
being four for the body, four for the astral, four for the soul, but one
for the spirit.

And until Jesus there had been no regeneration of the twelve in this
order-from within. Buddha at his death had attained to the ten only.

For of sonic the regeneration is fourfold; being one degree for each
kingdom, and the last for the marriage of the spirit.

And with some it is sevenfold; being two for each kingdom, and

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

the seventh for the marriage. Such was the regeneration of the mother
and father of Jesus.

But Jesus himself had more than the four, the seven, or the ten; for he
had the thirteen.

And first he had four of the soul. With these, two of the astral, and
one of the body, he was born.

Afterwards, at the "ninth hour," when he had completed the fourth degree
of the astral, he consummated the divine marriage.

Afterwards he achieved three degrees for his body, but the last only
after his "ascension" to the mount of the Lord.

No man ever attained thus before. And since the glory is of the Spirit,
or divine part, it is said <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110) that
Jesus by his marriage feast manifested forth his glory.

And the celebration of this marriage was in Jordan; but the
manifestation was in Cana.

For Jesus had received the Double Portion; and hence his double
glory. <span id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_111)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[65:2](cws28.htm#fr_107) London, July 9, 1881.
Received in sleep. See also No. XXXIII.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[65:3](cws28.htm#fr_108) Some occultists have
made their own failure to discern the reflect of Jesus--a failure here
accounted for--a ground for denying his existence.    E. M.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[65:4](cws28.htm#fr_109) For another and more
profound meaning of the derivation from David, see note to No.
XXXVIII.    E. M.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[68:1](cws28.htm#fr_110) *I.e.* in the
Mysteries, on which the Gospels are based.    E. M.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[68:2](cws28.htm#fr_111) Concerning the Double
Portion, see No. XXXVII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXV: Concerning The Christ And The Logos](cws29)
