[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws21)  [Next](cws23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XVIII

#### CONCERNING THE GREEK MYSTERIES <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md)

IN the celebration of the mysteries of Phoibos Apollo, it was forbidden
to eat anything upon which terrestrial fire had passed. Wherefore all
the food of his votaries was sun-baked, and his chief sacrifice
consisted in fruits from high trees ripened by the sun's rays.

With these mysteries of Apollo were associated those of Zeus and Hera,
the King and Queen, because both man and woman are admitted to the
highest; and also because Eve and Adam, being thus initiated, were
eaters only of fruits uncooked; and, in one of the historical senses of
the allegory, Eve and Adam were the first Messengers. It was, therefore,
an offence against Phoibos and Zeus for their votaries to eat anything
on which fire had passed, or any fermented wine. Their wine was the pure
juice of the grape drunken new, and their bread was unleavened and
sun-baked.

The last Messengers must be initiated, as were Eve and Adam, into these
inmost and highest mysteries of the perfect humanity, which constitute
the highest of all castes, and entitle those who attain to them to sit
on the golden seats. <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86.md)

These mysteries have also an inward significance which is not hard to
find.

In the mysteries of Phoibos and Zeus, the initiated attained to the
condition of a grand Hierophant. ("See! I tell you all things.") He was
enlightened by the "sun," and was in the fourth interior circle of
spirits, which is that of the Christs of God. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_87.md) To this interior circle Jesus of Nazareth
aimed to pass after his resuscitation; as was implied when he said, "I
will drink no more of the grape until I drink its blood *new* in the
kingdom of God."

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

In the mysteries of Hermes, the second circle,--the God who guards the
Soul,--it was forbidden to eat any creature which had life, or, rather,
which had seeing eyes. <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md) For Hermes is
the Seer. His votaries partook only of vegetable food, which might be
cooked with terrestrial fire, and of wine, which might be fermented.

Next in order were the orgies of Her who rose from the sea; and in these
the initiates might eat fish which are truly fish, having fins and
scales, but baked with fire, not raw. Wherefore as that

Goddess is the Angel of Harmony, or of the Sweet Song, the eating of
fish became a symbol of brotherly love and union; and two small fishes
together was the mystical type of little children dwelling together in
unity or charity. <span id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_89.md) For fishes swim in
pairs; and He who fished for men drew them unto him by love. And all
fishers were under the protection of the Sea-Queen. There are two
mystical truths belonging to the mysteries of Maria the Sea-Star; and
they are, in their interior sense, the two fishes which Jesus imparted
to the multitude. Of this I shall tell you more afterwards when I speak
to you of the twelve baskets of bread. For these are the baskets which
the twelve virgins carried in the divine orgies.

In the mysteries of Bacchos it was permitted to the outer circle to eat,
if indeed they would, of all flesh save of the unclean. This is, they
might eat of all clean beasts of the field and birds of the air. This
was the fourth and lowest caste. But the votaries of Iacchos (the mystic
Bacchos), having known all the higher rites, abstained from these
things, though they allowed them to the multitude who are in the body
only. For none of those who worshipped Dionysos (or Iacchos) were
uninitiated in the rites of Demeter and Aphrodite. And for this reason
there were substituted for the mysteries of Dionysos those of Ceres, the
Earth Mother, in which the use of flesh was entirely prohibited. For
this reason also one hears not of the mysteries of Bacchos save in
connection with wine, whether fermented or not; for the interior
significance of his rites had reference to the truth and meaning of
things. The orgies of Ceres and Bacchos were therefore united, the
Goddess being honoured in her bread, and the God in his chalice of
truth. For in that these are body and spirit, solid and fluid, outer and
inner, they comprise all things in earth and in heaven.

And beyond the circle of Dionysos lay yet another--that of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

a God who also had indeed his orgies, but these were forbidden save in
certain fierce nations and barbarous times. For in the mysteries of
Ares, the Man of War, they sacrificed and ate human flesh and the flesh
of horses, which also war together with man. For this circle is outside
the kingdom of the fourfold circles, and belongeth to the beasts of
prey. And his star is red, as with the blood of the slain. But the
orgies of Ares the Ram-headed no man celebrated save in war; and he who
knew the God spared not his life, but freely sacrificed himself. For it
was an abomination to eat at the altar of Ares in time of peace.

Yet hath Ares also his interior meaning:--O Knowledge, thou art hard of
access! The Horse (which is the symbol of the intellect) dieth for thee,
and the Warrior is pierced. Thou art the Man of War, and of iron are the
wheels of thy chariot!

The Hebrew Scriptures describe the Lord Jehovah, or Logos, as operating
as the Spirit of the fifth circle, when they speak of God as a Man of
War. And the book of Wisdom (xviii. 15) thus represents Him. For the
Divine Word takes many forms, appearing sometimes as one, sometimes as
another, of His Seven Angels, or Elohim. These are only Seven, because
this number comprises all the Spirits of God. So that when the seventh
is passed, the octave begins again, and the same series of processes is
repeated without, as reflects--becoming by distance weaker and
weaker--of the same Seven Lights.

See that above all things you teach the doctrine of Caste. The
Christians made a serious mistake in requiring the same rule of all
persons. Castes are as ladders whereby to ascend from the lower to the
higher. They are, properly, spiritual grades, and bear no relation to
the outward condition of life. Like all other doctrines, that of caste
has been materialised. The castes are four in number, and correspond to
the fourfold nature of man.

The Daimons, Guardian Angels, or Genii belong to the order of Seraphs,
or Serpents of Light, which surround and spring from the supreme orb.
Hence the idea of the serpent as a fallen angel, the astrals being
serpents of fire, springing from Hades, or the lower--the material and
astral--world, which is the obverse of the upper.

Venus, or Aphrodite, is celestial Harmony,--that binding power of
sympathy which purifies, enlightens, and beautifies. The Apple in her
hand is the Kosmos (denoting the world sustained and redeemed by Love).

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

The Owl, sacred to Pallas, and the Cat to Hermes, are types of the Seer.
For Wisdom and Understanding can behold things in dark places.

The Spoiling of the Egyptians has a secondary reference to the
appropriation of their sacred mysteries by the Hebrews. The primary
reference is to the enrichment and edification of the soul by means of
the lessons obtained through the experiences of the body, symbolised as
Egypt.

Air, Pallas, is the offspring of Ether, Jupiter, or original Substance
in its masculine aspect. Ether is universally diffused, penetrating
everywhere, or, rather, impossible to be excluded from anywhere. The
whirling atoms of the densest solids revolve in ether, as do the planets
in space. In a sense Ether is space.

The Soul, Persephone, is the daughter of Earth, Demeter or Motion, and
of Ether, Zeus or Rest, respectively the visible and invisible. To him
who knows the mysteries of Demeter or Ceres, the eating of flesh is an
abomination.

These mysteries contained, among other things, the relation of the soul
to the elements by which on either side it is beset, namely, to motion
and matter on the outer side, and to rest and spirit on the inner. Hence
Demeter and her mysteries are of profound import, and relate to secrets
the most interior. As the force which causes spirit to become manifest
as matter or earth, she is the Earth-Mother and the power whereby
germination occurs. Constituting all that is fixed and solid, she is
creation, or manifestation through action or motion, the invisible made
visible. And to her is due the phenomenal or illusive by which her
daughter Persephone--or the soul--is drawn outwards and downwards.
Illusion, the "fiery" or electric body generated of motion, and
operating as a veil to hide the inner reality, is Maya and Glamour; and
the soul following this is carried off to Hades by its ruler Pluto (the
God especially of riches, themselves, illusive as products of the
earth). Eating of the Mystic Pomegranate (the "Apple" of Eve), the
volatile becomes alchemically fixed, the soul is incorporated with the
body, and in part, at least, materialised, and is no longer "virgin" or
pure, because wedded to flesh and sense. At the entreaty of her mother,
who fears her total immersion in matter, and consequent final loss, Zeus
grants that she may divide her existence between the two worlds or
conditions, the earthly and the heavenly, being--while in the
lower--Queen of the Shades or those who sleep, being unconscious of
things spiritual.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Thus the volatile or astral body, which is the immediate manifestation
of the soul, is the daughter--or product--of Motion; and Motion is the
daughter of Time (Kronos or Saturn), and of Substance, which is Rhea, or
the Holy Spirit in its feminine aspect. This last is the Great Mother,
the original Panthea. The production of the material body by the fixing
of the particles of the volatile body comes of the reversal of the poles
of those particles through the outward tendency of the will of the
individual, and its separation or divergence from the divine or central
will.

The force whereby Zeus, the central spirit, produces the soul or
ethereal body, and which also the soul uses to project itself still
further, is the same force whereby the system is transmuted and indrawn
again to its divine centre and made volatile. The force is one, it is
the will and direction that are various.

In one application Persephone is the grain of wheat, Ceres the soil, and
Hades the darkness which hides the seed, until under solar influence it
emerges and returns to the light. It was through a misunderstanding of
the mysteries of Ceres, and of the true meaning of the resurrection of
the body, that the custom of burning the dead was given up for that of
burying them.

The Gods of the elements, Athena (air), Poseidon (water), Hephaistos
(fire), and Demeter (earth), are among the greatest, and are close to
the throne, having universal sway, inasmuch as their empire is
universal. <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[48:1](cws22.htm#fr_85.md) London, March 27, 1881.
Received in sleep.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[48:2](cws22.htm#fr_86.md) See No. XXII. also
*Dreams and Dream-Stories*, No. IX.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[48:3](cws22.htm#fr_87.md) Comp. *Hymn to Phoibos*,
Part II, No. XI.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[49:1](cws22.htm#fr_88.md) Comp. Hermes to his
Neophytes, Part II, No. XII, pt. 2.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[49:2](cws22.htm#fr_89.md) Comp. Hymn of Aphrodite,
Part II, No. XIV (2).

<span id="fn_90"></span>[52:1](cws22.htm#fr_90.md) See Part II, No. XIII,
pt. 2, and Appendix, note R.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XIX: Concerning The Origin Of Evil, And The Tree As The Type
Of Creation](cws23.md)
