[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws22)  [Next](cws24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XIX

#### CONCERNING THE ORIGIN OF EVIL, AND THE TREE AS THE TYPE OF CREATION

##### PART I <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91)

SPEAK of the Tree and of its meaning. Of this the Hindûs understand more
than you, for they represent their gods with many arms. This is because
they recognise the fact that the type of all existence is a Tree, and
that God's universal symbol is that of the vegetable kingdom. It is for
this reason that the Tree was planted in the midst of the garden,
forasmuch

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

as it was and is the type of all existence, the centre from which
radiates the whole of creation. Let the insight of the Hindûs instruct
you on this matter.

"You have demanded also the origin of Evil. This is a great subject, and
we would have withheld it from you longer, but that it seems to us now
that you are in need of it. Understand, then, that evil is the result of
creation. For creation is the projection of spirit into matter; and with
this projection came the first germ of evil. We would have you know that
there is no such thing as purely spiritual evil, but that evil is the
result of the materialisation of spirit. If you examine carefully all we
have said to you concerning the various forms of evil, you will see that
every one is the result of the limitations of matter. Falsehood is the
limitation of the faculty of perception; selfishness is the result of
the limitation of the power to perceive that the whole universe is but
the larger Self; and so of all the rest. It is, then, true that God
created evil; but yet it is true that God is Spirit, and being Spirit,
is incapable of evil. Evil is then, purely and solely, the result of the
materialisation of God. This is a great mystery. We can but indicate it
to-night."

##### PART 2

I see a lake, vast and deep and bright. I am not certain whether it is
lake or sea. It has no borders that I can perceive. Its waters are so
clear that I could see the pebbles shining at the bottom, if it had one.
It is overspread by a flood of nebulous light, evenly diffused in all
parts; and now, as I look, the light has become concentrated into
flowers, and between them are spaces of darkness caused by the
withdrawal of the light into the flowers. It is a vast floating garden
of flowers, and in the midst of the garden is a Tree. The tree spreads
out its arms everywhere. The garden is creation, the tree is God. And
the tree seems in some way to be the flowers, and the flowers belong to
the tree. I cannot discern the material of the tree; it evades me as I
look. It is not matter; it is the substance of matter, the divinity
underlying it. God is not light, but that of which light itself is the
manifestation. God willed it to be. Light is the result of God's will.
God said, "Let light be"; and it was. Matter is the intensification of
Idea. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) All things are made of God's

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

thought. God is Spirit, and the substance of things. I see two forces
ever in operation. They are the centrifugal and the centripetal. And
they are one; yes, one and the same, for, I see the force rebound back
to God. Creation is ever being projected from God as from a luminous
centre; it is always being drawn back again also. Some parts refuse to
return; they go into outer space; they are lost. Let me see,--can it be
that they pass beyond the sphere of the Divine attraction? Yes; I see
that it is so, and oh! they are lost. The Spirit is withdrawn; it is as
if it were sucked out of them, and they wander away into darkness, and
expend themselves. The rest, who approach God, develop the Spirit in
them, becoming more and more like God. God is the richer for them. They
continue to exist. They return, but do not become lost in God.

I thought I was describing orbs in space, projected from a central sun
around which they circled; but, looking closer, I see them as
individuals. They have become persons. It must be that the method of
creation is the same for all.

God subsisted prior to creation; there was a time when God did not
create; it was God's Sabbath of rest. Such Sabbaths recur,--when there
is no material universe. This is when the Divine mind ceases from
thinking. For God to think is to create. Matter itself is a result of
the Divine thought; it was first produced by the intensification of
Idea. It appears to me that its first form was like water-fluidic.
Spirit is Divinity itself. God is dual. I see, on looking closer, that
through this duality God produces creation. Evil is caused by creation,
or the projection of spirit into matter; that is, it is spirit which, by
being projected far enough from the Divine centre, <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93) becomes matter. Perception is one; the
senses are specialised modes of perception. God is perception itself.
God is universal percipience. God is both that which sees and that which
is seen. If we all could see all, hear all, touch all, and so forth,
there would be no evil, for evil comes of the limitation of perception.
Such limitation was necessary, if God was to produce aught other than
God. Aught other than God must be less than God. Without evil,
therefore, God would have remained alone. All things are God, according
to the measure of the spirit in them. And now I see that the nearest of
all to God is a woman. <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94)

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[52:2](cws23.htm#fr_91) Paris, July 21, 1877.
This part was written down by the seeress herself while in trance. Part
2 was spoken in the same condition immediately afterwards.    E. M.

Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. i, pp. 181-182.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[53:1](cws23.htm#fr_92) Compare No. XXXI.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[54:1](cws23.htm#fr_93) The centre, that is, of
the Divine operation, not of the Divine Being.    E. M.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[54:2](cws23.htm#fr_94) As type of the feminine
or love aspect of the Divine Nature.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XX: Concerning The Great Pyramid, And The Initiations
Therein](cws24)
