[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws20)  [Next](cws22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XVII

#### CONCERNING THE GODS <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md)

A TRUE Idea is the reflect of a true Substance. It is because religious
ideas are true ideas that they are common to all ages and peoples; the
differences being of expression merely, and due to the variation of
density and character of the magnetic atmosphere through which the image
passes. The fact that every nation in every age has conceived, in some
shape, of the Gods, constitutes of itself a proof that the Gods really
are. For Nothing projects no image upon the magnetic light; and where an
image is universally perceived, there is certainly an object which
projects it. An Idea, inborn, ineradicable, constant, which sophism,
ridicule, or false science has power to break only, but not to dispel:
-an image which, however disturbed, invariably returns on itself and
re-forms, as does the image of the sky or the stars in a lake, however
the reflecting water may be momentarily shaken by a stone or a passing
vessel:--such an image as this is necessarily the reflection of a real
and true thing, and no illusion begotten of the water itself.

In the same manner the constant idea of the Gods, persistent in all
minds in all ages, is a true image; for it is verily, and in no
metaphoric sense, the projection upon the human perception of the Eidola
of the Divine persons. The Eidolon is the reflection of a true object in
the magnetic atmosphere; and the magnetic atmosphere is a transparent
medium, through which the soul receives sensations. For sensation is the
only means of knowledge, whether for the body or for the reason. The
body perceives

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

by means of the five avenues of touch. The soul perceives in like manner
by the same sense, but of a finer sort, and put into action by subtler
agents. The soul can know nothing not perceptible; and nothing not
perceptible is real. For that which is not can give no image. Only that
which *is* can be reflected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[47:1](cws21.htm#fr_84.md) London, December 20,
1880. Spoken in trance. Referred to in Life of Anna Kingsford, vol. i,
p. 412.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XVIII: Concerning The Greek Mysteries](cws22.md)
