[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws26)  [Next](cws28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXIII

#### CONCERNING REGENERATION <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102)

THE difference between the "Son of God" and the mere prophet is that the
former is born regenerate, and is therefore said to be "born of a
virgin." <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) But regeneration is a
union of the soul and spirit, and is not a process in which the body
bears a part. In the "Baptism" Jesus received the, Æon, or "Dove," and
was filled with the Holy Ghost, becoming a Medium for the Highest. The
Christ is informed from within, and "needeth not that any man should
tell him; for he knows what is in man." But the adept receives from
without, and is instructed by others.

The adept, or "occultist," is at best a religious scientist; he is not a
"saint." If occultism were all, and held the key of heaven, there would
be no need of "Christ." But occultism, although it holds the "power,"
holds neither the "kingdom" nor the "glory." For these are of Christ.
The adept knows not the kingdom of heaven, and "the least in this
kingdom are greater than he." "Desire *first* the kingdom of God and
God's righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." As
Jesus said of Prometheus, <span id="fr_104"></span>[3](#fn_104) "Take no
thought for to-morrow. Behold the lilies of the field and the birds of
the air, and trust God as these." For the saint has faith; the adept has
knowledge. If the adepts in occultism or in physical science could
suffice

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

to man, I would have committed no message to you. But the two are not in
opposition. All things are yours, even the kingdom and the power, but
the glory is to God. Do not be ignorant of their teaching, for I would
have you know all. Take, therefore, every means to know. This knowledge
is of man, and cometh from the mind. Go, therefore, to man to learn it.
"If you will be perfect, learn also of these." "Yet the wisdom which is
from above, is above all." For one man may begin from within, that is,
with wisdom, and wisdom is one with love. Blessed is the man who
chooseth wisdom, for she leaveneth all things. And another man may begin
from without, and that which is without is power. To such there shall be
a thorn in the flesh. <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105) For it is
hard in such case to attain to the within. But if a man be first wise
inwardly, he shall the more easily have this also added unto him. For he
is born again and is free. Whereas at a great price must the adept buy
freedom. Nevertheless, I bid you seek; and in this also you shall find.
But I have shown you a more excellent way than theirs. Yet both Ishmael
and Isaac are sons of one father, and of all her children is Wisdom
justified. So neither are they wrong, nor are you led astray. The goal
is the same; but their way is harder than yours. They take the kingdom
by violence, if they take it, and by much toil and agony of the flesh.
But from the time of Christ within you, the kingdom is open to the sons
of God. Receive what you can receive; I would have you know all things.
And if you have served seven years for wisdom, count it not loss to
serve seven years for power also. For if Rachel bear the best beloved,
Leah hath many sons, and is exceeding fruitful. But her eye is not
single; she looketh two ways, and seeketh not that which is above only.
But to you Rachel is given first, and perchance her beauty may suffice.
I say not, let it suffice; it is better to know all things, for if you
know not all, how can you judge all? For as a man heareth, so must he
judge. Will you therefore be regenerate in the without, as well as in
the within? For they are renewed in the body, but you in the soul. It is
well to be baptized into John's baptism, if a man receive also the Holy
Ghost. But some know not so much as that there is any Holy Ghost. Yet
Jesus also, being himself regenerate in the spirit, sought unto the
baptism of John, for thus it became him to fulfil himself in all things.
And having fulfilled, behold, the "Dove" descended on him. If then you
will be perfect. seek

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

both that which is within and that which is without; and the circle of
being, which is the "wheel of life," shall be complete in you. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[63:1](cws27.htm#fr_102) London, June 1881.
Received in sleep, in answer to an inquiry respecting the advisability
of studying occult science.    E. M.

Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, pp. 97-98.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[63:2](cws27.htm#fr_103) *I.e.* his own soul
purified from taint of materiality-the soul being always the "mother" of
the mystic or interior man. See "Definitions" in Appendix.    E. M.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[63:3](cws27.htm#fr_104) A term which signifies
forethought. The remonstrance is against undue anxiety and alarm on the
soul's behalf while in the path of duty, as implying distrust of the
divine sufficiency. See Appendix, note J.    E. M.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[64:1](cws27.htm#fr_105) *I.e.* the flesh
itself is their thorn. E. M.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[65:1](cws27.htm#fr_106) The above
interpretation concerning Rachel and Leah, as we subsequently
ascertained, is on the lines of the Kabala.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXIV: Concerning The Man Regenerate](cws28)
