[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws28)  [Next](cws30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXV

#### CONCERNING THE CHRIST AND THE LOGOS <span id="fr_112"></span>[3](#fn_112.md)

NOW, Christ Jesus--the perfected spiritual, not physical, man--is the
culmination of the human stream which flows upwards into the bosom of
God. Man, arising by evolution from the lowest, finds his highest
development, as man, in the Christ. Having reached this point, he is the
perfect Son of Man, in that he is produced in and of Humanity; and being
such, and because he is such, he receives the baptism of the Logos. Now,
the Logos is the Adonai <span id="fr_113"></span>[4](#fn_113.md) a word
which implies Duality. And the Adonai is the Son of God, the
Only-Begotten, the Two-in-One, whose manifestation is possible only
through the Christ. The Celestial Trinity is composed of Substance,
Force, and Law. Force is Original Life, or God the Father. Substance is
Original Being, or God the Mother. Indissolubly conjoined, together they
are Living Substance, the En-Soph or Boundless One of the Kabala. In
themselves incapable of manifestation, they become manifest in and
through Law, their Expression, Word, Logos, or Son. But

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

the Logos is celestial, and the human could not know him in his divine
nature. That the human may touch and know the divine, it is necessary
for the two natures to meet. This is accomplished in "Christ Jesus."
Christ signifies the Anointed. He is human in pedigree; and his
Christhood is attained only when he receives into his own spirit the
Logos. Then is accomplished the union of the two natures, the divine and
the human. The two streams meet and mingle, and thenceforth man knows
and understands God--through the Christ. For the Christ, having received
the Logos, is Son of God, as well as Son of Man; and the Son of God in
him reveals to him the Father. Man as human only could not say, as the
Christ says--"I and the Father are One." It is the in-dwelling Word who
enables him to say this--"For He who dwelleth in the bosom of God (the
Logos) even He hath revealed God." Having received the Law, or Word, the
Christ receives also the Father and the Wisdom of God through the Word
or Son, because Adonai--being the Duality--manifests both of these to
and in the Christ. Hence Stephen, dying, exclaimed--"Behold, I see the
Heavens open, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God." In
this utterance he declares the union of the Human and the Divine. He
declares that in Christ, Adonai is manifest; and that in consequence of
this union, humanity is exalted into Heaven. For humanity can attain to
the celestial only through "Christ." When man penetrates into this
sphere he is "in Christ Jesus." And, as Paul says, "being in Christ he
is in God, and God in him; for Christ is God's." God, so to speak, lays
hold of man in Christ, and draws him into Heaven. For at this moment
both rivers meet, and flow one into the other in indissoluble union, the
Logos in the Christ, the Divine in the Human, the God in Man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[68:3](cws29.htm#fr_112.md) London, July 12, 1881.
Received in sleep.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[68:4](cws29.htm#fr_113.md) The name invariably
substituted by the Hebrews for Jehovah in speaking. See Part II, No.
VIII: also Part III.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXVI: Concerning The Perfectionment Of The Christ](cws30.md)
