[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws38)  [Next](cws40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXXV

#### CONCERNING THE HOLY FAMILY <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143)

THERE were two subjects, on which I was desiring light, the explanation
of which came to me in curious manner. They were (1) The real
signification of the gospel account of the parentage and childhood of
Jesus, which we have seen reason to regard as mystical and unliteral;
and (2) The faculty of divination by means of the crystal or cup. I had
just awoke, and was on the point of drinking my usual cup of coffee,
when I was astonished by seeing in the liquid some words, while at the
same instant there was flashed upon my mind a full view and explanation
of the meaning of the Holy Family; and this is what I received.

"This is <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144) the divining cup of
Joseph, who represented the spiritual Egypt of Israel's infancy. Egypt
was the spiritual father of Jesus, his spiritual mother, Mary, being
Israel's pure intuition of God, and "virgin daughter of Sion." <span
id="fr_145"></span>[3](#fn_145) Being of Jewish birth, Jesus went into
Egypt to be initiated in the sacred mysteries of the country from which,
through Moses, the Israelites originally obtained their religion. Of
that religion and those mysteries, Jesus, as a Christ, was the product.
For their object was the production of a man so perfected through the
development of his mind and spirit, as to realise the divine idea of
humanity. As a full initiate and adept, a hierarch or "master" of the
mysteries, Jesus returned to Judæa to fulfil his mission, receiving at
the hands of John--a prophet of the Essenes, who were followers of the
same mysteries--his baptism of the Spirit.

Joseph, therefore, represents Egypt--not, however, as denoting the
body, <span id="fr_146"></span>[4](#fn_146) but the mind--and is an old
man because Egypt was the senior of Israel, and also because, in the
evolution of man, the mind precedes the soul in manifestation. And in
having him for his foster-father, Jesus is set forth as adopting the
wisdom and

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

elder religion of Egypt, to incorporate them with the Jewish. Joseph,
moreover, in being elderly and a widower, <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) represents Egypt in respect of its past
youth and lost prime. That he is not shown as the true spouse of Mary,
or real father of her son, is because, though the mind may aid these by
its knowledge and wisdom, the true spouse of the soul is the Divine
Spirit, who is thus the true father of the man regenerate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_143"></span>[89:1](cws39.htm#fr_143) Paris, October 27,
1878.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[89:2](cws39.htm#fr_144) Meaning, of course,
*answers to*; the effect of a bright surface, as that of a crystal,
disc, or fluid, being so to magnetise the sensitive as to render
objective any images or ideas previously subjective whether in his own
or in another's magnetic atmosphere, or in that of the planet, this last
being the *anima mundi*. See note at end of No. XXXII.    E. M.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[89:3](cws39.htm#fr_145) In this aspect Mary is
the soul collective instead of individual only.    E. M.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[89:4](cws39.htm#fr_146) See Part II, No. XIII,
Hymn to the Planet-God (6).

<span id="fn_147"></span>[90:1](cws39.htm#fr_147) According to Christian
tradition.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXXVI: Concerning The Metempsychosis Or Avatâr](cws40)
