[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws36)  [Next](cws38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXXIII

#### CONCERNING THE ACTUAL JESUS <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139)

I AM shown the Descent from the Cross. I see Jesus carried by Joseph of
Arimathea to his house. The house communicates with a sepulchre; and
Jesus is carried to the house where they do something to revive him; for
he has swooned rather than died. The clothes are placed in the
sepulchre, but not Jesus. I see a rupture of the pericardium, but no
fatal injury to the heart. I see plainly that he is not dead. There is
no organic lesion; and the wound heals like a simple wound, without
suppuration, and by incessant bathing with water. What a lovely climate
it is there! and how curious that there should have been a Joseph at
both birth and crucifixion!

I am now shown the truth respecting the birth of Jesus. It was most
certainly an ordinary birth. I see that quite distinctly. The names are
all altered. The birth-name of Jesus is not Jesus, or anything like it.
Nothing is real as I have thought it. Very little happens as related.
The losing and finding in the temple and the feeding of the five
thousand are allegories of which the signification is spiritual. The
miracles of the raising of the ruler's daughter and widow's son are real
facts. Jesus saw clairvoyantly that the former was not dead, and that
the body was uninjured by disease, so that the soul could return to it.
For disease is gradual death, and when death occurs through it the soul
is set free altogether. In violent or sudden death the soul is slow to
get away, and the separation is a long process.

In his own case Jesus instructed his friends beforehand what to

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

do. Joseph of Arimathea was a friend of Mary Magdalen; and she procured
for him the requisite balms. I see her running with them through the
sepulchre to the house. Jesus was not organically dead at all, for the
heart never ceased to beat. He foreknew all the particulars of the
event, and provided accordingly.

Nor is Jesus well again on the third day. He is at least ten days under
treatment in Joseph's house. Three days is a mystical period, having no
relation to actual time. All about him are women except one, the old
man. Jesus' name begins with *M*. I do not see the rest of it.

The perfect adept is he who has attained in himself the Philosopher's
Stone of a spirit absolutely quiescent, and is in union with the Divine
Will. Being without ardour, sympathy and compassion are for him but
other names for justice; and, incapable of anger, his temperament is
always cool and equable. I now see faults in Jesus which I did not see
before. I mean Jesus as he actually was, and not as he is depicted in
the Gospels. They are faults from the adept's point of view. I am shown
a passion-flower as the emblem of his character. He sacrificed himself
for others, but would have been able to do more had he been more
careful,--especially in respect of his diet. His liability to give way
continually to indignation or pity prevented him from getting higher. He
allowed himself to be drawn too much out of himself to reach the highest
possible.

I see him bidding his followers good-bye. It is on a hill which he
ascends, and he disappears from their view, lost in cloud or mist. He
now becomes a hermit. I see him in the wilderness alone; and there he
attains the higher life which constituted his true ascension.

Jesus was able to influence persons at a distance by means of an
emanation which he projected from himself; so that it was not necessary
for him to be dead when supposed to be seen by Paul.

I now see some one with him on his mountain. It is John, writing down
the Apocalypse at the dictation of Jesus. Jesus recollects all his past
incarnations, and epitomises them in the Apocalypse, which is the
history of his, and of every perfected soul. He is quite an old man at
this time.

And now I see the panther's skin of Bacchos, and whence Jesus got the
name which has been given him of "Rabbi Ben Panther," and why he was
said to be the son of one Panther. It is a play on *Pan* and *theos*,
and means *all the gods*. The panther's skin

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

represented the raiment, or attributes, of all the gods, with which
Jesus, as a "Son of God," was held to be endowed.

I am shown that there is but little of real value in the Scriptures.
They are a mass of clay, comparatively modern, with here and there a bit
of gold. The angel whom I saw before, and who told us to burn the
Bible, <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) now puts it in the fire,
and there comes out a few pages only of matter which is original and
divine. All the rest is interpolation or alteration. This is the case
with both Old Testament and New, Isaiah and the prophets. Isaiah is a
great mixture. It is all fragments from various sources, just thrown
together. The book of Genesis is one large parable; and so are all the
legends of the wanderings and wars of Israel. All is mixed up with
fiction. Moses wrote none of it. And similarly with all the books of the
Law and the prophets. All are made up in this manner. Here and there is
an original piece of the ancient Revelation, but these are largely
interspersed with additions and embellishments, commentaries, and
applications to the times by copyists and interpreters. And when the
angel told us to put the Bible in the fire, he meant separate the gold
from the dross and clay.

As for the gospels, they are almost entirely parabolical. Religion is
not historical, and in no wise depends upon past events. For, faith and
redemption do not depend upon what any man did, but on what God has
revealed. Jesus was not the historical name of the initiate and adept
whose story is related. It is the name given him in initiation. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141) His birth, the manner of it, his being
lost and found by his parents in the temple, his lying three days in the
tomb,--all are parabolic, as also is the story of the Ascension. The
Scriptures are addressed to the soul, and make no appeal to the outer
senses, The whole story of Jesus is a mass of parables, the things that
occurred to him being used as symbols. Thus, the Crucifixion represents
the soul's sufferings; the Resurrection its transmutation; and the life
and Ascension are a prophecy of what is possible to man.

The real original gospel is that of John. The others came long
afterwards, and all were written long after the time of Jesus. Jesus
largely wrote the Apocalypse by the hand of John, as he sat with him on
the mountain. This was many years after the "Ascension," as his
disappearance on the hill was termed. The Apocalypse was rather a
recovery than an original composition

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

of Jesus. The gospel life of Jesus is made up of the lives of all the
divine teachers before him, and represents the best the world had then,
and the best it has in it to be. And it is therefore a prophecy. The
recorded life of Jesus epitomised all the teachers before him, and the
possibilities of mankind some day to be realised.

The "beautiful feet of the messengers on the mountains" are the first
rays of the rising sun of the coming salvation, seen by the watchers
from the spiritual heights,--the "shepherds who tend their
flocks,"--even their own pure hearts and thoughts. They it is who see
from the "hills" the coming God, the demonstration of the divinity that
is in humanity, while the world below is wrapped in darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[84:1](cws37.htm#fr_139) London, March 22,
1881. Spoken in trance. See also No. XXIV. Referred to in *Life of Anna
Kingsford*, vol. ii, p. 4.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[86:1](cws37.htm#fr_140) In a vision received
some time previously.    E. M.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[86:2](cws37.htm#fr_141) See Part II, No. XI,
Hymn to Phoibos, v. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXXIV: Concerning The Previous Lives Of Jesus](cws38)
