[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws47)  [Next](cws49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XLIV

#### CONCERNING THE POET, AS TYPE OF THE HEAVENLY PERSONALITY

\[Extract from Diary, Paris, Christmas Day, 1882. <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172.md)

"It is strange how I forget! This evening I have re-read several
passages and chapters written by my own hand, and conceived in my own
mind, of The Perfect Way, and they filled me with as great wonder and
admiration as though I had read them for the first time in some
stranger's work. Ought this not to set me a-thinking how little this
outward and mundane memory has to do with the true and interior
consciousness? For, indeed, in my true self I know well all these
things, and an hundredfold more than there lie written; yet my exterior
self forgetteth them right readily, and, once they are written, scarce
remembereth them more! And this sets me wondering whether, perchance, we
are not altogether out of the reckoning when we talk of memory as a
necessary part of selfhood; for memory, in the sense in which we use the
word,

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

signifies a thinking back into the past, and an act by which past
experience in time is recalled. But how shall the true, essential self,
which is without end or beginning, have memory in any such sort, since
the "eternal remembrance" of the soul seeth all things at a glance, both
past and to come? To that which is in its nature Divine and of God,
memory is no longer recollection, but knowledge. Shall we say that God
remembers? Nay, God knoweth. I thank thee, O my Divine Genius; Thou art
here! I feel thee; thine aura encompasseth me; I burn under the glow of
thy wonderful presence. Yes, it is thus indeed!" Here meditation passes
into Illumination, and the diary thus continues. It will be seen that
the writer had caught in advance the style of her illuminator.\]

THIS faculty which we call Memory is but the faint reflex and image in
the material brain of that function which, in all its celestial
plenitude, can belong only to the heavenly man. That which is of time
and of matter must needs think by means of an organ and material cells,
and these can only work mechanically, and by slow processes. But that
which is of eternity and spirit needeth neither organ nor process, since
organism is related only to time, and its resultant is process. "Yea,
thou shalt see face to face! Thou shalt know even as thou art known!"
And just as widely and essentially as the heavenly memory differs from
the earthly, so doth the heavenly personality differ from that of the
material creature.

Thou mayest the more easily gather somewhat of the character of the
heavenly personality by considering the quality of that of the highest
type of mankind on earth,--the Poet.

The poet hath no self apart from his larger self. Other men pass
indifferent through life and the world, because the selfhood of earth
and heaven is a thing apart from them, and toucheth them not.

The wealth of beauty in earth and sky and sea lieth outside their being,
and speaketh not to their heart.

Their interests are individual and limited: their home is by one hearth:
four walls are the boundary of their kingdom,--so small is it!

But the personality of the poet is divine: and being divine, it hath no
limits.

He is supreme and ubiquitous in consciousness: his heart beats in every
element.

The pulses of all the infinite deep of heaven vibrate in his own: and
responding to their strength and their plenitude, he feels more
intensely than other men.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Not merely he sees and examines these rocks and trees: these variable
waters, and these glittering peaks.

Not merely he hears this plaintive wind, these rolling peals.

But he *is* all these; and with them--nay, in them--he rejoices and
weeps, he shines and aspires, he sighs and thunders.

And when he sings, it is not he--the man--whose voice is heard: it is
the voice of all the manifold Nature herself.

In his verse the sunshine laughs: the mountains give forth their
sonorous echoes; the swift lightnings flash.

The great continual cadence of universal life moves and becomes
articulate in human language.

O joy profound! O boundless selfhood! O God-like personality!

All the gold of the sunset is thine; the pillars of chrysolite; and the
purple vault of immensity!

The sea is thine with its solemn speech, its misty distance, and its
radiant shallows!

The daughters of earth love thee: the water-nymphs tell thee their
secrets; thou knowest the spirit of all silent things!

Sunbeams are thy laughter, and the rain-drops of heaven thy tears; in
the wrath of the storm thine heart is shaken: and thy prayer goeth up
with the wind unto God.

Thou art multiplied in the conscience <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173.md) of all living creatures; thou art young
with the youth of Nature; thou art all-seeing as the starry skies:

Like unto the Gods,--therefore art thou their beloved: yea, if thou
wilt, they shall tell thee all things;

Because thou only understandest, among all the sons of men!

Concerning memory; why should there any more be a difficulty in respect
of it? Reflect on this saying,--"Man sees as he knows." To thee the
deeps are more visible than the surfaces of things; but to men generally
the surfaces only are visible. The material can perceive only the
material, the astral the astral, and the spiritual the spiritual. It all
resolves itself, therefore, into a question of condition and of quality.
Thy hold on matter is but slight, and thine organic memory is feeble and
treacherous. It is hard for thee to perceive the surfaces of things and
to remember their aspect. But thy spiritual perception is the stronger
for this weakness, and the profound is that which thou seest the most
readily. It is hard for thee to understand and to retain the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

memory of material facts; but their meaning thou knowest instantly and
by intuition, which is the memory of the soul. For the soul takes no
pains to remember; she knows divinely. Is it not said that the
immaculate woman brings forth without a pang? The sorrow and travail of
conception belong to her whose desire is unto "Adam." <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_172"></span>[108:1](cws48.htm#fr_172.md) Referred to in *Life
of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, pp. 96-97, 100-102.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[110:1](cws48.htm#fr_173.md) An archaism for
consciousness. In the French there is still but one
word--*conscience*--for the two things.    E. M.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[111:1](cws48.htm#fr_174.md) *I.e.* the outer
sense and lower reason.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XLV: Concerning Psyche](cws49.md)
