[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws39)  [Next](cws41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXXVI

#### CONCERNING THE METEMPSYCHOSIS OR AVATÂR <span id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_148)

METEMPSYCHOSIS means, in its chief aspect, not transmigration which is
of souls, but the vivification or illumination of a soul already
incarnate by the spirit of a preceding "angel." Thus, the soul of Jesus
was overshadowed by the angel of Moses.

The Word, Logos, or Adonai--for they are the same--speaks in the spirit
of one or the other of the Gods of the Seven Spheres. He spoke through
the Spirit, or God, of the Fourth Sphere--Dionysos or Iacchos--to Noah,
Moses, and Jesus. Nevertheless Jesus was not an incarnation of either of
these, and when he said, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day,"
he spoke, in one sense, <span id="fr_149"></span>[3](#fn_149) of his own
former birth as Isaac. For Jesus was a transmigration or re-incarnation
of the soul of Isaac, and the two names are occultly related.

The metempsychosis constitutes a planetary Avatâr. The number of these
is variously stated to be ten and twelve. Both are, in a sense, right.
There are ten such Avatârs and twelve angels, or messengers, for the
first and last are dual or "twins." The pair at the first Avatâr were
"Eve" and "Adam"--for this also is one sense of the allegory. The
Avatârs and their angels have their corresponding signs in the Zodiac,
the double ones being represented by the double signs Gemini and Pisces.
The latter Avatâr, now at hand, will introduce Aquarius, "the sign of
the Son of Man in Heaven." Heracles is an [epitome](errata.htm#0) of the

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

"twelve Avatârs of the Lord." Each of his labours--the labours, that is,
of the soul--represents a divine operation, and constitutes an Avatâr,
while its sign in the Zodiac corresponds to the nature of the Labour.
These signs represent the twelve gates of the Holy City, or perfected
kosmos, and the twelve mysteries of the greater initiation; and the
gates are spoken of as pearls, because pearls are found at the
sea-bottom, and in oysters, which are difficult to get and hard to open;
and the sea represents the Holy Spirit and the soul. In order to obtain
these twelve mysteries, one must be at great labour and trouble, risking
one's life in diving for them, going down into the sea naked and
stripped of all things, finding them in obscurity and darkness, and when
they are brought up, requiring a keen blade to open them.

The "twelve apostles" are types of these angels and mysteries. John
represents the dual messenger to come. And by a metempsychosis
corresponding to that by which the spirit of Moses instructed Jesus, the
spirit of John will instruct the angel of the new Avatâr. This spirit is
dual. For John represents both the Virgin and himself. This is the
"mother" referred to by Jesus at his crucifixion. John comprises the
feminine as well as the masculine element. His inspiring spirit is the
same as that of Daniel. The spirit that informed Noah, Moses, and Jesus
is Dionysos (Jehovah Nissi), the God of the planet. And the spirit which
informed Daniel and John, and will inform the angel of this century, is
Michael, who represents Zeus and Hera, or the planet Jupiter. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150)

That which comes back as a messenger or angel, is not the personal soul
of the individual man employed; for that has become transmuted into
spirit. Nor does the spirit itself which was in that soul become
re-incarnate. That which comes is the overshadowing informing spirit who
influenced and spoke through the man in his lifetime, and the man
himself also, who has become an angel, or pure spirit, and who no longer
needs the body. So that his return is voluntary, and his coming an
Avatâr. The new Avatâr will be of the double or overshadowing spirit of
Daniel and John, as well as the spirit which was in those men. For,
owing to the union between them, the two--the man's spirit and the
divine spirit--are so much one as to be scarcely distinguishable; and
the

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

God speaks through the man's spirit. It is as a tube within a tube. God
speaks through the Logos, the Logos through an Elohe, and the Elohe
through the perfected spirit of a former prophet. But of this last it is
a metempsychoisis, not a transmigration or re-incarnation. That is, the
spirit returning informs the spirit of one already incarnate, and who,
like John the Baptist, may be thus used without being himself regenerate
and "in the kingdom of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[90:2](cws40.htm#fr_148) London, March 1881.
Spoken in trance.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[90:3](cws40.htm#fr_149) Another sense was
Abraham's recognition of the doctrine implied by the term "Christ." In
their profoundest and most interior meaning the Patriarchs represent the
component elements of the planetary divinity.    E. M.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[91:1](cws40.htm#fr_150) See Daniel X, 21, and
xii, i, and Apoc. xii, 7. That Michael is by many regarded as the angel
of the sun, is probably from their taking him to be the "angel standing
in the sun" of Apoc. xix, 17. But even so, the position would not imply
more than a temporary presidency.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXXVII: Concerning The Æon of the Christ](cws41)
