[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws43)  [Next](cws45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### No. XL

#### CONCERNING THE HEREAFTER <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160)

WHEN a man parts at death with his material body, that of him which
survives is divisible into three parts, the *anima divina*, or, as in
the Hebrew, Neshamah; the *anima bruta*, or Ruach, which is the
*persona* of the man; and the shade, or Nephesh, which is the lowest
mode of soul substance. In the great majority of persons the
consciousness is gathered up and centred in the *anima bruta*, or Ruach;
in the few wise it is polarised in the *anima divina*. Now, that part of
man which passes through, or transmigrates,--the process whereof is
called by the Hebrews Gilgal Neshamoth,--is the *anima divina*, which is
the immediate receptacle of the deific Spirit. And whereas there is in
the world nothing save the human, actual or potential, the Neshamah
subsists also in animals, though only as a mere spark, their
consciousness being therefore rudimentary and diffuse. It is the
Neshamah which finally escapes from the world and is redeemed into
eternal life. The *anima bruta*, or earthly mind, is that part of man
which retains all earthly and local memories, reminiscent affections,
cares and personalities of the world or planetary sphere, and bears his
family or earth-name. After death this *anima bruta*, or Ruach, remains
in the "lower Eden," within sight and call of the magnetic earth-sphere.
But the *anima divina*, or Neshamah,--the name of which is known only to
God,--passes upwards and continues its evolutions, bearing with it only
a small portion, and that the purest, of the outer soul, or mind. This
*anima divina* is the true man. It is not within hail of the magnetic
atmosphere; and only on the rarest and most solemn occasions does it
return to the planet unclothed. The astral shade, the Nephesh, is dumb;
the earthly soul, the *anima bruta*, or Ruach, speaks and remembers; the
divine soul, the Neshamah, which contains the divine light, neither
returns nor communicates, that is, in the ordinary way. That which the
*anima bruta* remembers is the history of one incarnation only, because
it is part of the astral man, and the astral man is renewed at every
incarnation

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of the Neshamah. But very advanced men become re-incarnate, not on this
planet, but on some other nearer the sun. The *anima bruta* has lived
but once, and will never be re-incarnate. It continues in the "lower
Eden," a personality in relation to the earth, and retaining the
memories, both good and bad, of its one past life. If it have done evil,
it suffers indeed, but is not condemned; if it have done well, it is
happy, but not beatified. It continues in thought its favourite pursuits
of earth, and creates for itself houses, gardens, flowers, books, and so
forth, out of the astral light. It remains in this condition more or
less strongly defined, according to the personality it had acquired,
until the *anima divina*, one of whose temples it was, has accomplished
all its avatârs. Then, with all the other earthly souls belonging to
that divine soul, it is drawn up into the celestial Eden, or upper
heaven, and returns into the essence of the Neshamah. But all of it does
not return; only the good memories; the bad sink to the lowest stratum
of the astral light, where they disintegrate. For, if the divine soul
were permanently, in its perfected state, to retain the memories of an
its evil doings, its misfortunes, its earthly griefs, its earthly loves,
it would not be perfectly happy. Therefore, only those loves and
memories return to the Neshamah, which have penetrated the earthly soul
sufficiently to reach the *divine soul*, and to make part of the man. It
is said that all marriages are made in Heaven. This means that all true
love unions are made in the celestial within the man. The mere
affections of the *anima bruta* are evanescent, and belong only to it.
When this, the Ruach, is interrogated, it can speak only of one life,
for it has lived but one. Of that one it retains all the memories and
all the affections. If these have been strong, it remains near those
persons whom especially it loved, and overshadows them. A single
Neshamah may have as many of these former selves in the astral light, as
a man may have changes of raiment. But when the divine soul is
perfected, and about to be received into "the Sun," or Nirvâna, <span
id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161) she indraws all these past selves, and
possesses herself of their memories; but only of the worthy parts of
these, and such as will not deprive her of eternal calm. In "the
planets," the soul forgets; in "the suns," she remembers. For, in
*memoriâ æternâ erit Justus*. <span id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_162) Not
until a man has accomplished his regeneration, and become a son of God,
a Christ,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

can he have these memories of his past lives. Such memories as a man, on
the upward path, can have of his past incarnations, are by reflection
only; and the memories are not of events usually, but of principles and
truths, and habits formerly acquired. If these memories relate to
events, they are vague and fitful, because they are reflections from the
overshadowing of his former selves in the astral light. For the former
selves--the deserted temples of the *anima divina*--frequent her sphere
and are attracted towards her, especially under certain conditions. From
them she learns through the intermediary of the genius, or "moon," who
lights up the *camera obscura* of the mind, and reflects on its tablet
the memories cast by the overshadowing past. The *anima bruta*, or
Ruach, seems to itself to progress, because it has a vague sense that
sooner or later it will be lifted to higher spheres. But of the method
of this it is ignorant, because it can only know the celestial by union
with it. The learning which makes it seem to itself to progress is
acquired by reflected soul-rays coming from the terrestrial. Advanced
men on the earth assist and teach the astral soul, and hence its
fondness for their spheres. It learns by reflected intellectual images,
or thoughts. The Ruach is right when it says it is immortal. For the
better part of it will in the end be absorbed into the Neshamah. But if
one interrogate a Ruach of even two or three centuries old, it seldom
knows more than it knew in its earth-life, unless, indeed, it gain fresh
knowledge from its interrogator. The reason why some communications are
astral, and others celestial, is simply that some persons --the greater
number--communicate by means of the *anima bruta* in themselves; and
others--the few purified--by means of their *anima divina*. For, like
attracts like. The earthly souls of animals are rarely met with; they
come into communion with animals rather than with man, unless an
affection between a man and an animal have been very strong. If a man
would meet and recognise his beloved in Nirvâna, he must make his
affection one of the Neshamah, not of the Ruach. There are many degrees
of love. True love is stronger than a thousand deaths; for, though one
die a thousand times, a single love may yet perpetuate itself past every
death from birth to birth, growing and culminating in intensity and
might.

Now, all these three, Nephesh, Ruach, and Neshamah, are discrete modes
of one and the same universal being, which is

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

at once life and substance, and is instinct with consciousness, inasmuch
as it is, under whatever mode, Holy Spirit. Wherefore, there inheres in
them all a divine potency. Evolution, which is the manifestation of that
which is inherent, is the manifestation of this potency. The first
formulation of this inherency, above the plane of the material, is the
Nephesh, this being the soul by which are impelled the lower and earlier
forms of life. It is the "moving" soul that breathes and kindles. The
next--the Ruach--is the "wind" that rushes forth to vivify the mind.
Higher, because more inward and central, is the Neshamah, which, borne
on the bosom of the Ruach, is the immediate receptacle of the Divine
particle, and without which this cannot be individualised and become an
indiffusible personality. Both the "wind" and the "flame" are spirit;
but the wind is general, the flame particular. The wind fills the house;
the flame designates the person. The wind is the Divine Voice resounding
in the ear of the Apostle and passing away where it listeth; the flame
is the Divine Tongue uttering itself in the word of the Apostle. Thus,
then, in the soul impersonal are perceived the breath and afflatus of
God; but in the soul personal is the formulate and express utterance of
God. Now, both of Nephesh and Ruach, that which is gathered up and
endures is Neshamah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[96:1](cws44.htm#fr_160) London, July 1881.
Received in sleep, in timely and satisfactory solution of sundry
perplexing experiences: and subsequently found to be a concise statement
of the doctrine of the Kabala.    E. M.

Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, p. 30.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[97:1](cws44.htm#fr_161) See Appendix, note A.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[97:2](cws44.htm#fr_162) Ps. cxii, 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XLI: Concerning The True Ego](cws45)
