[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws40)  [Next](cws42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXXVII

#### CONCERNING THE ÆON OF THE CHRIST <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151)

THE Christs are above all things *media*, and the various descriptions
they gave of their office--such as "I am the way, the truth, and the
life." "I am the door," and the like--referred not to themselves at all,
but to the Spirit who spoke through them. Jesus, when questioned on this
very subject, said plainly, "The words which I speak unto you I speak
not of myself; but the Father which dwelleth in me, he doeth the works."
Jesus, then, spoke as he was moved by the Holy Ghost, and was no other
than a clear glass through which the divine glory shone. \[As it is
written, "And we beheld his glory, the glory *as of* the Only Begotten
of the Father, full of grace and truth." Now, the Only Begotten is not
mortal man, but he who has been in the bosom of the Father from all
eternity, even the Word, the Maker, the Speaker, the Manifestor.\] It
was this Holy Spirit which descended upon Jesus at his baptism, and
dwelt in him for the time of his sojourn upon earth, speaking through
him and controlling him; while he, on his part, so lived as to bring all
his personal will into oneness with that Spirit.

The Spirit answers to the Essence, the Father, and the Word. Of these,
the first is one of the seven spirits, or divine flames, of universal
Divinity. The second is the angel, or God, of the planet, and is the Æon
of the Christ. The third is the Christ. They are respectively "the
spirit, the water, <span id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_152) and the blood."
The Father and the Word may therefore be said to be one;

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

for by the Word the Father is manifest, and--in the microcosm--the Word
is the Father manifested.

The greatest hierarch--he, that is, who has the most perfect control
over Nature--is not only a man of many incarnations, but has obtained
from God the greatest and rarest of gifts,--that of being a medium for
the Highest. <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153) Such a one is the
Æon, <span id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_154) and has what is called the
"double portion." Elisha craved and received this grace. "Where now is
the God of Elijah?" he cried, when endeavouring to work his first
miracle; and he besought Elijah that a portion of his double <span
id="fr_155"></span>[3](#fn_155) might rest upon him. For Elijah had so
transmuted his soul into spirit that it was doubled, and a portion of
this he bestowed on Elisha. Such an Æon it was that descended upon
Jesus, to quit him at the final moment. Hence the exclamation, "My God,
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[92:1](cws41.htm#fr_151) Paris, October 12,
1878. Received in sleep. Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol.
i, p. 282.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[92:2](cws41.htm#fr_152) A term which, as here
used, implies also the "mother," "water" denoting especially the
substance or feminine principle, as distinguished from the energy or
masculine principle.    E. M.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[93:1](cws41.htm#fr_153) "The very fact that
the Christ is describable as 'a medium for the Highest,' must imply and
involve the perfectionment of His own indwelling spirit, since it is
only through the identity in condition of the God within Him and the God
without Him that the two could unite and blend" (*Life of Anna
Kingsford*, vol. i, p. 282).    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[93:2](cws41.htm#fr_154) The person who
receives the Æon being called an Æon, as the person who manifests the
Christ is called a Christ.    E. M.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[93:3](cws41.htm#fr_155) This is not the
magnetic phantom ordinarily so called.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXXVIII: Concerning The Doctrine Of Grace](cws42)
