[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws50)  [Next](cws52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XLVII

#### CONCERNING THE SUBSTANTIAL EGO AS THE TRUE SUBJECT <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180.md)

##### PART I

IT hath been said, "All life is a burning," and thou sayest,

"Let the cells of the brain be likened to these burning logs, and their
ash to waste tissue, and the flame to consciousness. Then is
consciousness nothing more than an unstable product, which, when the
logs are all consumed, dieth away with their ash. How then shall we
think of Psyche, if she be this flame? Is not all consciousness
phenomenon merely, depending for its existence on an organic
[process](errata.htm#2.md); a *consensus* of vital action in the nervous
cells? And the Psyche, what is she but the sum of conscious states,--a
complexity, unstable and automatic, making and unmaking herself at each
instant, even as the flame?"

What, then, doth cognise these unstable states? These successive and
ephemeral objective conditions to what Subject do they manifest
themselves, and how are they recognised? If consciousness be phenomenon,
to what noumenon is it related?

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Perceivest thou not that the flame, which is
phenomenon, appeareth not *to itself*, and dependeth for its objectivity
on the subjectivity of the observer? The physiologist who telleth thee
that memory is a biological *processus*, and that consciousness is a
state dependent on the duration and intensity of molecular nervous
vibration, toucheth not the Psyche. For this molecular phenomenon is
incapable of cognising itself; it is objective only. Seest thou not that
unless there be an inner, subjective ego to perceive and to reflect in
itself this succession of phenomenal states, the condition of
personality would be impossible? Or, thinkest thou that unless in the
true and inner universe the ideal flame subsisted, thou couldst cognise
the material flame? Knowest thou not that in the Divine Mind subsist
eternally and substantially all those things of which thou beholdest the
images and phenomena? It is this inner substantial noumenon which is the
Psyche. And as in nature there are infinite gradations from simple to
complex, and from coarse to fine, so is Psyche reached by innumerable
degrees, and they who have not penetrated to the inner, stop short at
the secondary consciousness, which is objective only, and imagine that
the subjective, which alone explains all, is undemonstrable. But only
Psyche can apprehend the psychical; only reason can reach the ultimate.
"By what, or by whom," say the biologists, "are these ephemeral and
unstable states which they name consciousness, apprehended? Dependent
for their production upon duration and intensity of vibration, they pass
away as quickly as they appear." If, then, they appear, it is *to
something*, otherwise their production and apparition, automatic in
itself, could not be cognised. A thing or a state doth not appear to
itself, but to the observer. For apparition and production are processes
affecting a Subject, and this Subject is Psyche.

But the vice of your biologists lieth in their pursuit of the unity in
the simple rather than in the complex. By this method they reverse and
invert the divine method of evolution, and nullify its end. They refuse
unity to the man, in order to claim it for the molecule. For the
ultimate element, indivisible and indestructible by thought, for the
simplest and lowest monad only, they claim unity, and thereby
individuality. Thus they divinise the lowest, and in their method
evolution hath no motive or reasonable end.

But, in truth, Psyche is the most complex of essences, and of this
complexity is born *responsibility*. Pure and naked simplicity

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

of being is the outermost and lowermost, touching negation. And the
dignity and excellence of the human soul lieth not in her simplicity,
but in her complexity. She is the summit of evolution, and all
generation works in order to produce her. The philosophy then, which
defies the lowest in place of the highest, ignores the true sense of its
own doctrine of evolution. For the occult law which governs evolution
brings together, in increasingly complex and manifold entities,
innumerable unities, in order that these units may, of their substantial
essence, polarise one complex essence;--complex, because evolved from,
and by the concurrence of, many simple monads;--essence, because in its
nature indivisible and indestructible. The problem of the Ego in man is
the problem of God in nature. By the same method which expounds the
last, shall the first be expounded likewise. The human ego is,
therefore, the synthesis, the divine impersonal personified. And the
higher and more excellent this personality, the profounder the
consciousness of 'the impersonal. The divine personality is not
concrete, but abstract, and the divine consciousness is not objective,
but subjective. The phenomenal personality and consciousness are to the
noumenal as water reflecting the heavens, the nether completing and
returning to the upper its own concrete reflex.

If thou desirest really to study, to comprehend, and to master the
heavenly science, thou must learn that interior and subjective method by
which only heavenly things are apprehended. Thou must shift the ground
of thine observation from the exterior to the interior; and this can be
accomplished only by means of regeneration. "I tell thee that unless
thou be born again, thou shalt not see the kingdom of God." And this
saying meaneth that unless a man be regenerate he shall not be able to
see the inner and essential, which are the only true and divine things.
The unregenerate man works always from the exterior, and hath experience
only of that which is without. But thou, if thou wouldst behold the
kingdom of God, learn to live in the essential, and fix the polaric
point of thy mind in the central and substantial.

##### PART 2 <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_181.md)

It is necessary before entering on the study of the substantial, that
thou shouldst clearly apprehend what difference there is

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

between the abstract and the concrete. Now the study of the material is
the study of the objective, and that of the substantial is the study of
the subjective. That, then, which the biologists term the subjective is
not truly so, but only the last or interior phases and conditions of
phenomena. Thus, for example, the unstable states which constitute
consciousness, are in their view subjective states. But they are
objective to the true subject, which is Psyche, because they are.
perceived by this latter, and whatever is perceived is objective. There
are in the microcosm two functions,--that of the revealer, and that of
the entity to which revelation is made. The unstable states of the
biologist, which accompany certain operations of organic force, are so
many modes whereby exterior things are revealed to the interior subject.
They are not in themselves the subject to which the revelation is made.
Do not think that thou canst attain the subjective by the same method of
study which discovers to thee the objective. The last is found by
observation from without; the first by intuition from within. The human
kosmos is a complexity of many principles, each having its own mode of
operation. And it is, therefore, on the rank and order of the principle
affected by any special operation that dependeth the nature of the
effect produced. When, therefore, for example, the biologist speaketh of
"unconscious cerebration," he should ask himself to whom or to what such
operation is unconscious, knowing that in all vital processes there is
infinite gradation. Questions of duration affect the mind; questions of
intensity affect the Psyche. All processes which occur in the objective
are relative to *something*; there is but one thing absolute, and that
is the Subject. Unconscious cerebration is, therefore, only relatively
unconscious in regard to that mode of perception which is conditioned in
and by duration. But inasmuch as any such process of cerebration is
intense, it is perceived by that perceptive centre which is conditioned
by intensity, and in relation to that centre it is not unconscious. The
interior man knoweth all processes, but many processes are not
apprehended by the mental man. This truth ought in itself to demonstrate
to thee the distinction of the human principles, and their separability
even on this plane of life. If, then, the mundane ego and the heavenly
ego be so distinct and separable, even when vitally connected, that a
nervous process conscious to the latter shall be unconscious to the
former, how much more shall separability be possible when the vital bond
is broken? If the polarities of all thy kosmos were single and identical
in direction, thou wouldst be

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

conscious of all processes, and nothing would be to thee unknown,
because thy central point of perception would be precisely the focus of
all convergent radii. But no unregenerate man is in such case. For most,
the perceptive point lies in the relative and objective man, and by no
means in the absolute and subjective. Thus the convergent radii pass
unheeded of their consciousness, because, as yet, they know not their
own spirit. They are asleep while they live, and incapable of absolute
cognition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[116:1](cws51.htm#fr_180.md) Paris, February 27,
1883. Received during the night, and written down while in trance. The
word Subject, spelt with a capital, is used herein in its metaphysical
sense, to denote the thinking and perceiving agent.    E. M.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[118:1](cws51.htm#fr_181.md) Received at the same
time and in the same manner as the foregoing, but written down on the
following day.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XLVIII: Concerning The Christian Mysteries](cws52.md)
