[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws52)  [Next](cws54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XLIX

#### CONCERNING DYING <span id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_187)

WHEN a man or an animal dies a violent death, it is not an immediate
separation that takes place between body and soul. There are many
principles to be considered, each, as it were, incased in an outer, like
a nest of Chinese boxes, or the spiral of a cone. And the lower
consciousness can be reanimated in the physical body by physical means.
This is the consciousness related to nerve-stimulation and reflex
action, as involuntary gesture and all animal functions. It is only by
degrees that the soul disengages itself, and its skirts linger long in
the physical system, and can be detained artificially.

All the component elements of the body polarise to form a unity which is
as a sun to the system. But this polarisation is fourfold, and the
central and inmost point of radiance is not objective, but subjective.
That which reflects is molecular; that which shines is non-molecular.
Force, or spirit, is non-molecular. That, therefore, is alone one and
indivisible, and it is subjective. When Psyche is one with the spirit,
she too becomes subjective. It has been said, "All things are by
infinite gradation, and Psyche is reached by innumerable degrees; so
that they who have not penetrated to the inner, stop short at the
secondary consciousness, and imagine that to be the subjective." Psyche,
so long as existence <span id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_188) lasts, is a
mirror to the spirit, she reflects, and is therefore molecular. But she
is gradually in process of *at-one-ment*; she and the spirit mutually
attract and permeate each other. She will, then, finally become
non-molecular and entirely subjective. Therefore the higher the entity
undergoing death, the easier the detachment of Psyche from the lower
consciousnesses which enshrine her. For the nearer she is to being
herself a radiant point, the nearer she is to unity and spiritual
subjectivity. The

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

saint does not fear death because his consciousness is gathered up into
Psyche, and she into her spouse. "The grave--that is the physical and
astral consciousness--cannot retain the holy Virgin." The whole object
of incarnation is to buildup a spiritual counterpart, subjective and
substantial. Now, when once the radii of the physical and astral
molecules have polarised a radiant point interior and superior to
themselves, no injury or mutilation of the physical ego will affect the
subjective ego. As a matter of fact, physical bodies are constantly
changing and interchanging their particles; portions of other bodies are
engrafted continually within them; but there is no change in the unity
or continuity of the higher consciousness. This is because the true
unity is not objective, but subjective. The true "Son of man" is "in
heaven," and it is his body and *anima bruta* only which are on earth.
Most of the mistakes of the materialists arise from understanding
localities and things when they should understand conditions and
principles. Of course a subjective entity cannot be localised in space
or duration. Potentially the soul is always eternal, although brought
into relation with the objective through time. It is therefore a mistake
to suppose that the soul is in the body in the same sense as the watery
humours of the body. The soul is in the body only in the sense in which
Arche is in the universe; that is, she is interior to it in the fourth
dimension, of which, objectively, no idea can be formed. If there were
no other consciousness inherent in man than the lower consciousness of
the cells, there could be no self-consciousness, or unity of thought.
The cerebral sense would not be reflected in knowledge, and man would
not be cognisant of his apprehensions and perceptions. Continuity of
memory and will must belong to *one*, and must be positive and absolute,
that is, when they relate to higher selfhood.

As regards the lower consciousness, it is easy to understand that in the
case of violent death, death is not instantaneous. The stroke of the
sword which divides the physical head from the physical trunk may indeed
be instantaneous, but this physical separation does not constitute
death, and this process is not really complete until the phantom is
wholly disengaged. So long as it is present, of course, any physical aid
given to the nerve-cells permits the manifestation of its forces. But
when it has wholly abandoned the body such aid would be furnished in
vain. The fluidic body is so tenuous and elastic that no mere separation
of the physical frame would suffice to destroy its integrity.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[123:1](cws53.htm#fr_187) Home, August 23,
1883. Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, Vol. ii, p. 136.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[123:2](cws53.htm#fr_188) The state of
manifested as distinguished from unmanifested being.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. L: Concerning The One Life: Being A Recapitulation](cws54)
