[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws59)  [Next](cws61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. IV

#### CONCERNING SIN AND DEATH <span id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_195.md)

AS is the outer so is the inner: He that worketh is One.

2\. As the small is, so is the great: there is one law.

3\. Nothing is small and nothing is great in the Divine Economy.

4\. If thou wouldst understand the method of the world's

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

corruption, and the condition to which sin hath reduced the work of God,

5\. Meditate upon the aspect of a corpse; and consider the method of the
putrefaction of its tissues and humours.

6\. For the secret of death is the same, whether of the outer or of the
inner.

7\. The body dieth when the central will of its system no longer bindeth
in obedience the elements of its substance.

8\. Every cell is a living entity, whether of vegetable or of animal
potency.

9\. In the healthy body every cell is polarised in subjection to the
central will, the Adonai of the physical system.

10\. Health, therefore, is order, obedience, and government.

11\. But wherever disease is, there is disunion, rebellion, and
insubordination.

12\. And the deeper the seat of the confusion the more dangerous the
malady, and the harder to quell it.

13\. That which is superficial may be more easily healed; or, if need
be, the disorderly elements may be rooted out, and the body shall be
whole and at unity again.

14\. But if the disobedient molecules corrupt each other continually,
and the perversity spread, and the rebellious tracts multiply their
elements; the whole body shall fall into dissolution, which is death.

15\. For the central will, that should dominate all the kingdom of the
body, is no longer obeyed; and every element is become its own ruler,
and hath a divergent will of its own.

1:6. So that the poles of the cells incline in divers directions; and
the binding power, which is the life of the body, is dissolved and
destroyed.

17\. And when dissolution is complete, then follow corruption and
putrefaction.

18\. Now, that which is true of the physical, is true likewise of its
prototype.

19\. The whole world is full of revolt; and every element hath a will
divergent from God.

20\. Whereas there ought to be but one will, attracting and ruling the
whole man.

21\. But there is no longer brotherhood among you; nor order, nor mutual
sustenance.

22\. Every cell is its own arbiter; and every member is become a sect.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

23\. Ye are not bound one to another: ye have confounded your offices
and abandoned your functions.

24\. Ye have reversed the direction of your magnetic currents; ye are
fallen into confusion, and have given place to the spirit of misrule.

25\. Your wills are many and diverse; and every one of you is an
anarchy.

26\. A house that is divided against itself, falleth.

27\. O wretched man; who shall deliver you from this body of death?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[135:1](cws59.htm#fr_194.md) Paris. Received
October 19, 1878. Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, Vol. i, pp.
282, 283.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[135:2](cws60.htm#fr_195.md) Paris, October 3,
1878. Received in sleep. Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, Vol.
i, p. 282.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. V: Concerning The ''Great Work,'' The Redemption, And The
Share Of Christ Jesus Therein](cws61.md)
