<span class="small">[Sacred-Texts Main Index](../../index)  [Northern
European Index](../index)  [Graal Index](index) 
[Previous](branch34) </span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch XXXV

TITLE I.

Herewithal is the story silent of Briant and talketh of Perceval, that
the ship beareth away right swiftly; but so long hath he held battle
therein that every one hath he slain of them that were in the ship save
only the pilot that steereth her, for him hath he in covenant that he
will believe in God and renounce his evil Law. Perceval is far from land
so that he seeth nought but sea only, and the ship speedeth onward, and
God guideth him, as one that believeth in Him and loveth Him and serveth
Him of a good heart. The ship ran on by night and by day as it pleased
God, until that they saw a castle and an island of the sea. He asked his
pilot if he knew what castle it was.

"Certes," saith he, "Not I, for so far have we run that I know not
neither the sea nor the stars."

They come nigh the castle, and saw four that sounded bells at the four
corners of the town, right sweetly, and they that sounded them were clad
in white garments. They are come thither.

II\.

So soon as the ship had taken haven under the castle, the sea
withdraweth itself back, so that the ship is left on dry land. None were
therein save Perceval, his horse, and the pilot. They issued forth of
the ship and went by the side of the sea toward the castle, and therein
were the fairest halls and the fairest mansions that any might see ever.
He Looketh underneath a tree that was tall and broad and seeth the
fairest fountain and the clearest that any may devise, and it was all
surrounded of rich pillars, and the gravel thereof seemed to be gold and
precious stones. Above this fountain were two men sitting, their beards
and hair whiter than driven snow, albeit they seemed young of visage. So
soon as they saw Perceval they dressed them to meet him, and bowed down
and worshipped the shield that he bare at his neck, and kissed the cross
and then the boss wherein were the hallows.

"Sir," say they, "Marvel not of this that we do, for well knew we the
knight that bare this shield tofore you. Many a time we saw him or ever
God were crucified."

Perceval marvelleth much of this that they say, for they talk of a time
that is long agone.

III\.

"Lords, know ye then how he was named?"

Say they, "Joseph of Abarimacie, but no cross was there on the shield
before the death of Jesus Christ. But he had it set thereon after the
crucifixion of Jesus Christ for the sake of the Saviour that he loved so
well."

Perceval took off the shield from his neck, and one of the worshipful
men setteth upon it as it were a posy of herbs that was blooming with
the fairest flowers in the world. Perceval looketh beyond the fountain
and seeth in a right fair place a round vessel like as it were ivory,
and it was so large that there was a knight within, all armed. He
looketh thereinto and seeth the knight, and speaketh unto him many
times, but never the more willeth the knight to answer him. Perceval
looketh at him in wonderment, and cometh back to the good men and asketh
them who is this knight, and they tell him that he may know not as yet.
They lead him to a great hall and bear his shield before him, whereof
they make right great joy, and show thereunto great worship. He seeth
the hall right rich, for hall so rich and so fair had he seen never. It
was hung about with right rich cloths of silk, and in the midst of the
hall was imaged the Saviour of the World so as He is in His majesty,
with the apostles about Him, and within were great galleries that were
full of folk and seemed to be of great holiness, and so were they, for
had they not been good men they might not there have remained.

IV\.

"Sir," say the two Masters to Perceval, "This house that you see here so
rich, is the hall royal."

"By my faith," saith Perceval, "So ought it well to be, for never saw I
none so much of worth."

He Looketh all around, and seeth the richest tables of gold and ivory
that he saw ever. One of the Masters clappeth his hands thrice, and
three and thirty men come into the hall all in a company. They were clad
in white garments, and not one of them but had a red cross in the midst
of his breast, and they seemed to be all of an age. As soon as they
enter into the hall they do worship to God Our Lord and set out their
cups. Then went they to wash at a great laver of gold, and then went to
sit at the tables. The Masters made Perceval sit at the most
master-table with themselves. They were served thereat right gloriously,
and Perceval looked about him more gladlier than he ate.

V.

And while he was thus looking, he seeth a chain of gold come down above
him loaded with precious stones, and in the midst thereof was a crown of
gold. The chain descended a great length and held on to nought save to
the will of Our Lord only. As soon as the Masters saw it descending they
opened a great wide pit that was in the midst of the hall, so that one
could see the hole all openly. As soon as the entrance of this pit was
discovered, there issued thence the greatest cry and most dolorous that
any heard ever, and when the worshipful men hear it, they stretched out
their hands towards Our Lord and all began to weep. Perceval heareth
this dolour, and marvelleth much what it may be. He seeth that the chain
of gold descendeth thither and is there stayed until they have well-nigh
eaten, and then draweth itself again into the air and so goeth again
aloft. But Perceval knoweth not what became thereof, and the Master
covereth the pit again, that was right grisly to see, and pitiful to
hear were the voices that issued therefrom.

VI\.

The Good Men rose from the tables when they had eaten, and gave thanks
right sweetly to Our Lord; and then returned thither whence they had
come.

"Sir," saith the Master to Perceval, "The chain of gold that you have
seen is right precious and the crown of gold likewise. But never may you
issue forth from hence save you promise to return so soon as you shall
see the ship and the sail crossed of a red cross; otherwise may you not
depart hence."

"Tell me," saith he, "of the chain of gold and the crown, what it may
be?"

"We will tell you not," saith one of the Masters, "Save you promise that
which I tell you."

"Certes, Sir," saith Perceval, "I promise you faithfully, that so soon
as I shall have done that I have to do for my lady my mother and one
other, that I will return hither, so I be on live and I see your ship so
marked as you say."

"Yea, be you faithful to the end herein, and you shall have the crown of
gold upon your head so soon as you return, and so shall you be seated in
the throne, and shall be king of an island that is near to this, right
plenteous of all things good, for nought is there in the world that is
there lacking that is needful for man's body. King Hermit was the king
thereof that thus hath garnished it, and for that he approved himself so
well in this kingdom, and that they who are in the island consented
thereto, is he chosen to be king of a greater realm. Now they desire
that another worshipful man be sent them for king, that shall do for
them as much good as did he, but take you good heed, sith that you will
be king therein, that the island be well garnished; for, and you garnish
it not well, you will be put into the Poverty- stricken Island, the
crying whereof you have but now since heard, and the crown thereof will
again be reft from you. For they that have been kings of the Plenteous
Island and have not well approved them, are among the folk that you saw
in the Poverty- stricken Island, lacking in all things good. And so I
tell you that King Hermit, whom you will succeed, hath sent thither a
great part of his folk. There are the heads sealed in silver, and the
heads sealed in lead, and the bodies whereunto these heads belonged; I
tell you that you must make come thither the head both of the King and
of the Queen. But of the other I tell you that they are in the
Poverty-stricken Island. But we know not whether they shall ever issue
forth thence."

VII\.

"Sir," saith Perceval, "Tell me of the knight that is all armed in the
ivory vessel, who he is, and what is the name of this castle?"

"You may not know," saith the Master, "until your return. But tell me
tidings of the most Holy Graal, that you reconquered, is it still in the
holy chapel that was King Fisherman's?"

"Yea, Sir," saith Perceval, "And the sword wherewith S. John was
beheaded, and other hallows in great plenty."

"I saw the Graal," saith the Master, "or ever Joseph, that was uncle to
King Fisherman, collected therein the blood or Jesus Christ. Know that
well am I acquainted with all your lineage, and of what folk you were
born. For your good knighthood and for your good cleanness and for your
good valour came you in hither, for such was Our Lord's will, and take
heed that you be ready when place shall be, and time shall come, and you
shall see the ship apparelled."

"Sir," saith Perceval, "Most willingly shall I return, nor never would I
have sought to depart but for my lady my mother, and for my sister, for
never have I seen no place that so much hath pleased me."

He was right well harboured the night within, and in the morning, or
ever he departed, heard a holy mass in a holy chapel the fairest that he
had seen ever. The Master cometh to him after the mass and bringeth him
a shield as white as snow. Afterwards, he saith, "You will leave me your
shield within for token of your coming and will bear this."

"Sir," saith Perceval, "I will do your pleasure."

He hath taken leave, and so departeth from the rich mansion, and findeth
the ship all apparelled, and heareth sound the bells at his forth-going
the same as at his coming. He entereth into the ship and the sail is
set. He leaveth the land far behind, and the pilot steereth the ship and
Our Lord God guideth and leadeth him. The ship runneth a great speed,
for far enough had she to run, but God made her speed as He would, for
He knew the passing great goodness and worth of the knight that was
within.

VIII\.

God hath guided and led the ship by day and by night until that she
arrived at an island where was a castle right ancient, but it seemed not
to be over-rich, rather it showed as had it been of great lordship in
days of yore. They cast anchor, and Perceval is come toward the castle
and entereth in all armed. He seeth the castle large, and the dwelling
chambers fallen down and the house-place roofless, and he seeth a lady
sitting before the steps of an old hall. She rose up as soon as she saw
him, but she was right poorly clad. It seemed well by her body and her
cheer and her bearing that she was a gentlewoman, and he seeth that two
damsels come with her that are young of age and are as poorly clad as is
the lady.

"Sir," saith she to Perceval, "Welcome may you be. No knight have I seen
enter this castle of a long time."

"Lady," saith Perceval, "God grant you joy and honour!"

"Sir," saith she, "Need have we thereof, for none scarce have I had this
long while past."

She leadeth him into a great ancient hall that was right poorly
garnished.

"Sir," saith she, "Here will you harbour you the night, and you would
take in good part that we may do and you knew the plight of this
castle."

She maketh him be unarmed of a servant that was there within, and the
damsels come before him and serve him right sweetly. The lady bringeth
him a mantle to do on.

"Sir," saith she, "Within are no better garments wherewith to show you
honour than this."

Perceval looketh on the damsels and hath great pity of them, for so well
shapen were they of limb and body as that nature might not have better
fashioned them, and all the beauty that may be in woman's body was in
them, and all the sweetness and simpleness.

IX\.

"Lady," saith Perceval, "Is this castle, then, not yours?"

"Sir," saith she, "So much is all that remaineth unto me of all my land,
and you see there my daughters of whom is it right sore pity, for nought
have they but what you see, albeit gentlewomen are they and of high
lineage, but their kinsfolk are too far away, and a knight that is right
cruel hath reft us of our land sithence that my lord was dead, and
holdeth a son of mine in his prison, whereof I am right sorrowful, for
he is one of the comeliest knights in the world. He had not been knight
more than four years when he took him, and now may I aid neither myself
nor other, but I have heard tell that there is a knight in the land of
Wales that was the son of Alain li Gros of the Valleys of Camelot, and
he is the Best Knight in the World, and this Alain was brother of
Calobrutus, whose wife was I, and of whom I had my son and these two
daughters. This know I well, that and the Good Knight that is so near
akin to them were by any adventure to come into this island, I should
have my son again, and my daughters that are disherited would have their
lands again freely, and so should I be brought out of sore pain and
poverty. I am of another lineage that is full far away, for King Ban of
Benoic that is dead was mine uncle, but he hath a son that is a right
good knight as I have been told, so that and one of these two should
come nigh me in any of these islands right joyous should I be thereof."

X.

Perceval heareth that the two damsels are his uncle's daughters, and
hath great pity thereof.

"Lady," saith he, "How is he named that is in prison?"

"Sir," saith she, "Galobruns, and he that holdeth him in prison is named
Gohaz of the Castle of the Whale."

"Is his castle near this, Lady?" saith he.

"Sir, there is but an arm of the sea to cross, and in all these islands
of the sea is there none that hath any puissance but he only, and so
assured is he that no dread hath he of any. For none that is in this
land durst offend against him. Sir, one thing hath he bid me do, whereof
I am sore grieved, that and I send him not one of my daughters, he hath
sworn his oath that he will reave me of my castle."

"Lady," saith Perceval, "An oath is not always kept. To the two damsels,
please God, shall he do no shame, and right heavy am I of that he hath
done already, for they were daughters of mine uncle. Alain li Gros was
my father and Galobrutus my uncle, and many another good man that now is
dead."

XI\.

When the damsels heard this, they kneeled down before him, and began to
weep for joy and kiss his hands, and pray him for God's sake have mercy
on them and on their brother. And he saith that he will not depart from
their land until he hath done all he may. He remaineth the night in the
castle and his mariner likewise. The lady made great joy of Perceval,
and did him all the honour she might. When the morrow came they showed
him the land of the King that had reft them of their land, but the lady
could not tell him where her son was in prison. He departeth and cometh
back to his ship when he hath taken leave of the lady and the damsels,
and right glad was he to know that the damsels were so nigh to him of
kin. So he prayeth God grant him that he may be able to give them back
their land and bring them out of the poverty wherein they are. He roweth
until that he is come under a rock, wherein was a cave at top round and
narrow and secure like as it were a little house. Perceval looketh on
that side, and seeth a man sitting within. He maketh the ship draw nigh
the rock, then looketh and seeth the cutting of a way that went upwards
through the rock. He is come forth of the ship and goeth up the little
path until he cometh into the little house. He findeth within one of the
comeliest knights in the world. He had a ring at his feet and a collar
on his neck with a chain whereof the other end was fixed by a staple
into a great ledge of the rock. He rose up over against Perceval as soon
as he saw him.

"Sir Knight," saith Perceval, "You are well made fast."

"Sir, that irketh me," saith the knight, "Better should I like myself
elsewhere than here."

"You would be right," saith Perceval, "For you are in right evil plight
in the midst of this sea. Have you aught within to eat or to drink?"

"Sir," saith he, "The daughter of the Sick Knight that dwelleth in the
island hard by, sendeth me every day in a boat as much meat as I may
eat, for she hath great pity of me. The King that hath imprisoned me
here hath reft her castles like as he hath those of my lady my mother."

"May none remove you hence?"

"Sir, in no wise, save he that set me here, for he keepeth with him the
key of the lock, and he told me when he departed hence that never more
should I issue forth."

"By my head," saith Perceval, "but you shall! And you were the son of
Galobrutus, you were the son of mine uncle," saith Perceval, "and I of
yours, so that it would be a reproach to me for evermore and I left you
in this prison."

XII\.

When Galobruns heareth that he is his uncle's son, great joy hath he
thereof. He would have fallen at his feet, but Perceval would not, and
said to him, "Now be well assured, for I will seek your deliverance."

He cometh down from the rock, and so entereth the ship and roweth of a
long space. He looketh before him and seeth a right rich island and a
right plenteous, and on the other side he seeth in a little islet a
knight that is mounted up in a tall tree that was right broad with many
boughs. There was a damsel with him, that had climbed up also for dread
of a serpent, great and evil- favoured that had issued from a hole in a
mountain. The damsel seeth Perceval's ship coming, and crieth out to
him.

"Ha, Sir," saith she, "Come to help this King that is up above, and me
that am a damsel!"

"Whereof are you afeard, damsel?" saith Perceval.

"Of a great serpent, Sir," saith she, "that hath made us climb up,
whereof ought I not to be sorry, for this King hath carried me off from
my father's house, and would have done me shame of my body and this
serpent had not run upon him."

"And what is the King's name, damsel?" saith Perceval.

"Sir, he is called Gohaz of the Castle of the Whale. This great land is
his own that is so plenteous, and other lands enow that he hath reft of
my father and of other."

The King had great shame of this that the damsel told him, and made
answer never a word. Perceval understandeth that it was he that held his
cousin in prison, and is issued from the ship forthwith, sword drawn.
The serpent seeth him, and cometh toward him, jaws yawning, and casteth
forth fire and flame in great plenty. Perceval thrusteth his sword right
through the gullet.

"Now may you come down," saith he to the King.

"Sir," saith he, "The key of a chain wherewith a certain knight is bound
hath fallen, and the serpent seized it."

Perceval rendeth open the throat and findeth the key forthwith, all
red-hot with the fire of the serpent. The King cometh down, that hath no
dread of aught, but cometh, rather, as he ought, to thank Perceval of
the goodness he had done him, and Perceval seizeth him between his arms
and beareth him away to the ship.

XIII\.

"Sir Knight," saith Gohaz, "Take heed what you do, for I am King of this
land."

"Therefore," saith Perceval, "I do it. For, had it been another I should
do it not."

"Ha, Sir," saith the damsel, "Leave me not here to get forth as I may,
but help me until that I shall be in the house of my father, the Sick
Knight, that is sore grieved on my account."

Perceval understandeth that it is the damsel of whom Galobruns spake
such praise. He goeth to bring her down from the tree, then bringeth her
into the ship, and so goeth back toward the rock where his cousin was.

"Sir Knight," saith Gohaz, "Where will you put me?"

"I will put you," saith he, "as an enemy, there, where you have put the
son of mine uncle in prison; so shall I avenge me of you, and he also at
his will."

When the King heard this, he was glad thereof not a whit, and the damsel
was loath not a whit, whom he had thus disherited. They row until they
come to the rock. Perceval issueth forth of the ship, and bringeth Gohaz
up maugre his head. Galobruns seeth him coming and maketh great joy
thereof, and Perceval saith to him: "Behold here your mortal enemy! Now
do your will of him!"

He taketh the key and so looseth him of the irons wherein he was
imprisoned.

XIV\.

"Galobruns," saith Perceval, "Now may you do your pleasure of your
enemy?"

"Sir," saith he, "Right gladly!"

He maketh fast the irons on his feet that he had upon his own, and
afterward setteth the collar on his neck.

"Now let him be here," saith he, "in such sort and in such prison as he
put me; for well I know that he will be succoured of none."

After that, he flingeth the key into the sea as far as he might, and so
seemed it to Galobruns that he well avenged himself in such wise, and
better than if he had killed him. Perceval alloweth him everything
therein at his will. They enter into the ship and leave Gohaz all
sorrowing on the rock, that never thereafter are nor drank. And Perceval
bringeth his cousin and the damsel, and they row until that they come
into their land, and Perceval maketh send for all the folk of King Gohaz
and maketh all the more powerful do sure homage to Galobruns and his
sisters in such sort that the land was all at their will. He sojourned
there so long as it pleased him, and then departed and took leave of the
damsel and Galobruns, that thanked him much for the lands that he had
again through him.

XV\.

Perceval hath rowed until that he is come nigh a castle that was burning
fiercely with a great flame, and seeth a hermitage upon the sea hard by.
He seeth the hermit at the door of the chapel, and asketh him what the
castle is that hath caught fire thus.

"Sir," saith the hermit, "I will tell you. Joseus, the son of King
Pelles, slew his mother there. Never sithence hath the castle stinted of
burning, and I tell you that of this castle and one other will be
kindled the fire that shall burn up the world and put it to an end."

Perceval marvelleth much, and knew well that it was the castle of King
Hermit his uncle. He departeth thence in great haste, and passeth three
kingdoms and saileth by the wastes and deserts on one side and the other
of the sea, for the ship ran somewhat a-nigh the land. He looketh and
seeth on an island twelve hermits sitting on the seashore. The sea was
calm and untroubled, and he made cast the anchor so as to keep the ship
steady. Then he saluteth the hermits, and they all bow down to him in
answer. He asketh them where have they their repair, and they tell him
that they have not far away twelve chapels and twelve houses that
surround a grave-yard wherein lie twelve dead knights that we keep watch
over. They were all brothers-german, and right worshipful men, and none
thereof lived more than twelve years knight save one only, and none of
them was there but won much land and broad kingdoms from the
misbelievers, and they all died in arms; and the name of the eldest was
Alain li Gros, and he came into this country from the Valleys of Camelot
to avenge his brother Alibans of the Waste City that the Giant King had
slain, and he took vengeance on him thereof, but he died thereafter of a
wound that the Giant had given him."

"Sir," saith one of the hermits, "I was at his death, but nought was
there he so longed after as a son of his, and he said that his name was
Perceval. He was the last of the brothers that died."

XVI\.

When Perceval heard this he had pity thereof, and issued forth of the
ship and came to land, and his mariner with him. He prayed the hermits
that they would lead him to the graveyard where the knights lay, and
gladly did they so. Perceval is come thither and seeth the coffins right
rich and fair, and the chapels full fairly dight, and every coffin lay
over against the altar in each chapel.

"Lords, which coffin is that of the Lord of Camelot?"

"This, the highest," say the hermits, "and the most rich, for that he
was eldest of all the brethren."

Perceval kneeleth down before it, then embraceth the coffin and prayeth
right sweetly for the soul of his father, and in like manner he went to
all the other coffins. He harboured the night with the hermits, and told
them that Alain li Gros was his father and all the other his uncles.
Right joyous were the hermits for that he was come thither, and the
morrow, or ever he departed, he heard mass in the chapel of his father
and in the others where he might. He entered into the ship and sped full
swift, and so far hath the ship run that he draweth nigh the islands of
Great Britain. He arriveth at the head of a forest under the Red Tower
whereof he had slain the lord, there where Meliot delivered Messire
Gawain. He is issued forth of the ship and leadeth forth his horse and
is armed, and commendeth the pilot to God. He mounteth on his destrier,
all armed, and goeth amidst the land that was well-nigh void of people,
for he himself had slain the greater part thereof, albeit he knew it
not. He rideth so long, right amidst the country, that he cometh toward
evensong to a hold that was in a great forest, and he bethought him that
he would go into the hermitage, and he cometh straight into the hold,
and seeth a knight lying in the entrance of the gate on a straw
mattress, and a damsel sate at the bed's head, of passing great beauty,
and held his head on her lap.

XVII\.

The knight reviled her from time to time, and said that he would make
cut of her head and he had not that he desired to have, for that he was
sick. Perceval looked at the lady that held him and served him full
sweetly, and deemed her to be a good lady and a loyal. The Sick Knight
called to Perceval.

"Sir," saith he, "Are you come in hither to harbour?"

"Sir," saith Perceval, "So please you, I will harbour here."

"Then blame me not," saith the knight, "of that you shall see me do unto
my wife."

"Sir," saith Perceval, "Sith that she is yours, you have a right to do
your pleasure, but in all things ought one to be heedful on one's way."

The knight made him be carried back into the dwelling, for that he had
been in the air as long as pleased him, and commanded his wife that she
do much honour to the knight that is come to lodge within.

"But take heed," saith he, "that you be not seen at the table, but eat,
as you are wont, at the squire's table, for, until such time as I have
the golden cup I desire, I will not forego my despite against you."

XVIII\.

Perceval unarmed him. The lady had brought him a surcoat of scarlet for
him to do on, and he asked her wherefore her lord reviled her and
rebuked her in such sort, and she told him all the story how Lancelot
had married her to him, and how her lord ever sithence had dishonoured
her.

"Sir," saith she, "Now hath he fallen into misease, sithence then, and
he hath a brother as sick as he is, and therefore hath Gohaz of the
Castle of the Whale reft him of his land, whereof is he right sorry, and
my lord hath never been heal since that he heard thereof. And well you
know that such folk wax wroth of a little, and are overjoyed when they
have a little thing that pleaseth them, for they live always in desire
of somewhat. My lord hath heard tell of a cup of gold that a damsel
beareth, that is right rich and of greater worth than aught he hath seen
this long time, and a knight goeth with the damsel that beareth the cup,
and saith that none may have it save he be the Best Knight in the World.
My lord hath told me many times, sithence he heard tidings thereof, that
never shall the despite he hath toward me be forgone, until that he
shall have the cup. But he is so angry withal with his brother that hath
lost his land, that I aby it right dear, for I do all his will and yet
may I have no fair treatment of him. Howbeit, for no ill that he may do,
nor no churlishness that he may say, will I be against him in nought
that he hath set his mind on. For I would have him, and I had him,
blessed be Lancelot through whom it was so. As much as I loved him in
health, so much love I him in his sickness, and more yet, for I desire
to deserve that God shall bring him to a better mind."

XIX\.

"Lady," saith Perceval, "Great praise ought you to have of this that you
say; but you may well tell him of a truth that the sick King his brother
hath all his land freely and his daughter, for I was at the reconquering
thereof, and know the knight well that gave it back unto him. But of the
golden cup can I give you no witting"

"Sir," saith she, "The damsel is to bear it to an assembly of knights
that is to be held hard by this, under the White Tower. There hath she
to give it to the best knight, and him that shall do best at the
assembly, and the knight that followeth the damsel is bound to carry it
whither he that shall win it may command, and if he would fain it should
be given to another rather than to himself."

"Lady," saith Perceval, "Well meseemeth that he who shall win the cup by
prize of arms will be right courteous and he send it to you, and God
grant that he that hath it may do you such bounty as you desire."

"Sir," saith she, "Methinketh well, so Lancelot were there, either he or
Messire Gawain, that, and they won it, so they remembered them of me,
and knew how needful it were to me, they would promise me the cup."

"Lady," saith Perceval, "By one of these Ywain ought you well to have
it, for greater prize now long since have they won."

She goeth to her lord and saith to him: "Sir," saith she, "Now may you
be more joyous than is your wont, for that your brother hath his land
again all quit. For the knight that is within was at the reconquering."

The Sick Knight heard her and had great joy thereof.

"Go!" saith he to his wife, "and do great honour to the knight, but take
heed you sit not otherwise than you are wont."

"Sir," saith she, "I will not."

XX\.

The damsel maketh Perceval sit at meat. When he had washen, he thought
that the lady should have come to sit beside him, but she would not
disobey her lord's commandment. When Perceval was set at the table and
he had been served of the first meats, thereupon the lady went to sit
with the squires. Perceval was much shamed that she should sit below,
but he was not minded to speak, for she had told him somewhat of her
lord's manner. Howbeit, he lay the night in the hold, and, on the morrow
when he had taken leave, he departed, and bethought him in his courage
that the knight would do good chivalry and great aims that should do
this sick knight his desire as concerning the cup, in such sort as that
his wife should be freed of the annoy that she is in, for that all
knights that knew thereof ought to have pity of her. Perceval goeth his
way as he that hath great desire to accomplish that he hath to do, and
to see the token of his going again to the castle where the chain of
gold appeared to him, for never yet saw he dwelling that pleased him so
much. He hath ridden so far that he is come into the joyless forest of
the Black Hermit, that is so loathly and horrible that no leaves nor
greenery are there by winter nor by summer, nor was song of bird never
heard therein, but all the land is gruesome and burnt, and wide are the
cracks therein. He hath scarce gone thereinto or ever he hath overtaken
the Damsel of the Car, that made full great joy of him.

"Sir," saith she, "Bald was I the first time I saw you; now may you see
that I have my hair."

"Certes, yea!" saith Perceval, "And, as methinketh, hair passing
beautiful."

"Sir," saith she, "I was wont to carry my arm at my neck in a scarf of
gold and silk, for that I thought the service I did you in the hostel of
King Fisherman your uncle. had been ill bestowed; but now well I see
that it was not; wherefore now carry I the one arm in the same manner as
the other; and the damsel that wont to go a-foot now goeth a-horseback;
and blessed be you that have so approved you in goodness by the good
manner of your heart, and by your likeness to the first of your lineage,
whom you resemble in all good conditions. Sir," saith she, "I durst not
come nigh the castle, for there be archers there that shoot so sore that
none may endure their strokes, and hereof will they stint not, they say,
until such time as you be come thither. But well know I wherefore they
will cease then, for they will come to shut you up within to slay and to
destroy. Natheless all they that are within will have no power, nor will
they do you evil, save only the lord of the castle; but he will do
battle against you right gladly."

XXI\.

Perceval goeth toward the castle of the Black Hermit, and the Damsel of
the Car after. The archers draw and shoot stoutly. Perceval goeth
forward a great gallop, but they know him not on account of the white
shield. They think rather that it is one of the other knights, and they
lodge many arrows in his shield. He came nigh a drawbridge over a moat
right broad and foul and horrible, and the bridge was lowered so soon as
he came, and all the archers left of shooting. Then knew they well that
it was Perceval who came. The door was opened to receive him, for they
of the gate and they of the castle within thought to have power to slay
him. But so soon as they saw him, they lost their will thereof and were
all amared and without strength, and said that they would set this
business on their lord that was strong enough and puissant enough to
slay one man. Perceval entered all armed into a great hall, and found it
filled all around with a great throng of folk that was right foul to
look on. He that was called the Black Hermit was full tall and Seemed to
be of noble lordship, and he was in the midst of the hall, all armed.

"Sir," say his men, "And you have not defence of yourself, never no
counsel nor aid may you have of us!"

XXII\.

"We are yours to guard, to protect, and oftentimes have we defended you;
now defend us in this sore need."

The Black Hermit sate upon a tall black horse, and was right richly
armed. So soon as Perceval espieth him, he cometh with such a rush
against him that he maketh all the hall resound, and the Black Hermit
cometh in like sort. They mell together with such force that the Black
Hermit breaketh his spear upon Perceval, but Perceval smiteth him so
passing stoutly on the left side upon the shield, that he beareth him to
the ground beside his horse, so that in the fall he made he to-frushed
two of the great ribs in the overturn. And when they that were therein
saw him fall, they opened the trap-door of a great pit that was in the
midst of the hall. So soon as they had opened it, the foulest stench
that any smelt ever issued thereout. They take their lord and cast him
into this abysm and this filth. After that, they come to Perceval, and
so yield the castle and put them at his mercy in everything. Thereupon,
behold you, the Damsel of the Car that cometh. They deliver up to her
the heads sealed in gold, both the head of the King and of the Queen,
and she departeth forthwith, for well knoweth she that Perceval will
achieve that he hath to do without her. She departeth from the castle
and goeth the speediest she may toward the Valleys of Camelot. And all
they of the castle that had been the Black Hermit's are obedient to
Perceval to do his will, and they have him in covenant that never more
shall knights be harassed there in such sort as they had been
theretofore, but rather that they should receive gladly any knights that
should pass that way, like as in other places. Perceval departed from
the castle rejoicing for that he had drawn them to the believe of Our
Lord, and every day was His service done therein in holy wise, like as
it is done in other places.

XXIII\.

Hereof ought the good knight to be loved that by the goodness of his
heart and the loyalty of his knighthood hath achieved all the emprises
he undertook, without reproach and without blame. Perceval hath ridden
until he hath overtaken the damsel that carried the rich cup of gold and
the knight that was along with her. Perceval saluteth him, and the
knight maketh answer, may he be blessed of God and of His sweet Mother.

"Fair Sir," saith Perceval, "Is this damsel of your company?"

Saith the knight, "Rather am I of hers. But we are going to an assembly
of knights that is to be under the White Tower to the intent to prove
which knight is most worth, and to him that shall have the prize of the
assembly shall be delivered this golden cup."

"By my head," saith Perceval, "That will be fair to see!"

He departeth from the knight and the damsel, and goeth his way a great
pace amidst the meadows under the White Tower, whither the knights were
coming from all parts, and many of them were already armed to issue
forth. So soon as it was known that the damsel with the cup was come
thither, the fellowships assembled on all sides, and great was the
clashing of arms. Perceval hurleth into the assembly in such sort that
many a knight he smiteth down and overthroweth at his coming, and he
giveth so many blows and so many receiveth that all they that behold
marvel much how he may abide. The assembly lasted until evensong, and
when it came to an end the damsel came to the knights and prayed and
required that they would declare to her by right judgment of arms which
had done the best. The more part said that he of the white shield had
surpassed them all in arms, and all agreed thereto. The damsel was right
glad, for well she knew that they spake truth. She cometh to Perceval;
"Sir," saith she, "I present you this cup of gold for your good
chivalry, and therefore is it meet and right you should know whence the
cup cometh. The elder Damsel of the Tent where the evil custom was wont
to be, sent it to Messire Gawain, and Messire Gawain made much joy
thereof. And it came to pass on such wise that Brundans, the son of the
sister of Briant of the Isles, slew Meliot of Logres, the most courteous
knight and the most valiant that was in the realm of Logres, and thereof
was Messire Gawain so sorrowful that he knew not how to contain himself.
For Meliot had twice rescued him from death, and King Arthur once. He
was liegeman of Messire Gawain. Wherefore he prayeth and beseecheth you
on his behalf that you receive not the cup save you undertake to avenge
him. For he was loved of all the court, albeit he had haunted it but
little. Brundans slew him in treason when Meliot was unawares of him."

"Damsel," saith Perceval, "Were there no cup at all, yet natheless
should I be fain to do the will of Messire Gawain, for never might I
love the man that had deserved his hatred." He taketh the cup in his
hand. "Damsel," saith he, "I thank you much hereof, and God grant I may
reward you for the same."

"Sir," saith she, "Brundans is a right proud knight, and beareth a
shield party of vert and argent. He is minded never to change his
cognisance, for that his father bore the same."

Perceval called the knight that was of the damsel's company. "I beseech
you," saith he, "of guerdon and of service, that you bear this cup for
me to the hold of the Sick Knight, and tell his wife that the Knight of
the White Shield that was harboured there within hath sent it her by
you."

"Sir," saith the knight, "This will I do gladly to fulfil your will."

He taketh the cup to furnish out the conditions of the message, and so
departeth forthwith.

XXIV\.

Perceval lay the night in the castle of the White Tower, and departed
thence on the morrow as he that would fain do somewhat whereof he might
deserve well of Messire Gawain. Many a time had he heard tell of Meliot
of Logres and of his chivalry and of his great valour. He was entered
into a forest, and had heard mass of a hermit, from whom he had
departed. He came to the Castle Perilous that was hard by there where
Meliot lay sick, lay wounded, when Lancelot brought him the sword and
the cloth wherewith he touched his wounds. He entered into the castle
and alighted. The damsel of the castle, that made great dole, came to
meet Perceval. "Damsel," saith he, "Wherefore are you so sorrowful?"

"Sir," saith she, "For a knight that I tended and healed herewithin,
whom Brundans hath killed in treason, and God thereof grant us vengeance
yet, for so courteous knight saw I never."

While she was speaking in this manner, forthwith behold you a damsel
that cometh.

"Ha, Sir," saith she to Perceval, "Mount you again and come to aid us,
for none other knight find I in this land nor in this forest but only
you all alone!"

"What need have you of my aid?" saith Perceval.

"A knight is carrying off my lady by force, that was going to the court
of King Arthur."

"Who is your lady?" saith Perceval.

"Sir, she is the younger Damsel of the Tent where Messire Gawain
overthrew the evil customs. For God's sake, hasten you, for he revileth
her sore for her love of the King and of Messire Gawain."

Perceval remounteth forthwith and issueth forth of the castle on the
spur. The damsel bringeth him on as fast as the knight can go. They had
not ridden far before they came a-nigh, and Perceval heard the damsel
crying aloud for mercy, and the knight said that mercy upon her he would
not have, and so smote her on the head and neck with the fiat of his
sword.

XXV\.

Perceval espied the knight and saw that the cognisance of his shield was
such as that which had been set forth to him.

"Sir," saith he, "Too churlishly are you entreating this damsel! What
wrong hath she done you?"

"What is it to you of me and of her?"

"I say it" saith Perceval, "for that no knight ought to do churlishly to
damsel."

"He will not stint for you yet!" saith Brundans. He raiseth his sword
and dealeth the damsel a buffet with the fiat so passing heavy that it
maketh her stoop withal so that the blood rayeth out at mouth and nose.

"By my head," saith Perceval, "On this buffet I defy thee, for the death
of Meliot and for the shame you have done this damsel."

"Neither you nor none other may brag that you have heart to attack me,
but you shall aby it right dear!"

"That shall you see presently," saith Perceval and so draweth back the
better to let drive at him, and moveth towards him as fast as his horse
may run, and smiteth him so passing sore that he pierceth his shield and
bursteth his habergeon and then thrusteth his spear into his body with
such force that he overthroweth him all in a heap, him and his horse, in
such sort that he breaketh both legs in the fall.

Then he alighteth over him, lowereth his coif, unlaceth the ventail, and
smiteth off his head.

"Damsel," saith he, "Take it, I present it to you. And, sith that you
are going to King Arthur's court, I pray and beseech you that you carry
it thither and so salute him first for me, and tell Messire Gawain and
Lancelot that this is the last present I look ever to make them, for I
think never to see them more. Howbeit, wheresoever I may be, I shall be
their well-wisher, nor may I never withdraw me of my love, and I would
fain I might make them the same present of the heads of all their
enemies, but that I may do nought against God's will."

The damsel giveth him thanks for that he hath delivered her from the
hands of the knight, and saith that she shall praise him much thereof to
the King and Messire Gawain. She goeth her way and carrieth off the
head, and Perceval biddeth her to God. He returned back to Castle
Perilous, and the damsel made great joy thereof when she understood that
he had slain Brundans. Perceval lay there that night, and departed on
the morrow after that he had heard mass. When he came forth of the
castle he met the knight by whom he had sent the cup to the Sick
Knight's wife. Perceval asketh how it is with him.

"Sir, saith he, "I have carried out your message right well, for never
was a thing received with such good will. The Sick Knight hath forgone
his grudge against his wife. She eateth at his table, and the household
do her commandment."

"This liketh me right well," saith Perceval, "and I thank you of doing
this errand."

"Sir," saith the knight, "No thing is there I would not do for you, for
that you made my brother Knight Hardy there where you first saw him
Knight Coward."

"Sir," saith Perceval, "Good knight was your brother and a right good
end he made, but a little it forthinketh me that he might have still
been living had he abided in his cowardize."

"Sir," saith he, "Better is he dead, sith that he died with honour, than
that he should live with shame. Yet glad was I not of his death, for a
hardy knight he was, and yet more would have been, had he lived longer."

XXVI\.

Perceval departeth from the knight and commendeth him to God. He hath
wandered so far one day and another that he is returned to his own most
holy castle, and findeth therein his mother and his sister that the
Damsel of the Car had brought thither. The Widow Lady had made bear
thither the body that lay in the coffin before the castle of Camelot in
the rich chapel that she had builded there. His sister brought the
cerecloth that she took in the Waste Chapel, and presented there where
the Graal was. Perceval made bring the coffin of the other knight that
was at the entrance of his castle within the chapel likewise, and place
it beside the coffin of his uncle, nor never thereafter might it be
removed. Josephus telleth us that Perceval was in this castle long time,
nor never once moved therefrom in quest of no adventure; rather was his
courage so attorned to the Saviour of the World and His sweet Mother,
that he and his sister and the damsel that was therein led a holy life
and a religious. Therein abode they even as it pleased God, until that
his mother passed away and his sister and all they that were therein
save he alone. The hermits that were nigh the castle buried them and
sang their masses, and came every day and took counsel of him for the
holiness they saw him do and the good life that he led there. So one day
whilst he was in the holy chapel where the hallows were, forthwith,
behold you, a Voice that cometh down therein: "Perceval," saith the
Voice, "Not long shall you abide herein; wherefore it is God's will that
you dispart the hallows amongst the hermits of the forest, there where
these bodies shall be served and worshipped, and the most Holy Graal
shall appear herein no more, but within a brief space shall you know
well the place where it shall be."

When the Voice departed, all the coffins that were therein crashed so
passing loud that it seemed the master-hall had fallen. He crosseth and
blesseth him and commendeth him to God. On a day the hermits came to
him. He disparted the holy relics among them, and they builded above
them holy churches and houses of religion that are seen in the lands and
in the islands. Joseus the son of King Hermit, remained therein with
Perceval, for he well knew that he would be departing thence betimes.

XXVII\.

Perceval heard one day a bell sound loud and high without the manor
toward the sea. He came to the windows of the hall and saw the ship come
with the white sail and the Red Cross thereon, and within were the
fairest folk that ever he might behold, and they were all robed in such
manner as though they should sing mass. When the ship was anchored under
the hall they went to pray in the most holy chapel. They brought the
richest vessels of gold and silver that any might ever see, like as it
were coffins, and set therein one of the three bodies of knights that
had been brought into the chapel, and the body of King Fisherman, and of
the mother of Perceval. But no savour in the world smelleth so sweet.
Perceval took leave of Joseus and commended him to the Saviour of the
World, and took leave of the household, from whom he departed in like
manner. The worshipful men that were in the ship signed them of the
cross and blessed them likewise. The ship wherein Perceval was drew far
away, and a Voice that issued from the manor as she departed commended
them to God and to His sweet Mother. Josephus recordeth us that Perceval
departed in such wise, nor never thereafter did no earthly man know what
became of him, nor doth the history speak of him more. But the history
telleth us that Joseus abode in the castle that had been King
Fisherman's, and shut himself up therein so that none might enter, and
lived upon that the Lord God might send him. He dwelt there long time
after that Perceval had departed, and ended therein. After his end, the
dwelling began to fall. Natheless never was the chapel wasted nor
decayed, but was as whole thereafter as tofore and is so still. The
place was far from folk, and the place seemed withal to be somewhat
different. When it was fallen into decay, many folk of the lands and
islands that were nighest thereunto marvel them what may be in this
manor. They dare a many that they should go see what was therein, and
sundry folk went thither from all the lands, but none durst never enter
there again save two Welsh knights that had heard tell of it. Full
comely knights they were, young and joyous hearted. So either pledged
him to other that they would go thither by way of gay adventure; but
therein remained they of a long space after, and when again they came
forth they led the life of hermits, and clad them in hair shirts, and
went by the forest and so ate nought save roots only, and led a right
hard life; yet ever they made as though they were glad, and if that any
should ask whereof they rejoiced in such wise, "Go," said they to them
that asked, "thither where we have been, and you shall know the
wherefore."

In such sort made they answer to the folk. These two knights died in
this holy life, nor were none other tidings never brought thence by
them. They of that land called them saints.

XXVIII\.

Here endeth the story of the most Holy Graal. Josephus, by whom it is
placed on record, giveth the benison of Our Lord to all that hear and
honour it. The Latin from whence this history was drawn into Romance was
taken in the Isle of Avalon, in a holy house of religion that standeth
at the head of the Moors Adventurous, there where King Arthur and Queen
Guenievre lie, according to the witness of the good men religious that
are therein, that have the whole history thereof, true from the
beginning even to the end. After this same history beginneth the story
how Briant of the Isles renounced King Arthur on account of Lancelot
whom he loved not, and how he assured King Claudas that reft King Ban of
Benoic of his land. This story telleth how he conquered him and by what
means, and how Galobrus of the Red Launde came to King Arthur's court to
help Lancelot, for that he was of his lineage. This story is right long
and right adventurous and weighty, but the book will now forthwith be
silent thereof until another time.

THE AUTHOR'S CONCLUSION

For the Lord of Neele made the Lord of Cambrein this book be written,
that never tofore was treated in Romance but one single time besides
this; and the book that was made tofore this is so ancient that only
with great pains may one make out the letter. And let Messire Johan de
Neele well understand that he ought to hold this story dear, nor ought
he tell nought thereof to ill- understanding folk, for a good thing that
is squandered upon bad folk is never remembered by them for good.

EXPLICIT THE ROMANCE OF PERCEVAL THE NEPHEW OF KING FISHERMAN.

\[End of "The High History of the Holy Graal"\]
