[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei00)  [Next](jei02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

#### A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR

# CONTENTS

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY

A New Idea and a plea for its fair hearing.--The trained scientist and
the average reader.--Old ideas about the Constitution of the
Earth.--Cranky ideas are not in the same class with reasoned and
scientific ones.--Where our evidence comes from.--Our theory in a
nutshell.--Observing the planets.--Observing conditions on our own
planet, the Earth.--Peary and the polar orifice.--The fact of
gravitation and our theory.--Facts which we have gathered together in
one volume for the first time in the history of scientific thought.--The
final test [21](jei04.htm#page_21)

CHAPTER II.

THE NEBULA AND OUR THEORY

The nebula, astronomy's most important concept.--How celestial bodies
are derived from nebulæ.--The Milky Way and Andromeda.--George F.
Chambers quoted.--Are nebulæ stellar or gaseous?--The Spectroscope
supplies the answer.--Simon Newcomb on Laplace's theory.--Professor
Moulton criticises Laplace.--Telescopic observation of nebulæ.--Garrett
P. Serviss quoted.--Do the nebulæ point to a new theory?--Sir Robert
Ball quoted.--The Spiral Nebulæ in Canes Venatici.--The Great Nebula in
Orion.--The Ring Nebula in Lyra.--The Dumb-bell Nebula.--The evident
evolution of nebulæ.--Professor Moulton quoted.--A. M. Clerke
quoted.--Burham's observation on central nuclei.--Dr. Scheiner's
photographs.--A prophetic sentence.--A. M. Clerke on planetary
nebulæ.--All planetary nebulæ are hollow.--Have a central sun and polar
openings.--Professor Chant on early observations of nebula.--The number
of nebulæ in the visible heavens.--The shell-like structure and the
central star.--Condensation and rotation.--Professor See quoted.--Garett
P. Serviss on Laplace.--Our answer to Mr. Serviss's challenge.--What we
can actually see going on.--Moulton's and Chamberlain's theories.--Why
not a Planet?--Our theory of the evolution of the nebula.--Referring

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

to the Dumb-bell nebula.--Detailed proofs promised.--The
comet.--Professor Moulton's 'Descriptive Astronomy" quoted.--On the
[occurrence](errata.htm#0) of cellular structure throughout the universe
[36](jei05.htm#page_36)

CHAPTER III.

MARS

Coming closer to absolute proof.--From Mars to the Earth.--A general
survey of Mars.--The atmosphere of Mars.-The circular polar caps.--The
alleged canals.--Scientists do not advance in their knowledge of the
planet--Some new facts.--Great extremes of temperature.--Astronomers
confused.--Comparing the two planets.--Star-like flashes in the midst of
the polar cap.--An earlier but similar observation.--Edward S. Morse
quoted.--Lowell is confused by what he sees.--The beam from Mars was
yellow, showing it to be direct light.--Brilliant light from the polar
caps.--Comparing these observations.--A gleam from the central sun of
Mars.--Observations versus explanations.--Professor Denning quoted.--J.
Norman Lockyer quoted.--A direct source of light.--Water vapor in the
atmosphere of Mars.--The spectrum of the light from Mars.--Polar caps
are not carbon-dioxide.--How the astronomers are misled.--Corroborative
facts from Venus.--E. Walter Maunder quoted.--Polar caps of Venus and
Mars ought to have common explanation.--Hector MacPherson
quoted.--Professor Proctor on Mercury [65](jei06.htm#page_65)

CHAPTER IV.

EARLY POLAR EXPLORATION

Our theory convincing if polar facts support it says eminent English
scientist.--We now proceed to show that those facts do so.--A word in
advance as to Peary's exploits.--Evidences of warmth near the
pole.--Hon. D. Barrington's treatise on the possibility of approaching
the north pole,--Some of the facts he adduces.--Barrington controverts
the notions current in his day.--Reports to the Royal Society, England's
premier scientific body.--Actual ice conditions in the far north.--Ice
only from fresh water.--Within five and a half degrees of the
pole.--What Barrington thought the actual conformation of the polar
regions was like.--Observations of a Dutch sea captain.--The northwest
passage [100](jei07.htm#page_100)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

CHAPTER V.

FURTHER ARCTIC EXPLORATION

Sir John Franklin begins the brilliant work of the nineteenth century in
polar exploration.--The expeditions in search of him.--Observations of
Lieutenant McClintock and Dr. Kane.--Kane finds that ice melts as he
gets further north.--Plenty of game in the far north.--An open northern
sea.--Other explorers had postulated an open polar basin.--Traces of the
Esquimaux very far north.--Kane speaks of the difficulty of determining
one's location in the Arctic.--Observation of Dr. I. I. Hayes, Kane's
companion.--Hayes finds mild temperatures at Cape Alexander.--Hayes
finds warmth where he had expected greater cold.--He is astonished at
"unusual phenomena."--A warm sledge journey.--He stands upon the edge of
the polar basin and finds open sea.--He sees birds flying north.--What
Hayes really points out is the discovery which will be made through our
theory.--The temperatures of the polar regions.--Sir David Brewster's
guess.--Hayes' observations which support our theory are in agreement
with those of Wrangell.--Esquimaux tells Hayes there are other tribesmen
far to the north.--Animal life around the pole [111](jei08.htm#page_111)

CHAPTER VI.

GREELY'S EXPLORATION

The preface to "Three Years of Arctic Service."--He admits that what one
finds in polar exploration is contrary to accepted ideas.--The "Crimson
Cliffs" of Sir John Ross.--Traces of the musk-ox.--Lockwood's
observations.--Complete coniferous trees.--Butterflies and bees.--A
flower of unknown species.--An Esquimaux encampment.--The temperature.
rises considerably.--Greely's general results.--Hunting
plentiful.--Esquimaux remains.--Where did these Esquimaux go?--Whale and
other animals and their winter quarters.--Why do herbivorous bears go
north?--The Ross gull.--Greely tells of his discoveries.--The farther
north the warmer.--His observations on the tidal flows.--Open water and
warmer near the polar orifice [135](jei08.htm#page_135)

CHAPTER VII.

NORDENSKIOLD'S VOYAGES

Adolf Erik Nordenskiold spends twenty-one years of his life as an Arctic
explorer.--His observations of bird and insect life

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

in the far north.--Animal observations confirmed in voyage after
voyage.--Explorers unnecessarily afraid of the ice he says.--Esquimaux
go naked.--Warm weather comes with winds from north
[159](jei10.htm#page_159)

CHAPTER VIII

WITH NANSEN IN THE NORTH

Scientific world ridicules Nansen when he announces his plans.--How the
wreckage of the Jeannette had drifted through the Arctic
regions.--Greely does not think that Nansen can succeed.--But Nansen is
successful in his first voyage.--He observes mosquitos in
Greenland.--His success suggests plan for exploring region around
pole.--He notices that with wind from north comes warmth.--Meeting a
walrus.--The sun is unexpectedly seen.--May it not have been a
reflection of the interior sun?--Nansen says Arctic ice is not the
result of excessive cold weather.--Sounding the polar sea.--Numerous
Arctic birds.--Nansen finds it impossible to locate his position.--He
admits that he is' lost--Foggy weather and inaccuracy of maps.--Nansen
finds that ice is of fresh water.--He finds that both his latitude and
longitude are impossible of determination.--His observations puzzle him
profoundly.--Conclusive proof that Arctic exploration is largely a
matter of guess work.--Where did this fox come from?--Nansen can hardly
sleep for the heat.--The whole matter of location is a riddle to him,
says Nansen.--Even when he reaches land Nansen cannot identify
it.--Location is incomprehensible, he says.--It must be a land hitherto
unknown he thinks.--Payer's map does not help him.--What this proves
[165](jei11.htm#page_165)

CHAPTER IX

WAS THE NORTH POLE DISCOVERED?

Our theory and the alleged discovery of the poles.--Cook made first
claim.--Peary's rivalry.--Admiral Melville says Cook's proofs are
crazy.--Dr. Tittman of the Coast Survey prepares the way for our
theory.--Swedish academy fails to endorse Cook.--Cook himself admits
that he did not actually reach any point that could be called the
pole.--Peary's proofs just as indefinite as Cook's.--Peary was not
substantiated by any witnesses.--Hon. J. Martin Miller quoted.--Peary
figures of his rate of travel are self-contradictory.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Miller thinks question insoluble.--But suppose
there were no pole to be discovered.--Quotations from Peary's own book
show him to be inaccurate.--Statement of Matthew Henson.--Congress is
placed in a dilemma.--Investigation a year after clamor had died down
brings in verdict that Peary did not prove claims.--Summing up of, the
lessons of this controversy.--A note following the news of Peary's
death. [190](jei12.htm#page_190)

CHAPTER X.

TWO CONGRESSIONAL OPINIONS ON PEARY AND COOK

Hon H. T. Helgesen of North Dakota tells why Peary could not have
discovered pole.--All his other claims to Arctic discoveries have been
proved false.--Peary's own self-contradictions.--His "discoveries"
eliminated from official maps.--Peary and his missing "data."--Dr.
Tittman's adverse testimony.--Hon. S. D. Fess of Ohio on Cook's
claims.--He demolishes them utterly [211](jei13.htm#page_211)

CHAPTER XI.

THE MAMMOTH

From where does this animal come?--J. W. Buel quoted.--Remains of
tropical animals.--A tremendous elephant in a state of perfect
preservation.--Another writer describes the same find and corroborates
the story.--Whole islands of sand and elephant remains.--George W.
Melville quoted.--Nordenskiold's views.--A puzzle to the geologist.--In
the New Siberian Islands.--Edwin S. Grew tells of similar
discoveries.--The carcass of the fresh mammal.--Cannot be a "primeval"
monster.--Must come from a warm climate.--Suppose they were a million
years old.--Contradictions in that view.--Other similar
discoveries.--Another description.--Freezing was instantaneous.--The
interior of the earth the habitat of the Mammoth.--The Mastodon.--The
Mammoth banquet.--A description of the fresh meat.--D’Annunzio tastes it
and entertains his friends with it. [220](jei14.htm#page_220)

CHAPTER XII.

THE LIFE OF THE ARCTIC

A general view of Arctic animal life.--No new observations but phenomena
as old as the memory of man.--Immense shoals of fish.--Where do they
winter.--The seal.--The

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

reindeer.--Musk-oxen.--Swans, geese and other fowls.--Even the Eskimos
did not know where they bred.--Driftwood and seeds of plants.--More
about reindeer.--Millions of birds.--The only place where certain birds
could migrate.--For instance, there is the sand-piper.--The "Arctic
Highlanders."--Animal life more abundant in the Arctic than in the
tropics.--A veritable paradise [247](jei15.htm#page_247)

CHAPTER XIII.

OTHER INTERESTING ANIMALS OF THE INTERIOR

Robert S. Cook's observations.--An unknown animal, the arcla.--Curious
remains in the Antarctic.--The Mylodon.--An Eskimo tradition
[265](jei16.htm#page_265)

CHAPTER XIV.

THE AURORA

What the Aurora looks like.--Is it continuous or spasmodic?--Greely
quoted.--Nansen also describes it.--Our explanation.--Not caused by
electricity.--Clouds in the interior.--Payer's observations.--Greely
says magnet is not disturbed by Aurora.--Further evidence on that
point.--Professor Bruce on the Aurora in Venus.--Other evidence that the
Aurora is due to the interior sun.--Its light continuous during Arctic
night.--The nearer the pole the better the auroral display.--The sun's
corona and the Aurora seem similar.--Earlier scientists have seen
[similarity](errata.htm#1) between auroral and sun light.--Difference of
behavior between Aurora light and electric light
[272](jei17.htm#page_272)

CHAPTER XV

THE ESKIMO

From where did the Eskimo come?--Nansen quoted.--Nearer to the Chinese
than to any other race.--Their origin is a puzzle.--Scientific ignorance
on the subject.--The Eskimo must have come from the north.--Their means
of transport.--But they found poorer hunting when they got too far
south.--Early Norwegian ideas on the Eskimo.--An early Norwegian legend
about a visit to the interior of the earth.--These Norse ideas are very
significant.--Traces of their tools found at sea.--Fresh immigration
from the north.--Dr. Nicholas Senn's observations of the Eskimo and

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Chinese type.--Eskimo ideas as to their origin
and home.--Their faith that the stock of their ancestors still survives
over the polar lip [292](jei18.htm#page_292)

CHAPTER XVI.

EVIDENCE IN THE ANTARCTIC

Not so voluminous as that from the Arctic but very conclusive.--A gap in
scientific knowledge.--A possible lost Antarctic continent.--Shifting
the location of the Garden of Eden.--A common birthplace of many widely
distributed animal species.--The interior of the earth fulfills this
description.--An Antarctic mystery that only our theory will
solve.--Where did these human beings come from?--A race in the interior
[312](jei19.htm#page_312)

CHAPTER XVII

THE JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR

Suppose we were to set off on an expedition, what should we see?--Our
start.--Getting into warmer water.--Landing in the interior.--Some
vegetation that is new to us.--A spongy and peaty soil.--Fernlike and
parasitic plants.--Insect and animal life.--How the Mammoth is
trapped.--Are there people in this country.--No changes of light or
season.--The interior sun and radium.--The geologist will find iron
ore.--Animals, birds and insects.--The Irish elk.--Mineral
wealth.--Emerging at the other end [321](jei20.htm#page_321)

CHAPTER XVIII.

THE FORMATION OF THE EARTH

How scientists disagree on this subject.--The old liquid-interior
idea.--What causes volcanoes?--What would happen if the earth had a
liquid interior.--Volcanoes are surface manifestations.--An ocean 7900
miles in every direction, including depth.--The earth does not weigh
enough to be solid.--Actual observations contradict idea that earth is
solid as well as idea that it is liquid.--Was the earth ever
molten?--Dr. N. Herz on the alleged solidity of the earth.--Let us leave
theories and see what the facts are.--Sir G. H. Darwin's observations
and experiments.--The earth trembles like the surface of a soap
bubble.--Its crust is constantly in vibration.--Earthquakes are not so
important from standpoint of adding to our knowledge as is this
ceaseless trembling.--A

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

confession of scientific bankruptcy.--The earth does not get hotter the
farther one penetrates; that is true only up to a certain point near the
surface [341](jei21.htm#page_341)

CHAPTER XIX.

HOW OUR THEORY DIFFERS FROM THAT OF SYMMES

Symmes' theory is unlike ours in both method of proving and result of
argument--He believes in concentric spheres; we do not.--He has his own
theory about gravity.--He thinks the outer sun is hollow.--He postulates
five hollow spheres as forming the earth.--His idea of polar openings is
an altogether different one from ours.--Our theory has, therefore,
nothing in common with his.--His idea of double-shelled spheres
inhabited on inner as well as outer surfaces.--Symmes' theory cannot be
taken seriously.--Symmes would explain polar caps of planets and
planetary rings by refraction.--But this idea will not hold
water.--Symmes on sun-spots.--A synopsis of our own theory showing how
utterly different it is from that of Symmes[358](jei22.htm#page_358)

CHAPTER XX.

THE MOON

The moon was not hurled off from the revolving earth.--The "capture"
theory.--Scientists admit that the moon is hollow.--The moon's weight in
relation to that of earth shows that both are hollow
[373](jei23.htm#page_373)

CHAPTER XXI.

A NOTE ON GRAVITATION

Gravitation and centrifugal force.--The gravitational pull in the
interior [377](jei24.htm#page_377)

CHAPTER XXII.

HOW OUR THEORY HAS BEEN RECEIVED

What we expected when the first draft of our theory was published.--But
we met with a much better reception than is usually given such a
revolutionary idea.--Professors in European universities proved much
more open-minded than in our own universities.--A letter from His
Majesty, the King of Sweden.--The King and Queen of Italy express their
gratification.--From a celebrated Swedish scholar.--He admits

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the originality of our theory.--But an American scientist tries to
ridicule our theory without any basis in argument.--He misrepresents it
and we challenge him to prove his point.--Dr. Arthur Conan Doyle writes
us in regard to our theory and the alleged discovery of the poles.--His
letter ought to carry weight with American scientists.--Professors
Moulton of Chicago and Barrell of Yale on our theory.--Contrast with
their half-heartedness or open opposition the tone of a letter from a
famous Russian geologist.--German scientist recommends us to Austrian
explorer but war prevents expedition--Practical men take kindly to our
theory.--Mr. H. M. Chance quoted.--A scientist who tried to confute us
and his signal defeat.--What many private individuals have to say.--A
question as to the Central Sun.--Chicago woman greets our theory as one
that will solve many puzzles.--A prominent Canadian physician on our
theory.--A librarian who totally misunderstands our theory and confuses
it with that of Symmes.--The "Scientific American" compares us to Jules
Verne.--A Chicago Daily News reviewer is either ignorant or attempting
to be facetious.--The San Antonio Express admits that we have
discredited the orthodox school-day teachings of astronomy.--A note on
comparisons with Jules Verne; he dealt in fancies, we deal in facts.--A
great religious leader endorses our theory.--Western woman student of
cosmogony thinks we are on right track [380](jei25.htm#page_380)

CHAPTER XXIII.

OUR CONTROVERSY WITH DOMINIAN

Dominian's main objections to our argument.--"Cause for Red Snow."--A
continental mass.--The Pittsburgh Leader thinks it has disposed of
us.--But it prints our reply to Dominian.--The Constitution of the
Earth.--The argument from the mammoth.--The Red Snow.--Mr. Dominian
astraddle of a floating log.--A few points Mr. Dominian forgot to
mention.--We never heard from him again [424](jei26.htm#page_424)

CHAPTER XXIV

OUR COUNTRY AND OUR THEORY

A world of inconceivable riches.--It ought to be discovered by the
United States.--Will America grasp her opportunity?--But we must not
delay.--A benefit to mankind [434](jei27.htm#page_434)

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

CHAPTER XXV.

IN CONCLUSION

Scientists who dispute our theory should answer some questions.--If our
theory be not true why has Venus permanent polar caps?--How other than
on our theory is the Aurora to be explained?--How do those who deny our
theory explain the red pollen of the far north?--What have the orthodox
scientists to say in regard to the Mammoth?--How, aside from our theory,
could those human remains in the Antarctic be explained?--And why cannot
the orthodox scientists agree about the genesis of the moon?
[442](jei28.htm#page_442)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Illustrations](jei02)
