[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei02)  [Next](jei04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

# PREFACE

THE MAN whose acquaintance with [cosmogony](errata.htm#2) and
physiography is confined to what he learned in school, and, perhaps,
afterward read in popular publications, has certain very definite
notions about the shape of the earth and the construction of its
interior. These notions, he thinks, are based upon the proven
discoveries, or the impregnable theories of the scientists, and so he
accepts them in blind faith. But the scientists themselves do not rest
under the impression that they have solved every mystery that is buried
in the bowels of the earth. While they hold to a general theory about
the shape and constitution of the earth, that it is a rigid solid--a
theory which is now beginning to supersede the older theory that it was
a shell with a liquid interior--they admit that there are many questions
raised by recent observations of facts that cannot be explained by their
present theory.

To the scientist then, and also to the layman whose interest and
encouragement may do much for scientific advancement, when he sees in
what direction it is tending and what results it may have, are the
following pages addressed. In them will be found a recital of certain
well known and fuly authenticated facts of geography, exploration, and
astronomy

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

which have not been satisfactorily explained by any of the theories of
the shape and constitution of the earth so far held. Then, on the basis
of these facts, a new theory is presented which I claim does explain
them; does make them fit in with the accepted results of scientific
investigation, and which does not conflict with any other relative facts
in the world, but unites them all in an intelligible manner.

### WANTED--A FAIR HEARING

In any such attempt as this two [tendencies](errata.htm#3) have to be
overcome before an author can secure a fair hearing. The first is the
conservatism of scientists who do not care to revise their theories--and
especially when that revision is made necessary by discoveries which are
made independently of the great universities. I think, however, that the
array of confirmatory evidence which I have brought to bear upon my
position will be sufficient to counteract this conservatism and induce
scientists to give my theory a respectful hearing and full discussion.
The second adverse tendency which must be overcome is the erroneous
notion of the general public that a scientific theory or hypothesis is,
in reality, a final truth that must not be denied. The layman imagines
that the scientists have some mysterious means of discovering the actual
truth, and that once discovered it is final. In this matter of the
composition and shape of the earth, for instance, he thinks that

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

the scientists actually know that the earth is a ball of a certain
density and composition. Only a short time ago, however, the scientists
thought that the earth was a solid shell with a liquid interior--and any
layman would have sworn this was true just because the scientists
imagined it. Nov the real fact of the matter is--and any scientist will
admit it that a scientific theory, such as either of the two just
mentioned, does not represent an ultimate truth. It is simply an essay
of the imagination to weld certain facts, which are not apparently
related, into some sort of connection. For instance, we have the facts
of gravitation, electricity and light, all acting thru great spaces--and
all having what are apparently common properties. To explain their
action the scientists build up theories of wave motion through the
ether. Now the layman accepts the luminiferous ether as a finality. But
the scientist might discover some fact tomorrow which could not be
explained on that assumption of a universal ether, and so he would have
to construct a new theory more comprehensive than his former one, and
which would make room for the new fact. I do not imply that such a
theory is either likely or possible, but I simply give this as a
convenient example of the same thing which I have done in the domain of
cosmogony. And my point is, that a theory is good so long as it gives us
such a view of the matter as will enable us to discover new facts, but
good for that purpose only.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### AN ADVANCE ON COPERNICUS

The copernican system of astronomy was a step in advance of the
Ptolemaic system just because it enabled scientists to discover many new
facts about the solar system which the error of the old view had hidden
from their gaze. My own theory adds to the valuable results gained by
the Copernican system, not by subverting it--for I imagine that no sane
person would now try to do that--but by accepting it fully, and adding
to it a different theory of the evolution of the several planets from
their nebula, and from this new theory of evolution deducting certain
presumptions about the interior of the earth. These presumptions I have
supported by a wealth of facts discovered by the telescopic observations
of astronomers of nebulæ and our sister planets, Mars, Venus and
Mercury, and made by explorers of the most fascinating parts of our own
planet--the polar regions.

In conclusion I would ask the reader to remember that I do not write as
a scientist or claim to be a scientist. I simply claim to have applied
the lessons of common sense to these problems. I do claim to have
studied all the material, to have gathered my facts carefully. But there
is nothing in my book that the layman cannot understand. It is written
by a layman for him. It is to his common sense that it appeals.

*The Author*.

Aurora, Illinois.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Introductory](jei04)
