[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei10)  [Next](jei12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

# CHAPTER VIII.

## WITH NANSEN IN THE NORTH

Nothing can illustrate better how really ignorant the scientists have
been concerning the real constitution of the polar regions than the
ridicule which many arctic explorers, and especially Greely, who seemed
to believe in his later years that the pole was really a solid sheet of
ice, cast upon Nansen when he [announced](errata.htm#44) his plans for a
polar expedition.

### SCIENTISTS LAUGH AT NANSEN

It was in the spring of 1888 that Fridtjof Nansen startled the
scientific world "by announcing his determination to cross the ice-dome
of Greenland." Nansen's idea was that instead of starting to explore
Greenland from the west coast, leaving behind stores and a refuge that
could be turned back to in case of failure, to start from the barren
east coast and make toward the west where there were settlements and
help. Thus if he got half way across and found great difficulties the
natural thing would not be to turn back as was the temptation when food
and shelter were behind and only further hardship in advance. It was on
the expedition so planned that Nansen observed "a teeming current on the
east coast of Greenland, piling the floes into the south"; he had found
the same on the west side.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

### HOW THE JEANNETTE DRIFTED

"He had learned that wreckage from the Jeannette had drifted through the
polar sea and to Julianehaab in the southern part of Greenland; also
that Siberian larch and other woods indigenous to northern Europe had
been found on the Greenland shores. . . . "--as his story is summed up
in D. M. Edwards'"The Toll of the Arctic Seas." So, arguing from these
facts, he further startled the scientific world by announcing that it
would be possible to build a ship strong enough to withstand all the ice
buffeting and drift in it across the polar sea. He was not trying to
find the exact mathematical point that formed the earth's extremity, he
said, but "to investigate the great unknown regions that surrounded the
Pole."

### GREELY IS SKEPTICAL

Greely denied that the wreckage which had been found was that of the
Jeannette she was the ship on which De Long sailed for the Arctic in
1879--and he did not think that the Fram--as Nansen's ship was
called--could stand the pressure of the Arctic ice. It is a curious
thing that Greely should have, after all his arctic experience, gone
back to such old-fashioned ideas as he seemed to have, but he painted a
picture of what the ship would have to endure which was quite falsified
by events--and in fact, Greely admitted, after Nansen came back, that

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

he had been wrong. So much for scientific infallibility. Let us now
follow Nansen upon his two explorations that across Greenland and that
which attempted the pole, and see what a lot of evidence he gathers
which all points in one direction.

### NANSEN IS SUCCESSFUL

On the Greenland expedition--which was quite successful, even to
fulfilling practically every plan which Nansen has scheduled he found
evidence that while the lower part of Greenland was covered with an
immense ice dome, rising to approximately 8,000 feet above sea-level,
there was every evidence of fertility and warmth further north and a
more open sea along the coast of Greenland as the party skirted it to
the north in the small boats which they had carried overland with them.

### MOSQUITOES IN GREENLAND

'While they were still on the east coast, traveling north, a swarm of
mosquitoes attacked the party one morning and made life miserable for
them. They were so thick that the explorers could not get their food
into their mouths before it was covered with the insects. And Nansen
adds that Greenland is, as a matter of fact one of the worst countries
in the world for that pest. The east coast was also found prolific in
sea-fowl, including gulls, guillemots, and eider-duck. In a fresh water
tarn in a meadow they

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

found a new species of fish. Sorrel grew in abundance. On some nights it
was too warm to sleep in the tent. In talking to the Eskimo and in
reading accounts of earlier explorers, Nansen constantly heard legends
and rumors of the fertile land to the north--behind the ice barrier.
Nansen also tells of a dust on the ice which was observed by
Nordenskiold and which he thought came from some other planet. Nansen,
however, thinks that it is simply dust from some mountains that are not
covered with ice and that it is blown over to the Greenland ice sheet.
But it seems as if the quantities were too great to assume that it comes
from any of the mountains known to explorers in those regions. We would
be inclined to think that it comes from the other side of the polar
ice-ring--from the land to which this book gives us the key. He also
recounts, on the authority of Nordenskiold, the appearance to that
explorer when in Greenland, of two ravens flying from the north: pretty
good evidence that there was land there that was not covered with ice.
After Nansen had penetrated the interior for some distance he was
visited by a snow-bunting which was flying north--thus strengthening the
evidence supplied by the two ravens.

### SUCCESS LEADS TO FURTHER PLANS

But the chief importance of Nansen's first expedition was that it led
him to think he could reach

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

the north pole, and it is on this second journey that he really begins
to make remarkable observations.

By the beginning of 1894, Nansen was between 79 and 80 degrees north,
not making very rapid progress as they were shut in by the ice and
dependent on the drift. And then Nansen noticed that whenever the wind
blew from the north the temperature rose considerably. He says:

### WARMTH WITH NORTHERN WINDS

"It is curious that there is almost always a rise of the thermometer
with these stronger winds. . . . A south wind of less velocity generally
lowers the temperature, and a moderate north wind raises it. Payer's
explanation of this raising of the temperature by strong winds is that
the wind is warmed by passing over large openings in the ice. This can
hardly be correct, at any rate in our case, for we have few or no
openings."

Nansen's own idea was that the heat was caused by winds from the higher
reaches of the atmosphere where it had not been cooled by contact with
the ice. But in trying to explain the high temperatures in this way he
forgot that it was only the north winds which raised the temperatures
and not the south winds. And where would the higher air get its heat
from in any case? The heat must come from a definite source and in the
far north the only possible source is the one which we have pointed out.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

### MEETING A WALRUS

The explorers had reached 79 degrees, 41 minutes when suddenly one day
on the ice they observed a large walrus. Nansen--who was out on the
ice--rushed back to get a harpoon but by the time he secured it the
animal had disappeared. There were no openings apparently in the ice,
but the animal had vanished. He regrets that they were not prepared to
capture it, but adds:

"But who expects to meet a walrus on close ice in the middle of a wild
sea of a thousand fathoms' depth, and that in the heart of winter? None
of us ever heard of such a thing before; it is a perfect mystery."

### SUN UNEXPECTEDLY SEEN

When the party reached 80 degrees, 1 minute, a remarkable observation
was made which may be explained in more than one way:

". . . . about midday we saw the sun, or, to be more correct, an image
of the sun, for it was only a mirage. A peculiar impression was produced
by the sight of that glowing fire lit just above the outermost edge of
the ice. According to the enthusiastic descriptions given by many Arctic
travelers of the first appearance of this god of life after the long
winter night, the impression ought to be one of jubilant excitement; but
it was not so in my case. We had not expected to see it for some days
yet, so that my

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

feeling was rather one of pain--of disappointment, that we must have
drifted farther south than we thought. So it was with pleasure I soon
discovered that it could not be the sun itself. The mirage was at first
like a flattened-out, glowing red streak upon the horizon; later there
were two streaks, the one above the other, with a dark space between;
and from the main-top I could see four, or even five, such horizontal
lines directly, over one another, and all of equal length, as if one
could only imagine a square dull-red sun, with horizontal streaks across
it."

### COULD IT BE REFLECTION FROM INTERIOR?

Now it is quite a question whether the mirage that Nansen saw at this
time was a mirage of the sun in our sky or whether it might not have
been some sort of a reflection of the sun of the interior of the earth.
Certainly he was not expecting to see the solar light at that time.

Two or three days later this mirage of whichever sun it might have been
was seen again.

By spring the party had reached 80 degrees, 20 minutes, and Nansen was
surprised to find how warm the water was at a great depth. He remarks
that on the surface the temperature of the water of the East Greenland
current is just about the ordinary freezing point, while usually--at
lower latitudes--the water falls as you get below the surface, so that
at depths

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

greater than a hundred fathoms it is from one to two Centigrade degrees
cooler--but of course it does not freeze owing to the greater pressure
and other factors. But here, on the contrary, in 80 degrees instead of
from 60 to 70 degrees, he found that the deeper he took soundings the
warmer the water was. He did not know where this warm water came from,
but we can suspect.

### ARCTIC ICE NOT FROM COLD WEATHER

In July, Nansen made a number of observations on the formation of ice
and came to the conclusion that the thickness of the arctic ice is not
attained by direct freezing as a result of cold weather. Only a little
ice is formed at a time, and the great hummocks and floes of which we
read are simply formed by the ice packing and mass after mass being
frozen up into great aggregates.

### SOUNDING THE POLAR SEA

The next job Nansen set himself was deep sea sounding. He had expected
the polar seas to be shallow and none of his lead-lines were long enough
to touch bottom. So he sacrificed one of the Fram's steel cables,
unraveled it, and twisted two of the strands into a lead line of 2700
fathoms in length. With this he touched bottom at depths ranging from
1800 to 2100 fathoms. He says:

"This was a remarkable discovery, for, as I have

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

frequently mentioned, the unknown polar basin has always been supposed
to be shallow, with numerous unknown lands and islands. . . ."

From this assumption of a shallow polar sea it was concluded that the
regions about the pole had formerly been covered with an extensive tract
of land, of which the existing islands are simply the remains. This
extensive tract of polar land was furthermore assumed to have been the
nursery of many of our animals and plant forms, whence they had found
their way to lower latitudes. These conjectures now appear to bear upon
a somewhat infirm basis.

The importance of those remarks is obvious. If the Polar sea in these
latitudes is not shallow and if the land which is spoken of above never
really existed in more extended form than the present islands where was
that "nursery of many of our plant and animal forms"? If Nansen had only
guessed it was not so very far away from the locality which has been
assigned to it. Not the land that these explorers and scientists thought
arose out of that shallow Polar sea, but a land just a little further
away--the other side of the immense polar aperture.

Meanwhile Nansen kept up his records of temperatures at various depths,
and always found that while the temperatures fluctuated at various
depths, they rose when very deep water was reached.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

### NUMEROUS ARCTIC BIRDS

Numbers of birds visited the explorers from early summer on, including
ice-mews, kittiwakes, fulmars, blue and herring gulls, black guillemot,
skua, and snow-bunting. But these visits were eclipsed in interest by
the following, which Nansen tells under date of August 3rd, 1894:

"On August 3rd a remarkable [occurrence](errata.htm#45) took place: we
were visited by the Arctic ross-gull. I wrote as follows about it in my
diary: 'Today my longing has at last been satisfied. I have shot Ross's
gull, three specimens in one day. This rare mysterious inhabitant of the
unknown north, which is only [occassionally](errata.htm#46) seen, and of
which no one knows whence it cometh or whither it goeth, which belongs
exclusively to the world to which the imagination aspires, is what, from
the first moment I saw these tracts, I had always hoped to discover as
my eyes roamed over the lonely plains of ice. And now it came when I was
least thinking of it. I was out for a little walk on the ice by the
ship, and as I was sitting down by a hummock my eye wandered northward
and lit on a bird hovering over the great pressure-mound away to the
northwest. At first I took it to be a kittiwake, but soon discovered it
rather resembled the skua by its swift flight, sharp wings and pointed
tail. When I had got my gun there were two of them together flying round
and round the ship. I now got a closer view of them and discovered

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

that they were too light colored to be skuas. They were by no means shy,
but continued flying about close to the ship. On going after them on the
ice I soon shot one of them (and, was not a little surprised on picking
it up, to find it was a little bird about the size of a snipe; the
mottled back, too, reminded me also of that bird. Soon after this I shot
the other. Later in the day there came another which was also shot....
Some few days afterwards some more of these birds were shot, making
eight specimens in all.'"

Is it not a remarkable thing that these ross-gulls should have no known
habitat as Nansen points out in the above paragraph? They must live and
breed somewhere, and as these specimens--the first two at all
events--were actually seen to come from the north it is only reasonable
to suppose that they came from that land which we assert is to be found
on the other side of the ice barrier, in the interior of the earth.

### NANSEN GETS LOST

The observations quoted above, the constant noting by Nansen that the
weather is warmer than he had expected, the soundings of the sea, are
all important but they are not so important, from the standpoint of
making the reader understand Arctic voyaging, as what follows. The
following words of Nansen have been picked out of page after page of his
journals. And they all refer to one fact: that he

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

could not tell where he was. Before we quote these let us see just what
they imply. When we read of Arctic explorers moving from point to point
and calculating their whereabouts we are apt to forget that what sounds
so simple when expressed on the page--such expressions as "We were now
in so many degrees latitude and such and such a longitude"--we are apt
to forget that those figures may have been obtained under great
difficulties or guessed at, and that they are often mere approximations.
Unknown currents and other factors may make what is known as "dead
reckoning" quite useless in the Arctic, and the unusual compass
variations and the impossibility at times of making observations of the
sun or stars lead the Arctic explorer very far astray. Now if the reader
does not bear that in mind he is apt to think that Peary's statement
that he actually found the Pole knocks out our theory. But if he does
bear that in mind and if he remembers, too, that Peary did not figure on
the actual conformation of the polar region as we have pointed it out,
he will readily see that Peary was mistaken in his assertion. And, apart
entirely from the fact that there is no solid pole to discover, he will
see how easily Peary could be wrong by noticing how far wrong Nansen is
constantly getting. Only Nansen does not feel any hesitation about
admitting it. And the fact that this competent explorer with all the
science of navigation at his command has so much difficulty in finding

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

his way around in the polar regions shows how little is really known
about them. Suppose that Peary made one such miscalculation as some of
these that Nansen confesses to, and suppose that he used that
calculation as a basis from which to make others: the error would be
multiplied, and Peary might claim to find the Pole or anything else
without being able to prove anything as to his exact location.

### HE IS QUITE UNABLE TO LOCATE HIMSELF

But here is the sort of thing which is constantly happening to Nansen.
In the course of the voyage of the Fram through the Kara Sea in 1893,
while they were still as far south as seventy-six degrees, two minutes
north latitude: "or about 14 miles from what is marked as the mainland
on Nordenskiold's or Bove's map", we find: "It was hardly to be expected
that these should be correct, as the weather seems to have been foggy
the whole time the explorers were here".

Right there we see two chances for error: foggy weather and the
inaccuracy of maps--itself due to previous foggy weather or to any other
cause.

Nansen then proceeds:

"Nor were we successful in finding Hovgaard's Islands as we sailed
north. When I supposed that we were off them, just on the north side of
the entrance to Taimur Strait, I saw, to my surprise, a high mountain
almost directly north of us, which

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

seemed as if it must be on the mainland. What could be the explanation
of this? I began to have a growing suspicion that this was a regular
labyrinth of islands we had got into. We were hoping to investigate and
clear up the matter when thick weather with sleet and rain, most
inconveniently came on, and we had to leave this problem for the future
to solve."

### HE IS STILL LOST

That is just one illustration of the uncertainties of Arctic travel. But
it is by no means the only one. Here are a number of others taken from
the records which Nansen made after he had proceeded much further north.
In February, 1895, Nansen left Sverdrup in charge of the Fram and
started out on a northward sledge journey which he hoped would take him
to the pole and from there to Spitzbergen by way of Franz Joseph Land.
The start was made from latitude 83 degrees, fifty minutes north. Nansen
was accompanied by Johansen and had six sledges well equipped, including
an instrument which registered the mileage covered. One or two false
starts were made, but at last the party got under way and by Friday,
March 22nd, had reached a latitude of 8S degrees, 9 minutes north. One
very interesting observation which was made at this point was of a
"large frozen pool" which looked almost like a large lake. Nansen says
"It is wonderful that these pools can form up there at that time of
year."

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

### FINDS ICE IS FROM FRESH WATER

It is also noteworthy that the ice over which the party traveled was
fresh: Nansen found that it was quite possible to quench the thirst by
sucking it. By March 29, we began to get the sort of observation which
we promised the reader: the observation which showed that the explorer
could not determine his whereabouts. On that date, for instance, Nansen
took an observation which showed him to be in latitude 85 degrees, 30
minutes. He says: "I could not understand this; thought that we must be
in latitude 86 degrees, and, therefore, supposed there must be something
wrong with the observation." Incidentally he also noticed other fresh
water pools.

By the time Nansen had reached a latitude of more than 86 degrees he
found the temperature rising, and was far more comfortable than he had
been further south. By April 14th, Easter Day, Nansen took the
opportunity of being halted by lanes to make extensive observations, as
he had allowed the watches to run down and wished to calculate the time
from his observations. He had also determined not to try to get any
further north on that trip and had shaped his course for Cape Fligely.
But he was puzzled by his observations. He says:

"I have calculated our previous latitudes and longitudes over again, to
see if I can discover any mistake in them. I find that we should
yesterday have come farther south than 86 degrees, 5.3 minutes north;
but

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

according to our reckoning, assuming that we covered fifty miles during
the three days we should have come down to 85 degrees and fifty odd
minutes."

### NEITHER LATITUDE OR LONGITUDE IS RIGHT

Meanwhile, he was also in doubt about his longitude. He assumed that it
was 86 degrees East but adds in a footnote, "I felt convinced that we
could not have reached such a westerly longitude, but assumed this for
the sake of certainty, as I would rather come down on the east side of
Franz Josef Land than on the west side. Should we reach the latitude of
Petermann's Land or Prince Rudolf Land without seeing them, I should in
the former case be certain that we had them on our west, and could look
out for them in that direction, whereas in the event of our not finding
land and being uncertain whether we were too far east or too far west,
we should not then know in what direction we ought to look for it."

### PROOF THE ARCTIC EXPLORATION IS LARGELY GUESS WORK

Nov, we ask the reader if that passage does not prove conclusively that
finding one's position in the Arctic region is largely a matter of guess
work and approximation and luck? Is it not possible that this difficulty
is due to the downward curvature of the earth's surface?

Meanwhile, the explorer had sunshiny, mild and

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

balmy weather. On April 16th, in fact, the sun scorched quite
unpleasantly. The tent was pitched in broiling sun, and for days after
the atmosphere was equable and stagnant.

### WHERE DID THIS FOX COME FROM?

On April 26th, Nansen has something very significant to report:

"I was not a little surprised yesterday morning when I suddenly saw the
track of an animal in the snow. It was that of a fox, came about W. S.
W. true, and went in an easterly direction. The trail was quite fresh.
What in the world was the fox doing up here? There were also unequivocal
signs that it had not been without food. Were we in the vicinity of
land? I looked around for it, but the weather was thick all day
yesterday, and we might have been near it without seeing it. In any
case, a warm-blooded [mammal](errata.htm#47) in the eighty-fifth
parallel. We had not gone far before we came across another fox-track;
it went in about the same direction as the other, and followed the trend
of the lane which had stopped us and by which we had been obliged to
camp. It is incomprehensible what these animals live on up here, but
presumably they are able to snap up some crustaceans in the open water
ways. But why do they leave the coasts? That is what puzzles me most.
Can they have gone astray? There seems little
[probability](errata.htm#48) of that."

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

Well, this is not the first animal whose presence in the remote Arctic
has startled explorers, and as we shall see it is by no means the last.
They are so abundant in those supposedly bleak and inhospitable regions
that there is only one possible explanation of their presence: they must
come from the interior. They could not possibly have come from the south
for, as we have seen it is further south than where they have been found
that the Arctic explorer finds most of his difficulties. No, these
animals and birds have their homes and breeding places in the interior
of the earth, near the polar orifice, and it is from there they come and
thither do they go. Have we not the explorers' testimony time after time
that these animals and birds have actually been seen on their way north?

### NANSEN CAN HARDLY SLEEP FOR HEAT

On May 4th, the explorer is again found commenting on the mild weather.
One night, he says, he could hardly sleep for heat. In the day time he
can lie in the tent basking in the heat from the sun. "Last night," runs
another entry, "it was almost too warm to sleep".

About May 19th, Nansen is again off his bearings:

"We can hardly be far from 83 degrees, 10 minutes, North, and should
have gained Petermann's Land if it be where Payer supposed. Either we
must be unconscionably out of our bearings, or the country

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

very small. Meanwhile, I suppose, the east wind is driving us westward,
out to sea, in the direction of Spitzbergen. Heaven alone knows what the
velocity of the drift may be here."

A few days later he writes:

"We ought to have latitude 83 degrees behind us, but as yet no sight of
land. This is becoming rather exciting."

On May 27th he writes:

"We are in latitude 82 degrees, 30 minutes, North, perhaps even a minute
or two farther south. But it is growing more and more remarkable that we
see no sign of land. I cannot explain it in any other way than that we
are some degrees farther east than. we suppose."

By May 31st we find him saying "It is impossible that we can have far to
go now." But there is "still no glimpse of land; this is becoming more
and more of an enigma."

### CONFESSES LOCATION IS A RIDDLE TO HIM

On June 5th, he has still the same story to tell. He wishes for a "final
solution of this riddle which is constantly before me". But by June 11th
there is still no sign of land and Nansen says, "We do not know where we
are, and we do not know when this will end."

A few days later he says: "I have calculated and

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

calculated and thought and thought, but can find no mistake of any
importance, and the whole thing is a riddle to me. I am beginning
seriously to doubt that we may be too far west after all. I simply
cannot conceive that we are too far east."

On July 19th Nansen notes the large number of Ross's gulls, which strike
his attention as he cannot imagine where they can come from. He is still
completely lost.

### LAND, BUT WHAT LAND?

It is only on July 24th that he catches his first glimpse of land, which
he had really seen a little time before but had mistaken for clouds on
the horizon. The two explorers made incredibly slow progress in their
attempt to reach it. After traveling day after day and having to fight a
bear that had followed them, they actually reached it early in August.
After traveling on the land for a few days, Nansen makes this startling
entry:

"This land grows more of a problem, and I am more than ever at a loss to
know where we are."

Certainly, one would think that even if the explorer were lost as long
as he was on the ice he would instantly find his bearings when he
reached solid and permanent land. But as a matter of fact Nansen admits
that he does not know even whether he is on the west coast of the
archipelago of Franz Josef Land or whether he has fetched up on some
other

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

coast altogether. He keeps on going, however, and a few days later
writes:

### INCOMPREHENSIBLE

"Where we are is becoming more and more incomprehensible. There appears
to be a broad sound west of us, but what is it? . . . . . . . .

"We must have come to a new land in the western part of Franz Josef Land
or Archipelago, and so far west that we had seen nothing of the
countries discovered by Payer, but so far west that we had not even seen
anything of Oscar's Land, which ought to be situated in 82 degrees,
North, and 52 degrees East." This was, indeed, incomprehensible, but was
there any other explanation?

A few days later Nansen notices that red snow on the glaciers which has
been such a puzzle to explorers but which can only come from the
interior of the earth.

It may sound incredible, but in February, 1896, Nansen and Johansen have
still not succeeded in discovering their whereabouts. They were
speculating about getting home, and as to whether the Fram would reach
Norway before them, and Nansen writes:

### MUST BE A HITHERTO UNKNOWN LAND

"But where were we? And how great was the distance we had to travel?
Over and over again I reckoned out our observations of the autumn and

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

summer and spring, but the whole matter was a perpetual puzzle. It
seemed clear, indeed, that we must be lying somewhere far to the west,
perhaps off the west coast of Franz Josef Land, a little north of Cape
Lofley, as I had conjectured in the autumn. But, if that were so, what
could be the lands which we had seen to the northward? And what was the
land to which we had first come? From the first group of islands which I
had called White Land to where we now lie, we had passed about 7 degrees
of longitude--that our observations proved conclusively. But if we were
now in the longitude of Cape Fligely, these islands must lie on a
meridian so far east that it must fall between King Oscar's Land and
Crown Prince Rudolf Land; and yet, we had been much farther east and had
seen nothing of these lands. How was this to be explained? . . . . No,
we could not have been near any known land. . . . There were other
things, too, that greatly puzzled me. If we were on a new land near
Spitzbergen, why were the ross-gulls never seen there, while we had
found them in flocks here to the north? And then there was the great
variation of the compass. . The whole thing was, and remained, an
insoluble riddle."

The reader will at once see how the question of the presence of the
ross-gulls only added to Nansen's perplexity, as he could not know of
the real facts: that these gulls were seen to the north because

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

they came from the north. And the extreme variation of the compass in
the arctic regions is not due to the fact that the magnetic pole does
not coincide with the north pole, but is due to the peculiar
conformation of the region. In calculating the magnetic pole's position,
geographers have not allowed for the actual shape of the earth at the
polar regions. But that is a matter which belongs in another chapter.

How Nansen gradually made his way south until he came to land that he
knew and found his way to Cape Flora, where he met white men, does not
concern us here. Suffice it to say that he could not even then discover,
with all the maps at his disposal, just where he had spent the previous
summer and winter. He says:

### PAYER'S MAP DOES NOT HELP

"Much of Payer's map I found to coincide well enough with our own
observations. But the enigma over which we had pondered the whole winter
still remained unsolved. Where was Dove Glacier and the whole of Wilczek
Land? 'Where were the is-lands which Payer had named Braun Island,
Hoffmann Island, and Freden Island? The last might, no doubt have been
identified with the [southernmost](errata.htm#49) island of White Land
but the others had completely disappeared. I pondered for a long time
over the question how such a mistake could have crept into

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

a map by such a man as Payer--an experienced topographer, whose maps, as
a rule, bear the stamp of great accuracy and care, and a polar traveler
for whose ability I have always entertained a high respect".

### WHAT NANSEN'S EXPERIENCE PROVES

No further argument ought to be necessary to convince the reader that
the polar regions are not as well known as we are given to suppose. Here
is Nansen admitting that even with the maps before him, he cannot
identify the mysterious land which he found after making a sledge voyage
in which he did not once know just what his bearings were. And here is
his pronouncement that lands which were definitely marked on the map of
one of the best known explorers and a man used to map making simply did
not exist. Surely from those significant facts the reader can draw his
own conclusion: that the statements of Arctic travelers relative to
reaching the pole and discovering this land or that land, must be taken
with a great deal of reserve. When in the near future an æroplane or
dirigible shall actually travel over all these regions, the observers
thereon will see much that no Arctic explorer has ever told us about,
and they will fail to see some things which Arctic explorers have
claimed they found. Such observers will see the great barrier of
northern ice come to an end at the edge of a great polar ocean, and they
will sail high over that ocean until they see,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

even though it be in the midst of the Arctic winter, a sun that is
shining all the time. And then they will know that they have followed
the curve of that great ocean surface as it dipped out of sight of our
horizon and began to wash the shores of the inner surface of the world,
a surface divided even as the outer one is, into land and water, both
steeped in perpetual but cloud-engirt sunshine, and both the abode of
animal and vegetable life. There will be found the home of the ross-gull
and the haunt of Arctic bear and fox. And beyond that polar orifice they
will not only find those animals roaming and breeding, but they may see
the mammoth alive there that is so often found dead in the Siberian ice.
But to that immense animal, long thought extinct, we shall devote a
later chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Was the North Pole Discovered?](jei12)
