[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei23)  [Next](jei25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

# CHAPTER XXI.

### A NOTE ON GRAVITATION

It has been objected against our theory that the weight of the earth is
known and that it is much heavier than would be the case if it were
hollow as we have claimed. At first glance that might sound like a
plausible objection, but a moment's thought will dispel it. After all,
weight is a purely relative matter. The same object weighs more at the
polar orifice than it does at the equator because the pull of gravity
upon it differs. Weight, the reader will remember is due to the
attraction of the force of gravity and it varies according to the
distance there may be between the object and the center of the force of
gravity which is pulling on it. And as the force with which the earth
attracts objects is the original unit upon which the whole idea of
weight is based, it follows that we cannot use that unit to measure
itself--we have to take it for granted. What scientists actually did
when they "weighed the earth" was to assume, first of all that it was a
more or less homogenous sphere. They then observed the force with which
it exerted attractions on various bodies. But the amount of attraction
which the earth exerts, say, on a pendulum, bringing it to rest in a
certain time, is a fact which is not altered by showing that

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

the earth is hollow. All we can say is that a lesser mass of earth than
we had supposed is after all able to affect the pendulum. Or we can put
it this way. We had supposed in the past that it took the gravitational
force of a solid or semi-solid sphere the size of the earth to hold us
on its surface against the centrifugal force which would tend to throw
us off the surface of the earth owing to its fast rate of revolution.
Nov some people argue as if the truth of our theory would reduce the
gravity of the earth so that that centrifugal force would throw us all
off the earth. But that is not so. All we have to do is to admit that
the pulling force of the earth is greater than we had thought, for now
it appears that a globe which is not solid but hollow--however, having a
very thick shell--is sufficient to hold us by gravity against the push
of the centrifugal force.

### GRAVITATIONAL PULL IN THE INTERIOR

And one correspondent has even asked why the inhabitants, human or
animal, of the interior would not be pulled into the central sun by the
force of its gravitational pull. The answer is of course, easy. In the
first place the central sun is a very small body and its gravitational
pull is therefore counteracted by the gravitational pull of the shell of
the earth. And again, in the interior of the earth the centrifugal force
tends to hold things down to the ground, because it is always directed
from the center out at

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

right angles, and its direction is therefore the same whether one is on
the outside or the inside of the shell of the earth. When we are on the
outside we are held down against its pull by the combined gravitational
pull of the whole earth--shell and interior sun. If we were on the
inside of the earth we should be held by the balance of the forces, the
interior sun exerting a force of gravity on us which, if unopposed would
pull us into itself, the gravitational pull of the earth's shell pulling
us the other way, and the centrifugal force of the whirling earth adding
to that pull by pressing us against the inner surface. For that reason
if a man on the interior of the earth dug a hole--which would point the
opposite way to a hole which we would dig on our surface, he would be
likely to fall up, if he were careless, as we are to fall down a hole if
we do not take precautions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. How Our Theory Has Been Received](jei25)
