[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei25)  [Next](jei27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

# CHAPTER XXIII.

### OUR CONTROVERSY WITH DOMINIAN

One of the first newspapers to recognize the importance of our
contribution to the world's knowledge was the *Pittsburgh Leader*. In
their issue of December 28, 1913, they devoted a whole page to an
exposition of our theory, with illustrations of the earth and a portrait
of the writer of this book. They saw that if our idea was to be accepted
it must stand the acid test of discussion, and so they picked out the
most expert man they could find among scientists to examine the theory
critically and to demolish it if he could. The scientist to whom this
task was given was Dr. Leon Dominian, of the staff of the American
Geographical Society. So in his article on our theory we have what is in
effect the official answer of the scientists of the country, and
especially of those most interested, the geographers, to our ideas. If
there are any scientific arguments that go counter to our theory Dr.
Dominian knows them. If he fails to demolish our theory it may be taken
as proved, for there are no secrets in science, what one man discovers
is communicated to all other scientists through their periodicals and
societies, and when it comes to a matter of generally accepted
principles one scientist can talk for the whole body just as well as an-

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

other can. Science rests upon a body of accepted doctrine, and when Leon
Dominian speaks against our theory he is not uttering private objections
to it, but is voicing the objections which all scientists would hold.
And also when we answer Dr. Dominian we answer not an individual but the
concerted voice of orthodox science. We will now proceed to give in full
Dr. Dominian's attempt to demolish our theory, and after that we will
give, word for word, our reply--a reply which crushed Dr. Dominian, for
he never "came back" at all. Here, then, are his objections to our
arguments. He begins by discussing the mammoth:

### DR. DOMINIAN'S MAIN OBJECTIONS

"The matter of the presence of remains and of whole mastodons in the
Arctic ice has been known to the world for more than a hundred years. It
is acknowledged by all authorities in the subject that the region of the
poles was at one time in the earth's history a tropical zone. It is
believed that some disturbance caused the axis of the earth toward the
equatorial circle of the universe to change suddenly and to turn the
tropical regions of the poles into their present conditions of a world
of snow and ice. The mastodon were caught and preserved by the change,
death coming instantly to those that have been found as whole bodies.
Anyone who is not familiar with this explanation has not had much
training in glacial theories.

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

### CAUSE FOR RED SNOW

"As for the 'red snow' it is believed to be carried to those northern
cliffs of ice from a great distance just as the yellow sands of the
interior of the Desert of Sahara are swept through the air to Egypt
where it covers monuments and buildings at times with a coat of yellow.
All Southern Europe feels something of this same thing when the African
simoon becomes the French mistral with its sand-laden air that comes
from the Sahara across the Mediterranean to plague the people of the
Midi.

"There is no special significance in finding the trunk of a tree from
the Temperate zone in the Arctic Sea. The vagaries of floating objects
are too common for that find to excite anyone's suspicions or cause such
an incident to create a theory of a new world. As for the south-going
current observed by Nansen, that may be due to the one questionable
point in our knowledge of the polar regions--that is, whether there
really exists a continental mass south and west of Peary's route to the
Pole.

### A CONTINENTAL MASS

"From observation of the tidal currents the scientists of the United
States government believe that such a continental mass exists. If it
exists its outposts may be Peary's Crocker Land of 1896, Keenan Land,
the questionable Sanikov Land and the latest land sighted by the
Russians as reported a few weeks ago. It

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

is to discover the existence of such a continental mass that Stefansson
has gone into the polar seas under the patronage of the Canadian
Government.

"Roughly speaking, this continental mass is supposed to be north of
Siberia and Alaska, and it is the only portion of the Polar regions that
has not been explored. If Stefansson finds it some of the few 'popular'
mysteries of the Polar regions may be explained away, but none of them
is likely to be found to come out of the center of the earth. The
discoveries of Peary, Amundsen, and Scott at the two poles do not seem
to have been taken into account by Mr. Gardner."

### WE ARE NOT THUS DISPOSED OF

The Pittsburgh Leader thought that was a very conclusive answer to our
argument, and it added on its own account a paragraph to the effect that
all our arguments had been met by the studies which scientists had been
carrying on "for years and years"--as if we did not know all about those
very studies and quote them in our book. Also they played up in larger
type a statement by Dr. Dominian to this effect:

"Geographers know two things about the poles to-day.

"The North Pole is within an area of open sea. Peary proved this.

"The South Pole is on a continental mass of rock and ice. Amundsen and
Scott proved this.

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

"Scientists accept these discoveries as the final word in Polar
exploration, so far as the general conditions existing at the poles are
concerned."

 

As the official answer of science to our claims, the above remarks
strike us as being very weak indeed. So let us now reprint the answer
which we made at the time to Dr. Dominian's assertions--for they are
assertions of belief rather than arguments. Our answer was printed in a
prominent manner in the *Pittsburgh Leader* for February 8, 1914, as
follows:

### CONSTITUTION OF THE EARTH

"A Reply to Leon Dominian by Marshall B. Gardner, author of 'A Journey
to the Earth's Interior, or Have the Poles Really been Discovered.'

"When I sent out my little book I expected some very drastic criticism
at the hands of scientists. I knew that the great majority of scientific
men would not believe as I have come to believe in this matter. I also
thought that they would not only express that disbelief, but back it up
with arguments, and modify some of the details in my theory, or at least
find more suitable ways of expressing its essential facts.

"May I say at the outset of my answer to the member of the American
Geographical Society's staff who has written about my book in the
*Leader* that if his position on the staff of that society means that he
speaks with the authority of orthodox science and as a representative of
that science, then I am astonished

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

at the feeble resistance to the new idea which orthodox science is
putting up. That feebleness I shall now proceed to point out by taking
up Mr. Dominian's points in order and answering them. I shall then
mention a thing or two that he has apparently been quite unable to
answer and has left unanswered, although his doing so robs his reply of
all claim to be a really comprehensive answer to my arguments.

### THE MAMMOTH

"First: Mr. Dominian first attacks my evidence based on the finding of
the mastodon in a state of perfect preservation. He says these animals
are found imbedded in polar ice because once upon .a time the polar
lands, where their bodies are now found, were tropical. In those
tropical lands they lived and had their being, then all of a sudden some
disturbance caused the axis of the earth toward the equatorial circle of
the universe to change suddenly and turn the tropical regions of the
poles into their present conditions of a world of snow and ice, and that
the mastodons were caught and preserved by this change, death coming
instantly to those that have been found as whole bodies.

"'Well, I do not pretend to understand all of the above, especially that
phrase, 'the equatorial circle of the universe,' my common sense
judgment tells me that it is highly improbable. In the first place we
note that Mr. Dominian only believes this--he does

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

not prove it. Now the only theory of a sudden change in the earth's axis
for which scientists have ever claimed to have a shadow of proof is that
change which they assert took place when the moon was separated from the
surface of the earth. I doubt very much if that ever took place because
the depths of the oceans on earth are hardly enough to account for the
tearing away from the earth's surface of such a body as the moon. But
even if that sudden change did take place it occurred many million years
before there were any mammoths. 'Oh, well,' Mr. Dominian may reply,
'There was another sudden change after life had reached the point where
the mammoths did inhabit the northern region.' Well, suppose there was.
Why, then, are the mammoths alone preserved, and not the tropical
vegetation and surroundings in which they were when the sudden change
came? If the mammoth which I described in my book, which was caught
while it was eating, was preserved so well that the very food between
its teeth was identifiable, then why was not the food also preserved
which had not yet been lifted from the ground--why was none of the
surrounding foliage preserved? It is quite obvious that Mr. Dominian's
belief of a sudden change fails altogether to meet my point.

### THE RED SNOW

"Second: My critic's next point is that the red snow did not come from
the interior of the earth, but was pollen. He admits that it was blown
from other

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

places, just as the sand of the Sahara is blown across the Mediterranean
to Southern Europe.

"Now this is an interesting comparison, but it is not a complete
parallel. In the first place Mr. Dominian knows where the sand comes
from, but he does not pretend to say where the red pollen comes from.
And what is more, if he did try to say where it came from he would solve
the problem of its origin--and that has not yet been accomplished. But
suppose we agree with him that it comes from a great distance, then why
should it have such a strange affinity for the polar regions? Why should
it not be blown to Southern Europe or Pittsburgh? Strange that magnetic
attraction of the polar regions from a mysterious and great distance.

### ASTRADDLE A FLOATING LOG

"Three: With my critic's next objection I have less fault to find. In
fact it is the most logical in his whole paper. He says that there is no
special significance in finding the trunk of a tree from the temperate
zone floating in the Arctic Sea, the vagaries of floating objects being
too common for that find to create a theory of a new world.

"Now isn't that true? Don't we just have to bow down before Mr. Dominian
and assure him that he has indeed proved for all time that anyone who
founds a theory of the world on a floating log is indeed a fool? Logic
so compels us, and we do. Even Newton would hasten to deny that he
founded the

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

theory of gravity on the falling of an insignificant apple if he were to
hear that argument. But if Mr. Dominian is not merely laying down a
general truth here, but trying to imply that I founded my theory on a
floating log, then I must protest against his method of attacking an
opponent, for I merely mentioned that log as an interesting little piece
of corroborative evidence, and Mr. Dominian makes the most of it.

### A FEW POINTS HE FORGOT

"By contrast let us see how much he makes of my direct ocular evidence
from Mars, and which applies of course to every planet in the stellar
universe. I cannot see any mention of it, for in all of his reply he has
not deigned to discuss the matter at all.

"Well, perhaps he has shown where I am wrong on the Aurora Borealis. No.
I fail to find any mention of that in his answer.

"And yet he calls his remarks a reply to my theory and ventures on the
strength of them to assail my theory as impossible.

"Mr. Dominian himself admits the open polar sea, but he does not make
any illuminating comment on it or explain why there should be such a
warm sea around the North Pole. Except on my theory this is one of those
puzzles which the orthodox scientists may have a job to solve.

"In conclusion let me say that I do not claim to speak as a trained
scientist in putting out my theory. I have had no observatories or
subsidies, nor years of

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

training along scientific lines to assist me in these investigations. To
the criticism that amateurs attack great problems which true scientists
leave alone which has been said about me--all I can reply is that the
evidence makes the problem. I did not make up this theory out of a few
mathematical formulas and a vivid imagination. I simply saw the facts
and put them together. Any attempt to argue from the question of my
equipment as a scientist is futile. I have stated the facts. Can they be
explained in any other way? I answer, No."

### WE NEVER HEARD FROM HIM AGAIN

Well that is our answer to Dominian, and as we have said, above, we
never heard from him again. That his attempt to overthrow our theory was
ridiculous is perfectly evident. We might have said more than we did in
answer to him, but what we said was sufficient.

For instance, we might have added to our remarks on the mastodon, that
if the axis of the earth had shifted with such suddenness as to freeze
them instantly--which could not have happened anyway--but even if we
suppose that it did, the enormous centrifugal force evolved would have
lifted the beasts from the surface of the earth and as they fell they
would have been dashed into fragments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Our Country and Our Theory](jei27)
