[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](botd07)  [Next](botd09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434485382/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Brother of the Third Degree*, by Will L. Garver, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

#### MEMBER OF THE FIFTH DEGREE.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> card I had received from the Madame
read M. Raymond, Rue Notre Dame des Champs, and then several lines of
writing in what I took to be Sanskrit. While not a Sanskrit scholar, I
knew the alphabet and simple word-combinations; but this writing I was
unable to decipher. Repairing promptly on time to the address given, I
was met at the door of an unpretentious residence by a small,
nervous-looking man with a black pointed beard and well-waxed mustache.
Upon presenting the card he looked at me keenly for a moment, and then
invited me in and motioned me to a seat.

What is your name, please?" he asked, quite pleasantly.

"Alphonso Colono," I replied.

"Well, Monsieur Colono, you have been sent here for me to find out how
much you know; do you wish to proceed with the examination at once, or
do you desire time for preparation?"

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

Although this was a little unexpected, I determined to lose no time, and
answered: "If it is convenient for Monsieur, yes."

"No inconvenience," he replied; "we will proceed at once. When a thing
is to be done, it should be done. Come into this room." He led the way
to an adjoining room which looked like a university condensed. On the
walls were blackboards, maps, charts and drawings, while globes,
terrestrial and celestial, chemical appliances and laboratory apparatus
were on numerous tables. The work commenced at once, and for seven days
I was subjected to the most rigid and thorough examination upon every
department of human knowledge, from the very elements to the highest
studies of science and philosophy.

The little man seemed to possess almost universal knowledge, and took
everything in a systematic and orderly manner.

On the afternoon of the seventh day, without a word or hint to let me
know my standing, he gave me a card written in Sanskrit and told me to
go to my home and await developments. Not a word of encouragement, not a
sign of either commendation or otherwise.

I returned home, thinking that I was as much as ever in the dark, and
apparently making very slow progress. Another week passed, and still no
information. On questioning M. Durant

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

one day when I met him alone, he answered that he had done all he could,
and that from thenceforth I must trust to the fates and rely upon myself
alone. On the evening of the fourteenth day I received a note through
the mail, requesting me to call at the rooms of M. Raymond. I did so
without delay; in fact, I was becoming slightly impatient.

M. Raymond met me at the door and ushered me in and along the hall to a
rear room, where, upon entering, I found myself in the presence of four
other men who were seated at a center-table. Each had his face entirely
concealed by a black mask, sufficiently long to conceal whiskers. At a
sign from M. Raymond, I took a seat beside him near the end, when one of
the men handed me a paper across the table, at the same time all keeping
their eyes fixed intently upon me. Opening the piper I found it to be a
pledge with blank spaces for signatures. It read as follows:

<span class="small">I, Alphonso Colono, son of Ferdinand and Nina
Colono, do most solemnly swear and affirm, in the name of my parents and
nay sacred honor, and in the presence of my living soul and Almighty
God, to maintain inviolable secrecy until death as regards all teachings
and instructions that may be given me in the Secret Hermetic Schools;
and I likewise swear and affirm never to divulge or reveal anything
concerning persons, things or places which knowledge may come to me
through connection with these schools.</span>

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

"Will you sign that?" asked the man who had handed it.

"I will, with one qualification," I replied. "And what is that?" he
asked.

"That my ideas of God may not be misunderstood or misconstrued, I would
have the words—the Infinite and All-pervading Spirit—inserted after the
word God. I do not believe in God as many men give meaning to that
word."

The four men looked at one another and then at M. Raymond.

"Very well," said the leader, "we will insert the clause." He took the
paper and made the insertion, handing it back when he had finished.

Again reading the pledge, I signed. Then each of the four signed as
witnesses and handed it to M. Raymond. As the latter signed, I noticed
that each had put a different and peculiar mark after his signature.

"Now, M. Colono," said the spokesman, as he took the paper, "you are an
accepted member of the fifth degree of the Fourth Degree. The Fourth
Degree has seven sub-degrees; you were born in the third sub, and have
for eight years been unconsciously a member of the fourth. You pass to
higher degrees as your growth and knowledge permits. Men are frequently
members of the lower degrees when they know it not. Admission does not
consist in the possession of a certificate,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

but in compliance with the rules. Those who obey the rules and lead the
life are members, though they know it not. In this degree the watchwords
are—Study, Patience, Knowledge—and all advance depends upon the efforts
of the student and the purity of the motive that prompts his desire for
knowledge. At the start know that all depends on you, and on you alone.
Ask no advice, but rely upon your inward strength. Now you are excused.
Next Thursday night there will be a masquerade ball at the residence of
M. Careau; a party will call for you, and you will please attend." As he
finished, he motioned toward the door. Ushered through the hall by M.
Raymond, I departed, wondering what possible connection there could be
between a masquerade ball and a school of occultism. Then I recalled the
name Careau. Careau, why that was the name of the secretary of war, who
had ordered the removal of the picture from the Louvre.

I had not learned much that was definite in its nature, but the isolated
incidents were becoming more connected. "A party will call for me—I hope
it will be my unknown friend," I muttered. "But will she be masked, and
will I never see her face?" Thus thinking and soliloquizing I returned
home, and applied myself with still greater diligence to my studies.

Thursday evening came, and I had robed myself

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

as a monk and was awaiting my expected caller. It was something after
seven o'clock when a cal) drove up to the front gate, and to my
disappointment a man got out, and, proceeding to the entrance, rang the
bell and sent me his card. Joseph Henry, I read, awaits you at the
carriage. The sender had returned to the cab, and, adjusting my
garments, I soon joined him. Where the Careau mansion was I had not as
yet learned; but the carriage started directly toward the center of the
city. "Have you the card given you by M. Raymond?" asked my companion in
pure English.

"I have," I answered.

"Then it will not be necessary for me to accompany you; and as I have
some other very important business to attend to, I will give you my
carriage and leave you to proceed alone." Before I could answer, he
continued:

"When you arrive at the ball-room entrance present your card, and when
admitted answer all questions that may be asked and obey all commands
that may be given."

"I shall do as you have instructed," I answered, at the same time
thinking this was a strange proceeding for obtaining entrance into a
ball-room. As the stranger vouchsafed no further remarks, we drove on in
silence until we reached the Madeleine, when he got out of the carriage
which

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

immediately turned about and proceeded rapidly away. Along the
brilliantly-lighted thoroughfares, the sidewalks of which were thronged
with crowds of gay and careless people, the driver hurried until we came
to a boulevard less brilliantly lighted. We continued along this at a
rapid pace for about thirty minutes when we drove up to a gate in front
of a brilliantly-lighted residence some distance from tine street. After
a brief stop we passed through and drove up to the front portico. As I
got out of my carriage a veiled woman in black left a cab just in front
of mine. Seeing me, she turned as though about to speak, when a tall,
cloaked figure passed between us, and I heard the words—"four plus
three." The woman immediately turned and hastened up the steps, while
the man disappeared around a pedestal. The same happy sensation which I
had experienced when in company with the unknown woman in black some
weeks before again ran through me, and I felt certain that this was the
same party. I hurried up the steps and entered a crowded hall just in
time to gee her disappear through a side door. There was evidently some
delay in obtaining entrance into the ball-room, as the hall was full of
masked people rushing forward to the entrance, I found that only one was
admitted at a time, and the door was closed for several minutes after
each entry. Somewhat mystified at these proceedings, I took my turn

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

and presented my ticket. After a careful scrutiny by the masked
door-keeper, it was returned and I was admitted, the door closing behind
me.

A blank wall was in front, but turning down a narrow passage to the
right, I found myself in a small, square room filled with a green light
from a chandelier in the center, and containing two occupants. At a
table at my right sat an aged patriarch, whose long, white hair, beard
and shaggy eyebrows gave him indeed a venerable appearance. At my left,
at another table, sat a black-robed woman, whose youthful features were
only partly concealed by a black mask across the eyes, which, black and
piercing, sparkled like coals of fire.

"Your name?" asked the patriarch.

"Alphonso Colono," I answered.

"Are you sworn?" asked the low, penetrating voice of the woman.

"I am," I answered.

"Let us see your card."

I handed it to the woman, who, after examination returned it with a bow
and motion for me to alsc hand it to the patriarch. Bowing affirmatively
to the woman, he returned it and asked:

"Your place and date of birth?"

"Paris, June the 5th, 18—."

"The hour?"

"Seven forty-five A.M.," I answered.

"Pass to the left," said the woman, who had

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

taken down each answer. As though by some secret signal a door opened at
the left, and passing through I found myself with another masked man in
a room corresponding to the first.

"Brother," said the man, motioning me to a seat, "all these
preliminaries which you have gone through may seem strangely out of
place on an occasion like this, and I will therefore explain: Those who
participate in this ball are our chosen sons and daughters, the flowers
of all lands. It is but right that we should protect them from the
wolves who, under the polish of a smooth exterior, desecrate and soil.
The lives they lead make them extremely sensitive to every evil thought
and influence; and we must therefore exercise great care. Brother, it is
your privilege this night to associate with the world's purest and most
perfect men and women. Higher, indeed, there are, but they are not of
this world. We hope and believe you are worthy of this privilege. Your
presence here constitutes your introduction to all. Formalities and
conventionalities, so necessary among the shams and deceptions of the
outside world, are here unknown. All are brothers and sisters. Enter!
Enjoy life in its highest aspect, where heart and mind unite in harmony
with the body's rhythmic motion, and purest love is queen."

He opened a door, and I found myself in a brilliantly-lighted ball-room.
The sweet strains of a

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

waltz filled the room, and rich perfumes were fragrant in the air. For a
moment I stood at the door, surveying the hall, in the hope of seeing
her who wore the black dress; but she was nowhere to be seen.

"Does the father grant to woman equal rights with man?" said a low
feminine voice at my side. Turning, I found a pretty peasant girl beside
me. Wondering what could be the purport of such a question at such a
time, I answered as I thought:

"Sex should be no bar to rights; hearts and brains should determine
these. In things of heart the woman should have every right and be
supreme; in things of head, the man."

"Ah! then the father does not think that woman is equal to man when it
comes to mind?"

"Not as a rule; exceptions there most truly are, but exceptions only."

"Well, father cannot consider the dance a thing of mind, so I ask him to
join me in the waltz."

The incidents of the last few days had not been of a nature to stimulate
the frivolous in me; the sudden appearance of my mother and
disappearance of my father, together with my examination and studies,
had made me of a very serious turn of mind; but I could not refuse, so
we were soon gliding over the waxed floor in the swaying movement of the
dance.

Get any body of people to do the same thing at

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

the same time, no matter how simple or insignificant it may be in
itself, and you unite them, as it were, in a common unity. I soon felt
myself as a part of the assembly, and forgot my cares and worries in the
pleasure imbibed from these free, gay hearts. My companion was a
graceful dancer, and hung like a fairy on my arm. The feeling that
filled me was not, however, like the heart-thrilling sensations that had
been caused by the woman in black, but in the pleasure of the moment she
was forgotten. The waltz ended, and once more I was my individual self.
Serious thoughts again stole on my mind, and, recalling that I was a
monk, I determined to take advantage of the character.

"What if the bishop of your diocese had seen you just now, gay monk?
where would be your charge?" questioned my fair companion with a merry
laugh.

"Father forgive me, I will never do it again," I solemnly replied. "Oh,
that I should for one moment have allowed a beautiful woman to tempt me
thus!"

"Another case, my father, of Adam and Eve and the weakness of poor man,"
said my gay companion with a mocking laugh.

"Yes, the devil subtly tempts us under the guise of beauty," I answered,
preserving my character with all its dignity.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

"But, my father, where would Adam's children be to-day had it not been
thus? Poor imbeciles, blind fools, without mind or sense; innocent but
devoid of knowledge. Blessed be Eve who tempted man to eat of the tree
which bringeth wisdom," said my hitherto simple peasant girl, becoming
serious.

"With subtle sophistries thou triest to defend thy erring mother; beware
of heresy, my child."

"Heresy! Do not the Scriptures themselves so say? Did she not tempt him
to eat of the tree that bringeth a knowledge of good and evil, and makes
men as Gods? Who can criticise so high and noble an aspiration?"

"Child, child, confess thy sins before God's wrath shall damn thee," I
said, wondering if all here were like her.

"God has no wrath; the Scriptures say that God is Love."

"Child, who taught thee thus to misconstrue the sacred words of
Scripture?"

"Misconstrue! For two thousand years monks like thee, with biased minds,
have perverted truth and filled men's minds with errors; and dost thou
now thus question me?" Her eyes sparkled with the fire of enthusiasm and
indignation. Evidently her whole soul was in the argument. Things were
getting interesting, I was about to be cornered, but I must maintain my
part, so I answered:

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

"For this men are themselves to blame, not us. We veil in forms and
under symbols the sacred truths, and men, not using reason, take the
shell and lose the kernel, feed on husks and see not the corn."

"But why not teach the plain pure truth? why thus deceive by forms?"

"It must be so; to cast our pearls before swine, to trample under feet,
would be but waste and loss of time and woefully indiscreet."

"Ah! does the father hint at occultism in the Church of Rome?"

"Hush! Talk not so loud; the walls have ears. What knowest thou of
occultism?"

"A thumb's length," she answered quickly and mystically; and as I
answered not, she looked surprised. Evidently I was caught—there were
passwords here.

"Ah! I comprehend," she said. "Come with me and I will show you what we
know." Now deeply interested, and wondering what was next, I followed.

I now noticed that a series of doors lined the hall on each side.
Leading the way across to the left, she knocked upon one of these four
times. It was immediately opened and we entered.

The sides of the room were surrounded by shelves full of books, and the
green walls had a frieze of mystic symbols. At a number of tables

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

were groups of men and women, apparently engaged in study. These groups
were invariably six in number, with a seventh who was evidently a
teacher.

In the center of the room, at a table which almost surrounded him, sat a
middle-aged man whose features were only partly concealed by a black
mask across his eyes. Approaching this man my companion said, "A new
student."

Turning to me the man said, "Let me see your card, please." After
inspecting the card he returned it, and addressing my conductor, said:

"The groups are completed to-night; but if Mademoiselle will leave him
in my charge I will attend to his instruction."

My companion bowed and was about to retire, when I asked if it would be
out of order for me to see her after the ball. "I will await the father
at the entrance," she smilingly replied, and departed. " Monsieur," said
the man, motioning me to draw up a seat near him at the table, "Your
card from M. Raymond, E.E. (Exoteric Examiner), says you have passed a
very creditable examination and are competent to receive further and
more difficult instructions. From now on your study will be that great
but wonderfully neglected mystery—Man, including all that pertains to
man, socially and individually, but, first of all, man as a being. Now
to come closer to the point, you, yourself, are

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

a man and therefore your study is yourself. Your presence here implies
that you are comparatively free from bias and ready and willing to look
your own nature, good and bad, squarely in the face. Is this correct?"

"It is," I answered, thinking I was on the right track at last.

"Very well, then know that every man is dual in his nature—male and
female in one, as says the much misunderstood book of Genesis when read
between the lines. That is, the male and female elements make up your
constitution. Now you are a man, the male element predominating; the
female element is in you, but subservient. The first thing for you to
do, the first great step in all occult initiations, is to bring these
two elements into a state of equilibrium. Man must be conjoined with
woman; mind must be conjoined with heart. Mind, unchecked by heart or
the intuitions that come therefrom, but leads to blind materialism and
cold dead forms, the riddle of the universe it cannot solve. Heart,
divorced from mind, leads but to blind, fanatic faith, where reason is
unknown and fancy runs the imagination wild. To reach supreme
enlightenment, reason and conscience must go hand in hand, indissolubly
united. Now the method we pursue to bring this end so much desired is
very simple, hut its simplicity may lead astray; do not mistake; mark
well my words.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To every male we
join a female in the lawful bonds of love. You, through her, unfold your
female nature, she, through you, her male; and thus is brought that
equilibrium so indispensable to light. This is the meaning of this ball.
Unlike the monks of old, we cultivate that flame called love, but only
in its purest form. Bear this in mind, and know that your growth depends
upon your union with a female soul. Among our sisters you will find
those who are worthy of your highest love. If one you find whose soul is
sympathetic with your own, choose her to be your mate; but do not choose
unless your heart so bids, and ever let your thoughts be pure."

I thought of the doctrine of sympathetic souls and my parents' early
teachings. And here it was that my father met my mother; was I here also
to meet my fate? My thoughts drifted to the woman in black, and I was
anxious to meet her again and know more of her.

"Now," continued my teacher, "we will consider the signs, veiled words,
and allegories of the mystics, in particular those of Hermes
Trismegistus, Paracelsus, Jacob Bohme, Elephas Levy, and the much
misrepresented and little understood Madame Blavatsky. You are supposed
to be somewhat familiar with the published works of these teachers, but
only the few find the hidden teachings in their books." Now followed two
hours of

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

instruction upon the doctrines of these teachers, and for the first time
the veil commenced to be pulled aside. The works of these great mystics
had been in my father's library, and we had often studied them together;
but while father had often hinted at the esoteric meaning of many parts
of these books, he had never divulged it, saying I must learn it in the
regular way. Now it appeared the opportunity had come.

All this time each group had carried on its studies in low subdued
tones, and my instructor spoke in like manner. Suddenly a single chord
of music vibrated through the room, and all study ceased.

"The time has come for unmasking and the after converse," said my
teacher. "We meet every week, but in order to avoid undesired attention,
alternately at the home of another member. In the meantime prosecute
your studies. Obtain the works of these writers at M. Callio's, being
careful to get only those which have a peculiar mark on the —— page, and
then dwell long and earnestly upon the italics."

We were now in the hall which, masks being removed, was thronged with
beautiful, refined and intelligent-looking women and handsome and
serious-looking men. No introductions were necessary, as the man at the
entrance had said, your presence being sufficient. I now found myself

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

in society as it should be, where men and women were true brothers and
sisters and mind and heart dwelt upon the loftiest aspirations and the
most profound questions. And what was my surprise and pleasure, here was
Camille and many of my social friends. They all crowded around,
congratulating me upon my advance.

"You now see," said Camille smiling, "that a woman can keep a secret if
she chooses; but from now on we can talk a little more freely."

"But where are Monsieur and Madame Durant?" I asked.

"They are not members of this section, they belong to a still higher
degree, I believe," she answered.

A curly-headed Frenchman now claimed her attention and I turned to seek
my peasant sister. As I was vainly searching to find her, the veiled
woman in black came out of a side door just as I was passing. That same
thrill of pleasure ran through my frame, the same panting breath; now is
my time, I thought, I must speak to her.

"Mademoiselle," I said, "we meet again."

She turned, but even under her veil her face was masked.

"Have we ever met before?" she asked in English.

The voice was not the same, but perhaps this was because of language;
before she had spoken

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

in French, in which language I had addressed her, and which she
therefore understood.

"Does not Mademoiselle remember the carriage drive?" I asked, still
persisting in using French.

"What carriage drive?" she replied, equally persistent in English.

I recalled my pledge of secrecy and was hesitating whether or not I
could speak more fully, when we reached another door, and with a low bow
that meant dismissal, she left me.

What meant this cold reception? Her actions were unlike the others. She
did not even deign to speak as friend. Could my heart have made mistake?
No, it must be her; I felt her absence. Now I noticed that a number of
people were still masked. In the hope of extending my acquaintance I was
about to address one of these, when I was surrounded by a group and
carried into a discussion on medicine.

Another hour passed in most interesting conversation, when a small,
white hand was placed upon my shoulder, and, looking up, I saw my
peasant sister, but she was still masked.

"I am about to leave, my reverend father," she said with a mocking
smile, "and will bid you goodnight."

"May I not act as escort?" I asked, rising and accompanying her toward
the door.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

With pleasure, if you so desire," she answered, and together we passed
the entrance.

The two inner guards were gone, but the doorkeeper was still on duty.

"If you go with me you must grant one request," said my companion, as we
descended the steps.

"It is already granted; what is it?" I replied.

"That I see you home in my carriage," she answered to my surprise.

"Why this is not leap-year," I ventured, half protestingly.

"Never mind, no jokes, my request is granted."

"Very well, if you insist," I answered, as we entered her carriage and
were quickly driven toward my home. As we drove up in front of the
Durant mansion a most interesting conversation ceased, and as the
carriage stopped I got out and thanked her for her kindness in taking me
to my teacher and thus escorting me home. In reply she said:

"Had you persisted in the dance, sober monk, you would not have had the
opportunity again for a long time. You stood your first and unsuspected
test well, and chose the serious and not the frivolous. I congratulate."

"Well, dear sister, I thank you and bid you good-night, hoping soon to
meet you again when

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

I may see. your face. Why do you and the other few thus hide your faces
with masks?"

"There are those who deem it best to hide their identity even from their
brothers; as you advance you will no doubt know the reason why.
Goodbye." I thought I detected a change in her voice, and, strange to
say, that never-to-be-forgotten thrill ran through my frame and a joyous
pleasure filled my heart. But she was gone; what did it mean? Was my
dream of sympathetic souls naught but a dream? Did I have two loves?
Thus pondering I sought my room.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Iole](botd09.md)
