[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](botd04)  [Next](botd06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434485382/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Brother of the Third Degree*, by Will L. Garver, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### PARIS—MOTHER!

<span class="smallcaps">Arriving</span> at Paris, Garcia hailed a cab
and we were driven rapidly across the city to the palatial residence of
Monsieur Durant, an old-time friend of my parents, and for whom I had a
sealed letter from my father.

M. Durant, an elderly gentleman of about sixty years with a military
looking beard and mustache slightly sprinkled with gray, met us at the
entrance in person, and, grasping my hand and speaking most cordially,
led the way to his private reception-rooms.

After some time in pleasant conversation Garcia arose, and, saying he
would see me again, departed, leaving me alone with M. Durant to whom I
now gave the letter from my father as he had instructed.

As he broke the seal and opened the letter a casual glance showed me it
was written in hieroglyphics.

M. Durant read its contents in silence, then

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

turned, and setting his dark, piercing eyes on me, held them there for
several seconds as though trying to read my inmost thoughts. At last,
evidently satisfied with his inspection, he kindly remarked that I would
be his guest for some time; and, as I was no doubt tired, he would
accompany me to my room. Reaching a nicely furnished room upon the
second floor, with a window looking out upon the lawn, he told me to
rest, repair my toilet, and make myself perfectly at home; and he would
call in the course of an hour and accompany me to tea with Mme. Durant
and their daughter Camille.

An hour later M. Durant returned, and we proceeded to a private
supper-room where I was introduced to Mme. Durant and Camille. Madame
was a rotund woman of medium height with a broad, motherly face, black
eyes and hair, and very kind and agreeable in her manner. Camille was a
stately brunette with broad, white brow and lustrous eyes, that spoke
welcome as she shook my hand and took her seat beside me at the table.
The pleasant manners of all soon made me feel as one of the family, and
I soon cast off all reserve.

The lunch was very light, and consisted solely of fruits and nuts, Mme.
Durant remarking by way of explanation that their rules were to have
only two regular meals a day and a light repast for supper.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

I assured them that it was no hardship for me, as I had been raised from
childhood on a strict Buddhist diet of only two meals a day and no meat.
After a half hour's conversation Camille and I were fast friends, and,
with the smiling consent of her parents, we started on a tour of the
mansion.

Camille's education had evidently not been neglected, for as we walked
along the richly furnished halls and up the marble stairway she talked
with equal fluency and show of thought upon art, science and philosophy.
Her mind seemed to glide by instinct into the channels of my own, and
our sentiments were nearly one on almost every subject. How pleasant it
is to converse and be with those whose thoughts are in harmony with your
own. Over an hour was spent in the magnificent art gallery and not a
word was foolish or frivolous in its nature. When at last we parted for
the night, a carriage drive over the city was on the program for the
morrow.

On the following morning M. Durant met me in the hall and said he wished
to have a talk with me before my drive with Camille. So immediately
after breakfast we proceeded together to his private room. Having closed
the door he offered me a seat opposite him at a center table; then
leaning forward on his hands and looking me fixedly in the eyes he said:

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

"Alphonso Colono, your father informs me by his letter that you desire
entrance into certain secret schools that exist in Paris; and he further
vouches for your preliminary training and knowledge. Now do you
earnestly desire to enter these schools? If so, what motive prompts your
desire?"

"M. Durant," I replied, "from a child I have been fond of knowledge, and
knowledge is now the ambition of my life. The information that the
outside scientific world can give me does not satisfy; it can tell me
nothing concerning the real nature of things, and its knowledge consists
of a mass of unexplained facts and phenomena only. But from the
teachings received from my father, I am led to believe that there are
those in the world whose knowledge is not confined to such narrow
limits, that they will aid me to reach real knowledge, and it is them I
seek."

"Do you realize the serious nature of true knowledge? Do you know the
requirements necessary to its possession? Do you know the immense
responsibilities and duties that it brings?"

"These to some extent I know and realize; and these I am ready and
willing to meet and assume."

"You speak bravely and with confidence, but I fear you know not all.
Nevertheless, I believe

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

your motive pure, and will try to find some one who is associated with
this school and tell him of your desires. In the meantime you are not to
speak or talk with Camille upon this subject; and, furthermore, you are
pledged to silence. Do I hear your pledge?"

"You do," I answered.

"Now, referring to your knowledge: Your father says you are well
advanced in medicine, art, and law; this is well, for these are
indispensable requisites for an active life for mankind. He further says
you have not as yet received the formal and superficial titles that are
deemed so essential in this world, the great majority of whose people
never look beneath the surface.

"Therefore I advise you to enter the exoteric schools and institutes,
and get diplomas and certificates in these three professions. Your
knowledge will enable you to carry on all three subjects at the same
time. And while they can give you no real knowledge, they can teach you
much that will be of advantage in the world. In art, they can teach you
skill with the hand; in law, diplomacy and forms; in medicine, they can
teach you surgery, and give you confidence in yourself from the
ignorance they show.

"Then, further, you will form acquaintances, gain influence, and, if you
are accepted as a candidate for the secret schools, be ready for
consideration

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

without delay, for these qualifications are necessary to all who would
enter therein. Now, be silent; for the present you may go."

I left the room, and, proceeding along the hall, met Camille and
accompanied her in a pleasant drive over the city.

As on the evening before, she again demonstrated her ability as a
conversationalist and entertainer, and when we returned our friendship
was established.

Thus time passed, and Camille and I were almost constantly together. She
was a student of art at the Ecole des Beaux Arts, and, at her request,
and in accordance with M. Durant's advice, I also matriculated. At the
same time I entered two of the most celebrated schools for instruction
in medicine and law.

Through the Durants I gained entrance into the highest social circles of
Paris, forming many strong friendships with her beautiful and
intellectual women, and becoming closely associated with many men of
serious and studious minds. Although surrounded and in almost constant
association with the beauty and intellect of the French metropolis, I
had not, as yet, found my ideal love. Camille and I were closely
attached to each other, but only as brother and sister, and we called
each other such.

I often recalled the remarks of my father about

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

my sympathetic soul, and questioned myself if my ideal of love was not
too high. Born in purest wedlock, taught from youth to view love in its
purest beauty, I pictured it in most exalted form. I found great
pleasure in dwelling upon ideal conceptions of the beautiful and good;
and, as this habit continued, my ideals grew stronger and purer, until
perfect man and woman and perfect civilization were constantly uppermost
in my mind. Father corresponded regularly, and his letters were always
filled with words of loving tenderness and good advice. He urged me to
prosecute my search for knowledge, and learn patience, so as not to be
discouraged by the apparent slow manner in which true knowledge comes.
"For," he wrote, "knowledge is a growth, and not an external
acquirement; and all enduring growths are slow. As your faculties unfold
and your organism becomes perfected, true knowledge, which ever dwells
within, will find the instruments necessary for its manifestation, and
come forth."

Garcia, without a word of explanation, had altogether disappeared; and,
trusting M. Durant to attend to my application for membership into the
secret schools, I settled down to business and concentrated all nay
energies upon my studies; and this without divorcing myself from social
life, for the keynote of my father's teachings was concentration. I had
so cultivated this power, that

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

while in my study I was all student, elsewhere, I was in harmony with my
surroundings.

Father's letters contained not a word concerning mother and sister, and,
notwithstanding his peculiar remarks to the contrary, I had concluded
they had perished in that fateful storm.

This conclusion soon received a startling contradiction.

It was on the night of the fifth of September, one year after my arrival
at the Durant mansion, and Camille and I occupied a box at the Grand
Opera House where Mlle. Vivani, the world-renowned prima-donna, was to
appear that evening.

The house was filled to its utmost capacity in expectation of the great
event, and the élite of the city were out *en masse*. The hour had
arrived for the performance to commence, and the audience was eager with
expectation, when the manager appeared before the curtain, and, with a
low and courteous bow, addressed the questioning audience:

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "it is with mingled feelings of sorrow
and pleasure that I have to make an announcement.

"Mlle. Vivani has contracted a severe cold and will not be able to
appear this evening."

A shuffle of feet and murmur of disappointment ran through the audience,
when the speaker continued:

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

"But I am pleased to announce that another will appear in her place,
who, while not known upon the stage, has a right to be ranked with the
highest who are, and who will surely meet and gratify your highest
expectations. It is my pleasure, ladies and gentlemen, to present to you
Mme. Nina, the unknown queen of song."

As he spoke a beautiful and stately woman, dressed in a Grecian costume
of purest white, appeared upon the stage.

A thrill ran through my form, my limbs trembled with agitation, a
suppressed cry escaped my lips; I leaned forward with a startled look,
and as Camille, dumfounded by my actions, laid her hand upon my shoulder
and asked what was wrong, I uttered the one word—"Mother!" Yes, there
upon the stage, in all her queenly beauty, her broad white brow and dark
lustrous eyes now more beautiful than ever, was my mother. Mother, or
her living image?

As though the intensity of my gaze attracted her, she turned, and her
eyes met mine. A momentary pallor came over her face and she gripped her
hand; then, as if by a supreme effort of will, turned her eyes to the
audience.

Now her voice rises in song. Yes, it is the same sweet voice I had
listened to so often, but, if anything, more sweet than ever.

With wondrous power her voice rises and falls

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

in almost celestial harmony as she sings that great love song, "Utopian
Lovers," each word carrying with it the power of a virgin heart. Under
its soul-soothing power I forgot my agitation, and, entranced, was only
aroused as the last words died away, followed by a deafening roar of
applause.

"Oh, Camille!" I cried, as she disappeared, "that is my long-lost
mother, whom for years I have thought dead. I cannot be in error. I must
see her."

"Alphonso, what ails you? Your mother died eight years ago. ’Tis only a
resemblance; don't be so agitated."

Again she appeared, and, as though she knew me, her eyes again met mine
in kind and loving look.

And—was I deceived? I hear the words as though coming from within my
ears: "Be calm, my son, be brave and do your duty; all is well."

"Camille, did you hear that?" I asked.

"No; hear what?"

Then her voice again arose in the deep and soul-thrilling words of "The
Virgin Wedding." A death-like stillness seized the audience; au
all-pervading calm seemed to hold each being. Never had Paris been so
entranced before.

For several moments after she had Ceased a hush pervaded all, as though
too sacred for applause,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

and then—a heavy breath, as from a thousand souls at once, was followed
by a deafening roar. Tears had come to many eyes; not tears of pain, but
tears of suppressed emotion.

Souls that had never before given thought to beauty and love, were
thrilled by the all-pervading love stirred by that heavenly voice and
soul.

It was the last appearance.

"Camille," I said, "it is my mother. I must speak to her; I must see
her. Let us to the stage entrance."

"I don't know what is the matter with you," she replied, "but lead the
way; where you go I follow."

Quickly we hurried to the stage entrance most convenient, and, pushing
open the door, entered but to be confronted by a tall, cloaked figure.

"Albarez!" I exclaimed, for I could never forget his face.

"Alphonso Colono," replied the adept, "away and do your duty; when that
is done then can you meet your mother. All is well—away!"

"And then she is my mother?"

"She is or was, now she awaits you in the Brotherhood where alone will
you ever meet her. Away!"

And, as though I could not disobey, I turned away, and hurrying with
Camille to a cab, returned home all agitation and excitement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. More Mystery](botd06)
