[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](botd19)  [Next](botd21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434485382/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Brother of the Third Degree*, by Will L. Garver, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

### CHAPTER XIX.

#### BROTHER OF THE "THIRD DEGREE."

<span class="smallcaps">Everything</span> else being equal, the more
thought a man bas given any subject the more apt is he to be right
thereon. But far more important than thought itself is an honest desire
to know the truth, free from bias and without preference. The man who
seeks for truth with a selfish motive will never find it, for his
desires will pervert his judgment and befog his reason. Truth is pure
and undefiled, and none but the pure in heart and mind can see it in all
its beauty. The greatest cause of error in the world is that prejudice
which distorts facts to make them fit with preconceived opinions, and
prejudice has its root in self. Remembering my motto—"Forget self,"— I
had instantly chosen the path which seemed to bring more arduous labor.
Trusting to the love of truth and right within me, I had chosen with
hardly a second thought. Had I chosen right? St. Germain soon dispelled
my doubt by saying:

"Brother, you and your noble sister are most

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

truly one; you have chosen the path on which your sister now precedes
you, and without delay you shall join her. Two souls like yours should
work together until the end. But before we send you forth, we will help
you to unlock the mighty powers within your soul. These powers, so long
withheld, can be but faintly realized by what I now tell you. Power will
be given thee to surround thyself with an impenetrable shield, to become
invisible even though present, to project your conscious astral to a
distance, to transmute metals, to read the past and the future so far as
determined; to read the hearts and minds of men, to influence their
thoughts unknown, to control the elements, to cast out demons, to heal
the sick by power of will, to mould into visible forms the astral
substance, and to master all the powers of nature by the God-power in
yourself. I say these powers will be given to you; but, more correctly,
you give them to yourself, for you even now possess them though you know
it not, otherwise you never could for nothing can be added to man from
without, all comes from within. Before I give you the secret which
enables you to unlock yourself, I must be convinced beyond all shadow of
doubt that you never will use them for selfish ends, even though to save
your life or those you love. Of your unselfishness I am now convinced,
not only by your soul as visible to the spiritual

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

sight, but from your life for seven years. But one duty you have yet to
perform before I can give you the sacred word; your body must receive a
complete and final purification, and that necessitates your return to it
in the West.

"Iole will return here and wait for your life-term to terminate, which
is not long."

"And has every man a fixed time for his bodily dissolution?" I asked.

"Every organism has a time fixed for its dissolution," he replied, "but
as man changes his organism, so also does he change the time for its
death. The astrological conditions which meant death to your
constitutional combination previous to the time when modified by your
will, have no power over your organism as it now is. During life you
have, by the power of will, so modified your form that its dissolution
comes under different planetary aspects. Esoteric astrology does not
preclude free-will or the power of man to modify his nature."

"Then destiny is a variable quantity?" I asked.

"Every conscious act of will brings a modification in your so-called
destiny; but only a few men consciously will, most following blindly the
impulses or tendencies of their nature. Therefore, most men's lives are
fixed and subject to only slight variations. But there are exceptions,
and

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

if you take a man of powerful mind and will it is difficult to cast his
horoscope; for he can in a few short hours modify his course in life,
and his predominant quality to-day may be replaced by another
to-morrow."

"And you say my life-term is short?" I asked.

"Your bodily combination of early life would not have come under
death-dealing influences until it had reached its sixtieth year, but
your body, as it now is, will meet the influences which mean its
dissolution in four years. It so happens that it will then be at the
mystic age of thirty-three. You have shortened your earth life, but you
will enter that much sooner into the higher life."

"Only four years to labor, yet, oh! so much to do!" I exclaimed, as an
all-encompassing love welled up in my heart.

A loving smile lit up the face of St. Germain, and he said: "It will
then be permitted you to labor as an invisible or be reborn; now turn
thy mind within."

As he uttered this command a heavenly rapture filled my soul, it seeming
to [expand until](errata.htm#7.md) all beings and creatures were included
in its wondrous love, and an unutterable peace took possession of me.
Looking at St. Germain I saw that his face was radiant with light, and
his features seemed angelic in their beauty as he gave the
command—"Return!"

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

In obedience to his command, I threw my consciousness within, a numbness
came over my body, and an outward suction commenced in my left side;
then there was a moment's blank, from which I awoke to find myself
looking at Iole's body, now in deep trance in a chair before me.
Wondering what I was I tried to see my form, but my mind and
consciousness seemed to be in nothing but a nucleus of substance. As I
longed to see, I again took form, the transparent Bather obeying my
desire. St. Germain had evidently gone through like transformations, for
he floated in like form beside me. "Come!" he said in mental speech, and
again with the rapidity of thought we passed through space. Through
clouds of floating substance of many hues and colors, which scintillated
with life and seemed to be in one continuous transformation, we flew. I
had no breath or sense of weight, and my transparent form seemed carried
by my will. Suddenly I was drawn down as by a suction, and the next
instant was beside a bed on which lay my sleeping form; and beside me,
in body like my own, stood or floated my sister Iole.

"Hast thou returned?" she asked in thought, for no words were spoken.

"Yes, sister, go thou with the Master to the East; when my life-term is
up we will meet again."

Thus speaking I saw that a thread of violet light

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

formed a circuit through our bodies and that of St. Germain. It formed a
loop and passed from Iole to me through my sleeping body, and then two
strands reached from St. Germain's transparent form and mine to a misty
cloud behind us. A current of life was throbbing through this slender
wire from Iole to my sleeping form; but as I spoke the current changed,
and I was drawn toward my form and sank into unconsciousness.

When I awoke I was in a little cottage in New Orleans, once more
embodied Alphonso Colono; but an awful change had taken place. I was not
then conscious of the experiences just written, they have since been
recalled. My mind was almost a blank, a horrid blackness was around me.
I had a faint recollection of lost knowledge, but in vain I pressed my
head in effort to recall it; all was gone! Had my brain been shattered?
Had I lost my mind? My God! What did it mean? Who was I? Iole! who was
Iole? Masters! who were Masters? Ha! ha! am I crazy? I! who am I? There
is no I. Ha! ha! I is nothing but a delusion produced in the brain by
motions in its molecules. Mind! mind! there is no mind! what foolish men
call mind is but a secretion from the brain. Soul! soul! there is no
soul! it is a superstition for which we have no proof. Who ever saw a
soul? What is it like? Has it shape or form? Is it a body? Ha! ha! who
ever saw anything without

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

a body? Thus I raved. My God! where did these thoughts come from?
Strangely unlike myself I arose and dressed. Feeling like some one I did
not know, I walked to the mirror. "My God! My God I" I cried, "what
demon is it!" The face of Alphonso Colono, but strangely distorted and
evil. I turned away; I was abnormally sensitive, and everything I
touched appeared to move. My ears thumped and I could hear constant
rap-pings through the room; cold currents touched my face and slimy
hands grasped me. In trembling terror I strove to drive them away, but
all of no avail. I put on my hat and left the room, but the horrible
sensations followed me. Along the street I hurried, hardly knowing what
I was doing and ignorant of where I was going. As I passed by people
stopped and in horror shrank back; while now, to add to my torments, a
demoniacal voice laughed in my ears, ha! ha! ha! ha! they are afraid of
me! Seeking relief and finding none, I returned to my room. All day long
I paced restlessly back and forth before the mirror, dimly conscious
that I was something, yet lost to myself. The evening grew apace and
night came on; it was a dark and sultry night, and the oppressive
stillness around only made the rappings and invisible voices more awful.
As though seized by an insane idea, and despite the oppressive heat, I
built a blazing fire upon the hearth, and sitting down before

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

it gazed into its red flames. As I did so the licking flames grew
higher, and leaping up seemed to lean forward toward me; then I became
as though entranced and lost the power of motion. At the same moment the
horrible creature I had seen at the Durant mansion formed in the flames
before me; but this time instead of repelling, it seemed to fascinate,
and as I leaned forward I recognized its evil and malignant features as
my own. It smiled hideously, and continuing to look, it became
attractive. As I did not repel, it came toward me; but now, my God! what
is it? It shapes into a living skeleton, and its bony form, covered with
dry and wrinkled flesh, shone with a greasy gloss of reddish-green. It
extended its bony hands to embrace me, I felt them on my neck and
shoulders, I inhaled its sickening, poisonous breath; then, as its bony
fingers clasped me around the neck as though to choke me, a faint ray of
light dawned upon my mind, and I uttered the one word—"Iole!"

An awful, demoniacal shriek rang in my ears; a groan of despair, and the
form was sucked back toward the fire. It struggled and pulled toward me,
its fiery eyes looking from their sunken depths with a wild, satanic
glare; but a white form now stood before me, and with outstretched hand
pushed the monster into the flames. With one last wild shriek, it fell
into the fire, and as though

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

made of pitch was consumed by the lurid flames, At the same moment, as
by an instantaneous change, my soul was filled with light, and looking
up I beheld the radiant form of my glorious sister.

"Iole, my savior!" I cried.

"Only the Iole in thyself can be thy savior; only the Christ, Krishna,
God or Master within can save thee," answered her mind to mine.

"Thou hast just now slain the last shadow of thy demon nature formed in
lives gone by; and now thou art absolutely pure. All men must meet and
slay their demon before they can pass on, for this demon shadow ever
awaits them at the threshold, and unless they conquer they cannot pass
through. When you called for me you called upon your God, for I am but a
symbol of the God within your soul."

"With this, thy last experience, thou canst realize the condition of
those men who are completely imbued in matter," interrupted another
voice-mind, and St. Germain stood before us.

Before I could reply he continued:

"The great hierophant sends me to call thee to the East, and as I leave
with thy sister, in peace retire to sleep; when the morning comes start
on thy journey. Thy sister will meet thee at Calcutta and journey with
thee through the forbidden passes to Teshee Lumbo."

"We leave you with our bodies, but we are with you in our souls," said
Iole, and as she spoke a

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

misty cloud enveloped them and I was left alone. No, not alone this
time; the ecstasy of God was in my soul, the spirit filled my being.
That night I slept the sleep of peace, and in the morning, with my heart
as light as the spirit can make it, commenced my journey to the East.
What joy I had en route! What peace and happiness I spread along my
path! The soul illuminated with love spreads peace where’er it goes.
When I reached Calcutta Iole met me robed as a Buddhist nun, her face
being veiled to hide the radiant beauty of her features. We reached
Darjeeling, and from there journeyed as pilgrims on to Lhassa, the
secluded city from which all foreigners are debarred. Here St. Germain,
the St. Germain of France, once more in body, met us to lead us across
the unknown country to the sacred home. For many days we traveled, but
without weariness or haste, and our journey was one continuous discourse
on all that is grand and beautiful. The towering Himalayas and the bleak
ranges to the north impressed us with feelings of sublimity, while the
azure blue of heaven, filled with rainbow-colored clouds at day and the
starry constellations at night, turned our minds and conversation to
only the beautiful and good. At last we passed the guarded valley and
reached the isolated monastery of "Him Who Knows." Far up the
mountainside, reached only by a narrow path, this massive

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

structure, built in cyclopean style, was beyond the reach of the
despoiler's hand. All around were deep gorges and ranges of snow; but no
sooner had I entered into the inner court than I knew that I had seen
the place before. But where or when? Ah! I had seen it in my visions
both in Mexico and France, as also in my astral voyage in the care of
St. Germain. I thought of the initiations of father and mother, and as a
question arose in my mind, as though she read it, Iole said:

"Your father and mother are members of the 'Third Degree' of Lhassa, and
are now head teachers with King Eral in France. Your sister, Esmeralda,
has gone with her brother Henrie to teach in Scandinavia. Your friend
Garcia is a high teacher in California, and Dr. Rankel is Governor of
Germany. Seg. Parodi is Governor of Italy, and Albarez makes the world
his home."

"And Napoleon?" I asked.

"He lives for many years yet, until, by his now mighty genius, the
republic makes all past ideals a fact."

"And may I now ask you of your parents?"

"That I will answer," interrupted St. Germain. "But for your sister you
would not have passed beyond Lhassa in this life. Iole has made several
incarnations in one life. When the Princess Louise of England died,
before her body was marked for dissolution, she whom you know as Iole
incarnated

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

there. When she had served her purpose there, she discarded the former
form of Princess Louise and took another, which she now has. She has
given you her past history, but has by her powers ever veiled the
present. It was through her that you were recalled when I sent you forth
for four more years’ labor in the West, and as she is the adopted
daughter of the Great Lama himself, she had a right to give the order,
for she knew your past existences. When you, with the powers you now
have, recall these prior lives, the reason of your present elevation
will be made clear."

"Yes," I replied, "I see that far back I was a Brahmin monk of adept
power, but for lack of certain experiences I took western incarnations."
"All things are then made clear, are they?" said Iole.

"The past is now an open book," I answered; for all my lives were now
linked into one. "Then we are ready for our great labor," she replied.

"And can I accomplish more here than in the West?" I asked.

"Much more," she answered, "for here we labor day and night; in the
day-time in our material bodies, and at night, in that natural trance
called sleep, we labor invisibly in our astrals among our brothers in
the West. The superficial world thinks we have left them for selfish
solitude,

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

but we work through the world of mind and never stop for rest."

We now entered a cyclopean-like chamber of white granite, and were in
the presence of the dark Oriental we had seen at Paris.

"Brother," he said, addressing me, "after many weary incarnations the
wanderer has returned; gladly we welcome his now purified and
illuminated soul. He has seen misery and suffering; he has seen and
experienced pain and woe; now can his soul realize divine compassion and
labor for mankind. Go with our sister Iole and learn to employ the
powers it is now your privilege to use. Another crisis is approaching in
the new Atlantis of the West, and as we never idle, you must be
prepared. No, the question in your mind concerning your approaching
disembodiment will not keep you from this labor. You have joined the
immortals, and if your body is deemed fit for another life, when its
hour of dissolution comes we will place it in a trance-like state in
which life and its inimical influences cannot act; for life is death,
and the vital activity disintegrates the body. That which in life works
as a unit in all the atoms of the body, at death assumes an individual
and separate activity in each. No, you will not die; both you and Iole
shall have self-conscious astrals and live immortal in the world of mind
and æther, until you choose to pass into the two degrees that lie still

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

higher on. These two most superior degrees are too high for earthly
minds to comprehend, and even you can but dimly realize. In the next
degree there is no fixed form or body. Each being, in a flame of the
universal Spirit, and with its creative power, can make a form to suit
its wants or needs in any portion of the boundless universe. As a spirit
spark, a centre without form, it can dart through the universe of space
from star to star, and system to system, and there make a form or
vehicle to suit its sphere. This form it can at will cast off, disperse,
and then through space pass to another universe and build again. For
these beings or spirits are in essence God-spirit, and possess all the
powers therein. Of the First Degree, it is not permitted us to speak,
all words degrade; the conception is too grand for any but the gods to
realize. Now to your chamber with your sister; your initiation comes
this evening."

As he finished, Iole led me from his presence.

"Brother," she said, when we were seated in our room, "the thought comes
to my mind that our experiences would help many aspiring souls if they
but knew them."

"True," I answered, "we hold the thought in common; can we not cloak the
mysteries and reveal up to a certain limit?"

"Yes; tell to the world our lives, but conceal well the secret
teachings. The great truths are open

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

to all who seek the light and allow their minds to become illuminated by
a pure, unselfish heart; but everything must come in its right order."

"Then I will veil the teachings, but so lightly that the seeker cannot
but find; the ignorant we cannot reach; they will but laugh and scoff.
Their ignorance we pity, but they must abide their time."
\*     \*     \*     \*     \*     \*

That evening the initiation of my visions was reenacted, and I was
principal. Clothed in a gauze of silken threads I was led before the
throne. The God-man gave me the " magic kiss," and the slumbering Christ
awoke to liberate the virgin from the tomb.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Awake! thou that sleepest,  
Arise from thy tomb,  
Descend from thy cross,  
Ascend to thy throne.  
Rend the veil of the Temple,  
Stand out in the light,  
Let the Holy of holies  
No more be in night.  
Join hands with the Masters,  
The Great Brothers above,  
Who labor forever  
Through greatness of Love.  
Man! know thy Redeemer,  
He dwelleth within;  
Buried deep in thy body,  
Now gross from thy sin,  
Is the only true Savior,  
The Christ-spirit—within.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

Four years, or what men call years, went by; years of divine love and
the ecstasy that comes from labor for mankind; years of celestial
rapture in which the soul realizes that it is all and lacks nothing. It
was in the "sacred chamber," and Iole and I were seated by each other in
great pearl chairs beside an emerald table. The great hierophant with
his council, St. Germain and the dark Oriental among them, sat around.

"Cross thy hands," said the great Master.

We obeyed, and with reclining forms crossed our hands upon our breasts.

"Now breathe together deeply," came the order. We obeyed, and at once
became identified with each other and all in the chamber.

"Now turn thy mind within and place it upon the seat of Brahma."

And as the mind sank into the spirit's centre, a sacred mantra filled
the room, and then the sacred word; then our soul, both now merged into
one, became filled with celestial music made by the universe of spheres,
and we entered the eternal.

Now did we realize that "there is no death;" with bodies cast aside we
live immortal in the pearly essence capable of a higher form. We now
overshadow all who seek the light, and in time will come again to assist
you with our love.

*Om, mani padme, hum!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Vocabulary](botd21.md)
