[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](botd17)  [Next](botd19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434485382/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Brother of the Third Degree*, by Will L. Garver, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

### CHAPTER XVII.

#### NAPOLEON THE GREAT.

<span class="smallcaps">Two</span> weeks passed; two weeks of rapid
marching and concentrating forces, and we were upon the historic field
of Waterloo. I was body surgeon to the German commander-in-chief, Gen.
Von Kral, who now commanded four hundred thousand men. All was
discipline and the most expert training present everywhere. For a week
Iole had communicated with me regularly every night, from the secret
council tents of the new Napoleon. The hostile armies now lay facing
each other, and the next day would, without doubt, witness such carnage
and destruction of life as the world had never seen. Ten o'clock was
approaching, and having read the German general's thoughts throughout
the day, I had important information to communicate. To my great
satisfaction I had suddenly developed, or become possessed of the
faculty of clairvoyant sight, and could see the mental images of the
general as he thought.

Ten o'clock struck and I assumed a passive and

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

restful position between my covers. Hardly had I become silent when a
voice as though from my inner throat said, "All is well."

"All is well," spoke my mind in answer.

"Then communicate first," came back the response.

Feeling the current flowing from me, and knowing, therefore, she was
passive, I became the active end and spoke mentally as follows:

"Von Kral will strike to-morrow unless the totally unexpected
happens—here is his plan:

"He will repeat the field of Marathon; advancing with a weak center,
cloaked by apparent strength, he will mass his men upon the flanks. He
will let Napoleon pierce him but to let him fall into a deep ditch, not
unlike the sunken road of Waterloo, now dug across his rear. Behind this
ditch he has a jaggy fence, and this he calls his trap. As the French
pass through the center, he will close upon them on the sides and rear
and annihilate the whole; no quarter will be given; he means
extermination. All told, his force is four hundred thousand strong, and
he will himself command the right while Frensteine leads the left. If
not prepared to meet this strategy, but give the word, and an eastern
potion will be more powerful than all the guns of war."

Finishing thus I became passive, the current reversed and the following
answer came:

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

"We employ no such means; these men are but the instruments of Karma,
and we as agents of the Masters cannot annul the dues men and nations
have by their evil acts brought upon themselves. We can but control,
guide and keep within its proper limits, and bring to its appointed end
this awful whirlpool of Karmic retribution. What men and nations sow,
that they are bound to reap; and neither Gods nor Masters can annul or
set aside the law. When the hour arrives that marks the limits of this
retribution, then if these men persist and defy our order, we may act,
because the ends then justify the means. But no such methods must be
pursued until permit is given by those who know the limits, so say Eral
and St. Germain. Now I report to Napoleon at once; be ready to receive
an answering report at twelve."

The circuit broke and I sank off to sleep with will set to awake at
twelve. At the appointed time I awoke and felt a current as before.

"All is well," came the call.

"All is well," I answered.

"Napoleon is a peculiar man; he seems passionless and impenetrable; but
he cannot escape the inner eye which can see and interpret his very
thoughts. He received my communication in wrapt attention; his white
cheeks flushed a faint red; his lips became more firmly set; his eyes
filled

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

with a burning flame, but he said nothing. He then looked at me with
admiration in his eyes, and questioned me of my powers; but I refused to
speak of them, and he knew better than to insist. Strange as it may
seem, he is no brother, but he knows of the Brotherhood's existence and
realizes that its members possess great and abnormal powers. He says
little, but I know he realizes that his strength is not all his own, and
we, his human instruments, are not his only aids. His intuition does not
deceive him, for he is overshadowed by the invisible Masters and is
dimly conscious of it. Now I give you his plan as I saw it form in the
mental substance agitated by his mind. He will form a powerful center,
and of it himself take charge. Likewise two powerful flanks, with a thin
veil between them and the center, through which the enemy may rush. The
flanks will not advance, but the veils and center will, but only so far,
when the two sides of the center will face about, and back to back, meet
the enemy on right and left. When the Germans have pierced the veils,
our center will wheel with one accord and present a solid front; the
flanks will close in upon their sides and in a **U** they will perish;
no quarter will be given. Your safety rests with the higher powers, but
they will see to it or tell you what to do. Rest calmly now, good-night;
we will communicate again at five."

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

"Good-night," I answered, and again the link was broken.

For some time I lay lost in thought, thinking of the weeping widows,
orphan children and desolated homes this war would cause; thinking of
the maimed, crippled and misborn children who always follow this cruel
and wholesale butchery called war. Oh! why will men persist in the evil
and injustice which brings this slaughter?

Why will men be led by selfish leaders to thus, without reason, kill
their fellow-man? Why cannot brotherhood reign throughout the world and
fill it with peace and love? Why cannot homes and holidays replace forts
and battle-fields? Then my thoughts turned to religion, and I
queried,—how can men who believe in a great, omnipotent God-King justify
his silent permission of this bloody carnage? A hundred thousand widows
protest against it; four hundred thousand orphan children add their
cries. Then I turned to philosophy. No, said I to myself, whatsoever men
or nations sow, that they must also reap. The law of cause and effect is
eternal and immutable, and not even God Himself can set aside or destroy
his law without his self-destruction. As long as men sow seeds which
sprout in war, so long must wars continue. The consequences which follow
evil thoughts and acts cannot be forgiven,

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

and it is only through suffering that they can be expiated and
exhausted. O, may this awful massacre consume all the germs of evil! O,
may the cloud of evil vapors which now o’erhangs the world be dispersed,
and a spiritual light fill the hearts of men with peace and love! Then I
thought of Jesus, the meek and lowly Nazarene, and muttered: Where is
war? Not amid the teeming millions of the East unless stirred up by
western intrigues. Not among the heathens of the Orient. No; but among
the so-called Christian nations who blaspheme by their acts the name
they steal. At last I fell asleep and dreamed of the coming battle.
Spread out before me were all the armed hosts, but what attracted my
attention most was not the moving masses of men who trod the earth. No;
over the field of battle was a host more fierce and awful. The air was
filled with malignant faces on forms half-human, half-monster; their
mouths and hands were covered with blood, while their features were
frightful to behold. Every form that fell upon the field of conflict was
seized upon by a dozen of these blood-sucking vampires, who drank his
ebbing blood. The more they drank, the more insatiable became their
thirst; until, bathed in human gore, they laughed with demoniacal
laughter and fought among themselves. Above this bloody swarm I saw a
lesser host of white-robed spirits, who in calm tranquillity

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

watched the conflict raging in the red vapors beneath.

Suddenly I was aroused from my sleep, and looking up, to my surprise,
found Gen. Von Kral leaning over me. "Colono," he said, "come to my tent
at once." Wondering what this midnight visit could mean, I looked at my
watch and hurriedly followed. It was half-past four and almost time for
another communication with Iole. Reaching his tent, just adjoining mine,
he said: "Doctor, I have reasons to believe that my camp is full of
spies; I don't know whom to trust, and I have a very important message
which must be delivered to the king without delay. In you I have
confidence, and you must take it. Go with it as fast as horse can take
you to Berlin; or, better, proceed to the nearest station and take a
special engine. A horse is without; go at once and lose not a moment's
time." As he spoke he handed me a package, and not daring to disobey I
hastened to the horse in waiting. Soon I was beyond the pickets and
flying along the highway. Knowing it must be near five o'clock I drew up
for a moment near a narrow strip of woods, and striking a match saw by
my watch that it was just five minutes to five. I could not fail at this
critical moment to communicate with Iole, so I turned into the woods and
came to a stop. Jumping from my horse I

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

assumed a restful position against a tree, and centered all my thoughts
upon my sister. Almost immediately I felt the current and the signal
came—"All is well."

"All is well," I answered in mental speech. "Communicate first," she
replied.

"By a sudden and unexpected call, I am on the way to Berlin with a
message from Von Kral to the king. I shall not be able to return and
cannot keep you informed; have you any advice to give?"

"I will consult Germain, he has just arrived," came back the answer, and
the circuit became weak, the current feeble, but did not altogether
cease. A few minutes passed when the current commenced to pulsate, and
she spoke:

"Is your message sealed?"

"It is," I answered.

"Then hold it to your forehead and I will read," came back her answer.

Doing as she commanded she commenced to read:

"Napoleon will be overthrown to-morrow. Another sun will sink upon
subjugated France. Victory is assured and royalty is triumphant. No more
will the cry of 'Liberty' ring on Europe's soil. From victory here I
proceed on to Paris to destroy and level and plant her ruins in
thistles. Send Frederick at once to take his throne and build another
capital.

"<span class="smallcaps">Von Kral</span>,"

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

"That is all," she added, "proceed on your way; the powers for your
safety made you the bearer of this message. Good-bye."

"Good-bye," I answered, and the circuit broke.

Mounting my horse I turned into the highway and hastened on to Berlin. I
reached the capital. and delivered my message without loss of time;
indeed, my journey was made so quickly that I received the thanks of the
king.

And now for two days I had been at the residence of Dr. Rankel, and
during all that time had not heard a word from Iole. No response came to
my repeated efforts to reach her mind; was anything wrong? Had she been
injured? Calming my mind I determined to await developments; but that
evening my fears were again aroused, for the startling news reached the
city that the French had been overthrown with great slaughter, and Von
Kral was pushing on, by forced marches, to Paris. All was excitement;
bands played, and salute after salute was fired throughout the city.
Great bonfires lighted the streets and throngs of men and women filled
the thoroughfares. Shouts of victory and triumph arose, and the name of
Von Kral and the king echoed through the streets.

Was the report true? I asked myself, as I paced restlessly up and down
the room. Did this explain why no answer had come from Iole? Had

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

she been killed? Had St. Germain been wrong? Thus questioning and again
giving way to doubt, I locked the door and continued pacing up and down
my room waiting for the hour of ten to arrive. Determined to hear from
the front, I had fully made up my mind to take the powder and
communicate with Eral at Paris, if Iole did not answer. I remembered the
warning, that death would be the result if disturbed, but felt secure
for at least an hour in my present surroundings. Ten o'clock came at
last, and taking an easy chair I concentrated all the energies of my
mind on Iole, with the desire to speak. Thanks to a strong will and her
willingness, she answered. The current commenced to throb in my head,
and the words came plain and distinct from within.

"We have been marching day and night, and because of special
communications I had to carry on with other parties, had to sever our
relations for the time being. When important information and duty does
not demand, there is no urgent need of it. I observe from your mental
state that you have been under another test for the last two days. Let
me again warn you, never be disturbed or harbor doubt or fear; what.
ever happens you should take it calmly, and never become restless or
give way to emotion. Now hear what has happened. We have overthrown the
Germans and almost annihilated them. General

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Von Kral was
killed and the entire army scattered. We are now pushing forward with
all speed to Berlin. The reports you hear heralding our defeat are
false, and sent out for a purpose. Be not deceived, but warn all
brothers to leave the city, for we have psychic information that the
Germans themselves will destroy it when they learn of our approach. Your
mother is now a member of our secret council here, and communications to
her from your father, who is in the eastern army, say that the Russians
are victorious and are pushing toward the south six hundred thousand
strong. Maximilian has been killed and Vivani is in command; all depends
upon Napoleon, who seems, so far, to be the only fit instrument through
whom the invisibles can work. St. Germain has him completely in his
power, and gave him secret orders on the day of battle. The plan is now
to subjugate all Germany, dethrone the king, and keeping in the country
of the enemy, fall upon the Russians. We shall reach Berlin to-morrow
night, and our victory will be known there by daylight, to the sorrow of
the city. Warn all brothers and join our ranks; this is all to-night; my
love, have peace."

The circuit broke and I immediately informed Dr. Rankel, who quickly
sent word to all members. We were none too soon, for the sun had not
risen over the city before the truth was known. The

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

people, seized with a wild fear, became panic stricken, and fleeing from
the city fired their houses. That night a sea of flames met the
triumphant army of Napoleon. The king had flown, and with him Dr. Rankel
and all royalists. The social democrats, who were the secret allies of
the French because of their cry "All Europe one Republic," had tried to
save the city, but of no avail. The torch had been applied almost
everywhere at once, and before the night was over the city was in ruins.
I joined the Napoleonic forces where they were encamped on the edge of
the city. The secret council, now containing twelve members, occupied a
house surrounded by a double guard, and no one was admitted without an
order from one of the members. Proceeding to these quarters I was
admitted by means of a letter from Iole, and was soon in her presence.
She received me With a kiss and hand-shake and led me to her apartments.
Each member had a separate room, and, while marching, a private
carriage, so there should be no interruptions to their mental
concentrations.

"Where can I see my mother?" I asked, recalling that she was a member of
the council.

"All members are isolated from everybody except their mates, and it will
be impossible for you to see even your long-lost mother," she replied.

"Then she is your mother in an earthly sense no

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

longer, for she is now a member of the great Third Degree.'"

Knowing the occult rules necessary for one to retain his individual,
electrical condition, I showed no dissent, for I was convinced that
everything the Masters ordered was for the best. That night I had the
pleasure of Iole's company until a late hour, and in the morning we
proceeded on our march to the east. Napoleon, on a white charger, took
the lead, and behind him came the twelve gilded palace carriages which
contained the secret council. On each carriage was a coat-of-arms, and
its central character was a five-pointed golden star, which showed that
this army was, indeed, under the protection of mighty powers. A guard of
officers rode on either side of the vehicles, and each contained only
one occupant; but, at the order of Iole, I shared her carriage, which,
by special request of Napoleon, was the first in line. To the stirring
strains of " Liberty " we marched through the burned city. The Unter den
Linden was lined with blackened ruins, and the beauty of yesterday was
no more. Early in the march Napoleon rode up to our carriage, and seeing
me, eyed me sharply, with what I thought was displeasure. " Ah!
Mademoiselle has company," he said.

"Monsieur Colono," replied Iole, introducing me.

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

In reply he thanked me for my valuable services and complimented me on
the possession of such powers and such an excellent companion.

"Give all thanks to the Brotherhood," I replied.

He eyed me keenly, but said nothing in reply; then turning to Iole with
a rather tender look for his stern face, he asked:

"Will Mademoiselle allow me to ride with her sometimes when she is not
engaged?"

"Ask St. Germain; I am under his rules," she replied, without
hesitation.

A dark frown came over his face and he asked: "And does St. Germain
rule?"

"He does," she answered, not over-awed in the least by his
clearly-implied superiority.

"Well, we will see," he answered significantly; "I think I rule here."
As he spoke he rode to the front and Iole said:

"Will he, too, like his predecessor, be blinded by ambition, and in
selfish egotism misuse his opportunity in the world? Does he think that
he, himself, is great? No man is great in himself; he only becomes so by
expressing the will of many. Only those who realize this are truly
great. At this time the great majority of the people want liberty, and
if he will but utilize his opportunity and be to the great mass what the
head is to the body, his greatness is assured."

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

"Iole," I answered, not without a certain temporary pang of jealousy, "I
believe he is smitten with you."

She looked at me with her large brown eyes and answered:

"Never allow jealousy to contaminate your heart; keep it pure and good,
for only thus will it be a fit place for the dwelling of the divine."

Late in the afternoon an officer handed a note through the window to
Iole; passing it to me, I recognized the handwriting of my mother, and
opening it read:

"Count de St. Germain, now in the eastern army, orders through father,
who has just communicated with me, that you come by the quickest
possible route to Vienna. You know your duty; lose no time.

<span class="smallcaps">Your Mother-Sister, Nina</span>."

"Good-bye, Iole," I said, "I am off at once; and whatever happens duty
shall be first."

"You are my noble brother," she answered with a smile, as she
affectionately kissed me.

Leaving the carriage I sent the note to Napoleon, who, with a
questioning look, came back to where I was and asked:

"Who is this Count St. Germain?"

"The King of Occult Adepts," I replied. "Well, report to him at once,
and tell him I say there will be no kings this time next year."

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

I immediately knew the hidden significance of his remark, but said
nothing, and in an hour was hurrying across the country to the
southeast. Arriving at the camp of the eastern army I proceeded at once
to the isolated quarters of the secret council, where St. Germain met me
with his usual stern and serious manner. Taking me into his private
apartments he handed me two messages the had written. The first read as
follows:

"<span class="smallcaps">Napoleon Marleon</span>: Do you still hold
yourself subject to those who have made you what you are, and whom I
represent? or do you aspire to an empire under the fictitious name of
president? Allow not false pride or vain ambition to deceive you in this
matter; we have made you what you are, and we can as quickly unmake. We
have chosen you as our instrument, and it is our power that now sustains
you; we will give you all the glory and fame any man can wish, and you
had better serve our ends. We care not for fame or earthly power; we
want results alone. We are content to work in secret and unknown if we
can but bring the ends desired. Now, as our instrument, you must keep
within set limits and be subject to our secret orders. All Europe south
of the Baltic and west of the Dnieper must be one free republic, with
its capital at Paris. All kings and thrones must go and the people
reign. We will elect you first president so long as subject to our
orders. Do you accept the compact? subject or no. Yes, and your star
still rises; no, and it sinks.—*Ipse dixit*.

"<span class="smallcaps">St. Germain</span>."

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

The second message read:

"<span class="smallcaps">Albarez</span>: If Napoleon answers no, give
him a stroke. *Nyimayana*.

"<span class="smallcaps">St. Germain</span>."

This last message was written upon a peculiar paper, and had a mystic
sign colored in the substance thereof.

"Take these forward at once," said St. Germain. "Albarez will be there
when you arrive; he knows these orders already, but this message will be
his official permit. When Napoleon answers report to him."

Without waiting I hurried back to the French army, now advancing on
Warsaw and sweeping everything before it. The German king had made a
stand in Poland, and reinforced by two hundred thousand Russians was
awaiting battle in front of Warsaw. The English allies under Nelson were
bearing to the north to take the Russian capital, while Napoleon, with
new recruits, had four hundred thousand men and the enthusiasm which
always follows victory. When I arrived and presented my message,
instantly a change came over him. Turning to me with fierce sternness,
he answered:

"Tell your leader no."

Messages and new men from all over France and

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

Europe had intoxicated him with the vanity of victory, and he almost
thundered the response.

"If I and he," be continued, putting the I first, "can be friends and
allies, very well and good; but if we can be such only by my obedience
to his orders, then our relations must be severed. I am ruler here."

"That is your official answer?" I asked. "It is," he answered
laconically.

"Very well,' I replied, "it shall be so delivered;" and bowing, I was
about to retire, when he recalled me.

"What do you know about this Brotherhood?" he asked.

"All I know is that they possess powers superior to death, and have a
knowledge of the future; if they decree your downfall, no power on earth
can save you."

"And do you know that I have the lives of twelve of your members here?"

"And your life hangs but by a thread," I answered boldly.

He showed no change of countenance, but asked: "And do they threaten
me?"

"Not unless you threaten them," I answered.

"Well, take my answer to your leader and tell him I defy him. I hold his
council as hostages to compel his peace, and she you love will be my
queen. Go!"

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

Without a word I repaired to the quarters of the secret council, and was
there met by Albarez. Giving him Napoleon's answer I handed him message
No. 2. With an impenetrable face he told me to be ready for a call from
the commander and not leave camp. That evening Napoleon was stricken
with paralysis and I was summoned in haste. Repairing to his room I
ordered every one to leave and sent for Albarez. The latter approached
the stricken leader, and pressing his hands to his heart and head he
returned to consciousness. Then taking a seat by his bedside, the adept
calmly watched him. As the wonderful eyes of the adept remained fastened
on those of the stricken leader, he turned restlessly and said:

"What does this mean? I am not subject to paralysis; have you, by your
black art practices brought this on me?"

"Foolish man," said the adept, "to thus defy the powers that regulate
all destinies."

The fiery eyes of the commander looked at the adept long and intently,
but the latter calmly returned his gaze.

"By what right do you claim relationship with God and assume divine
prerogatives?" he asked the immovable adept.

"By the right of God enlightenment and thousands of years of work for
man," replied the adept.

"Do you know that by my order you and all

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

your members here would be executed in an hour?"

"You cannot give the order; and even if you should be permitted so to do
it would never be executed. There are powers present you do not see;
but, even though invisible, all your arms could not prevail against
them."

"Charlatans make loud pretensions and speak with mysterious hints, but
they never show their power," replied Napoleon.

The adept for answer leaned over the recumbent leader and moved his
hands above his head. Probably for the first time in his life a startled
expression came into his eyes, and he exclaimed: "Man! what demon powers
do you possess?"

"The powers of God," replied the adept, with deep solemnity.

The stricken leader moved restlessly and said: "If your claims are true
I will consider your demands; but can you prove them?"

"Partially," replied the adept.

"Then let me see your proof," said Napoleon.

"Sleep!" commanded the adept, with a sudden motion of his hand, and
instantly the eyes of the future great Napoleon closed in sleep.

"Watch him," said the adept, as the commander commenced to breathe
regularly; "when he awakes he will be well, and will change his answer
to St. Germain. Tell him I have gone to assist in the

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

ascent of his star, until, in growing splendor, he is proclaimed the
Great."

The adept left, and the commander, with deep, regular breathing
continued in his sleep for hours. According to orders I admitted no one,
and watched him continually. About three o'clock a change came in his
breathing; it grew lower and lower until there was no breath at all, and
he appeared in a death-like trance.

"Ah!" I said, "he journeys afar; "and knowing the nature of his
condition I gave strict orders that there be no noise about the house.
In the morning, as his condition still continued, I sent for Iole; and
she was present when, an hour later, he recovered. The first expression
of consciousness showed a change in his manner. Looking at Iole with a
pleasant smile, he said:

"Ah, my sister, I am well again."

All the effects of the stroke had disappeared, and rising he turned to
me and said:

"Go at once to St. Germain and tell him all is well; Napoleon is
convinced. You can remain, Mademoiselle, I like your company," he added,
addressing Iole as I bowed and left the room.

"Since you have joined with St. Germain I am your sister and will not
leave you," she replied, as I passed out the door on my way to the
eastern army.

\*      \*      \*      \*      \*      \*      \*

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

Five years passed; but why dwell upon these years of blood and carnage
which washed away the accumulated sins of Europe at the beginning of the
twentieth century? Suffice it to say that Napoleon, who now displayed
greater genius than ever, pushed forward, met and overthrew the
German-Russian allies at Warsaw. After three days’ bloody fighting the
king was killed, the city taken, and Napoleon, completely victorious,
annexed Poland to the now proclaimed Republic of Europe. Then turning to
the north he was about to follow in the footsteps of Bonaparte and march
on Moscow, when, in compliance with St. Germain's secret order, he
wheeled to the south, overthrew the Muscovites upon the Dnieper, and
proclaimed that river the eastern boundary of the republic. The
triumphant general was now called the Great, in order to distinguish him
in history from his illustrious predecessor. The monarchial powers,
Austria and Italy, who had joined with the Franco-English alliance at
first for their own preservation, becoming alarmed at the great chief's
growing power turned against him, but all to no avail. The secret order
had placed all the commanding generals, and the armies, drawn from the
masses, joined with Napoleon to fight for European democracy. Four
hundred thousand French and English families were placed in the
subjugated

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

states, and the native families removed therefrom and scattered in homes
over Europe. All people without property were given farms, and a
wonderful industrial activity set in. The English people proclaimed a
democracy and joined with Europe; and in one great republic extending
from the Dnieper and the Hellespont to Ireland's eastern cape, and from
the Mediterranean to the Baltic, liberty was proclaimed. In the
cataclysm, while the church was not overthrown, yet the minds of men
were changed; she lost her power upon the people, and a philosophical
religion sprang up to take its place. Enormous schools were built at
Paris, and thousands of wandering philosophers journeyed over the
country, teaching without pay or price. Napoleon was proclaimed
"liberator" and elected president by the votes of all the states. At the
advice of St. Germain, who still kept in the dark, he for diplomatic
purposes declined; but the people with one voice demanded his
acceptance, and he was inaugurated at Paris during a convocation of all
the states. A great Parliament of Liberty was formed, and the new
century announced by the constitution they proclaimed. In glaring
headlines it was scattered over the entire world, while throughout the
republic it was posted at every cross-road and corner and proclaimed by
orators on the highways.

Thus it read:

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td colspan="2" data-valign="top" width="695"><span class="smallcaps">Proclamation of the Twentieth Century</span>.
<p>All men are born free and all nature is their equal heritage; he who seizes more than his equal share must forfeit or render an equivalent. Occupancy and use shall be the sole and inviolable title to land and all natural things thereon, and neither governments nor men can abrogate or set aside such title.</p>
<p>Taxes shall be levied to equalize all inequalities that spring from special privileges that men have seized, for there must be special privileges to none.</p>
<p>Men, women and children, singly or collectively, shall have the unqualified right to go, do, and act as they please, so long as they injure not their fellow man or any harmless creature.</p>
<p>All proclaim—liberty, truth, justice, fraternity.</p>
<p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="347"><p>{Witness this our seal.}</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="347"><p><span class="smallcaps">The Parliament of Europe</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Lhassa](botd19)
