[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](botd03)  [Next](botd05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434485382/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Brother of the Third Degree*, by Will L. Garver, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### PRINCESS LOUISE.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> crossed the Atlantic, reached
Liverpool, and took the train for London without incident of note.

Garcia was a most interesting companion, possessed of extensive
knowledge and well informed in the ways of the world.

As though to stimulate my aspirations, he talked much of the mysterious
Brotherhood to which he and my parents belonged.

Many were the stories he told of the exalted wisdom and wonderful powers
of the members of the higher degrees.

Nothing was more interesting to me, as I had sow become fully imbued
with occult ideas and had determined to do all within my power to learn
and master the mysteries of the hidden side of nature.

I noticed, however, as with my parents, all information was strictly
confined within certain limits, beyond which he would never go, and he
Always diverted the conversation when thus pursued.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At London we
stopped three days, during which time an incident happened which
increased the mystery that already surrounded me.

Garcia was well acquainted with the streets, and was taking me over the
city. On the evening of the second day we were walking along in the
neighborhood of Trafalgar square, when a sudden commotion attracted our
attention.

"’Tis a runaway!" he exclaimed. And as the crowd drew back, I saw a
royal carriage drawn by two black and fiery steeds come dashing with
terrific speed along the thoroughfare.

"My God!" cried a hundred voices, "it is Princess Louise, the Queen's
most favored daughter! She will be dashed to pieces! Give them the road!
Don't turn them! God, what nerve! See how she holds them!"

Pale as death, a beautiful woman with braced feet pulled on the reins
with all her power, and with wonderful presence of mind kept the
frightened animals in the middle of the street. But her strength would
not suffice to stay them, as, covered with foam, their iron-shod hoofs
struck fire upon the granite paving.

"Can't some one stop them? My God! they go right toward the monument!
Oh, horror! ’Tis death!"

Just then a tall cloaked figure stepped hurriedly from the frightened
crowd, and rushed out directly

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

in front of the flying steeds. I felt a tremor run through the hand of
my companion and a suppressed cry came from his lips. At the same time a
strange, thrilling sensation ran through my form and my heart beat quick
and fast.

"Stand back!" cried many throats. "No human power can save her. 'Twill
be your death! Take care! Rash man——"

Straight toward the daring man, now standing calm and erect, dash the
frightened steeds and carriage. Will they trample him under their
grinding hoofs? Now they are on him—no. Quick as thought he stands
aside, a white misty vapor fills the air, enveloping coach and horses.
It clears away. And now, what strange and wonderful mystery! The fiery
steeds have changed, and, trembling in every limb, press back upon their
haunches to stay the carriage which comes to a stand just in front of
the monument. The mysterious stranger, who had followed the carriage,
stepped in beside the now fainting princess, and before the astonished
multitude could realize what had happened, seized the reins and turned
into a side street.

I was no less dumbfounded than those around, and stood speechless, a
strange sensation pervading my being. As the crowd commenced to recover
itself, Garcia grasped my hand and hurried me along to escape it.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

"What does it mean?" I asked. "Are not the days of miracles over?"

"Miracles," he answered, "there are no miracles; but this means much."

"What?" I asked.

"That man was an adept," whispered Garcia, "and as the lady was the
queen's favorite daughter, we may expect great changes in governmental
circles.

"The Masters do all within their power to aid the world in its upward
evolution, and, working through human instruments, seize all
opportunities for the accomplishment of this end. It is only on the most
exceptional occasions that they would use the powers here demanded."

In reply to my further questioning, he said: "Await developments, and
then my explanations will be more intelligible."

On the following morning we started for France. As we boarded the cars
for our station I bought a Daily Times; and there, in full-face type,
side by side upon the front page, were the headings:

<span class="smallcaps">Strange and Miraculous Escape</span>!

<span class="small">PRINCESS LOUISE BY SOME MYSTERY OF MAGIC SAVED FROM
A MANGLING DEATH.</span>

<span class="small">Princess Louise. who, as all know, is a most</span>

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

skilled horsewoman and an expert with the reins, while taking her usual
afternoon drive behind a pair of untried steeds, lost their control,
they being frightened by an accidental explosion on the street.

With her usual coolness and presence of mind she held the fiery animals
well in line, but was not strong enough to stay them. Along the street
they dashed, faster and faster, wilder and wilder. The heavy steeds
would have trampled any human to pieces, and the only hope was to keep a
clear road. It seemed that all was lost and death was inevitable when it
was seen that they were bearing directly toward the monument in the
center of the street.

A cry of terror arose from the crowd as they saw the danger; women
fainted and men turned away to shut out the awful scene, when a tall,
unknown man, with a long indigo-colored cloak stepped out directly in
front of the flying steeds, and with a coolness that looked like madness
calmly awaited their approach. Two deaths seemed inevitable, but when
the horses reached him he stepped quickly aside, and by some strange
mystery of magic, we know not what, covered coach and steeds with a
white, vapory mist, which in some still stranger manner seemed to change
the entire nature of the animals, and brought them in trembling terror
to a stand just in front of the monument.

Before the crowd could recover from its astonishment, the mysterious
stranger stepped in beside the fainting Princess, and, seizing the
reins, turned the horses into a side street and disappeared.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

Who the man was cannot be ascertained. He was not with the Princess when
she arrived at the palace, and the Princess will not talk and refuses
admission to all interviewers. The Queen also is silent, and the
indications are that his identity will remain a mystery. But the
wonderful nature of the occurrence, together with the well-known fact
that the Princess is a deep student of the occult, led us to investigate
in that direction.

A reporter called upon Hager, the celebrated hypnotic animal trainer,
and asked his opinion on the subject.

Hager says it was not done by hypnotic or magnetic power, as that
requires the animal's attention and a fair, square look into its eyes,
which was evidently impossible under the circumstances.

At the headquarters of the occult section of the Theosophical Society,
very little satisfaction could be obtained, although it is known that
Princess Louise is a frequent visitor there. Sankya Rao, the Hindu adept
now there, hinted in vague terms about Akasic ethers, elemental vortices
and kriyasakti powers, etc., but gave very little information.

Whoever the stranger was, and whatever his powers, the occurrence will
remain a nine days’ wonder and give the charlatans and pretenders to
secret wisdom another harvest from the multitude of dupes who now throng
the city in search of the occult.

The second heading, no less conspicuous, read as follows:

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="smallcaps">William Herbert Morley Appointed Premier</span>;

<span class="small">WHICH MEANS THE END OF ENGLISH POWER IN THE
EAST.</span>

<span class="small">JNO. CLARK RUSSELL LEAVES AS SPECIAL ENVOY FOR
INDIA, AND THE NEW PREMIER TAKES HIS SEAT TO-DAY.</span>

Then followed a lengthy account of startling and unexpected political
changes.

Garcia had also bought a paper and read the articles. Seeing my
inquiring looks, he glanced searchingly around and commenced in a low
tone as follows:

"My brother, do you think the material world is ruled by law and the
social world is left to chance? Do you think that human evolution has no
guidance, or that it is ruled direct by God? If the latter, you are in
error. God, the Infinite Spirit, while pervading all, is far beyond all
earth affairs. But between us and the Supreme are many grades of
beings—superior men, heroes, demi-gods and gods—and each host of these
works through those below. Kings, Queens, Presidents and Rulers are not
always so by chance; they never are in periods of transition, when great
changes are impending, for they are but instruments

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

for higher powers, and work unconsciously for predetermined ends.

"Warriors, statesmen and great religious teachers are thus overshadowed
by superior beings and are often even conscious of the fact, as Socrates
who had his Demon; Joan of Arc, who had her Voices. Mohammed, Cromwell,
Napoleon and all great men who have thought themselves the instruments
of fate for the accomplishment of some great end, have thus been
overshadowed.

"This is the secret of what some call fate. Men make themselves fit
instruments through which these powers can act and work to bring about
some lawful end. Men thus used shine with great genius, but when the end
is brought about, the real powers, who are unseen, forsake them, and
they sink again to the common grades of men. You think this desertion
cruel? Not so; those deserted are themselves to blame, for they abuse
the privileges they hold, and, thinking these powers their own, commence
to work for selfish ends and assume divine prerogatives.

"Then they must fall; for, in the words of Hugo, 'they displease God,'
and must become once more but men.

"These men are sometimes evil, but evil men are often, in the end,
unconscious instruments for bringing good."

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

"And do you relate all these remarks to the occurrence of yesterday?" I
asked.

"Yes," he replied in a suppressed whisper, "indications would seem to
say that the throne of England is thus overshadowed; but the invisible
workers veil their activities by working through what seem natural
channels."

Just then a stranger took a seat near by, and Garcia immediately changed
the subject of conversation.

We crossed the strait and proceeded on toward Paris. The crowd prevented
further conversation, but I was busy thinking. The Brotherhood had now
become the almost constant subject of my thoughts, and I was longing for
an opportunity to learn more concerning their mysterious powers and
society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Paris—Mother!](botd05)
