[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](botd08)  [Next](botd10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434485382/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Brother of the Third Degree*, by Will L. Garver, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

#### IOLE.

<span class="smallcaps">One</span> year passed by; fifty-two lessons had
been taken. Every week, under the cloak of a masquerade ball, we met
together for mutual study and improvement. Camille and I were still
great friends—brother and sister; likewise a strong attachment had grown
up between me and my peasant sister who, while often dressed in
different costumes, always kept her face concealed. In vain were my
solicitations; she checked them in no uncertain tone.

"Camille, who is she?" I asked one day.

"Know the rule," she answered, "those who keep masked must be unknown."

The veiled woman, who never dressed in anything but black, was a greater
mystery than ever; more so than my peasant sister, for while the latter
concealed her identity, she was my best companion. The woman in black,
however, seldom gave me an opportunity for conversation, but when she
did, strange though it may seem, I was the happiest

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

of men. I had become after the first night a member of a student group,
and the peasant girl was my sister student.

I made rapid progress, for, as my teacher had said, my preparatory
training had been the best. The blanks and gaps of materialistic science
were filling up, and its superficialities and guess-work becoming every
day more exposed. But this increasing knowledge only made plainer and
more evident certain missing links upon which I questioned and pondered
in vain. The main teacher, who had given me my first instructions, gave
a lecture at the opening of each session. These lectures were pregnant
with significant hints upon which he refused to answer all questions,
telling us to think and work it out.

When upon one occasion I showed signs of dissent, he said:

"Knowledge is not to be communicated, but evolved. Knowledge does not
come from without, it comes front within. All your study of books and
things is but to establish the instrumental conditions by and through
which the Knower can break forth and manifest."

I thought much upon this, and commenced to dwell and meditate upon this
Knower. The results were wonderful; I commenced to acquire knowledge in
a manner I knew not how, and often spoke with a wisdom that surprised
me. Now,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

after a year of study, it became evident to me that I was as yet only in
a semi-esoteric and comparatively outside group. With this conclusion in
my mind I formed a determination to advance, and went to the first
meeting of the second year with this resolve in mind. I recalled that
when I had signed my pledge the spokesman had said my advance would
depend upon my growth and fitness, and could not be obtained by further
application. I therefore concluded to use a little diplomacy, and as a
means to this end relied upon certain knowledge I had obtained in what
some people call dreams. Upon the night mentioned, after going through
the accustomary opening dance, I entered the study room, and approaching
the chief teacher whispered something in his ear.

"Where did you get that?" he asked quickly, looking up with surprise on
his face.

"I never got it, I know it," I answered, seriously.

"Well, don't communicate that here," he said, and without another word
he took a book from his pocket, and drawing forth a card wrote some
mystical characters upon it. Then handing it to me he said:

"On next meeting night present that card to the right hand inner guard;
now proceed with your studies and say nothing."

It was the fifty-fourth night, and I entered and handed my card to the
veiled woman at the right.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She took the card,
and having read it motioned me to hand it to the patriarch on the left.
After careful scrutiny, he nodded as in affirmation and, as I received
the card back, made a sign to the woman who said:

"Enter at the right and await our coming."

Heretofore I had always turned to the left, but as she spoke a concealed
door opened near her, and I passed through into a small room finished in
pure white. I took a seat upon a white divan, and had waited some time
when the patriarch and woman entered.

"Brother," said the woman, taking a seat in front of me, while the
patriarch seated himself at a table near by, "your presence before us
demands that you give us your unqualified confidence. The Esoteric
Examiner tells us you have information which belongs only to members of
the sixth sub. Where did you get it?"

"By meditation and inward concentration upon the Spirit," I answered,
almost before I thought, and was then surprised at my answer. They
looked at one another and the patriarch drew nearer.

"Don't you know that such practice is dangerous to those who are
unprepared?" questioned the patriarch in very serious tones.

"In my unselfish desire for knowledge I deem myself prepared," I
answered.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

"Is your life pure and free from taint? Are you free from even a shadow
of selfish ambition?" he again questioned.

"My life is pure, from childhood it has been thus," I replied.

"Why do you seek knowledge?"

"Because it is the soul's true nature so to seek," I answered.

"Will you ever use your knowledge for evil purposes or selfish ends?"

"I will not; the self is dead." As I said this I was startled at the
intensity of my answer. My companions looked at each other and the
patriarch continued:

"If this knowledge brings you power how will you use it?"

"For my fellow-men and truth," I answered, as an inspiration grew upon
me.

"Not otherwise nor indiscreetly?"

"Only for the good and with certainty of right; not otherwise."

"Have you learned the power and do you possess self-control?"

"I think I have," I answered, as I thought of the woman in black.

"Your words imply a doubt, where is your weakness?"

"I would not be too positive; there may be conditions under which I
might lose control of heart;

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

although I have been sorely tried." I was thinking of my parents and the
possibility of love. As though she divined my thoughts, the woman asked:

"Have you ever loved?"

"As child for parent, yes; as brother for sister, yes; as——"and I
hesitated.

"And not as lover?" asked the woman.

"I am in doubt, the word to me has uncertain meaning, but, I must
confess, an unknown sister here affects me strangely."

"Who is she?"

"I know not; she is always dressed in black and never is unmasked."

The two looked at one another, and the conversation was abruptly changed
by the patriarch who asked:

"How did you learn that man is seven minus two?"

"All the afternoon in deepest thought I had dwelt on man's mysterious
constitution. So deep in thought was I, the supper hour went by and in
my-chair deep sleep came over me. Suddenly I arose in space and was
carried over the ocean; unburdened by a form of weight I passed in
thought's swift motion to the East. I saw the Snowy Range deep in the
blue of heaven high above the clouds. Then by some miracle of change of
which all dreams are made, I found myself a student over a book in some
unknown and isolated crypt. Here

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

many mysteries, many things of wonder did I read. Long did I study, much
did I learn; and then a blank. Oh, that I could recall this knowledge!
But when once more I awoke, naught but this one fact and the memory of
the dream remained."

That strange inward activity which at frequent intervals throughout my
life had stirred within me had once more arisen, and I spoke as one
inspired. My questioners, who had been watching me with sparkling eyes,
now both spoke at once:

"We welcome thee, now art thou a member of the Sixth Degree; and she
shall be your teacher!"

I was about to speak again, when the patriarch pressed his finger to his
lips in token of silence and spoke:

"Two paths start from the Sixth Degree, both leading to the Seventh; and
thou must wear a mask until thy path is chosen. Let no one see thy face
while here assembled unless permit is given. Now to the hall; a friend
awaits you."

As the patriarch finished speaking a door opened, and at his motion I
passed through into the hall. The second waltz was in progress, and I,
this time masked and attired like a knight, was about to seek a partner,
when a nun, veiled and robed in purest white, laid a fair, white hand
upon my arm. The same thrilling sensation of pleasure ran through me,
and my heart beat violently as in a sweet, musical voice she said:

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

"In the name of peace and love, Sir Knight, discard thy arms. Dost thou
still sanction war, most cruel war? or is thy dress a mask on man of
noble heart and honor?"

"Fair nun," with beating heart I made reply, "if all women had the power
of thy sweet voice the world would soon have peace and all who fight
would love. But, fair nun, thou dost wrong the knights of chivalry who
ever fought for virtue and for love."

"Ah, that this, indeed, were true, but my memory says—not so. Well do I
remember when in past life knights, claiming honor, fought for and stole
poor nuns."

"Thou canst not be thus old, fair nun; what dost thou mean?"

"The age of form is not the age of soul. You and I have both lived on
earth many times before."

What strange feeling was this stirring in my heart? What strange ecstasy
of joy within my soul? I could not change this conversation for a dance;
she was bordering on the greatest question of life, the deepest subject
of my thoughts. With a never-before-experienced feeling of pleasure I
urged her on:

"If we have lived before, and thou rememberest, why not I? Perhaps I am
the knight of yore who stole thee; but, if so, it was for love. And if I

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

loved thee once, I love thee still; for I am one who never loves but
once."

"Be not so bold, thou warrior armed and mailed, thou mayest unknowingly
speak truth, at least in part; but if thou art interested in this
subject, let us go where we can be alone."

"Most gladly," I replied, as she took my arm and led the way to the
right side of the hall. Angel of love, I thought, she must have changed
from black to white. Her voice was the same as that of her whom I had
first met on the drive to Madame Petrovna; but how different from the
woman in black whom I had met in the hall. Could they be the same? If so
what meant this sudden change?

I had never been through any of the doors on the right-hand side of the
room, and as we now passed through one, I found myself in a room
finished in white and trimmed with gold. She closed the door and
motioned me to a sofa; taking a seat beside me she removed her veil,
saying as she did so:

"Will not the knight unmask his face?"

For a moment I was speechless, the marvelous beauty of her face
surpassing anything I had ever seen. At the same time strange memories
crowded through my mind. Where had I seen that face before?

Large brown eyes filled with a light of love,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

windows, truly, of a mighty soul. Long, regular lashes, shapely brows,
and a mouth of exquisite form. A face of pearl white with a healthy tint
of rose upon the, cheeks; but, above all, her facial expression, which
made her a perfect picture of divine beauty. No wonder she wore a mask
to avoid attention; no one could see that face without a pause.

Without dropping her wondrous eyes, and apparently unconscious of my
admiration, she repeated her request. Only a short time before I had
been warned by the patriarch not to show my face, and, recalling my
pledge, I with hesitancy replied:

"I am pledged to remain masked."

"We are alone," she answered; and I was on the point of yielding, when,
with a long-drawn sigh, she put on her veil and motioned me to desist.
Now I saw it was a trial, and she had seen my weakness. They had told me
of a friend and teacher, but nothing of a tempter.

"Sir knight," she now said, "we were talking of past lives, and you
asked why you did not remember such. First, the brain memory, which is
very fickle and uncertain, registers only the experiences of this life;
past lives have their records in the soul. Training brings the soul to
consciousness, and with this consciousness all memories of the past
preserved therein. Now, if

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

you will kindly listen I will tell you a story; please let your soul
awake."

Again she removed her veil, and taking a seat directly in front of me,
looked me fixedly in the eyes, and continued in a low, musical voice:

"It is a bright spring morning. A light breeze is carrying
golden-colored clouds across the azure blue of heaven. The fruit trees
are covered with wide-open flowers and blossoms and the air is fragrant
with their sweetness, while the happy birds sing everywhere. The
mountain-bordered horizon on one side, and the silver rivers flowing
through fields of green to the placid mirror of the sea upon the other,
shows that we are in Ancient Greece. Two figures are journeying along
the pathway that winds across the foothills. One, a young man in all the
glory of his strength and beauty, with features and half-exposed form
the like of which has seldom been seen since Greece has passed away. At
his side a beautiful woman,—a Grecian woman,—such as Phidias would have
sought for a model.

"They are going to the Games, the Olympian Games; he in full confidence
of his ability and skill, she happy in the thought of his sure victory.
With hands clasped and swinging arms, they go joyfully along the way.
Picking wild flowers, she makes a wreath and crowns his golden curls,
and,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

in token of appreciation, he stops to caress her and kiss her rosy
cheeks. Thus with joyous song they go merrily along. It seems that the
gods, nature, and men have united for once in love and peace. But now a
courier, rushing up behind, o’er-takes them.

"Xerxes is coming! Men are needed to guard the pass. All true Greeks
join Leonidas at Thermopylæ. Do your duty!' And he rushes on. With
hastened footsteps the couple hurry along to the outskirts of the crowd
that surrounds the Games. The word goes forth that the Games cannot be
neglected, even though the host is near; but among the crowd they find a
company preparing for an immediate start to guard the pass.

"The youth enlists to join them, and his fair companion, with tears
restrained, combs his hair in the careful style of those who fight till
death, and with a parting kiss says, 'For Grecian liberty I give you.'

"His name was Cleomedes, and with Leonidas his body lay upon the path
that wound o’er Œta's mount. That night Iole, Cleomedes companion, was
searching for her lover's form among the slain. She finds him—his face
now cold and white, but beautiful with a noble calm. Yes, she will take
one golden ringlet from that noble head to ever keep his love in mind. A
looting soldier of the Eastern horde thus finds her, and seeks her

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

virtue to betray. What monsters sport as men! She fights; in rage he
stabs her, and she falls with bleeding wound upon the body of her lover.
With mingled blood she dies, and night comes o’er the scene."

She paused for a moment, but I was in a spell; some magic power had
seized me. Every word brought pictures to my mind, and all were scenes
most strangely familiar. Seeing me thus silent, she continued:

"More than a thousand years have passed, and vast changes have been
wrought. The Roman world has come and gone and civilization's night is
on. The scene is now in Gaul. A youthful monk, ever bent on deeds of
charity and love, is bending o’er the mangled forms that fills the
fields of Poitiers. ’Tis night, and the pale moon stealing from behind
the clouds seems to give forms to specters that hover o’er this awful
field of blood. All unmindful the monk works on; with bandages he binds
the wounded, both Moor and Gaul alike. Morning finds him following in
the wake and administering to the fallen Moors. He gives no thought of
heathen, he works for man alone. Journeying on he comes to a convent
among the Pyrenees. Tired and worn out from travel without food, he
stops to rest. A youthful abbess meets him and gives him kindly welcome.
He stays. The abbess is deeply versed

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

in occult lore; so is the monk, and even now is secretly on his way to
Seville to get instructions from the Moors. Their souls in sympathy and
strangely drawn together, they fall in love, and, contrary to their
vows, live as man and wife, bound only by the ties of love. For a time
all goes well and they live happily together. But who could then escape
the spies of Rome? They were found out. He was cast into a basement
cell, and for many weary years he lingered, until death, kind friend,
relieved him. She, poor nun, persecuted by those who knew not honor,
sought relief in flight; but knights return her captive and she dies in
the cell beside her lover."

She had finished, and her white hands which by some magnetic attraction
had drawn to mine, were trembling as I held them. Her soul-consuming
eyes were still on mine, and I was speechless. By some unknown power the
present had become linked with the past. Lost memories indeed now filled
my soul, and the meaning of her stories came to me like a revelation. An
impulse came over me to enfold her in my arms and claim again my
long-lost love, but second thought prevailed and with trembling vice I
gasped:

"My God! and is this our past life history? Has love, eternal love, once
more brought us together?"

With wonderful self-control she answered:

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

"My brother knight, be calm; pure love is indeed eternal. What does your
soul say?"

"My soul is clouded, my spirit vision bedimmed by this flesh encasement,
and through the smoke I see but indistinctly," I answered.

"Well, my dear brother," she said, pressing my hand, "in the next degree
all becomes clear and the past yields all its knowledge to you."

"And do you belong to this degree?" I asked, now recovered from my
spell.

"By right I do; by choice I am here," she replied. Then almost before I
thought, I said:

"Then let us join our forces and push on together."

Looking me in the eyes she clasped my hands, and in eager and serious
tones replied:

"Do you mean it? Have you the strength?"

"I do, my love, my soul; with you I have all strength."

My love would out; and on the impulse of the moment I had spoken. Still
holding my hand and with a wonderful tenderness in her voice, she asked:

"Do you know the first condition?"

"No, but if you go with me it shall be fulfilled."

She now dropped my hands, and drawing back, in a calm, serious voice
said:

"Well, we shall see; but you must first pass

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

through the sixth degree. Much will be required of you and I will
commence as your teacher at the next meeting. But it is now getting late
and you must meet my other sixth-degree brothers and sisters." As she
spoke she arose. Be it confessed, for the first time I was selfish; she
called me like the others, simply brother. I wished for and thought our
past relations entitled me to a dearer term.

"Be a knight now," she said, as we again entered the hall. The study
hours had passed some time and the hall was alive with the informal
group conversations which always followed. I looked around for my
peasant girl, but of course only as a matter of interest. "Whom do you
seek?" asked my companion, noticing my glances.

"A peasant sister who has been kind to me," I replied.

"The peasant has become a nun," she replied, in the voice that my
peasant sister had made so familiar to my ears. In astonishment I looked
at her.

"What!" I exclaimed, "you and she the same?" "The same, yet not the
same; I played a part and evidently with success," she answered.

"And where is the black-veiled nun?" I asked, wondering if she too had
played her part.

"Black is a somber color and partakes of earth; she must have been in
mourning. I hope she

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

mourns no more," she replied, in tender and what I thought significant
tones.

"And have we sadness and mourners even here?" I asked.

"Ah, yes, my brother; is there a place on earth where sorrow does not
find its way? All bound to earth have sorrow, more or less, and there
are some who are by right above the earth, who, for a lingering brother
still tarry. But, brother, you have learned enough to-night; and as I am
to be your teacher, we still have many nights to learn together; now let
us meet our friends."

My companion and my mask seemed to bring me closer to the others who
were masked and who had heretofore been somewhat distant.

"We all assume new names here," said my companion, as we approached a
group of masked brothers and sisters. "My name is Iole, and I suggest
that you take Cleomedes; will you?"

"Since what you have told me, none could be more agreeable, my dear
sister, if such I must still call you; and as I take the name, so will I
ever cherish in my memory the glimpse you have given me of Ancient
Greece." As I spoke I pressed her hand and she returned the pressure.

A gypsy girl leaning upon the arm of a stalwart Turk now attracted my
attention.

"Let me make you acquainted with a subject of the Sultan," said Iole, as
they approached. " El

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arab, this is
Cleomedes," she said, addressing the Turk; and as he answered and bowed
with Oriental salaam, she continued: "And this is Ra-hula, Cleomedes."
As I took the small, gypsy hand, unusually white for one of her tribe, a
strange agitation seized me, and I noticed that she trembled and seemed
likewise agitated. She bowed in silence to my address, and drew her
shawl more closely around her neck and head. Somewhat surprised at this
unusual silence, I was eying her more closely than I should, perhaps,
when Iole called me away to another group. Thus time passed until the
hour for adjournment arrived.

"And will the nun permit a knight to escort her to her convent?" I
asked, as we approached the entrance.

"Believing you, Sir Knight, to be unlike the knights of old, I accept
your company with pleasure."

We passed the entrance; no one but the outer doorkeeper was on duty.

"You must take my carriage; no others are allowed within the convent
grounds," said my companion.

"It seems the ladies run things here, but, if you so request, I must," I
answered.

The carriage rolled rapidly away, I sitting close beside my companion;
but some restraining power repelled any further demonstrations of
affection.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Her presence was
sufficient, and for some time not a word was spoken—I was happy in a
silent joy. Did she likewise feel the joy I felt? I thought so, and on
we rode in silence. At last the carriage stopped, and looking out I
beheld the arched gate surmounted by the tiger held by Cupid's chains.
This entrance I had never been able to find since the day of my first
visit, when the veiled woman had cast such a glamour over me. But now
doubt was dispelled, and I said:

"Art thou, white nun, my sister Iole, she who was in black?"

"The same, Sir Knight; and thou art the father priest whom I refused to
know."

"And why were you so cruel?"

"You were not then of my degree, and had no right to know me. We have
rules as strict as castes, but all can enter who are worthy; you will
learn more as you progress."

The carriage now drew up in front of the great Corinthian portico, and I
was thinking I was some distance from my home, when she said:

"This time my carriage will take you home."

I was preparing to assist her out, when she motioned me to keep my seat,
and shaking my hand, said:

"We will meet again next Thursday night, and take more serious
teachings. In the meantime study well, analyze thyself and learn the art
of

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

self-control, for you may be sorely tried. And remember what I told you
on our first drive—'Great is he who controls the body, still greater he
who controls the mind, but greatest of all he who controls the heart.'"
Turning, with a kind "goodbye," she was gone; and the carriage turned
about and took me toward my home.

"Ah God!" I cried when now alone. "Control the heart! What superhuman
effort that must take! And why should I control my heart? I love with
purest love and what can ask for its suppression?" Yes, after years of
ideal dreaming the pent-up love within my heart had broken loose. What a
torrent these accumulations made! But for the strange controlling power
her presence exercised upon me, it would have been a passion and found
more violent expression; but her superior will changed the tempest into
calm and made my passion peace—the peace of love supreme.

That night I dreamed of Iole; and all the following week naught filled
my thoughts. Where was my study now? where my self-control? I argued,
why should I crush out this love, so pure, so strong? And, deeming my
argument unanswerable, I determined to know the reason why before I did
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Love](botd10.md)
