[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](botd10)  [Next](botd12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434485382/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Brother of the Third Degree*, by Will L. Garver, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

### CHAPTER X.

#### TESTS.

<span class="smallcaps">Another</span> week had passed, and I, in
accordance with instructions, had striven to the best of my ability to
secure mastery over mind. And now for the first time I commenced to
realize the power of the human will. Whenever my thoughts recurred to
Iole, with relentless severity I cast them away. In order to do this
more effectually, I chose deep questions in science, metaphysics and
philosophy, and concentrated all the power of my mind upon them. I took
the symbols and instructions that had been partially explained 'or
outlined to me, and dwelt upon them separately, and whenever my mind
tended to another object I brought it back with firmness and
determination.

Likewise, in all the little things of life I practiced concentration; I
tried by all possible means to overcome the habitual tendency of the
mind to wander, and strove to attain to what the Hindu yogi calls
"Onepointedness."

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

On the night for another meeting, I received a note by special messenger
telling me to remain at home and continue for another week as I had in
that just gone by.

It was signed "Iole," and offered no explanation. Without comment or
question I went back to my room, and, in order to stay my thoughts,
which now had a tendency to drift more than ever, chose the Ego as a
subject for contemplation.

Following certain rules, I locked the door, put out the lamp, and took
my position on my heavy cushioned seat. For several moments there was a
slight wavering, but, as I persisted, this ceased, and my mind became
centered upon my subject. The concentration grew more fixed, a pain
commenced to throb within my head. It ceased, and a numbness, commencing
in my lower limbs, stoic up my body. At the same time an inner suction
commenced between my eyes, and a burning fire pervaded my upper brain
and temples.

At this point a violent agitation commenced in my right side, and a
sense of fear came over me. I opened my eyes, which had been closed to
facilitate concentration, and—My God! I was surrounded by a white light,
and just beyond it in the darkness, now full of red-colored currents,
was a host of horrid creatures, half-human, half-animal, with monstrous
shapes and evil features. With a cry I sprang up; the light vanished,
the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

shapes faded away, and with my frame shaking with tremors I was left
alone in the darkness. After a time, recovering myself, I lighted the
lamp and became more calm. "I have gone too far," I muttered to myself.
" I tempt the demons of the air. If I thus call up elementals, without
sufficient strength to master them, I am doomed to madness."

Another week passed by, and I thought I had done my duty well. Evening
having come, and having received no orders to the contrary, I took my
carriage for the place of meeting. The masked woman motioned me to enter
the door at the right as before, and, passing through, I found myself in
the presence of the woman before whom I had first appeared, and who was
known to me as Madame Petrovna. Without a word she motioned me to a
seat, and, fixing her penetrating blue eyes upon me, gazed at me with
searching looks for several minutes. I returned her gaze without
flinching, and at last she said:

"Brother, your teacher informs me that you wish to enter the sixth
sub-degree; is this so?"

I thought I was already a member of the sixth degree, and, as if she
read my very thoughts, she said:

"No, you are not yet in the sixth degree; you are merely a probationer.
You can enter only when vouched for by a member who knows you.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Your teacher, whom
we know as Iole, has vouched for you and affirms that she knows you.

"Now know that by so doing she has assumed an awful responsibility; for
if you fail, she must suffer with you the dire results that inevitably
ensue. Now be candid, sir, has your teacher asked you to take this step?

"Only indirectly, by telling me of the grand heights to be attained; I
ask of my own free will and without solicitation."

"’Tis well; it is dangerous to proselyte; for, by so doing, we unite
ourselves with the results of the failures that may come. You then
assume all responsibilities, do you?"

"I do," I answered.

"Do you realize the serious nature of this step? Do you know the
responsibilities and duties that it brings?"

"I assume all these, whatever they may be; I am ready and willing," I
answered.

"Do you love your teacher?" she asked.

"As strong as man can love," I answered, without hesitation.

"Then do not fail, for, if you do, she too is doomed." Then, as though
by a secret signal, Iole opened the door and entered. She had on her
accustomed dress of white, but her beautiful face was unveiled and her
long rich hair hung loosely over her shoulder.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

"Unmask," commanded the Madame, addressing me, for all this time I had
been partly masked.

"Sister," she said, turning to Iole, "do you know, approve, and
recognize him as your brother?"

"I do," she answered, in a clear, certain voice, as she looked at me
with a deep and intent gaze.

"Then take him as your full brother; instruct him in the teachings of
this degree; we hold you responsible for all failures."

"Brother," she said, turning to me, "our most beloved daughter and
sister will teach you the secrets of the sixth degree; and as you love
her, as you love your soul, never, so long as life lasts, divulge them.
Let torture seal your lips; let rewards and fame but add muteness to
your silence."

"I swear, never will I speak unless permit is given," I answered
solemnly.

"Then go on, persevere; surmount all obstacles, and we may meet again;"
and at her motion Iole conducted me to a side-room.

Having closed the door and seated ourselves opposite each other at a
center-table, she leaned forward on her hands, and, looking me kindly in
the face, said:

"Brother, tell me of the experience you had in your room last meeting
night."

"Why? how did you find out concerning it?" I asked in astonishment.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

"By that portion of myself in you," she replied, smiling at my surprise.

"Will you explain more fully what you mean?"

"It is best that you should learn from experience; to explain by talking
to you of things perceptible only to senses you have not as yet
unfolded, would be but adding mystery to mystery. You can hardly
understand what is beyond your experience. When with our aid you have
evolved or brought from their latent condition your higher senses, all
will be clear. Now proceed."

I then related my experience, just as it was, and when I had finished
she said:

"The last three exhortations I gave you, my brother, were to kill out
doubt, fear, and love or thoughts of self, the three great enemies of
knowledge. You evidently forgot these or failed to do as I told, for
fear, and therefore thought of self, brought on this astral vision. But,
brother, you should know that so long as you are pure and your thoughts
unselfish, you have naught to fear. That white light which shone around
you, so long as white, is impenetrable and proof against all evil
external powers, visible and invisible. Guard the evil in you, and you
have no need to fear any evil that may be without. The gods have not
left the pure man without protection; he is guarded, even though he
knows it not. And further, you are now

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

a member of the Great Brotherhood whose great Protectors, although
invisible, are ever present around you." She paused, and I replied:

"Sister, your words recall the teachings of my parents, and fill me with
an anxious haste to know more of the Great Brotherhood, its Masters, and
my beloved parents who await me there."

"Brother, everything must abide its time; the eternal decrees of law
cannot be set aside to gratify your haste. You cannot be put into the
Great Brotherhood, you must grow into it. Heretofore, little has been
told you of your noble parents; now this much I tell you; they live, and
are members of the exalted 'Third Degree.'"

"And canst thou tell me of my sister, Esmeralda?"

"She too lives, a virgin sister, and you will meet her in this degree.
Now let us to our studies."

As she spoke she drew a rolled parchment from her robe and spread it out
between us on the table. It was a kind of vellum, and looked very
ancient.

Upon it was a strange combination of numbers, signs, letters, colors,
plants and animals; while in the corners were four allegorical scenes.

"This key, my brother, was brought from Thibet, or Tartary, by
Paracelsus in the sixteenth century; and, like all the occult works of
that great mystic, is incomprehensible to all but the initiated."

Iole had now, indeed, become a teacher; and as

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

she commenced to explain this mystic chart, I became all attention.

"This chart explains, when fully comprehended, all the mysteries of the
universe, from the infinitely small to the infinitely great. It makes
clear that great, mysterious law—the Law of Correspondences—and when you
understand the workings of this law of laws you will be ready for the
great Third Degree.' Here only part is given; this part, however, makes
you a full member of this degree. To proceed:

"These signs," pointing to a number of signs, "known to all astrologers,
symbolize the seven qualities that make the universe. Now you will
notice," she continued, as I bent forward, deeply interested, "these
three symbols are separated and there is no sign of correspondence
between them. This is a blind; they are really the most closely related
of the whole, and symbolized under the words, Sulphur, Mercury and Salt,
conceal a great mystery in the constitution of man. Know that the
universe came from an all-pervading, primordial, homogeneous substance,
every part or portion of which contained in potentiality all the powers
that now or ever hereafter shall exist. Now every particle of the
present heterogeneous universe, being but a conditioned aspect of the
homogeneous from which it came, contains inherent within it all these
infinite powers which are ever

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

seeking to express themselves. But the activity of these powers are
conditioned by the states of the substance in which they act, and all
these conditioned activities, one in reality, make life, will, mind, and
all the forces of nature. There is a trinity back of everything that is,
and that is—spirit or will, a self-moving power; substance or nether,
that inseparable portion of this same spirit which moves; and the third
and likewise inseparable fact of motion. Spirit, substance, motion, make
a trinity which is a unity."

Passing her fingers to some other peculiar signs, she continued:

"Now there are many different kinds and rates of motion or vibration,
and every motion or vibration makes its corresponding substance, color,
sound and number. Of the different kinds of motion, this character
represents the spiral, this the vortical, this the vibratory, this the
undulatory, and this attraction and repulsion. Scientists, by the aid of
microscopes, have discovered invisible lives corresponding to all these,
and even their form reveals their relation. Let them beware, they are
treading on the domains of the occult, and before long may be
proclaiming as scientific the much-ridiculed superstitions of the
ancients. Under new names ancient occultism is being taught today."

Thus for two hours she continued on this one

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

chart, elaborating with the greatest care each statement.

At the end of her lecture what a wonderful flood of light had been
thrown upon my past studies! Many puzzles were explained; but, while
many mysteries of the past were now clear to me, the field of knowledge
only widened and new mysteries were presented to my view.

"Wonderful, wonderful, wonderful!" I cried. " Is the field of knowledge
infinite?"

"Infinite," she answered. "The higher we go, the farther we see, the
limits that have bound us ever expanding, ever enlarging, until the
vastness of man and the universe give place to a still greater
vastness."

"Oh, Iole," I exclaimed, "how much I owe to you——"Her finger checked me,
and she replied:

Naught but your deserts; in time every man receives the full rewards of
his merits, full justice and all her dues, be they good or evil. You
delayed yourself, your heart you did not check; and when the past you
know, this will all be clear. Now again our lesson time ends," she said,
as a musical note vibrated through the room. " With the key you now
possess you must study for some time alone. I simply show the way, you,
yourself must do your work. I have now tried to show you the infinity of
love and likewise the infinity

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of knowledge and mind. Man, containing both a heart to love and a mind
to think, is the world's great consummation, the end toward which all
evolution tends, the object of creation."

"Do you consider man the consummation of all things?" I asked.

Man, containing all things, is the consummation of all. In him is the
universe in miniature. In man is God and demon; heaven, earth and hell;
stars, suns and planets; spirits, angels, and all the hosts that be."

"Then, truly, the ancient axiom, 'Know thyself,' had far wider meaning
than most men give."

"Far wider," she answered, "he who knows himself comprehends the
universe."

"You just said that all men in time got their deserts; do not men often
obtain what they do not deserve, and do not many suffer unjustly? Do you
believe that justice is certain and that there is no injustice?"

"We cannot say with certainty what a man deserves or what he does not
deserve; we do not know his past, which extends through many lives gone
by. The innocent do suffer and there is injustice in the world, but this
is because man is unjust to man; God and nature are infallibly just and
certain. Man has it within his power to go contrary to the laws which
should govern his nature,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

and by so doing can, as it were, pervert nature and establish conditions
not in harmony with the divine good. Therefore, in the world of men
there is a certain amount of injustice, and men who identify themselves
with this world are subject in like proportion to its uncertainties. But
they who join themselves with God, and work harmoniously with nature,
are never unprotected. Not only are they guarded by higher powers—the
Great Protectors —but their mode of life unfolds the white-light mystery
which you saw the other night. The elemental powers and evil shapes you
saw could not penetrate that essence. It is a protection against all
things exterior; only that within yourself can bring you harm."

"But," I persisted, "how can you say that God and nature are just when
there are so many self-evident inequalities in the world? How explain
the inequalities that come from birth? Why is this babe born pure and
good, with noble tendencies, when this other child is born diseased, an
imbecile, or evil in its tendencies? Shall the sins and errors of the
parents be thus visited upon the innocent children, and by nature's
God-made law? Conceding that man has the power to pervert nature's laws
with regard to results which affect himself, it seems to me that there
should be guards to prevent these perversions when the results affect
others."

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

"This is a question the answer to which the world is seeking; but which,
for fear of sequences, it seeks blindly. The Church, having no answer,
evades it; the pessimist, to substantiate his arguments, proclaims it;
and the doubting world, not answered, cries: 'Why should men be just
when nature is unjust?' Let us cast an oriental light upon this subject.
The character or nature with which every being enters this life is the
result which it has built up in many lives gone by. The sins of the
parents are not visited upon innocent children, but upon reborn souls of
ancient lives whose conserved qualities draw them to the parents through
whom they get their new bodies and just deserts."

"Then you accept the teaching of pre-existence and re-birth as an
explanation?

"Without these teachings to justify the inequalities among men, duty has
no basis and justice is a myth. Without these teachings, the soul's
continuance has no logic; conservation has no basis; evolution has no
meaning, and the inequalities of life blaspheme the Creator. But, my
brother, all this will become clear to you when you have passed through
this degree." As she finished speaking we arose and proceeded toward the
entrance. Our minds had made time pass almost as rapidly as upon the
preceding evenings, and we were among the last to leave.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

Iole was most certainly a remarkable woman. Loving me, as I knew she
did, with all her heart, she controlled her love with an iron will and
gave it no expression. Her conversation throughout the entire evening
was in tones of kind and affectionate earnestness, but never once did
she show sign of deeper sentiment. As we passed across the portico, I
noticed a tall cloaked figure come in off the same and enter the door
through which we had just come out; and, as he did so, Iole turned and
nodded her head. I said nothing, but could not help but recall the
strange adept, Albarez, who always dressed this way.

As the carriage rolled away through the darkness, Iole suddenly broke
the quiet by turning at my side and saying:

"Cleo, brother, I see a cloud overhanging you, and I now warn you that
you will be tested to the utmost limits of your strength before long. Be
on your guard, and do not fail. Guard well your heart, beware of
selfishness, fear and doubt, and whatever comes, be strong, be brave, be
true. Kill out selfishness with universal love; kill out doubt by
knowledge; kill out fear with strength; are you now strong?"

She dwelt with peculiar emphasis upon this last question, and I
responded:

"If I were always as strong as when in your presence, I never should
succumb.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

Why, I am always with you, my darling," she said, as she clasped my
hand.

"Ah! I forget that glorious truth, my soul," I answered, returning the
clasp.

"You must not forget my love of this life and many lives gone by," she
replied, as she laid her head on my shoulder.

Oh, the fever of love was coming over me again; the calm tranquillity of
the higher love commenced to give place to a more restless energy.

I pressed her hand, and as I looked into her face I saw that her
beautiful brown eyes were filled with tears.

"Iole," I said, "why are you so sad? why those pretty eyes thus filled
with tears?"

"Cleo," she answered, with a tremor in her voice and form, "my pent-up
love would speak."

"My darling, my love," I answered as I embraced her and kissed away her
tears, "let us be happy in our love."

Now her head nestled on my breast, now her heart beat against my own.
Oh, what joy has love! Too full for words we loved in silence. Smoothing
back the beautiful brown hair from her broad white forehead, I kissed
her brow with fervent kiss. And now her loving arms are around my neck
and with fond caress she whispers:

"Cleo, my darling, I love you, I love you."

And now the carriage stops and we are home.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

"Ah! must we part so soon?" she sighed.

"’Tis only for a little while, my love," I answered; "but, my darling,
why did you repulse my love so long?"

"That was but a test to try it, Cleo," she answered, as I lifted her
from the carriage.

"Then from now on our love shall know no barriers," I said, as I kissed
her good-night, "you are to be mine—my own true loving wife, will you
not, Iole?"

"My own darling husband," she answered, and with a lingering caress we
parted.

Back to my home I returned; now all my thoughts made one continuous
dream of love. Iole my wife—my darling wife.

Thus a week went by, and I appeared before the inner guards. The
patriarch and woman in black both looked at me sharply; when they had
finished their scrutiny in silence, a hitherto unknown door opened, and
at their command I passed through. Looking around, I found myself in a
room finished in a combination of green and indigo. Around the walls
were a number of isolated glass compartments, each containing a large
cushioned seat, a shelf of books and a small table, while upon the glass
doors of each was a hieroglyphic character. In the center of the room,
almost surrounded by a table hung with indigo-colored trimmings, covered
with mystical characters, sat a man

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

of undeterminable age. His curly chestnut hair, thin brown beard and
light mustache, gave him an appearance of youth, which contrasted
stranger with the lines of thought and experience which marked his white
forehead and face. No one else was in the room, and as I entered he
motioned ma to a seat near him at his table.

"My brother," he said, in a kind, low voice, "I am from now on to be
your teacher; and that you may know the reason for the transfer from
Iole to my charge, I will say that you failed to pass certain tests
necessary to entitle you to that privilege."

"I failed!" I gasped, with a vague apprehension of fear.

"Yes, you failed; but only because she sought to take you by
extraordinary means to the seventh sub-degree, of which she is a member.
You failed because you had not sufficiently developed your will to
control your heart. Before you can pass into the seventh sub, where she
now is, your will must be made supreme king."

A suspicion commenced to steal across my mind, and I asked:

"What have I done? When did I fail?"

"When you yielded to her love and your heart's desires last
meeting-night," he answered.

Now all became clear, her love had been a test; she had warned me of a
trial, I had declared my

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

strength to meet it; she then tried me and I failed. Those tears had
been caused by mingled love and misery; loving me, she was condemned to
try me, and those tears had been caused, nor only by her suppressed
love, but by the thought that I might fail. Then, I having failed, and
knowing the results could not be worse, she had for the time let loose
the flood-gates of her heart and nestled in fond love upon my bosom.

O God' what trials were these for human beings could any mortal man
overcome them? Turning to my new teacher, I asked, with lips trembling
with emotion:

"Could any human being pass such tests and not yield to such supreme
affection?"

"My brother," he answered solemnly, "the degree to which she sought to
take you is superhuman. When you reach it you will be more than man as
he is now known."

For a moment I sat in thought, my teacher looking silently on.

"And does this mean separation?" I asked, steadying myself.

"Until you have the strength to meet her in her proper sphere, you must
remain apart. No more will it be permitted her to descend and suffer
again for you; you must from now on fight your own battles and unfold
and rely upon your own strength."

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

As he ceased speaking a fierce determination arose within me, and I
said:

"My teacher, oft before have I said 'It shall be done,' and failed; but
now for the last time I say, 'Nothing shall bar my progress.' What
course shall I pursue?"

"Your course must now be regular; and, while slower, it is sure and
certain if persevered in First, you must labor for complete mastery over
mind, and when this is accomplished your will, developed by the process,
will be sufficiently strong to master your heart. Both heart and mind
must be mastered and controlled before you can pass into the next
degree."

"Then I am ready, and without delay put myself under your direction," I
answered, with firmness. "What is your course? What shall I do? Let me
proceed at once."

My teacher, with an indulging smile, replied:

"Aspirant, your fierce impetuosity speaks well, but remember that
enduring growths come slowly. Learn all patience and strive to realize
the eternity of time. Your first duty will consist of solitary
meditation and study. In addition to the instructions you have already
received, you will be given more; and in a private room, devoted to no
other purpose, you must ponder faithfully upon their meaning. Every
meeting-night a lecture will be given here, and when it is finished you
are to

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

retire to one of these compartments, which shall be yours exclusively,
and meditate upon the instructions given. If, at the end of six months
you have acquired sufficient control over your mind to restrain its
wanderings in the midst of the greatest confusion and diversity of
surroundings. you will be permitted to stand trial for entrance into
higher degrees. In the mean time it is hardly necessary for me to tell
you that you cannot possibly succeed unless you regulate your habits of
living. The animal nature cannot be subdued when it is constantly being
stimulated by animal food; neither can the life energies find expression
in the highest mental activity unless the strictest continence is
preserved. But to you these orders are unnecessary, for if there had
been the slightest exception here you would never have had the privilege
of associating with one so pure as Iole."

At this point a number of students who had evidently left the room for
the time being, reentered, and the teacher commenced a lecture, saying
by way of introduction:

"Brothers and sisters, a new member has joined us in our search for
truth, and for his instruction I will call your attention again to the
three professional requirements necessary for entrance into this degree.
We do not seek knowledge to store it away unused within the chambers of
our brains We seek knowledge that we may be useful in the

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

world and beneficial agents for it. With this end in view, we make as
indispensable requirements a knowledge of art, medicine and law.

"Art, that under the forms, colors and symbols which only give it
meaning, we may scatter far and wide throughout the world our noble
teachings. Under the cloak of art, through which the blind will never
see, we present our truths to all who seek the light, and impress
unconsciously even those who love the night.

"By music, subtle language of the soul and inseparable from art, we calm
the outer nature and soothe the soul that lies buried in the man of
sense. By the secret power of sound we reach the souls of the most
debased, and stir them, even though it be ever so little, to a higher
life.

"We learn and know medicine that we may relieve the suffering and
mitigate the world's great pain. Here vast are the opportunities for
good; for, in this charnel-house of life, pain and misery contend with
death to keep the world in woe. Great is the happiness that comes to him
who relieves the miseries of another; therefore, both for duty and for
happiness, we seek to be physicians.

"We master law that we may protect the helpless, defend the innocent,
and secure justice in the world of men. We must excel in law; not law as
perverted for cruel and selfish ends, but law, the rule of right, in
whose courts the weak with equity

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

can meet the strong, and purity and poverty contend with crime, greed
and gold.

"But know that we do not confine ourselves within the narrow limits that
the outside world puts around these fields. To comprehend these grand
professions, man must make the universe his study and understand
himself. Know that science cannot be without philosophy, the science of
the essence, the science of that great unity whose trinity we know as
color, form and sound."

He paused, and assuming a low, conversational tone, commenced a secret
lecture on the great triune mystery of color, form and sound, as made
clear by numbers.

Having finished his discourse thereon, he handed each member a chart,
giving me one also, as well as a key to one of the compartments. Going
to the one designated I unlocked the door and entered. Unrolling the
chart upon the table I found it to be a cipher-key; and taking the books
from the shelves I found they were in similar characters and treated on
spiritual magic. This was the commencement of a course of study which
continued for six months. All through the study hours of this period the
chief teacher sat in the middle of the room and kept a careful watch
upon each student; while at the end of each session he took all charts
and keys. During these six months I had, with a determination that was
almost cruel,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

banished Iole from my mind. I determined, if need be, to tear out my
very heart; an irresistible impetuosity to master all came over me, and
I made my assault upon the Kingdom of Heaven with violence, as it were.
On the twenty-seventh night my teacher told me that, if I so desired, I
could try the necessary test of strength preparatory to entrance into
the next higher degree.

"I desire the test," I answered, with confidence; at the same time,
recalling my past failures, I shut my teeth together with a grim
determination to succeed.

"Then follow me," he answered coldly.

I now had an idea of what the test would be, and was therefore better
prepared. I knew it would be a test of mental concentration. They would
give me a subject for thought, and then try, by means of noise,
confusion and other devices, to divert my attention from my subject. I
recalled Socrates, who stood for an entire day lost in deep thought,
even while the army was moving in confusion around him. I remembered the
Hindu yogi who, during the Indian mutiny, sat for hours silent and
immovable while the cannons thundered over him and the bullets hissed
around. With mind on the alert I accompanied my companion to the test.
With a mask on my face, he led me to the center of the crowded
ball-room.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The lively strains
of a quickstep filled the hall and dancing figures were gliding around
me. Keeping my eyes upon the polished floor, but ready at any instant to
turn them within, I was led to a cushioned seat and my teacher whispered
the one word—"Within!"

Instantly, I threw all the power of my will and mind into the deep.
Music, forms, time, space and all things vanished; a confused roar arose
within my ears, a clanking throb pulsated in my sub-cranial organs, and
then all was a nothingness. All sense of self died out; I was no more.
Three hours later I found myself alone with my teacher in his study.
When the change was made I knew not, but a wonderful light filled my
soul.

"The mysteries of the universe are not to be revealed," he said
significantly; and then added:

"You passed; not even Iole or your parents aroused you. Let your next
tests be met as successfully and all is well."

Ordinarily his remark about my parents and Iole would have disturbed me,
but now a serious calm and immovable indifference was upon me.

"Are there any more tests?" I asked, with a feeling of power.

"None from me," he answered. "If you wish to proceed write out your
application and I will give it to the proper parties; but remember, I do
not

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

advise you so to do; you must apply of your own free will."

A fearless recklessness now possessed me, and I answered:

"I go of my own free will; I choose with deliberation; give me a blank."

Without a word he handed me an application-blank, and in a firm, bold
hand I filled it out.

"Brother," he said, as he took the application, "this act of yours shall
be kept with the most inviolable secrecy by me; see that you do not
expose yourself to unnecessary dangers by revealing it. You need come
here no more. If the seventh degree council see proper to consider your
application, you will hear from them direct; if not, assume your duties
in the world and do all the good you can for your fellow-man. The
seventh degree council is not bound to receive any one; by this
application our relations are severed and you pass outside of our
jurisdiction. Forever maintain silence concerning the instructions you
have received, and perhaps we may meet again. Now you may go. Good
thoughts and pure aspirations protect you."

With a coolness that was surprising, I left my teacher and returned to
my rooms at the Durant mansion, little dreaming of what was so soon to
follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Black Brotherhood](botd12)
