[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml12)  [Next](tml14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

# Fall of Asgard

Vengeance of the Gods--Burning of the Hag--War of the Gods--Skade leaves
Njord--Mimer is slain--The Vans before Asgard--The Strategy of
Njord--How Sleipner was captured--A Spy in Asgard--Odin's Gate burst
Open--Invaders Victorious--Flight of Asa--Gods--The War in Midgard--The
Sons of Halfdan--Odin rescues Hadding--Loke's Evil Designs--Giants in
Conflict--Defeat of Hadding--How the Dead spoke--A Dread Curse--Forest
Peril--The Great Hand--Death of Giant Maid--Heimdal protects Hadding.

THE gods marvelled greatly at the disasters which had befallen them, and
they sat in council together to discover how Freyja had been lured from
Asgard, and who had plotted to work this evil.

Suspicion fell upon Loke's wife, Aurboda-Gulveig-Hoder, the Hag of
Ironwood, who dwelt among the gods in the guise of a maid-attendant to
Freyja. Wife she was also to Gymer, who had become possessed of the
Sword of Victory, and her son was Beli, "the howler", whom Frey had
slain. So well did she act her part, while she schemed to work evil,
that among the maids none seemed fairer or more faithful. Many missions
did she perform for Freyja. Once, indeed, she was sent to confer divine
favour upon mortals. A king and queen had long been married, and they
had no children.

Prayers they offered up to Freyja, and sacrifices made they that an heir
to the kingdom might be theirs. In compassion were they heard, and
Aurboda was sent

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

earthwards by Freyja in the guise of a crow, bearing with her the fruit
of fertility from the branches of Ygdrasil. When the queen partook of
it, her desire was fulfilled, and in due season an heir was born,
whereat there was great rejoicing in the kingdom.

Thus Aurboda <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) had fair repute in
Asgard despite her evil character--she who was mother of the wolves that
pursue [sun](errata.htm#0) and moon; she who was Hag of Eastern Winds
which bear the burden of her fearsome song and drive fair vessels into
the very jaws of Ægir, the storm-god of western ocean.

When the gods came to know she was indeed the Mother of Evil, and had
lured Freyja from her secure abode, they were moved with great wrath and
with horror against her. They found, too, that it was dread Aurboda who
had filled the air with witchcraft and wrought evil spells that
enchanted both gods and men. Black sorcery did she practise to stir up
the evil passions with which Loke had endowed human kind.

Thor sprang up in the High Thingstead of the gods and went forth hastily
to find her. By him was she seized and struck down. Then the gods burned
her as punishment for her witchcraft. A great pyre they reared in
Valhal, and they spitted her body with their spears, holding it over the
flames until it was consumed. But she came to life again. Thrice they
burned her and thrice was she restored, for evil is hard to destroy. The
third time they flung her ashes away, but her heart, which is the seat
of life, was but half-burned, and Loke found it and swallowed it.
Thereafter he partook in still greater measure of the evil character of
the Hag, who, however, came to life the third time in Ironwood, where
she must ever dwell despite the vengeance of the gods and their

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

wrathful desire to destroy her. But Asgard she could never again enter.

Now the Hag was the mother of Gerd, the giant maid whom Frey the
Vana-god had married. As kinswoman of one of their clan she was under
the protection of the Vana-gods, although, like the Asa-gods, they had
fear and hatred of her witchcraft. They therefore began to dispute with
the Asa-clan because the Hag had been burned. Long and loud the quarrel
waged, but suddenly it was brought to an end by Odin, who flung his
spear into their midst to signify that the war of words must end and the
war of arms ensue.

Thus was the breach between the gods accomplished by the fearsome Hag.

On earth, too, was a conflict begun between the tribes of men. Thus came
to be waged, as skalds have sung, "the first great war in the world".
Whereat the primeval cold heart of "the old one in the Ironwood" was
made glad. With her rejoiced Egther, "the sword-guardian", who is also
named Gymer, and is shepherd of her foul herds. On the Day of Vengeance,
when Surtur prepares to issue forth, Egther shall be visited by
Fjalar-Suttung, in the guise of the red cock of Hela, to obtain from him
the Sword of Victory with which to slay the gods.

Now when the Vans became hostile to the Asa-gods, they issued forth from
Asgard. With them went Njord. Skade, his wife, refused to dwell any more
with him when she found she had no longer need to fear the Asa-gods. She
wearied of the western seashore, for she loved Thrym-heim, the domain of
Thjasse-Volund, her father, with its serene mountains and wide plains
and forests of oak. For nine days and nine nights would Njord go with
her to the mountains, and then for a time would she

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

dwell with him beside the loud-voiced sea. Njord hated Thrym-heim as she
did Noatun, and with heavy heart he sang:

I am weary of the mountains,  
  The barren plains and lone,  
And dismal chasms of the winds  
  Where fettered demons groan;  
I am weary of the forests  
  And the wolves that howl by night,  
For I love the singing of the swans  
  Upon the ocean bright,  
The flash of oars on boundless seas  
  And billows plunging white.

In the kingdom of Njord did Skade sing:

O never mine eyes are closed in sleep  
  On my lonesome couch by the sea,  
For the clamour the restless seagulls keep  
  Is weary and strange to me.  
I pine for my mountains free, and the woods,  
  For the snow-clad plains and the chase;  
And I hate the cold-lipped shore that broods  
  In the shifting sea's embrace.

So Skade parted with Njord and went towards her ancient home, from which
she never returned. When the star-eyes of Thjasse-Volund are gleaming
bright in heaven, and winds are abroad, she runs on her skees adown
steep mountain slopes; and with her arrows and her spear she hunts the
bear and the wolf in dim forests and over snow-white plains.

Mighty Njord was leader of the Vans in their war against the Asa-gods.
And to the Vans was it given to triumph. In sore plight were Odin and
his strong warriors, for the Sword of Victory was no longer theirs, and
the hammer of Thor had been broken. Yet with

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

indomitable courage did Thor and brave Tyr and all the gods of Odin's
clan defend Asgard. Loke usurped Honer, for he desired to rule over the
Vana-gods.

Mimer, in the Underworld, was ever faithful unto Odin. So the Vana-gods
slew him, and to Odin they sent his head, and the great Asa-god embalmed
it. Then sang he sacred runes, so that in after time Odin spake with
Mimer's head, and heard words of wisdom from it, and received guidance
as of old. Honer was sent unto Mimer's realm, where he spoke without
confidence or clear knowledge, but he had not chosen his part.

Asgard fell, and by cunning strategy was it taken. Unscathed by the
vafer-flames did the Vans cross its fearsome river, for Njord burst open
the mighty gate with his great battleaxe and caused it to fall. So did
the Vans achieve gigantic triumph.

It was thus that the gods were overcome. Before Asgard their foes
assembled, and skirmishings there were when Odin's warriors issued
forth. On a silent evening the gate was lowered, so that it bridged the
river, and a god rode forth upon Sleipner. But in ambush was he taken by
Njord, and he leapt from his horse and hastened back to Asgard, crossing
the bridge, which was hastily raised again. But Sleipner was captured,
whereat there was sorrow and deep foreboding in Asgard.

Next morning the gods found Odin's horse outside the gate, and they
rejoiced and took it within. The robes of Njord they saw also in the
river, and what they thought to be his dead body, so they deemed
themselves secure.

But Njord was already in Asgard. He had gone to the river, horsed on
Sleipner, in the darkness of night. There he slew his attendant and
wrapped his own kingly robes about him, throwing the body into the dread
waters.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Whereupon he
crossed over on Sleipner, unscathed by the vafer-flames, scaled the
great wall, and concealed himself within the High Thingstead of the
gods.

When he came to know of the gods' plans, and perceived that he had
naught to fear, he crept forth and struck the gate with his battleaxe.
Across the river it fell like a bridge, and over it surged the
conquering Vana-gods. Thus did they become possessed of Asgard, the
celestial city.

Njord was chief of heroes, and with him fought Frey and Ull, the warlike
son of Sith, and Svipdag, Freyja's husband. Frigg espoused the cause of
the Vana-gods, her kinsmen, and remained in Asgard. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)

Odin made swift escape on the back of Sleipner, and Thor yoked his
goats, and in his thundering car departed with those who remained
faithful to his sire. Thus were the Asa-gods bereft of their power, and
thus became the Vana-gods the world-rulers in Asgard. Ull was chosen as
the chief, and to him did mortals offer up prayers and sacrifices.

Then did wicked men, by reason of great offerings which they made, seek
to win Hela's secure abode.

While the war was waged about Asgard there were mighty conflicts in
Midgard, for Halfdan's tribe sought to be avenged on the tribe of
Svipdag. But ere the tale of the battles be told it must needs be known
how the war upon earth came to be.

When Halfdan was wounded unto death, in the great fight in which Svipdag
overcame Thor with the Sword of Victory, his forces were driven hither
and thither. He had two sons--Hadding, whose mother was Signe-Alveig,
and Gudhorm, whose mother was Groa. They were in

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

great peril when Halfdan died, and Thor carried them unto Jotun-heim.
Gudhorm he gave to the giant Halfe, and Hadding to the giant Vagnhofde,
so that they might be cared for until they became great warriors.

When the Vans conquered Asgard, Loke sought to win their favour. He
perceived that they were scorned by Hadding's tribe, whom Saxons called
"the Heardings", and he laid snares against Hadding. But there came to
Hadding one day a tall old man with one eye, who rode a great horse. He
lifted Halfdan's son into his saddle, and round the lad he wrapped his
cloak. Then he set off with him. So swiftly did the horse travel, and
yet so smoothly, that the lad was curious to know whither they were
going. There was a small hole in the horseman's mantle, and when Hadding
peered through he saw the wide ocean far beneath and the clouds about
him. Fear filled his heart and he trembled, and the rider bade him to
look not forth again, For it was Odin who had rescued Hadding, and he
bore him to the place of refuge which the gods had selected when they
were driven out of Asgard.

Odin trained Halfdan's soil to become a great leader of men. Over him he
sang magical incantations which had power to free him from fetters and
chains. He also gave him to drink of the Splendid Draught, which was
called "Leifner's Flames". Its virtue was such that it imparted to
Hadding strength beyond that of all men, and bravery that was
unequalled. Then did Odin warn him that he would soon have need to use
his powers against his enemies.

Hadding returned on Odin's horse, as he had come, to the home of the
giant Vagnhofde. But soon he fell into Loke's snare. The evil god seized
him and chained him in a forest, as Svipdag had been chained by Halfdan,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

so that he might become the prey of wild beasts. Guards were set over
him to prevent his escape. But when these allies of Loke kept watch,
Halfdan sang an incantation which Odin had taught him, and they fell
into a magic sleep. A great wolf came towards him to tear his body to
pieces, and he sang the incantation which makes free, and his chains and
fetters fell from him. Then he attacked the wolf and killed it, and its
heart he did eat. With the might and ferocity of the wolf was Hadding
then endowed, and the guards he slew, and went upon his way.

He returned to the giants' home, and prepared to depart so that he might
raise his tribe to battle against the tribe of Svipdag. Now Hardgrep,
the giant's daughter, loved him and besought him not to leave her. She
had power to change her shape. Now she had stature which reached to the
stars, and anon she was of human size. In vain did she remonstrate with
Hadding because he scorned her love and sought to follow arms, thirsting
for throats.

But although at length she gained his love as a comely maid, he had
still resolve to be gone. So she attired herself as a male warrior and
went with him.

Then did Svipdag come from Asgard, and he sought to make peace with the
sons of Halfdan. To both he offered kingdoms, and his half-brother
Gudhorm, son of Groa, he made ruler over the Danes. But Hadding refused
his favours, and with anger and fierce scorn he vowed that he would
avenge his father's death and take no favour from the hands of his
enemy. Until his life's purpose was fulfilled he vowed to cut neither
hair nor beard, and long were both and very fair. It was thus that he
was called Hadding, "the hairy"

His eastern tribe of Swedes did the young warrior

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

raise to battle against Svipdag's tribe and their allies, and war he
declared against his brother Gudhorm, King of the Danes. Between the two
brothers did Loke work much evil. As a blind man he went to Hadding with
words his brother uttered, and with Gudhorm he was Bikke, a leader of
his army.

So the brothers fought one against another. To Gudhorm's aid went Halfe,
the giant who had nourished him, and to Hadding's went Vagnhofde.
Svipdag's Scandian tribe fought with the Danes.

On the night before the battle the opposing armies beheld the great
hairless giants contending in mid-air, the starlight gleaming on their
bald, horrible heads. Monstrous were the efforts of these foul gigantic
warriors. When the dread conflict was ended, victory was with Halfe.

On the morrow did Loke set in cunning battle array the forces of
Gudhorm, which triumphed on the field as Halfe had in mid-air.

The eastern Swedes were scattered, and Hadding became a fugitive in the
woods. With him was Hardgrep, the giant's daughter, who was a constant
protection to him. Great hardships did they endure together, and they
were ofttimes in peril.

But her aid he was doomed to lose. One night they entered a lonely
dwelling to seek hospitality, and there they found that the master of
the house was lying dead. His funeral rites were being performed. Now,
it was Hardgrep's desire to peer into the future, and she took a piece
of wood and on it engraved magic runes, which she caused Hadding to
place under the dead man's tongue, so that he might speak.

Angry, indeed, was the spirit thus compelled to make utterance. Nor did
it reveal what was sought, but cursed

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

the worker of the spell. Terrible was the voice that spoke and said:
"Cursed be the one who dragged me back from the Underworld! Let her
perish by the demon who called a spirit out of bale!"

Then fled from the house Hadding and Hardgrep and sought refuge in the
deep forest. Over the narrow path of a grove they made a shelter with
branches of trees and concealed themselves there. In the middle of the
night a rustling was heard in their secret dwelling, and a Great Black
Hand was perceived to move about, groping with iron fingers for its
prey.

Hadding was stricken with terror, and he awakened Hardgrep and besought
her to rescue him. Swiftly rose the giant-maid, and she assumed great
stature to defend her lover. With strength of her kind she clutched the
Great Hand round the wrist, and bade Hadding strike it with his sword.
Many blows did he give, seeking to hew it off, and his blade rang
noisily against the hard flesh.

Blood flowed from the wounds he made, but more venom than blood came
forth.

Then suddenly was Hardgrep caught by the Hand, which clutched her in
terrible embrace. Into her flesh sank the sharp claws, and her bones
were crushed, and she sank in death in the sheltered dwelling. Whereat
the Great Hand vanished.

Hadding was now alone and in great peril, for demons compassed him about
in the dark forest.

But Odin, in his compassion, sent forth Lyfir, "the shining one", who
was Heimdal in human guise, to protect the warrior in his loneliness.
Him did Hadding meet as a rover, and a bond of friendship they made
together by sprinkling one another's feet with their blood.

Soon again did Hadding appear in the east, leading his hosts to battle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[73:1](tml13.htm#fr_19) Also Angerboda.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[77:1](tml13.htm#fr_20) Hence the Heimskringla
story of Odin going a long journey, and the wooing of Frigg by his
brothers, who thought he would never return.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Gods Reconciled](tml14)
