[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml18)  [Next](tml20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

# The Great Stone Giant

Odin in Jotunheim--Two Swift Steeds--Race to Asgard--The Boastful
Giant--His Challenge to Thor--An Island Duel--The Clay Giant--A
Lightning Conflict--Thor is wounded--His Son Magni rescues Him--Groa's
Incantation--Story of Orvandel's Rescue--The Spell is broken--Odin as
the Ferryman--How he taunted Thor--A Divine Comedy.

THOR was in the east battling against the Trolls when Odin went forth
from Asgard towards the dwelling of Hrungner, the great Stone giant of
Jotun-heim.

Hrungner watched him coming through the air in splendour and beauty, and
he cried: "Who cometh towards me? On his head is a helmet of gleaming
gold. He rides over ocean and high upon the air. Swift indeed is his
mighty steed."

Ere the giant was silent the ruler of Asgard was nigh to him, and he
spake proudly. "In all Jotun-heim," Odin said, "there is not a horse
that is Sleipner's equal."

Then twitching the reins, he turned Sleipner back towards Asgard, and he
rode swifter than the wind.

"Thy steed is fast indeed," the giant bellowed, but my nimble-footed
Goldfax (gold mane) hath greater stride."

As he spake, Hrungner leapt upon his horse's back and set out in swift
pursuit of the Asa-god. But although he urged Goldfax to hasten, he
could not win nigh unto Odin. Yet would the giant pause not in

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

his speedy flight, for his heart was afire with ambition to prevail over
the rider of Sleipner. Swiftly indeed he rode, and ere he was aware he
found himself entering the gates of Asgard over the gate-bridge which
had been set down for Odin.

By the gods was he received with hospitality as he demanded. They took
him to the great feasting hall, and there he drank ancient mead and
sweet. The bowls from which Thor was wont to refresh himself were placed
before him, and Freyja filled them. Each of the bowls the giant emptied
in turn at a single draught. Indeed, so much did he drink that the mead
surged in his veins and his eyes rolled with redness, for he was made
drunk. Then was his tongue unloosened, and he gave forth loud boastings.

"Valhal," he cried, "shall be mine. . . . The warrior's hall must I
carry away with me to Jotun-heim."

More mead did Freyja pour out to him, filling the bowls of Thor.

Then Hrungner boasted that he would bring utter ruin to Asgard, and cast
down its wall and palaces.

"The gods," he cried, "and all that are within the city shall I slay
save Freyja and Sif."

As Freyja filled the bowls he said: "Ha! all the mead in Asgard I must
consume this day. None shall I leave for the gods."

Weary grew the gods of the braggart giant and his vain boastings, and
Thor they named. . . . Immediately Thor was in their midst. Black were
the brows of the thunder-god when he beheld Hrungner; white were his
knuckles as he clutched his great hammer.

"Who hath permitted this Jotun," Thor roared, "to drink the mead of
Asgard? Why doth Freyja pour it forth to him as if she were honouring a
feast of gods?"

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

Evil was in Hrungner's eyes as he scowled at Thor, "By Odin's wish am I
here," he sneered, "and under his protection I remain."

"When thou dost seek to go forth," Thor growled sullenly, "thou mayest
regret the invitation."

"Unarmed have I come," Hrungner protested with sudden alarm, "and of
little honour would it be to thee, O Asa-Thor, if thou didst slay me
now. If thou wouldst fain put thy valour to proof, thee I dare to
contend against me on the borders of my kingdom."

Thor cast at him defiant eyes, and the giant was troubled. "Alas!" he
cried; "I have done foolishly to come hither, leaving my stone shield
and my flint weapon in Jotun-heim. Were I armed, we might well fight.
This shall I say unto thee, O Asa-Thor: I would brand thee as a coward
if thou didst seek to slay me undefended. . . . I challenge thee to
contend with me in an island duel."

Now never before had Thor been challenged thus. For the island duel
(Holmgang) which Hrungner desired was fought by dealing blow for blow,
and the Asa-god would have the right to strike first because he was
challenged by the other. In the contest each would have a shieldbearer.
His consent did Thor give to the giant's terms, and in silence they
parted.

Through Jotun-heim the duel challenge was gravely debated by the giants,
and keen was their desire that Thor should be worsted, because Hrungner
was their strongest and greatest warrior, and they feared that if he
fell the thunder-god would do them more injury than heretofore.

On an island on the borders of rocky Grjottungard, where Hrungner had
his dwelling, the Jotuns made a giant of clay who was in height nine
miles, and three

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

in breadth between the shoulders. Him they called Mokker-kalfi
(Mist-wader), and they gave him a mare's heart. He was shieldbearer to
Thor's enemy.

Now Hrungner had a heart of stone; his head was of stone also. Broad and
thick was his stone shield, and in his right hand he grasped his great
flint weapon, which he swung over his shoulder. A terrible combatant was
Hrungner.

To the island duel did Thor set forth. His shieldbearer was his faithful
Thjalfe, son of Orvandel, who ran swiftly to the place of combat. To
Hrungner he cried:

"Although thy shield is held in front, thou dost stand unprotected, for
Thor cometh to attack thee from the earth beneath."

Then did Hrungner cause his shield to be cast down, Defiantly he stood
upon it, while with both hands he grasped his great flint weapon.

In fear and trembling was Mokker-kalfi. His mare's heart quaked within
him because Thor was coming, and sweat ran from his body in torrents.

Thunder broke forth and lightning flashed before Hrungner. Then he
beheld rushing swiftly towards him the black-browed thunder-god, who
swung his hammer to strike. Nor did Hrungner wait till he was nigh. He
raised his great flint weapon and flung it with might against Mjolner,
which Thor, divining his purpose, hurtled simultaneously. In mid-air the
weapons met and flashed forking fire that rent the heavens and covered
the ocean with flame. The flint was utterly shattered. On the ground
fell a portion, and there to this day are the flint hills, and a great
splinter pierced the forehead of the Asa-god, so that he was thrown
down.

Meanwhile the sublime hammer smote Hrungner and crushed his skull, and
he fell also. The giant's foot

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

struck Thor and lay heavily upon his neck, so that he could not rise to
his feet.

On the affrighted Mokker-kalfi had Thjalfe flung himself, and him he
overcame right speedily. Then ran he to help Thor, but in vain he strove
to lift Hrungner's foot from his neck. . . . He named the Asa-gods, and
they hastened from Asgard to the place of combat. When they found that
Thor was cast down, they put forth their strength to free him, but
unable were they to lift the giant's foot.

Then came Thor's son, Magni, whose mother was Jarnsaxa, the iron-crusher
of the World-mill. He was but three nights old, but had already
exceeding great strength. The giant's foot he seized and flung it from
his sire's neck, saying:

"Alas! I should have come sooner. Hrungner's head would I have broken
with my fist!"

Thor leapt up, and his arms he threw about his son, embracing him with
great love.

"To thee, O Magni," he said, "I shall give Goldfax, Hrungner's great
steed."

But Odin was ill-pleased with Thor, and to him he said: "Thou hast done
wrong to give unto a Hag's son the speedy horse of the giant. 'Twere
better if thou hadst gifted it to thy sire."

In wrath he turned away with the gods of his clan, and went towards
Asgard.

Now the day of the great island duel was long ere the time when the sons
of Ivalde waged the winter war against the Asa-gods. As Thor returned
towards Orvandel's dwelling, his resting place on the borders of
Jotun-heim, where he was wont to leave his swift, strong goats and his
sublime car, he met with Orvandel, who was in great peril, The elfin
archer had gone forth to fight

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

against the Frost-giants, but with ill success as it proved, for they
pressed nigh to him and sought to take him captive.

Thor rescued his friend speedily, and placed him in the meat basket,
which he carried on his shoulders, as he waded through deep Elivagar.
Orvandel thrust a toe through a hole, and a spell was put upon it by the
giants, so that it was frozen. Then did Thor snap it off and fling it
high in the heavens, where it became a bright star, which unto this day
is called "Orvandel's Toe". Thus it was that the elfin archer (Avo)
became a star hero.

When he parted with Orvandel, Thor yoked his goats, and in his sublime
car he hastened towards his dwelling in Thrud-Varg. In grievous pain was
he because of the wound which Hrungner had given him. Deep in his
forehead was the flint flake embedded. In vain did Sith seek to
alleviate his sufferings.

Now gentle Groa, Orvandel's wife, was dwelling in Thor's stronghold, as
was her wont when her husband went forth against the Frost-giants. She
had the power to work magic spells. She who was the "elf of growth"
could make rocks to move, and she had power to arrest the turbulent
floods. It was Groa who restored to strength those whom the Frost-giants
had wounded, and it was she who gave beauty again to the places which
they laid waste.

Unto Thor she came to heal his wound, and take from his forehead the
splintered flint which stuck fast there. Incantations she sang over him.
First she charmed away the pain which afflicted the god. Then the stone
quivered and grew loose.

The heart of Thor leapt within him when he perceived that Groa would
give him healing, and he was consumed with desire to reward her, and to
gladden her

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

heart without delay. So ere she sang further, he spake and she was
silenced,

Of Orvandel's peril Thor gave Groa tidings, and of how he had rescued
the elf from the power of the Frost-giants who encompassed him about.
With joy was Groa's heart filled, but the spell she wrought was broken,
and the memory of the magic song passed away. Thus was she unable to
take from Thor's forehead the splintered flint, and there it ever
remained because of his impatience to give premature reward.

So there was ever after weakness in Thor. Nor must mortal fling across
his dwelling a flint weapon, lest the stone in the Asa-god's forehead be
shaken, for then he would have suffering, and be moved to wrath against
an offender.

Great were the deeds of Thor, which brought security to gods and men,
for by him were the giants driven back and their power suppressed. Unto
him, therefore, was willing service at all times rendered.

But there fell a day when Odin went forth from Asgard and towards the
east. He saw Thor coming out of Jotun-heim, and sought to mock him so
that he might have mirth.

Elivagar ran deep, and Odin waited on the opposite shore in the guise of
Greybeard, the ferryman. Thor called upon him, but Odin refused to
cross, whereat there rose a dispute between them. The valour of Thor did
Odin question, and his feats belittle. With scornful laughter, too, did
he receive the angry threatenings of the thunder-god.

"Nimble is thy tongue," cried Thor, "but it would help thee little if I
waded across to thee. Louder than the wolf thou wouldst howl if I struck
at thee with Mjolner."

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

"Better wouldst thou be engaged," Odin answered, "if thou didst hasten
home; because there is one there whom Sif loves better than thee."

Thor was wroth. "Well dost thou know," he cried, "that thy cruel words
sting me. A coward art thou who speakest what is untrue."

Odin answered: "Truly I speak indeed. . . . Thou art tardy in returning.
Why art thou lingering on thy way? 'Twere better if thou hadst set forth
on thy journey at early morn."

"'Tis thou who delayest me, villain," Thor answered wrothfully.

Odin smiled. "Can one of so little account as I am", he said, "delay the
journey of the great Asa-god Thor?"

"Cease thy bantering," cried Thor; "hasten hither with thy boat, and
thou shalt have the friendship of the sire of Magni."

"Begone!" cried Odin. "I shall not cross thee."

Then said Thor, with pleading voice: "Show me the ford then, since thou
wilt not come over."

Odin wagged his head. "That is easy to refuse," he said. "The way is
long. Thou canst go a little way this direction, and a little way in
that; then thou canst turn to thy left till thou dost reach
No-man's-land. There wilt thou meet thy mother, who shall guide thee
unto Odin's land."

"Can I go thither to-day?" Thor asked.

Odin answered: "By sunrise, if thou dost travel quickly, thou mayest get
there."

"Mocker," exclaimed Thor, "our talk is ended! Thou hast denied me
crossing this day, but by the holy waters of Leipter, I swear that I
shall reward thee indeed when next we meet."

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

Odin smiled: "Begone!" he cried; "and may demons seize thee."

Then took Thor his departure in great wrath, nor did he ever discover
again the ferryman Greybeard who had mocked him and put him to shame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Balder the Beautiful](tml20)
