[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml13)  [Next](tml15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

### CHAPTER IX

# The Gods Reconciled

Svipdag leaves Asgard--Hadding's Strategy--Fleet sunk by Odin--Fate of
Svipdag--Freyja's Sorrowful Quest--The Sea-Dragon--Slain by Hadding--The
Curse of Freyja--Loke and Heimdal's Ocean Fight--Hadding's Peril--The
Gods and the Last Battle--Death of Svipdag's Son--His Faithful
Queen--Giants threaten Asgard--Odin's Warning--Thor wins Ull's
Favour--Asa-Gods return to Asgard--The Decrees of Odin--The Seven
Sleepers--St. Swithin's-Day Myth.

SVIPDAG descended out of Asgard and urged his tribe to help the Danes in
their campaign against Hadding. Ing was he called by his people. They
were ruled over by his son, Asmund, who had chosen to live among men.

The fame of Hadding had already gone forth because of mighty deeds he
had done. He had conquered King Hadvanus, although the city in which he
was besieged was protected by strong battlements. The cunning warrior
desired the speedy surrender of his foemen. He caused birds that nested
within to be caught, and to their feathers slow-burning lights were
attached, so that when they flew over the battlements they set the roofs
aflame. The people hastened to quench the great fires that raged about
them; soldiers left the fortresses, and the guards ran from the gates.
Then did Hadding make sudden and fierce assault and capture the town.
Not until he gave payment of much gold was the stricken king ransomed
and saved from death.

A great fleet sailed eastward with Svipdag's warriors.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In one ship, the
name of which was Gnod, went three thousand men. But Odin sank it, and
all on board perished in the waves.

'There are some who tell that Svipdag was drowned with his warriors, and
there are others who hold that he was punished by enchantments, for by
reason of Groa's incantations the sea could not harm him, and none there
were who had power over him save the Asa-gods. Indeed he had reason to
fear them greatly, for they were stirred with wrath against him because
he would not permit the war to have end. He was Odur, the one "endowed
with spirit".

It is told that enchantments were put upon Svipdag by the Asa-gods, and
that he was transformed into a great sea-dragon which dwelt beneath a
grey rock guarding much treasure.

The heart of Freyja was sad because that Svipdag came not nigh to her
with loving words and shining face. Deeply she yearned for him in
Asgard, wondering what evil had befallen The Shining One.

Then came she to know that he had suffered because of Odin's wrath, and
forth she went to search for him. Tears fell from her eyes, and they
became drops of pure gold, and those that showered into the sea were
changed to amber.

Through Midgard she went searching for Svipdag, and she roamed over
hills and plains and over rivers and lakes enquiring of whom she met if
her lost one had gone this way or that. And without ceasing she wept, so
that her tears of gold may be found in all lands, and her tears of amber
on the shores of wide seas. Faithful was she to Svipdag, and ever did
she sorrow as she went because she found him not.

At length she came to the shore of the sea where her

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

husband sorrowed also in dragon-guise. Horrible was he to behold and of
haggard seeming.

She was neither repulsed nor was her love turned cold, for the eyes of
the dragon were still the eyes of Svipdag, without change or lack of
beauty.

Then endeavoured she to comfort him, and wept more tears of gold. Great
indeed did the dragon's treasure become, for great was the sorrow of
Freyja. But break the spell she could not, for who can remove the curse
of Odin?

Long she stayed nigh to Svipdag, nor sought to return unto Asgard. And
when she entered the sea to comfort him her great necklace glittered
through the waves, and in darkness fire flashed from it. Beneath the
grey stone she left the necklace on the day when lasting sorrow was her
dower.

There came on that day to bathe in the sea Hadding, the vengeful son of
Halfdan. But he wondered because his body was scorched with great heat
and the waves boiled all around. Then suddenly he beheld the dragon
coming against him. With haste he seized his sword and made fierce
attack. Great was the might of Hadding, and by Odin was he given power
to prevail. With many strong blows he slew the monster, and he bade his
men to carry it to his camp.

Now, as he went thither, a lady came towards him. She was of such great
beauty that he was made silent before her. Golden was her hair, and
gleaming and blue were her eyes as the radiant, sun-kissed sea. But
Hadding knew not that it was the goddess Freyja who stood before him.

When she beheld the dragon she was stirred to divine wrath. Hadding she
cursed upon sea and upon land. "Suffer shalt thou," she cried, "the
vengeance of

 

<span id="img_08400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FREYJA AND THE
NECKLACE&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the painting by J. Doyle Penrose,
R.H.A. By permission of the artist&lt;/i&gt;](tn/08400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08400.jpg)  
FREYJA AND THE NECKLACE  
*From the painting by J. Doyle Penrose, R.H.A. By permission of the
artist*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the gods in Asgard. On battlefield and empty plain shall their wrath
attend thee. On seas eternal tempests shall thee follow. Wherever thou
dost wander thou shalt be accursed. Bitter cold shall follow thee to thy
dwelling; at its fire thou shalt be oppressed. Thy flocks shall die. All
men shall shun thee, for through the world thou shalt go as foul and as
hated as is the plague. Such is the wrath of the gods against thee, for
with sacrilegious hands thou hast slain a dweller in Asgard who was
enchanted in a form that was not his own. O slayer of the god I loved!
when thou art cast into the deep the wrath of demons shall fall upon
thee. Ever will you be under our curse until with prayers and sacrifice
to the Vana-gods our wrath is appeased."

All things that Freyja said came to pass. Stricken was Hadding by a
tempest and cast into the raging sea. Despised was he by strangers when
he was washed ashore, and shunned was he as if he were plague-smitten
and foul. Many disasters, indeed, fell upon him, until he offered up
dusky men in sacrifice to the god Frey. Then was the wrath of the
Vana-gods melted and the curse removed.

Each year did Hadding ever afterwards give Frey great offerings, as did
also his sons and their sons for generations.

Now Loke had watched the conflict between Hadding and the dragon while
yet afar off. When he perceived that Svipdag was slain, he hastened to
secure the treasure, and especially the necklace of Freyja, from below
the grey rock. In seal guise did he enter the sea, and he saw gleaming
through the dark waters the jewels of the divine Lover of Ornaments. But
Heimdal, the keen-eyed, followed him, and in seal guise was he also.
Thus did Loke and he meet in the sea's dim depths. By their

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

eyes did each know the other, and fiercely they fought on the grey rock
to be possessed of the jewels.

Heimdal, son of the waves, was victorious. He drave off Loke, and
possessed himself of Freyja's necklace, which he kept secure until he
returned to Asgard with the Asa-gods.

Then came the day of great battle between Hadding and the tribes that
were combined against him. Ere it began, he slew Henry, son of Asmund,
son of Svipdag. Then was Asmund filled with great wrath, and he vowed to
slay the warrior who had killed his sire and his son also.

But Odin was with Hadding, and the great god caused his favoured warrior
to marshal his army in wedge shape, so as to pierce and scatter the foe.
For long years after did the descendants of Hadding enter battle in this
manner.

Now when the conflict was at its height, Hadding was sore pressed
because of the strength of Asmund's arm which was made greater by his
exceeding great wrath and desire for vengeance. Odin perceived his
peril, and hastened from the battle to bring him aid.

The Vana-gods gave help to Asmund, and over Hadding's army there passed
a fierce rainstorm and wreaths of mist that caused confusion. Then came
Thor on a black thundercloud which drave back the rain-clouds over the
hills, and the sun broke forth in clear splendour.

Hadding's wedge-shaped army pressed forward, until Asmund was nigh to
his enemy, whose death he sought above all else. Then did Hadding call
upon the Asa-gods in his sore need. Asmund had flung his shield over his
back, and with both hands grasping the hilt, he wielded his great sword
so fiercely that he mowed down

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

his enemies before him. Nigh to Hadding came he indeed, when Odin
returned on his horse Sleipner, bearing with him the giant Vagnhofde. By
Hadding's side was the giant placed in the guise of a warrior bearing a
crooked sword.

When Asmund saw the weapon which the giant wielded he cried: "Thou
mayest fight with a crooked sword, but my short sword and my javelin
shall be thy doom this day. And thou, Hadding, holding thy shield
against me, art foul with crimes. Thy bold lance shall I bear down, and
thee shall I cover with shame."

But the giant engaged Asmund, and Hadding flung his lance, which pierced
Asmund's body so that he fell dying of his fierce wound. Yet was he not
without strength to strike a last blow, for he grasped his javelin and
flung it at Hadding, whose foot he pierced. Then died Asmund unrevenged,
but ever afterwards did the slayer of his sire and his son limp with the
wound he gave him in his last hour.

When Asmund fell, Hadding became victorious, and his foemen he drave in
confusion from the field.

The body of Asmund was buried with pomp and state. Bitter was the grief
of his queen Gunnhild, who desired not to live after him. With Asmund's
sword she slew herself, and with him was she laid in the tomb. She loved
him more than life, and with her arms around his body was she laid to
rest in his tomb. The whole tribe mourned them, sorrowing greatly for
many days.

Now the Frost-giants and the giants of the mountains plotted together to
conquer Asgard, and in Surtur's deep dales and in Iarnvid there was
promise and offer of help. Weak were the Vana-gods to resist the
disaster which impended, nor did they know a-tight of the evil plans of
their dread foes. But to Odin came full knowledge in

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

his exile. Well he knew that disaster irretrievable would befall both
gods and mortals if the high celestial city fell before the giants.

Sleipner he mounted, and towards Asgard sped he, bearing the tidings of
dread import. Then it was that the Vana-gods knew they had exceeding
great need of his wise and constant counsel. Deeply moved were they
towards the leader they had dethroned and driven into exile, because he
had forewarned them of the giants' plans.

To Thor went Ull, who sat in Odin's throne, and together they conferred.
With eloquent words did the Thunder-god fill the heart of Ull with
friendship towards the Asa-gods, so that he returned to Asgard to plead
their cause. Nor long did he speak when the Vana-gods sent speedily unto
Odin to beseech him to become once again their great chief ruler.

So were the Asas and Vans reconciled, but on the day of Ragnarok, when
Suttung comes forth to wreak vengeance, the wise Vans shall depart from
Asgard.

Soon after Odin had returned to sit supreme again upon his throne, the
giants made vain attempt to overcome the gods, but great punishment was
meted out to them for their presumption. Many were slain, and those that
survived were driven back to Jotun-heim. Then peace unbroken reigned in
Asgard. In Midgard, too, was peace restored, and men laid down their
arms, weary with fighting.

Odin then, remembering the evil wrought by the Hag of Iarnvid, issued
decrees which condemned magic and the practice of black sorcery. The
great sacrifices made by evil men did he also condemn, and he made known
that not only by the quantity of offerings would the gods be appeased or
the wicked recommended before the

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thingstead of the
Lower World. Those of his chosen warriors who were borne by the
Valkyries to his place of exile were brought unto Asgard to share the
joys of Valhal.

So ended the first great war in the world. But the dread effects of
Loke's evil had not yet their end.

When Mimer was slain, the fount of wisdom was without a watchman, and
Ygdrasil, the World-tree, ceased to draw sustenance therefrom so that it
began to wither. Many leaves faded, and its branches knew swift decay.

The seven sons of Mimer, who were guardians of the seven months of
change, <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) fell into deep stupor in
their golden hall, which was heaped with great treasure. Clad in
splendid robes, they lay upon the floor wrapped in magic sleep.
Sindre-Dvalin was there in the midst; his brothers were about him.
Mortals who have penetrated Hela and reached Mimer's realm have beheld
them lying asleep beside their treasure, but they feared to enter; for
if anyone touched the robes, or sought to be possessed of the gold, his
hand and his arm would wither.

The Seven Sleepers shall awake not, as mortals have been told, until
Ragnarok, "the Dusk of the Gods". When Heimdal blows a thunder blast
from Gjallarhorn on the day of the Last Battle, the sons of Mimer shall
start from sleep. They shall then arm themselves and issue forth. On the
wall have mortals beheld suspended and bright, seven long swords which
none save the sons of Mimer can wield.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[89:1](tml14.htm#fr_21) These are St. Swithin's
mythical predecessors. The ancient belief was that if it rained on "the
day of the Seven Sleepers" there would be rain for seven weeks
thereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Loke's Evil Progeny](tml15)
