[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml39)  [Next](tml41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

### CHAPTER XXXV

# The Betrayal of Siegfried

The Rival Queens--Their Quarrel--Brunhild plots against
Siegfried--Hagen's Vow--The Tragic Hunt--How Siegfried was deceived--The
Death Wound--Last Words--A Sad Homecoming--Kriemhild's Sorrow--Scene in
Church--Blood Testimony--Gunther pleads for Forgiveness--Treasure taken
to Worms--Where Hagen concealed it.

SIEGFRIED and Kriemhild went riding with a gay company towards Worms.
There was joy in every heart, but it was fated to end in heavy grief.
Prince Gunther journeyed not with them; never again did he behold his
sire or his mother.

The aged King Siegmund rode forth with his son; he had desire to meet
with Gunther and his knights, but had he known what sorrow was in store
for him he would have fared not from the Netherlands.

Gunther gave to all of them right hearty welcome. The queens greeted one
another with affection, but from that hour Brunhild could forbear not
watching Kriemhild with jealous eyes. . . . When she beheld the twelve
hundred knights of Siegfried, she said: "Never was there a subject king
who had greater wealth." . . . The queen, however, gave meet
entertainment to her guests; but ere long jealousy overcame love; the
heart of Brunhild grieved because that Siegfried and his queen were so
rich and powerful.

It fell that on a day when the knights tilted in the courtyard Kriemhild
lauded her husband's prowess.

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

"Siegfried," she said, "excelleth every other knight as the moon doth
the diminishing stars. For good reason take I pride in him."

"Valiant he may be," answered Brunhild, "yet thy brother Gunther
surpasseth him, for he is the greatest of all kings."

"My brother is indeed a noble knight," Kriemhild said, "yet is my
husband his equal."

Said Brunhild: "Did not the king surpass me in feats of strength in
Isenland, what time Siegfried remained in the ship? He is but my
husband's vassal. From his own lips I heard him confess it."

"Were Siegfried but a vassal," Kriemhild retorted, "thinkest thou that
my brother would have given me unto him for wife? I pray thee to repeat
not what thou hast said."

"That indeed I shall, said Brunhild. "Siegfried is our subject, and his
knights await to do us service when called upon."

Angry was Kriemhild. "No service canst thou claim," she said. "My
husband is greater than thine. If he were not he would have to pay
tribute, and never hath he done so. I pray thee to cease thine
annoyance.

"Boast not with empty pride," Brunhild cried angrily; "I am honoured far
above thee."

"Know now," retorted Siegfried's queen, "that my husband is no vassal to
thine, and is indeed a greater monarch. The kingdom of the Nibelungs he
won by his strong right arm, and he hath inherited the Netherlands from
his sire. To no man doth he owe allegiance. I am indeed a free and a
mighty queen. Dare not to chide me. Thou shalt see when I enter church
in thy company that I shall not walk behind."

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

"If thou art not my subject, then shalt thou go by thyself, nor walk in
my train," Brunhild said.

In anger did Kriemhild leave the Queen of Burgundy, and she bade her
maidens to put on their richest attire.

Many wondered to behold the queens walking apart. . . . It was doomed
that many should sorrow because of that in aftertime.

When they met before the church Kriemhild went forward to enter first,
and Brunhild forbade her. "Thou art my vassal," she said; "walk not
before me."

"'Twere better that thou shouldst hold thy peace," retorted Kriemhild;
"how can a vassal's paramour walk before a queen?"

"What dost thou mean?" Brunhild asked angrily. "Whom dost thou call a
paramour?"

"None other than thee," answered Kriemhild. "Did not my husband win thee
for thine? Thou didst prefer him thou now callest a vassal, forsooth. .
. . Speak not to me any longer. Thou knowest the truth now."

Then Kriemhild entered the church, and Brunhild followed her, weeping
sore. There was deadly hate betwixt them, and for that reason many a
goodly knight went to his grave.

When the service was over, Brunhild confronted Kriemhild, saying: "Thou
didst call me a paramour. I demand thee now to prove thy words."

"'Twere easy to prove them," retorted Kriemhild proudly, showing her
rival the ring and the girdle which Siegfried had taken from her.

"A paramour to Siegfried thou wert indeed," she said.

Brunhild bowed her head with shame, weeping bitterly; and when Gunther
asked her why she sorrowed she told him what Kriemhild had said.

 

<span id="img_38400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![KING GUNTHER AND
BRUNHILD&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the painting by Schnorr von
Carolsfeld&lt;/i&gt;](tn/38400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/38400.jpg)  
KING GUNTHER AND BRUNHILD  
*From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

Then was Siegfried brought before Gunther, and in Brunhild's presence he
swore that he had never uttered what Kriemhild had boasted of.

"I grieve that my wife hath made Brunhild to sorrow," he said.

The knights who were there spake one to another. "Would that women might
cease their gossip," said one. "Forbid your wives to boast about ye,
else there will be strife and shame among us all."

But Brunhild was not comforted. It chanced that Hagen came nigh to her
and found her weeping. He asked her why she did grieve so, and when she
told him what Kriemhild had said, he waxed wroth because he had sworn
allegiance unto Brunhild and served her faithfully, guarding her honour
and her life.

"For this insult," he said fiercely, "Siegfried shall pay with his
heart's blood. I shall avenge thee, O queen, or die."

Hagen spake to Gunther and the other knights in like manner, and he
roused them all to enmity against Siegfried, who reeked not of their
secret plotting.

Hagen first contrived that certain knights should visit Worms, making
pretence that they came as envoys from King Ludgast declaring war
against King Gunther. Siegfried made offer of his service, and Kriemhild
was proud thereat, yet did she fear that ill would befall him because
that he was reckless and overdaring in battle.

Hagen spake with her treacherously, and she told him that when her
husband bathed his body in the dragon's blood a leaf covered, a spot
betwixt his shoulders, and that if he were wounded there he would surely
die. Brunhild's knight rejoiced in secret, but he promised to defend
Siegfried, and counselled Kriemhild, that she should mark the spot by
sewing a small red cross upon his clothing,

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

so that he might know where to defend her loved one.

Then Hagen spake to the king, and Gunther arranged that they should go
through the forest on a great hunt which would last many days.

Go not forth, Kriemhild pleaded with her husband. "I dreamt that thou
wert given chase by two wild boars, and I saw the forest flowers made
red with blood."

"Fear not for me, my heart's love," Siegfried said; "I go not a-hunting
with foemen, but with thine own kin."

Kriemhild wept bitterly. "Alas! I fear for thy life," she cried. "But
yesternight I did dream that thou wert caught betwixt two hills, which
fell upon thee, and thou wert lost to my sight. . . . Stay with me here,
Siegfried, else I shall sorrow without end."

Siegfried kissed and embraced her with tenderness, and then hastened to
join the hunt.

She watched him through her tears as he went from her. Never again did
she behold her dear one in life.

There was none like to Siegfried at the hunt. Many wild animals he slew,
and he caught a bear alive and bound it, and when he set it free they
all gave chase, but it would have escaped but for his valour.

They afterwards sat down to feast together. Food there was in plenty but
no wine. Siegfried made complaint thereat, for he was grievously
athirst, and he vowed he would never again hunt with them. Little did he
dream that a plot was laid to accomplish his death.

Hagen said that there was a clear spring near by, from which they could
take refreshment, and he challenged Siegfried to race with him thither
for a wager.

Hagen stripped off his clothing, but Siegfried ran in full armour,
carrying his shield and spear and his bow and quiver, and yet he reached
the spring first. But the hero

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

drank not. He cast off his armour, and laid his weapons on the grass to
await the coming of Gunther, the king, so that he might have refreshment
before any other.

Dearly did he pay for his courtesy. When the king had taken his fill,
and Siegfried stooped down to drink, Hagen drew away stealthily the
sword and the bow, and then plunged the spear through the hero's back at
the spot where Kriemhild had embroidered the cross. He drew not forth
the weapon, but made hurried escape. Never before did he run so swiftly
from any man. Siegfried sprang up in anger, the spear sticking fast in
his back, and sought for bow or sword to take vengeance on Hagen. But he
found his shield only, and flung it after the traitor. It smote him to
the ground, and the forest echoed the blow. Had Siegfried but his sword,
in that hour Hagen would have been slain.

Snow-white grew the cheeks of that sore-wounded man, the lordly guest of
Gunther: he sank to the ground; his strength went from him; death was in
his face. Alas! many a fair woman wept tears for him in aftertime.

Among the flowers lay Kriemhild's noble husband, and they were made red
with his life blood.

He spake faintly, bitterly reproaching those who had plotted
treacherously against him. He called them cowards all. "I have served ye
well," he said, "and thus am I repaid. The children yet unborn shall
suffer for this foul deed."

Gunther wept. "Weep not for treachery, thou from whom treachery hast
come," Siegfried said.

"Now is all danger past," cried Hagen; "I rejoice that he is brought
low."

"Boast not, murderous man," Siegfried warned him; "in fair conflict I
had naught to fear from thee. . . . Oh,

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kriemhild,
Kriemhild, my deepest grief is for thee! . . . Would that our son had
never been born, because he must bear from his enemies the bitter
reproach that his kinsmen are murderers and traitors."

Gunther he reproached for his ingratitude. "I have saved thy life," he
said; "I have been the guardian of thine honour. This foul deed is my
payment . . . . If thou hast any honour left, protect my wife, thy
sister . . . ."

He groaned, for his wound afflicted him sore. Again he spake saying: "In
days to come ye shall suffer for this monstrous deed; yourselves have
you slain when ye slew me."

He spake no more. Among the blood-steeped flowers he struggled with
death. . . .

They laid his corpse upon a golden shield and bore it towards Worms, and
in the darkness they left it at the door of Kriemhild's dwelling.

In the morning, when the fair queen was going forth to prayers, she saw
the dead body of Siegfried.

"My husband is dead," she cried. "Brunhild hath desired that he should
be slain, and by Hagen was he murdered." Heavy was her heart with grief
unutterable, nor could she be comforted.

Old King Siegmund embraced his dead son and wept bitterly.

Tenderly was Siegfried's body lifted and borne within; his wounds were
washed; in grave robes was he dressed and laid upon a bier.

After three days of mourning the body was borne to the church, and many
assembled there to gaze with sorrow upon the dead hero.

Gunther came and said that Siegfried had been slain by robbers. "I
sorrow because that he is dead," he told Kriemhild.

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

"If there was sorrow in thine heart, she answered him, "my husband would
not now be laid in death. Would I were dead and he were still alive!"

When Hagen approached the body of Siegfried the spear wound bled afresh.
Thus was it proved to all who were there that he was indeed the
murderer.

Great was the mourning on the day of Siegfried's funeral. Many wept in
the streets. Kriemhild went to the grave, and or ever the coffin was
covered over she besought to gaze once again upon the face of her
husband. Her desire was granted her, and she lifted up that fair head in
her white hands and kissed the death-cold lips of Siegfried. Then fell
she in a swoon, nor did she open her eyes again until next morning.

Siegmund departed soon afterwards and journeyed to his own land. But
Kriemhild would not return with him, because she desired to be avenged
for her husband's death. She was ever mourning, but Brunhild cared not
in her pride.

At length Gunther sought her forgiveness, deeming that she had mourned
overlong. Kriemhild said: "I shall forgive him with my lips but never
with my heart." Yet was she at length constrained to pardon all who had
plotted the death of Siegfried, save Hagen, whom she could not suffer to
look upon.

Hagen spake to Gunther of the Nibelung treasure, which he could not but
think over, and the king contrived that Kriemhild should send for it. So
came it to pass that a strong army was sent unto Siegfried's kingdom.

The dwarf Alberich lamented the loss of the Cloak of Obscurity; yet did
he deliver up the vast treasure, in the midst of which was a magic rod
which would give to the one who possessed it anything that might be
wished for. But none knew its virtues.

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

Thus was all the wealth of the Nibelungs brought unto Kriemhild. She
distributed gold to rich and poor, and many adventurous knights paid
visit to Worms to share of her bounty. Wages she gave to a great number,
so that ere long she had a strong force of war-men at her service.

Hagen was greatly alarmed thereat, and spoke unto the king of
Kriemhild's doings. He counselled that the treasure should be taken from
her; but Gunther refused to do any harm unto his sister because of the
vows he had sworn. Then did Hagen seize the hoard by force, and carried
it away. He sank it in the Rhine at Lochheim, with hope to enrich
himself in after-time.

So was Kriemhild's immediate hope of vengeance cut off. She took her
departure from Worms and went to dwell with her mother at Lorsch. There
she embroidered tapestry with pictures of Balder, who had by his brother
been slain.

There she tarried for many years, biding the hour of vengeance. Tidings
at length came from beyond the Rhine which brought nearer the fulfilment
of Siegfried's dying words: "Yourselves have ye slain when ye slew me."

 

<span id="img_39000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE DEATH OF
SIEGFRIED&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the painting by F. Leeke. By
Permission of Franz Hanfstaengl&lt;/i&gt;](tn/39000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/39000.jpg)  
THE DEATH OF SIEGFRIED  
*From the painting by F. Leeke. By Permission of Franz Hanfstaengl*  
</span>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI. The Nibelungen Tragedy](tml41)
