[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0533)  [Next](sbe0535) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXV.

1\. On matters of religion <span id="fr_505"></span>[3](#fn_500) it says
in revelation thus: 'The creatures of the world were created by me
complete in three hundred and sixty-five days,' that is, the six periods
of the Gâhanbârs which are completed in a year. 2. It is always
necessary first to count the day *and* afterwards the night, for first
the day goes off, *and* then the night comes on <span
id="fr_506"></span>[4](#fn_501). And from the season (gâs) of
Mê*d*ôk-shêm <span id="fr_507"></span>[5](#fn_502),

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

which is the auspicious <span id="fr_508"></span>[1](#fn_503) day Khûr
of the month Tîr <span id="fr_509"></span>[2](#fn_504), to the season of
Mê*d*îyârêm <span id="fr_510"></span>[3](#fn_505), which is the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

auspicious day Vâhrâm of the month Dîn <span
id="fr_511"></span>[1](#fn_506)—the short*est* day—the night increases;
and from the season of Mê*d*îyârêm to the season of Mê*d*ôk-shêm the
night decreases *and* the day increases. 4. The summer day is as much as
two of the shortest <span id="fr_512"></span>[2](#fn_507) winter days,
*and* the winter night is as much as two of the shortest summer
nights <span id="fr_513"></span>[3](#fn_508). 5. The summer day is
twelve Hâsars, the night six Hâsars; the winter night is twelve Hâsars,
the day six; a Hâsar *being* a *measure of* time *and*, in like manner,
of land <span id="fr_514"></span>[4](#fn_509). 6. In the season of
Hamêspamadâyêm <span id="fr_515"></span>[5](#fn_510), that is, the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

five *supplementary* days at the end of the month Spendarma*d*, the day
*and* night are again equal.

7\. As from the auspicious day Aûharmazd of the month Fravar*d*în to the
auspicious day Anîrân of the month Mitrô <span
id="fr_516"></span>[1](#fn_511) is the summer of seven months, *so* from
the auspicious day Aûharmazd of the month Âvân to the auspicious month
Spendarma*d*, on to the end of the five *supplementary* days <span
id="fr_517"></span>[2](#fn_512), is winter of five months. 8. The priest
fulfils the regulation (va*k*ar) about a corpse *and* other things, by
this calculation as to summer and winter. 9. In those seven months <span
id="fr_518"></span>[3](#fn_513) of summer the periods (gâs) of the days
and nights are five—since *one* celebrates the Rapîtvîn—namely, the
period of daybreak is Hâvan, the period of midday is Rapîtvîn, the
period of afternoon is Aûzêrîn, when the appearance of the stars *has*
come into the sky <span id="fr_519"></span>[4](#fn_514) until midnight
is the period of Aîbisrûtêm, from midnight until the stars become
imperceptible is the period of Aûshahîn <span
id="fr_520"></span>[5](#fn_515). 10. In winter are four periods, for
*from* daybreak till Aûshahîn is all Hâvan, *and* the rest as I *have*
said; and the reason of it is this, that the appearance <span
id="fr_521"></span>[6](#fn_516) of winter is in the direction of the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

north, where the regions Vôrûbar*s*t <span
id="fr_522"></span>[1](#fn_517) and Vôrû*g*ar*s*t are; the original
dwelling of summer, too, is in the south, where the regions Frada*d*afsh
*and* Vîda*d*afsh are; on the day Aûharmazd of the auspicious month Âvân
the winter acquires strength *and* enters into the world, *and* the
spirit of Rapîtvîn goes from above-ground to below-ground, where the
spring (khânî) of waters is, and diffuses <span
id="fr_523"></span>[2](#fn_518) warmth and moisture in the water, *and*
so many roots of trees do not wither with cold and drought. 11. And *on*
the auspicious day Âtarô of the month Dîn <span
id="fr_524"></span>[3](#fn_519) the winter arrives, with much cold, at
Aîrân-vê*g*; *and* until the end, in the auspicious month Spendarma*d*,
winter advances through the whole world; on this account they kindle a
fire everywhere *on* the day Âtarô of the month Dîn, *and* it forms an
indication that winter *has* come. 12. In those five months the water of
springs *and* conduits is all warm <span
id="fr_525"></span>[4](#fn_520), for Rapîtvîn keeps warmth *and*
moisture there, *and one* does not celebrate the period of Rapîtvîn. 13.
As the day Aûharmazd of the month Fravar*d*în advances it diminishes the
strength which winter possesses, *and* summer comes in from its own
original dwelling, *and* receives strength and dominion. 14. Rapîtvîn
comes up from below-ground, *and* ripens the fruit of the trees; on this
account

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the water of springs is cold in summer <span
id="fr_526"></span>[1](#fn_521), for Rapîtvîn is not there; *and* those
seven <span id="fr_527"></span>[2](#fn_522) months *one* celebrates the
Rapîtvîn, *and* summer advances through the whole earth. 15. And yet in
the direction of Hindûstân, there *where* the original dwelling of
summer is nearer, it is always neither cold nor hot; for in the season
which is the dominion of summer, the rain always dispels most of the
heat, *and* it does not become perceptible; in the winter rain does not
fall, *and* the cold does not become very perceptible <span
id="fr_528"></span>[3](#fn_523). 16. In the northern direction, where
the preparation of winter is, *it is* always cold <span
id="fr_529"></span>[4](#fn_524); for in the summer mostly, on account of
the more oppressive winter there, it is not possible so to dispel the
cold that one might make *it* quite warm. 17. In the middle localities
the cold of winter *and* heat of summer *both* come on vehemently.

18\. Again, the year *dependent* on the revolving moon is not equal to
the computed year on this account, for the moon <span
id="fr_530"></span>[5](#fn_525) returns one time in twenty-nine, *and*
one time in thirty *days*, and there are four

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

hours (zamân) more than such a one of its *years* <span
id="fr_531"></span>[1](#fn_526); as it says, that every one deceives
where they speak about the moon (or month), except when they say that it
*comes* twice in sixty days. 19. Whoever keeps the year by the
revolution of the moon mingles summer with winter *and* winter with
summer <span id="fr_532"></span>[2](#fn_527).

20\. This, *too, it says*, that the auspicious month Fravar*d*în, the
month Ar*d*avahi*s*t, *and* the month Horvada*d* <span
id="fr_533"></span>[3](#fn_528) are spring; the month Tîr, the month
Amerôda*d*, *and* the month Shatvaîrô are summer; the month Mitrô, the
month Âvân, *and* the month Âtarô are autumn; the month Dîn, the month
Vohûman, *and* the month Spendarma*d* are winter <span
id="fr_534"></span>[4](#fn_529). 21. And the sun comes from the sign
(khûr*d*ak) of Aries, into which it proceeded in the beginning, back to
that *same* place in three hundred and sixty-five days and six short
times (hours), which are one year. 22. As every three months it (the
sun) advances through three constellations, more or less, the moon
comes, in a hundred and eighty days, back to the place out of which it
travelled in the beginning <span id="fr_535"></span>[5](#fn_530).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_500"></span>[91:3](sbe0534.htm#fr_505) That is, 'on the
*periods for* observance of religious duties.'

<span id="fn_501"></span>[91:4](sbe0534.htm#fr_506) The Jewish and
Muhammadan practice is just the contrary.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[91:5](sbe0534.htm#fr_507) The Av.
maidhyô-shema of Yas. I, 27, II, 36, III, 41, Visp. I, 3, II, 1,
Âfrîngân Gâhanbâr 2, 8. It is the second season-festival, held on the
five days, ending with the 105th day of the Parsi year, which formerly
corresponded approximately to midsummer, according to the Bundahi*s*.
Later writings assert that it commemorates the creation of water.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[92:1](sbe0534.htm#fr_508) A dispute as to the
meaning of this word formed no small part of the Kabîsah controversy,
carried on between the leaders of the two rival sects of Parsis in
Bombay about fifty years ago. Dastur Edalji Dârâbji, the high-priest of
the predominant sect (who adhered to the traditional calendar of the
Indian Parsis), insisted that it meant 'solar,' or 'belonging to the
calendar rectified for solar time by the intercalation of a month every
120 years;' Mullâ Firûz, the high-priest of the new sect (who had
adopted the calendar of the Persian Parsis, which is one month in
advance of the other), asserted that the word had no connection with
intercalation, but meant 'commencing,' or 'pertaining to New-year's
day,' as translated into Sanskrit, by Nêryôsang, in Mkh. XLIX, 27.
Anquetil translates it either as 'inclusive' or 'complete;' Windischmann
simply skips it over; and Justi translates it everywhere as 'inclusive.'
Dastur Edalji reads the word vehî*g*akî or vehî*g*ak; Nêryôsang has
vah*ez*a, Mullâ Firûz reads nâî*k*akîk in the Bundahi*s*, but
vêhî*g*akîk in the Dînkar*d*, where the word also occurs; Justi has
nâî*k*akîk. The meaning 'inclusive' suits the context in nearly all
cases in the Bundahi*s*, but not elsewhere; if it had that meaning the
most probable reading would be vikhê*g*akîk or nikhê*g*akîk, 'arising,
leaping over, including.' It is nearly always used in connection with
dates or periods of time, and must be some epithet of a very general
character, not only applicable to intercalary periods, but also to
New-Year's day and dates in general; something like the Arabic epithet
mubârak, 'fortunate,' so commonly used in Persian dates. Dastur Edalji
compares it with Pers. bîhrak or bihtarak, 'intercalary month,' which is
probably a corruption of it; and this suggests veh, 'good,' as one
component of the epithet. The word may be read veh-ya*z*akîk, 'for
reverencing the good,' but as veh, 'good,' is an adjective, this would
be an irregular form; a more probable reading is veh-î*k*akîk, 'for
anything good,' which, when applied to a day, or any period of time,
would imply that it is suitable for anything good, that is, it is
'auspicious.' Sometimes the word is written vehî*k*ak, vêhî*k*akîk, or
vêhî*k*ŏ; and epithets of similar forms in Pahlavi are applied by the
writers of colophons to themselves, but these should be read vakhê*z*ak
or ni*s*îvak, 'lowly, abject.'

<span id="fn_504"></span>[92:2](sbe0534.htm#fr_509) The eleventh day of
the fourth month, when the festival commences.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[92:3](sbe0534.htm#fr_510) The Av. maidhyâirya
of Yas. I, 30, II, 39, III, 44, Visp. I, <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>
6, II, 1, Âf. Gâhan. 2, 11. It is; the fifth season-festival, held on
the five days ending with the 290th day of the Parsi year, which
formerly corresponded approximately to midwinter, according to the
Bundahi*s*. Later writings assert that it commemorates the creation of
animals.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[93:1](sbe0534.htm#fr_511) The twentieth day of
the tenth month, when the festival ends.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[93:2](sbe0534.htm#fr_512) The word kah-aît is
merely a hybrid Huzvâri*s* form of kahist, 'shortest,' which occurs in
the next phrase.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[93:3](sbe0534.htm#fr_513) This statement must
be considered merely as an approximation. The longest day is twice the
length of the shortest one in latitude 49°, that is, north of Paris,
Vienna, and Odessa, if the length of the day be computed from sunrise to
sunset; and, if twilight be included, it is necessary to go still
further north. In Âdarbî*g*ân, the northern province of Persia, the
longest day is about 14½ hours from sunrise to sunset, and the shortest
is about 9½ hours.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[93:4](sbe0534.htm#fr_514) According to this
passage a hâsar of time is one hour and twenty minutes; it is the Av.
hâthra of the Farhang-i Oîm-khadûk (P. 43, ed. Hoshangji), which says,
'of twelve Hâsars is the longest day, *and* the day *and* night in which
is the longest day are twelve of the longest Hâsars, eighteen of the
medium, and twenty-four of the least—an enumeration of the several
measures of the Hâsar.' For the hâsar measure of land, see Chap. XXVI.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[93:5](sbe0534.htm#fr_515) So in K20, but this
name is rarely written twice alike; it is the Av. hamaspathmaêdaya of
Yas. I, 31, II, 40, III, 45, Visp, I. 7, II, 1, Âf. Gâhan. 2, 12. It is
the sixth season-festival, held on the five Gâtha days which conclude
the Parsi year, just before <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> the vernal
equinox, according to the Bundahi*s*. Later writings assert that it
commemorates the creation of man.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[94:1](sbe0534.htm#fr_516) That is, from the
first day of the first month to the last day of the seventh month.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[94:2](sbe0534.htm#fr_517) That is, from the
first day of the eighth month to the last of the five Gâtha days, which
are added to the twelfth month to complete the year of 365 days.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[94:3](sbe0534.htm#fr_518) All MSS. have 'five
months' here.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[94:4](sbe0534.htm#fr_519) K20 has 'when the
stars *have* come into sight.'

<span id="fn_515"></span>[94:5](sbe0534.htm#fr_520) The Avesta names of
the five Gâhs are Hâvani, Rapithwina, Uzayêirina, Aiwisrûthrema, and
Ushahina.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[94:6](sbe0534.htm#fr_521) Pâz. ashâri*s* is
evidently a misreading of Pahl. âshkârîh.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[95:1](sbe0534.htm#fr_522) See Chaps. V, 8, XI,
3. The north, being opposed to the south or midday quarter, is opposed
to the midday period of Rapîtvîn, which, therefore, disappears as winter
approaches from the north.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[95:2](sbe0534.htm#fr_523) If, instead of khânî
for khânîk, 'spring,' we read ahû-i, 'lord of,' the translation will be,
'so that the angel of waters may diffuse,' &c.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[95:3](sbe0534.htm#fr_524) The ninth day of the
tenth month.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[95:4](sbe0534.htm#fr_525) That is, warmer than
the air, as it is cooler in summer.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[96:1](sbe0534.htm#fr_526) K20 has 'winter' by
mistake.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[96:2](sbe0534.htm#fr_527) K20 has 'six,' and
M6 'five,' instead of 'seven.'

<span id="fn_523"></span>[96:3](sbe0534.htm#fr_528) This is a fairly
accurate account of the effect of the monsoons over the greater part of
India, as understood by a foreigner unacquainted with the different
state of matters in a large portion of the Madras provinces.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[96:4](sbe0534.htm#fr_529) M6 has khûrâsân
instead of ârâyi*s*n, 'preparation,' which alters the sense into 'that
is, Khûrâsân, of which the winter is always cold.'

<span id="fn_525"></span>[96:5](sbe0534.htm#fr_530) The MSS. have the
Huzvâri*s* term for 'month,' which is sometimes used, by mistake, for
'moon.' It is doubtful which word the author intended to use here, but
it is usual to count the days of a lunar month from the first actual
appearance of the new moon, which usually occurs a full day after the
change of the moon.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[97:1](sbe0534.htm#fr_531) Meaning, probably,
that the lunar year is four hours more than twelve months of 29 and 30
days each, alternately. It should be 8 hours, 48 minutes, and 37
seconds. The sentence seems defective, but it is evident from § 21 that
zamân means 'hour.'

<span id="fn_527"></span>[97:2](sbe0534.htm#fr_532) That is, the lunar
year being eleven days shorter than the solar one, its months are
constantly retrograding through the seasons.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[97:3](sbe0534.htm#fr_533) Generally written
Avardâ*d* in Pâzand, and Khurdâd in Persian.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[97:4](sbe0534.htm#fr_534) The names of the
months are selected from the names of the days of the month (see Chap.
XXVII, 24), but are arranged in a totally different order.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[97:5](sbe0534.htm#fr_535) Probably meaning,
that the new moon next the autumnal <span id="page_98">p. 98</span>
equinox is to be looked for in the same quarter as the new moon nearest
the vernal equinox, the moon's declination being nearly the same in both
cases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](sbe0535)
