[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0574)  [Next](sbe0576) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

### PART III.—*Appendix* <span id="fr_1863"></span>[1](#fn_1851).

##### CHAPTER XV <span id="fr_1864"></span>[2](#fn_1852).

1\. *It* is revealed by a passage of the Avesta that Zaratû*s*t, seated
before Aûharmazd, always wanted information (vâ*k*) from him; and he
spoke to Aûharmazd thus: 'Thy head, hands, feet, hair, face, and tongue
are in my eyes just like those even which are my own, and you have the
clothing men have; give me a hand, so that I may grasp thy hand.'

2\. Aûharmazd said thus: 'I am an intangible spirit; it is not possible
to grasp my hand.'

3\. Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: 'Thou art intangible, and Vohûman,
Ar*d*avahi*s*t, Shatvaîrô <span id="fr_1865"></span>[3](#fn_1853),
Spendarma*d*, Horvada*d*, and Amerôda*d* are intangible, and when I
depart from thy presence, and do not see thee *nor* even them—since of
the person whom <span id="fr_1866"></span>[4](#fn_1854) I see and
worship *there* is something—*should* thou and the seven archangels be
worshipped by me, or not <span id="fr_1867"></span>[5](#fn_1855)?'

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

4\. Aûharmazd said thus: ‘They *should* be; I tell thee, O Zaratû*s*t
the Spîtâmân! that each individual of us has produced his own one
creation (dâyak) for the world, by means of which they may set going in
its body, in the world, that activity which they would exercise in the
spiritual existence. 5. *In* the world that which is mine, who am
Aûharmazd, is the righteous man, of Vohûman are the cattle, of
Ar*d*avahi*s*t is the fire, of Shatvaîrô is the metal, of Spendarma*d*
are the earth and virtuous woman, of Horvada*d* is the water, *and* of
Amerôda*d* is the vegetation. 6. Whoever has learned <span
id="fr_1868"></span>[1](#fn_1856) the care of all these seven, acts and
pleases well, his soul never comes into the possession of Aharman and
the demons; when he *has* exercised his care of them, he has exercised
his care of the seven archangels, *and* ought to teach all mankind in
the world.

7\. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Aûharmazd in the world, wishes to
promote the things of Aûharmazd; *and* whoever he be, with whom
Aûharmazd ever is in every place (gâs) <span
id="fr_1869"></span>[2](#fn_1857), it is necessary *that* he
should <span id="fr_1870"></span>[3](#fn_1858) propitiate the righteous
man, in whatever

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

has happened *and* whatever occurs to him, and should act for his
happiness, and afford him protection from the vile. 8. Since the
righteous man is a counterpart of Aûharmazd the lord, *and* when the
righteous man acts it is caused by him who is Aûharmazd, whoever
propitiates the righteous man, his fame and welfare exist a long time in
the world, and the splendour of Aûharmazd and pleasure and joy become
his own *in* heaven (vahi*s*t).

9\. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Vohûman in the world, *and* wishes to
act for *his* happiness, is *he* who wishes to promote the things of
Vohûman; and it is necessary for him, so that Vohûman may be ever with
him, *that* he should propitiate, at every place (gâs) *and* time, the
well-yielding (hûdhâk) cattle, in whatever has happened *and* whatever
occurs, and should act for *their* happiness; and in the terrible days
and the hurried times (gâs) which *befall* them, he should afford them
protection from the oppressive and idle. 10. He should not give *them*
as a bribe to a man who is a wicked tyrant, *but* should keep *them* in
a pleasant and warm locality and place (gâs); and in summer he should
provide them a store of straw and corn, so that it be not necessary to
keep *them* on the pastures (*k*arak) in winter; and he should not
deliver them it *up* for this purpose, that is, "So that I may give them
up to the vile," because it is necessary to give to the good; and he
should not drive them apart from *their* young, and should not put the
young apart from their milk. 11. Since they are counterparts of him
(Vohûman) himself in the world, the well-yielding cattle, whoever
propitiates those which are well-yielding cattle his fame subsists in
the world, and

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

the splendour of Aûharmazd becomes his own *in* the best existence <span
id="fr_1871"></span>[1](#fn_1859).

12\. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Ar*d*avahi*s*t in the world is *he*
who wishes to promote his things; and it is necessary for him, so that
Ar*d*avahi*s*t may be with *him* at every place (gâs) and time, *that*
he should propitiate the fire of Aûharmazd, in whatever has happened and
whatever occurs, *and* should act for *its* happiness; he should not put
upon *it* wood, incense, and holy-water <span
id="fr_1872"></span>[2](#fn_1860) which are stolen and extorted, and he
should not cook at it a ration (bâhar) which is violently extorted from
men. 13. For it is a counterpart of him (Ar*d*avahi*s*t) himself in the
world, the fire of Aûharmazd; and whoever propitiates those which are
fires of Aûharmazd his fame subsists in the world, and the splendour of
Aûharmazd becomes his own *in* heaven.

14\. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Shatvaîrô in the world, and wishes to
act for *his* happiness, is *he* who wishes to promote the things of
Shatvaîrô; *and* whoever he be, it is necessary, so that Shatvaîrô may
be with him at every place and time, *that* he should propitiate melted
metal <span id="fr_1873"></span>[3](#fn_1861) at every place and time.
15. And the propitiation of melted metal is this, that he shall practise
habits (âîyînŏ) of the

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

heart so unsullied and pure that, when they shall drop melted metal upon
*it*, it does not burn. 16. And Âtarôpâ*d* son of Mâraspend <span
id="fr_1874"></span>[1](#fn_1862) even acted in this priestly fashion
(dastôbarîh), so that the melted metal, when they drop *it* upon the
region (khânŏ) of *his* pure heart, becomes as pleasant to him as
though <span id="fr_1875"></span>[2](#fn_1863) they were milking milk
upon it. 17. When they drop *it* upon the region of the heart of the
wicked and sinners, it burns, and they die. 18. And *one* should not
commit sin with metal, and with its burning; and should not give gold
and silver to the vile. 19. For it is a counterpart of Shatvaîrô himself
in the world for him, *and* since he propitiates those which are melted
metals, his fame subsists in the world, and the splendour of Aûharmazd
becomes his own *in* heaven.

20\. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Spendarma*d* in the world, wishes to
promote the things of Spendarma*d*; *and* whoever he be, it is
necessary, so that Spendarma*d* may be with him, *that* he should
propitiate, at every place and time, the earth and virtuous woman, in
whatever has happened *and* in whatever occurs, *and* should act for
*their* happiness. 21. For when he does not spread out (barâ lâ
vêshê*d*) this earth, and it does not separate one *piece* from another,
his body also *will* not be always

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

living upon *it at* every place and time <span
id="fr_1876"></span>[1](#fn_1864). 22. On account of the lodgment of
Spendarma*d* in the earth, when a robber, violent and worthy of death,
and wives who are disrespectful to *their* husbands walk about in
sinfulness in the world, and their husbands are active *and* virtuous,
it becomes much distressed (zanŏîk). 23. This, too, is declared, that,
whenever this *earth* becomes distressed (zanîk), it is most *so* at the
time when sinners worthy of death are most; for *it* is declared, when
sinners worthy of death walk upon *it, its* pain and uneasiness become
as distressing (dû*s*khvâr) to it as the dead son on *her* bosom *to* a
mother; *and* the lodgment of Spendarma*d* in the earth is little *in*
that place whereon sinners worthy of death walk. 24. And her <span
id="fr_1877"></span>[2](#fn_1865) happiness arises from that place when
they shall perform tillage and cultivation on it, and a virtuous son is
born upon it, and they rear cattle upon it; and it is so one's fame
subsists in the world, and the splendour of Aûharmazd becomes one's own
*in* heaven.

25\. 'Whoever wishes to propitiate Horvada*d* and Amerôda*d* in the
world, whereas that is necessary which promotes their things, whoever he
be it is necessary *that* he should propitiate, at every place and time,
the water and vegetation of Horvada*d* and Amerôda*d*, in whatever has
happened and in

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

whatever occurs, *and* should seize upon those who consume *and* steal
water and vegetation <span id="fr_1878"></span>[1](#fn_1866). 26. And he
should not act oppressively, he should not walk the world in sinfulness,
and should not bring bodily refuse (hîkhar), dead matter (nasâî) <span
id="fr_1879"></span>[2](#fn_1867), *or* any other pollution to water; he
should not destroy vegetation unlawfully, and should not give fruit to
the idle and vile. 27. For when he commits sin against water and
vegetation, even when it is committed against merely a single twig of
it, and he has not atoned for it, when <span
id="fr_1880"></span>[3](#fn_1868) he departs from the world the spirits
of all the plants in the world stand up high in front of that man, and
do not let him go to heaven. 28. And when he has committed sin against
water, even when it is committed against a single drop of it, and he has
not atoned for *it*, that also stands up as high as the plants stood,
and does not let him go to heaven. 29. Since they are counterparts of
Horvada*d* and Amerôda*d* themselves, the water and vegetation, whoever
propitiates those which be water and vegetation, his fame subsists in
the world, and a share of the splendour of Aûharmazd becomes his *in*
heaven.'

30\. Aûharmazd said this also to Zaratû*s*t, namely:

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'My will and
pleasure is *that* the observance and propitiation of these seven
archangels shall be *as I have* told thee; and do thou, too, speak thus
unto men, so that they may commit no sin and may not become wicked, and
the splendour of Aûharmazd may become their own *in* heaven.'

31\. Completed in peace, pleasure, *and* joy <span
id="fr_1881"></span>[1](#fn_1869).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[372:1](sbe0575.htm#fr_1863) This Appendix
consists of a number of fragments found in the old MS. M6, and of
somewhat the same character as the Shâyast lâ-shâyast, but they have no
claim to be considered as a portion of that work. Excepting Chaps.
XVIII, XIX, XXI, they are not found in the other old MS. K20, and beyond
the fact that they must be more than five centuries old their age is
quite uncertain, though some of them are probably older than others.

<span id="fn_1852"></span>[372:2](sbe0575.htm#fr_1864) This chapter
follows the Patît-i Khû*d* in M6, and is also found in L15, fols. 16-28;
for a Pâzand version of it, see L22, fols. 113-122, and L7, fols. 70-76.

<span id="fn_1853"></span>[372:3](sbe0575.htm#fr_1865) Written
Shatrôîvar throughout this chapter; these six (see Bund. I, 26) with
Aûharmazd himself, are the, seven archangels.

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[372:4](sbe0575.htm#fr_1866) Reading mûn,
'whom,' instead of amat, 'when' (see Bund. I, 7, note).

<span id="fn_1855"></span>[372:5](sbe0575.htm#fr_1867) Zaratû*s*t is
doubtful whether he ought to worship beings of <span id="page_373">p.
373</span> whose existence he had had no tangible evidence, when he no
longer saw them; fearing, perhaps, that they might have been mere dreams
or optical illusions. But he is told that each of these spiritual beings
is the protector of one class of worldly existences, and that the proper
treatment of these existences is a man's best means of reverencing the
spiritual beings interested in their welfare.

<span id="fn_1856"></span>[373:1](sbe0575.htm#fr_1868) Or 'taught,' for
the verb has both meanings.

<span id="fn_1857"></span>[373:2](sbe0575.htm#fr_1869) Or 'at all
times;' it is always doubtful whether gâs means 'time' or 'place.'

<span id="fn_1858"></span>[373:3](sbe0575.htm#fr_1870) Throughout this
chapter a conditional meaning is given to the verbs by prefixing hanâ,
aê, or 1 (all representing Pâz. aê or *e*) to the present tense, instead
of affixing it.

<span id="fn_1859"></span>[375:1](sbe0575.htm#fr_1871) See Chap. VI, 3.

<span id="fn_1860"></span>[375:2](sbe0575.htm#fr_1872) Holy-water is not
put upon the fire, for that would be sinful, but it is presented to the
fire, and the outside of the fire-place is sprinkled or washed with it
(see Haug's Essays, p. 403). The 'fire of Aûharmazd' means any fire,
whether sacred or used for household purposes.

<span id="fn_1861"></span>[375:3](sbe0575.htm#fr_1873) The word may be
read either aîyên or asîn (Av. ayangh, Pers. âyan, âhan, or âhîn), which
is usually translated 'iron,' but also means 'metal' generally, as it
certainly does here, and very probably likewise in B. Yt. I, 1, 5, II,
14, 22.

<span id="fn_1862"></span>[376:1](sbe0575.htm#fr_1874) The primate and
prime minister of Shâpûr II (A.D. 309-379), who is said to have
undergone the ordeal of having melted metal poured upon his chest, in
order to prove the truth of the Mazdayasnian religion. The metal used is
generally called rûî, 'brass,' but here it is aîyên, 'iron,' though a
more fusible metal than either was, no doubt, used.

<span id="fn_1863"></span>[376:2](sbe0575.htm#fr_1875) Reading amat,
'though,' instead of mûn, 'which' (see Bund. I, 7, note).

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[377:1](sbe0575.htm#fr_1876) Meaning that the
earth must be tilled in order to support its inhabitants, but there is
some doubt as to the exact wording of the translation.

<span id="fn_1865"></span>[377:2](sbe0575.htm#fr_1877) Spendarma*d* is a
female archangel; perhaps, however, the earth is meant here, as it is
said to be most pleased by the existence of fire-temples, dwellings of
righteous people, cultivation, stables, and pastures (see Vend. III,
1-20).

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[378:1](sbe0575.htm#fr_1878) Reading mûn,
'who,' instead of amat, 'when,' and dû*g*end, 'they steal,' instead of
dû*g*d (perhaps for dû*g*ak, 'thievish'); and supposing the verb to be
vakhdûnê*d*, 'takes, seizes,' and not vâdûnê*d*, 'makes, acts.' If the
reverse be assumed, the translation would be thus: 'should act for their
*happiness*. When they consume water and vegetation he should not act
thievishly and oppressively.'

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[378:2](sbe0575.htm#fr_1879) For the meaning
of hîkhar and nasâî, see note on Chap. II, 30.

<span id="fn_1868"></span>[378:3](sbe0575.htm#fr_1880) Reading amat,
'when,' instead of mûn, 'who' (see Bund. I, 7, note).

<span id="fn_1869"></span>[379:1](sbe0575.htm#fr_1881) This is the most
usual concluding phrase of short Pahlavi texts, and indicates that this
account of the best mode of propitiating the archangels is to be
considered as a separate text. It is followed in M6 by the paragraphs
which constitute the next two chapters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](sbe0576)
