[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0503)  [Next](sbe0505) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3. THE BUNDAHI*S*.

The term Bundahi*s*, 'creation of the beginning,' or 'original
creation,' is applied by the Parsis to a Pahlavi work <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) which, in its present state, appears to be a
collection of fragments relating to the cosmogony, mythology, and
legendary history taught by Mazdayasnian tradition, but which cannot be
considered, in any way, a complete treatise on these subjects. This term
is applicable enough to much of the earlier part of the work, which
treats of the progressive development of creation under good and evil
influences; but it is probably not the original name of the book. Its
adoption was no doubt partly owing to the occurrence of the word
bûn-dahi*s*n, or bûn-dahi*s*nîh, twice in the first sentence, and partly
to its appropriateness to the subject. But the same sentence seems to
inform

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

us that the actual name of the treatise was Zand-âkâs, 'knowing the
tradition.'

The work commences by describing the state of things in the beginning;
the good spirit being in endless light and omniscient, and the evil
spirit in endless darkness and with limited knowledge. Both produced
their own creatures, which remained apart, in a spiritual or ideal
state, for three thousand years, after which the evil spirit began his
opposition to the good creation under an agreement that his power was
not to last more than nine thousand years, of which only the middle
three thousand were to see him successful. By uttering a sacred formula
the good spirit throws the evil one into a state of confusion for a
second three thousand years, while he produces the archangels and the
material creation, including the suit, moon, and stars. At the end of
that period the evil spirit, encouraged by the demons he had produced,
once more rushes upon the good creation, to destroy it. The demons carry
on conflicts with each of the six classes of creation, namely, the sky,
water, earth, plants, animals represented by the primeval ox, and
mankind represented by Gâyômar*d*: producing little effect but movement
in the sky, saltness in the water, mountains in the earth, withering in
plants, and death to the primeval ox, and also to Gâyômar*d* after an
interval.

Then follows a series of chapters describing the seven regions of the
earth, its mountains and seas, the five classes of animals, the origin
of mankind, generation, the five kinds of fire and three sacred fires,
the white Hôm tree and the tree of many seeds, the three-legged ass, the
ox Hadhayô*s*, the bird *K*âmrô*s*, and other birds and animals opposed
to the evil creation, the rivers of the world, the seventeen species of
liquids, the lakes, the origin of the ape and bear, the chiefs of the
several kinds of creatures and creations, the calendar, lineal measures,
trees and plants, the characteristics of various demons, the spiritual
chiefs of the various regions of the earth, and the resurrection and
future existence; all which descriptions are given on the authority of
the Dîn, which may have been some particular

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

book, or revelation generally. The concluding chapters give the
genealogies of the legendary Persian kings and heroes, and of Zaratû*s*t
and certain priests, together with an epitome of Persian chronology from
the creation to the Muhammadan conquest.

As the work now stands it is evidently of a fragmentary character,
bearing unmistakable marks both of omissions and dislocations; and the
extant manuscripts, as will be seen, differ among themselves both as to
the extent and arrangement of the text. Many passages have the
appearance of being translations from an Avesta original, and it is very
probable that we have in the Bundahi*s* either a translation, or an
epitome, of the Dâmidâ*d* Nask, one of the twenty-one books into which
the whole of the Zoroastrian scriptures are said to have been divided
before the time of Darius. This may be guessed from a comparison of the
contents of the Bundahi*s* with those of the Dâmdâ*d* Nask, which are
detailed in the Dînî-va*g*arkar*d* as follows <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8):—'It contained an explanation of the
spiritual existence and heaven, good and evil, the material existence of
this world, the sky and the earth, and everything which Aûharmazd
produced in water, fire, and vegetation, men and quadrupeds, reptiles
and birds, and everything which is produced from the waters, and the
characteristics of all things. Secondly, the production of the
resurrection and future existence; the concourse and separation at the
*K*inva*d* bridge; on the reward of the meritorious and the punishment
of sinners in the future existence, and such-like explanations.
Moreover, the Dâmdâ*d* Nask is twice quoted as an authority in the
Selections of Zâ*d*-sparam (IX, 1, 16), when treating of animals, in
nearly the same words as those used in the Bundahi*s*.

The first manuscript of the Bundahi*s* seen in Europe was brought from
Surat by Anquetil Duperron in 1761, and he published a French
translation of it in his great work on the Zend-Avesta in 1771 <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9). This manuscript,

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

which is now in the National Library at Paris, was a modern copy,
written A.D. 1734, and contained a miscellaneous collection of Pahlavi
writings besides the Bundahi*s*. And Anquetil's translation, though
carefully prepared in accordance with the information he had obtained
from his Parsi instructor, is very far from giving the correct meaning
of the original text in many places.

In 1820 the very old codex from which Anquetil's MS. had been copied was
had been brought to Europe, from Bombay, by the Danish scholar Rask, and
was subsequently deposited in the University Library at Kopenhagen. This
most important codex, which will be more particularly described under
the appellation of K20, appears to have been written during the latter
half of the fourteenth century; and a facsimile of the Pahlavi text of
the Bundahi*s*, which it contains, was very carefully traced from it,
lithographed, and published by Westergaard in 1850. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)

In a review of this lithographed edition of the Pahlavi text, published
in the Göttinger Gelehrte Anzeigen in 1854 <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11), Haug gave a German translation of the
first three chapters of the Bundahi*s*. And Spiegel, in his Traditional
Literature of the Parsis <span id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_12), published
in 1860 a German translation of many passages in the Bundahi*s*,
together with a transcript of the Pahlavi text of Chaps. I, II, III, and
XXX in Hebrew characters. But the complete German translation of the
Bundahi*s* by Windischmann, with his commentary on its contents,
published in his Zoroastrian Studies <span id="fr_13"></span>[4](#fn_13)
in 1863, was probably toe most important step in advance since the time
of Anquetil, and the utmost

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

that could be done on the authority of a single MS. which is far from
perfect.

In 1866 another very old codex, containing the Pahlavi texts of the
Bundahi*s* and other works, was brought to Europe by Haug, to whom it
had been presented at Surat in 1864. It is now in the State Library at
Munich, and will be more minutely described under the appellation of M6.
In this codex the Bundahi*s* is arranged in a different order from that
in K20, and Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX, and XXXI-XXXIII are omitted.

A second complete German translation of the Bundahi*s*, with a
lithographed copy of the Pahlavi text, a transliteration of the text in
modern Persian characters, and a glossary of all the words it contains,
was published by Justi in 18681. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) Its
author, having had access to other MSS. (descended from M6) at London
and Oxford, was able to rectify many of the deficiencies in
Windischmann's translation; but, otherwise, he made but little progress
in elucidating difficult passages.

Other European writers have published the result of their studies of
particular parts of the Bundahi*s*, but it does not appear that any of
them have attempted a continuous translation of several chapters.

Whether the existence of previous translations be more of an assistance
than a hindrance in preparing a new one, may well be a matter of doubt.
Previous translations may prevent oversights, and in difficult passages
it is useful to see how others have floundered through the mire; but, on
the other hand, they occasion much loss of time, by the necessity of
examining many of their dubious renderings before finally fixing upon
others that seem more satisfactory. The object of the present
translation is to give the meaning of the original text as literally as
possible, and with a minimum of extra words; the different renderings of
other translators being very rarely noticed, unless there be some
probability of their being of service

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

to the reader. Some doubtful words and passages still defy all attempts
at satisfactory solution, but of these the reader is warned; and, no
doubt, a few oversights and mistakes will be discovered.

With regard to the original text, we have to recover it from four
manuscripts which are, more or less, independent authorities, and may be
styled K20, K20b, M6, and TD. The first three of these have evidently
descended, either directly or through one or more intermediate copies,
from the same original; but the source of TD, so far as it can be
ascertained, seems to have been far removed from, that of the others.
All the other MSS. of the Bundahi*s*, which have been examined, whether
Pahlavi or Pâzand, are descended either from K20 or M6, and are,
therefore, of no independent authority.

K20 is the very old codex already mentioned as having been brought from
Bombay by Rask in 1820, and is now No. 20 of the collection of Avesta
and Pahlavi MSS. in the University Library at Kopenhagen. It consists
now of 173 folios of very old and much-worn Indian paper of large octavo
size, but five other folios are certainly missing, besides an uncertain
number lost from the end of the volume. This MS. contains twenty Pahlavi
texts, written twenty lines to the page, and some of them, accompanied
by Avesta; the Bundahi*s* is the ninth of these texts, and occupies
fols. 88-129, of which fol. 121 is missing. Three of the texts,
occurring before the Bundahi*s*, have dated colophons, but the dates are
A.Y. 690, 720, and 700, all within 36 folios; it is, therefore, evident
that these dates have been copied from older MSS.; but at the same time
the appearance of the paper indicates that the actual date of the MS.
cannot be much later than A.Y. 720 (A.D. 1351), and there are reasons
for believing that it was written several years before A.Y. 766 (A.D.
1397), as will be explained in the description of M6. Owing to its age
and comparative completeness this MS. of the Bundahi*s* is certainly the
most important one extant, although comparison with other MSS. proves
that its writer was rather careless, and frequently omitted words and
phrases. The

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

loss of fol. 121, though it has hitherto left an inconvenient gap in the
text (not filled up by other MSS.), is more than compensated by the
three extra chapters which this MS. and its copies have hitherto alone
supplied. The text on the lost folio was supposed by Anquetil to have
contained a whole chapter besides portions of the two adjacent ones;
this is now known to be a mistake, Anquetil's Chap. XXVIII being quite
imaginary; the end of Chap. XXVII has long been supplied from other
MSS., but the beginning of the next chapter has hitherto been missing.

Only two copies of K20 appear to be known to Europeans; the best of
these is the copy brought from Surat by Anquetil, No. 7 of his
collection of manuscripts, now in the National Library at Paris; this
was written in A.D. 1734, when K20 appears to have been nearly in its
present imperfect state, though it may have had some 15 folios more at
the end. This copy seems to have been carefully written; but the same
cannot be said of the other copy, No. 21 in the University Library at
Kopenhagen, which is full of blunders, both of commission and omission,
and can hardly have been written by so good a Pahlavi scholar as Dastûr
Dârâb, Anquetil's instructor, although attributed to him.

K20b consists of nineteen loose folios <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15), found by Westergaard among some
miscellaneous fragments in the collection of Avesta and Pahlavi MSS. in
the University Library at Kopenhagen, and now forming No. 20b in that
collection, The first two folios are lost, but the third folio commences
with the Pahlavi equivalent of the words 'knew that Aharman exists'
(Bund. Chap. 1, 8), and the text continues to the end of Chap. XI, 1,
where it leaps at once (in the middle of a line on the fifteenth folio)
to Chap. XXX, 15, 'one brother who is righteous,' whence the text
continues to the end of Chap. XXXI, 15, which is followed by Chaps.
XXXII, XXXIV, as in K20. This

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> MS. is not very
old, and contains merely a fragment of the text; but its value consists
in its not being a descendant of either K20 or M6, as it clearly
represents a third line of descent from their common original. It agrees
with K20 in the general arrangement of its chapters, so far as they go,
and also in containing Chap. XXXI; but it differs from it in some of the
details of that chapter, and agrees with M6 in some verbal peculiarities
elsewhere; it has not, however, been collated in any other chapter. The
omission of nearly twenty chapters, in the centre of the work, indicates
that some one of the MSS. from which it is descended, had lost many of
its central folios before it was copied, and that the copyist did not
notice the deficiency; such unnoticed omissions frequently occur in
Pahlavi manuscripts.

M6 is the very old codex brought to Europe by Haug in 1866, and now No.
6 of the Haug collection in the State Library at Munich. It consists of
240 folios of very old, but well-preserved, Indian paper of large octavo
size (to which thirteen others, of rather later date, have been
prefixed) bound in two volumes. This MS. contains nineteen Pahlavi
texts, written from seventeen to twenty-two lines to the page, and some
of them accompanied by Avesta; eleven of these texts are also found in
K20, and the Bundahi*s* is the fourteenth of the nineteen, occupying
fols. 53-99 of the second volume. Two of the other texts have dated
colophons, the dates being fifty days apart in A.Y. 766 (A.D. 1397), and
as there are 150 folios between the two dates there is every probability
that they are the actual dates on which the two colophons were written.
The arrangement of the Bundahi*s* in this MS. is different from that in
K20, giving the chapters in the following order:—Chaps. XV-XXIII, I-XIV,
XXIV-XXVII, XXX, XXXII, XXXIV, and omitting Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX, and
XXXI. These omissions and the misplacement of Chaps. I-XIV render it
probable that the MS., from which the Bundahi*s* in M6 was copied, was
already in a state of decay; and this supposition is confirmed by
upwards of fifty peculiar mistakes, scattered over most parts of the

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

text in M6, which are evidently due to the illegibility of the original
from which it was copied, or to its illegible words having been touched
up by an ignorant writer, instances of which are not uncommon in old
Pahlavi MSS. Eliminating these errors, for which the writer of M6 cannot
be held responsible, he seems to have been a more careful copyist than
the writer of K20, and supplies several words and phrases omitted by the
latter. The close correspondence of K20 and M6 in most other places,
renders it probable that they were copied from the same original, in
which case K20 must have been written several years earlier than M6,
before the original MS. became decayed and difficult to read. It is
possible, however, that K20 was copied from an early copy of the
original of M6; in which case the date of K20, is more uncertain, and
may even be later than that of M6.

Several MSS. of the Bundahi*s* descended from M6 are in existence. One
is in the MS. No. 121 of the Ouseley collection in the Bodleian Library
at Oxford, and contains the chapters in the following order:—Chaps.
XV-XXIII, I-VII, 17 (to 'Arag river'), XII-XIV, XXIV-XXVII, XXX, VII,
12-XI; followed by Sls. Chap. XX, 4-17, also derived from M6. Another is
in the library of Dastûr Jâmâspji Minochiharji at Bombay, and contains
the chapters also in a dislocated state (due to the misplacement of
folios in some former MS.) as follows:—Chaps. XV-XXIII, I-XI, 5 (to 'and
the evil spirit'), XII, 2 (from 'Si*k*idâv')—XII, 2 (first word), XI, 5
(from 'produced most for Khvanîras')—XII, 2 (to '*and* Kôndras,
Mount'),—XXX, 32 (from 'the renovation arises in')—XXX, 33, XXXII,
XXXIV, Sls. Chap. XVIII, Bund. Chaps. XII, 12 (from 'Aîra*k*')—XIV,
XXIV-XXVII, XXX. A third is in the library of Dastûr Nôshirvânji
Jâmâspji at Poona, and contains the text in the same order as M6. A
fragment of the Pahlavi text of the Bundahi*s*, also descended from M6,
occupies eight folios in the Additional Oriental MS. No. 22,378 in the
Library of the British Museum; it contains Chaps. XVIII, XIX, 17, and
XX, 1-2 (to 'one from the other').

There are also several Pâzand manuscripts of the Bundahi*s*,

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

written in Avesta characters, and likewise derived from M6. One of the
best of these is No. 22 of the collection of Avesta and Pahlavi MSS. in
the India Office Library at London; it is old, and has the date A.Y. 936
(A.D. 1567) in a Pahlavi colophon on fol. III, but this may have been
copied from an older MS.; its contents are arranged as follows:—Chaps.
XVIII-XXIII, I-XIV, XXIV-XXVII, XXX, XXXII, XXXIV, followed by several
short Pâzand texts, only part of which are derived from M6, and the last
of them being left incomplete by the loss of the folios which originally
formed the end of the volume; instead of these lost folios others,
containing Chaps. XV-XVII, have been added and bound up with the rest.
Another MS., No. 7 in the same collection, which is dated A.Y. 1174
(A.D. 1805), is a modern copy derived from No. 22 through one or more
intervening MSS. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16); it contains
precisely the same text, but with many variations in orthography,
indicative of the very uncertain character of Pâzand spelling. Two
fragments of the Pâzand text are also contained in the MSS. No. 121 at
Oxford, already mentioned; they consist of Chaps. V, 3-7 (to 'would have
known the secret') and XXV, 18-22. Another fragment, evidently copied
from an old MS., is found on fols. 34, 35 of the Rivâyat MS. No. 8 of
the collection in the India Office Library; it consists of Chap. XVIII,
1-8.

The Pâzand text of the Bundahi*s*, derived from M6, is also written in
Persian characters in M7 (No. 7 of the Haug collection at Munich), dated
A.Y. 1178 (A.D. 1809). It is interlined by Persian glosses, word for
word, and consists of Chaps. XVIII-XXIII, I-XIV, XXIV-XXVII, and XXX on
fols. 81-119, with Chaps. XV-XVII on fols. 120-126, a repetition of
Chap. XV and part of XVI on fols. 223-227, and Chap. XXXII on fol. 232.

Thus far, it will be noticed, we have two good independent authorities,
K20 and M6, for ascertaining the text of the Bundahi*s* in the
fourteenth century, so far as Chaps. I-XXVII,

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> XXX, XXXII, and
XXXIV are concerned; and we have also, in K20b, a second authority for
so much of Chap. XXXI as occurs in K20; but for Chaps. XXVIII and XXIX
we have nothing but K20 to rely on, and part of Chap. XXVIII is lost in
that manuscript. Such was the unsatisfactory state of that part of the
text until Dec. 1877, when information about the MS. TD was received,
followed by further details and a copy of Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX, and
XXXI-XXXIII in Oct. 1878 <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17).

TD is a manuscript of the Bundahi*s* which contains a much more
extensive text than the MSS. already described, but whether it be an
extension of the hitherto-received text, or the received text be an
abridgement of this longer one, is likely to be a matter of dispute
among Pahlavi scholars until the whole of the new text has been
thoroughly examined. At any rate, the contents of this MS., combined
with those of some MSS. of the Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk, afford a means of
fixing the date of this recension of the Bundahi*s*, as will be seen
hereafter.

This MS. belongs to a young Mobad named Tehmuras Dinshawji Anklesaria in
Bombay, and was brought from Persia a few years ago by a Mobad named
Khodabakhsh Farod Abadan. It occupies the first 103 folios of the volume
containing it, and is followed by 112 more folios containing the
Nîrangistân. The first original folio, which contained the text as far
as Chap. I, 5 (to 'endless light'), has been lost and replaced by
another (which, however, is now old) containing some introductory
sentences, besides the missing text. The last original folio of the
Bundahi*s*, containing the last five lines of the last chapter, has also
been lost and replaced by another modern folio, which contains the
missing text followed by two colophons, both expressing approval of the
text, and asserting that the MS. was written by Gôpatshah Rûstâm Bôndâr.
The first of these colophons

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

is undated, but gives the testimony of Dastûr Rûstâm <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) Gû*s*tâsp Ar*d*ashîr, who is known to have
written another MS. dated A.Y. 1068 (A.D. 1699). The second colophon is
by Dastûr Jamshê*d* Jâmâsp Hakim, and is dated A.Y. 1113 (A.D. 1743),
which was probably the date when this last folio was supplied to
complete the old defective MS.

With regard to the age of the older part of. this MS. we can arrive at
an approximation in the following manner:—A valuable MS. of the
Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk, which also belongs to Tehmuras Dinshawji, was
written (according to a colophon which it contains) by Gôpatshah
Rûstôm <span id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19) Bândâr Malkâ-mar*d*ân in the
land of Kirmân, who was evidently the same person as the writer of TD.
Another MS. of the Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk was written by Mar*z*apân Frê*d*ûn
Vâhrôm Rûstâm Bôndâr Malkâ-mar*d*ân Dîn-ayâr, also in the land of
Kirmân, in A.Y. 941 (A.D. 1572). Comparing these two genealogies
together it seems evident that Gôpatshah was a brother of Vâhrôm, the
grandfather of Mar*z*apân, and, therefore, a grand-uncle of Mar*z*apân
himself. Allowing for these two generations, it is probable that
Gôpatshah wrote TD about A.Y. 900 (say A.D. 1530); although instances
have occurred in which a son has written a MS. at an earlier date than
that of one written by his father.

The introductory sentences on the first restored folio are evidently a
modern addition to the text, after it had acquired the name of
Bundahi*s*; but they seem to have been copied from some other MS., as
the copyist appears to have hardly understood them, having written them
continuously with the beginning of the text, without break or stop. The
spelling is modern, but that may be due to the copyist; and the language
is difficult, but may be translated as follows <span
id="fr_20"></span>[3](#fn_20):—

‘The propitiation of the creator Aûharmazd, the radiant,

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

glorious, omniscient, wise, powerful, and supreme, *by what is*
well-thought, well-said, *and* well-done in thought, word, and deed,
*and* the good augury of all the celestial angels *and* terrestrial
angels upon the virtuous creation, I beseech.

‘Written at the second fortunate conjunction (akhtar) in the
high-priestship (dastûrîh) of the God-devoted, all-sagacious cultivator
of righteousness, the lover of good works who is God-discerning,
spirit-surveying, and approved by the good, the high-priest of the good
religion of the Mazdayasnians, the glorified <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) Spendyâ*d* *son* of Mâh-vindâ*d*, *son* of
Rûstâm, son of Shatrôyâr.

‘The writing <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22) of the Bûndahi*s* was
set going by the coming of the Arabs to the country of Iran, whose
heterodoxy (dû*s*-dînîh) and ignorance have arisen from not
understanding the mysteries of Kayân <span id="fr_23"></span>[3](#fn_23)
orthodoxy (hû-dînôîh) and of those revered by the upholders of the
religion. From their deep seats it draws the purport of benedictions,
*and* from dubious thinking of actions it *draws* words of true meaning,
the disclosure of which is entertaining knowledge.

'On account of evil times, even he of the undecayed family of the Kayâns
and the Kayân upholders of the religion are mingled with the obedient
and just of those heterodox; and by the upper *class* the words of the
orthodox, uttered in assembled worship, are considered as filthy vice.
He also whose wish was to learn propriety (varâ*g*) through this
treatise (farhâng), might provide it for himself, from various places,
by trouble and day and night painstaking, *but* was not able.'

The text of Chap. I then commences (without any intermediate stop) with
the words zak zand-âkâsih, 'that knowledge of tradition.' As the whole
text of the Bundahi*s* occupies about 203 pages in TD, and each page
contains

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

seventeen lines rather longer than those in K20, it is evident that the
text in TD must be more than twice the length of that in K20, which
occupied originally about eighty-three pages of twenty lines each. This
additional text consists not only of additional matter in many of the
chapters, but also of extra chapters, which give the work a more
complete appearance than it presents in the manuscripts hitherto known.
The whole number of chapters in TD appear to be forty-two, the general
character of the contents of which may be gathered from the following
list of the headings of each chapter, with the space it occupies in TD,
and a reference to the corresponding chapter of the translation in this
volume (such chapters as seem to be entirely wanting in K20 being marked
with an asterisk):—

1\. The knowledge of tradition, first about Aûharmazd's original
creation and the antagonism of the evil spirit, afterwards about the
nature of the creatures of the world, from the original creation till
the end; 19 pages; see Chap. I.

2\. On the formation of light; 11 pages; see Chap. II.

3\. The rush of the destroyer at the creatures; 6 pages; see Chaps. III,
IV.

4\. On the opposition of the two spirits, that is, in what manner the
arch-fiends have come spiritually in opposition to the celestial angels;
10 pages; see Chap. V for two of the middle pages.

5\. On the waging of the conflict (âr*d*îk) of the creations of the
world, encountering the evil spirit; 1 page; see Chap. VI.

6\. The second conflict the water waged; 3 pages; see Chap. VII.

7\. The third conflict the earth waged; 1 page; see Chap. VIII.

8\. The fourth conflict the plants waged; ½ page; see Chap. IX.

9\. The fifth conflict the primeval ox waged; ⅓ page; see Chap. X.

\* 10. The sixth conflict Gâyômar*d* waged; 1⅓ page.

\* 11. The seventh conflict the fire waged; ⅓ page.

\* 12. The eighth conflict the constellations waged; ⅓ page.

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

\* 13. The ninth conflict the celestial angels waged with the evil
spirit; three lines.

\* 14. Tenth, the stars practised non-intermeddling (agûmê*g*i*s*n) ½
page.

15\. On the species of those creations; 2⅓ pages.

16\. On the nature of lands; 1⅓ page; see Chap. XI.

17\. On the nature of mountains; 4½ pages; see Chap. XII.

18\. On the nature of seas; 2½ pages; see Chap. XIII.

19\. On the nature of rivers; 5 ⅓ pages; see Chaps. XX, XXI.

20\. On the nature of lakes; 1¼ page; see Chap. XXII.

21\. On the nature of the five classes of animals; 5⅓ pages; see Chap.
XIV.

22\. On the nature of men; 7½ pages; see Chap. XV <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24).

23\. On the nature of generation of every kind; 5 pages; see Chap. XVI.

24\. On the nature of plants; 3½ pages; see Chap. XXVII.

25\. On the chieftainship of men and animals *and* every single thing;
2⅓ pages; see Chap. XXIV.

26\. On the nature of fire; 4⅔ pages; see Chap. XVII.

\* 27. On the nature of sleep; 2⅓ pages.

\* 28. On the nature of wind and cloud and rain; 9⅔ pages.

\* 29. On the nature of noxious creatures; 4½ pages <span
id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25).

\* 30. On the nature of the wolf species; 2 pages.

31\. On things of every kind that are created by the spirits <span
id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26), and the opposition which came upon them;
7¾ pages; see Chaps. XVIII, XIX.

32\. On the religious year; 4 pages; see Chaps. XXV, XXVI.

\* 33. On the great exploits of the celestial angels; 17½ pages.

34\. On the evil-doing of Aharman and the demons; 7 pages, as in Chap.
XXVIII.

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

35\. On the body of man *and* the opinion of the world <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27); 7 pages.

36\. On the *spiritual* chieftainship of the regions *of the earth*; 3½
pages, as in Chap. XXIX.

\* 37. On the *K*inva*d* bridge *and* the souls of the departed; 5⅔
pages.

\* 38. On the celebrated provinces of the country of Iran, the residence
of the Kayâns; 5 pages <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28).

\* 39. On the calamities of various millenniums happening to the country
of Iran; 8⅔ pages <span id="fr_29"></span>[3](#fn_29).

40\. On the resurrection and future existence; 6⅔ pages; see Chap. XXX.

41\. On the race and offspring of the Kayâns; 8⅔ pages, as in Chaps.
XXXI-XXXIII.

42\. On the computation of years of the Arabs; 2¼ pages; see Chap.
XXXIV.

Comparing this list of contents with the text in K20, as published in
Westergaard's lithographed facsimile edition, it appears that TD
contains, not only fifteen extra chapters, but also very much additional
matter in the chapters corresponding to Chaps. I, II, V, XVI, XXVIII,
and XXXI of the translation in this volume, and smaller additions to
those corresponding to Chaps. III, IV, XV, XVII, and XXXIV. The
arrangement of the chapters in TD is also much more methodical than in
the Indian MSS., especially with regard to Chaps. XX, XXI, XXII, and
XXVII, which evidently occupy their proper position in TD; and so far as
Chap. XX is concerned, this arrangement is confirmed by the insertion of
its first sentence between Chaps. XIII and XIV in the Indian MSS., which
indicates that the whole chapter must have been in that position in some
older copy. In fact, the Indian MSS. must probably be now regarded
merely as collections of

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

extracts from the original work; this has been long suspected from the
fragmentary character of the text they contain, but it could hardly be
proved until a more complete text had been discovered.

Whether TD may be considered as a copy of the text as it stood
originally, or merely of an after recension of the work, can hardly be
determined with certainty until the whole contents of the manuscript
have been carefully examined; it is, therefore, to be hoped that its
owner will be induced to publish a lithographed facsimile of the whole,
after the manner of Westergaard's edition. So far as appears in the
lengthy and valuable extracts, with which he has kindly favoured me, no
decided difference of style can be detected between the additional
matter and the text hitherto known, nor any inconsistencies more
striking than such as sometimes occur in the Indian MSS. On the other
hand, it will be noticed that heading No. 25 in the list of contents
seems to be misplaced, which is an argument against the text being in
its original state; and the style of the Bundahi*s* is so much less
involved and obscure than that of the Selections of Zâ*d*-sparam (see
Appendix to the Bundahi*s*), which treat of some of the same subjects,
that it may be fairly suspected of having been written originally in a
different age. But the writer of the text, as it appears in TD, calls
Zâ*d*-sparam <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) one of his
contemporaries (see Chap. XXXIII, 10, 11 of the translation); it may,
therefore, be suspected that he merely re-edited an old text with some
additions of his own, which, however, are rather difficult to
distinguish from the rest. No stress can be laid upon peculiarities of
orthography in TD, as they are, in all likelihood, attributable to
copyists long subsequent to Zâ*d*-sparam's contemporaries.

Any future translator of the Bundahi*s* will probably have to take the
text in TD as the nearest accessible approach to the original work; but
the present translation is based, as heretofore, upon the text in K20,
corrected in many places from M6, but with due care not to adopt

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

readings which seem due to the illegibility of the original from which
M6 was copied, as already explained. In Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX, XXXI,
XXXII, and XXXIII, however, TD has been taken as a principal authority,
merely checked by K20, and having its additional passages carefully
indicated; and in Chap. XXXI, K20b has also been consulted.

Since the present translation was printed, any lingering doubts, as to
the genuineness of the text in TD, have been, in a great measure,
dissipated by the discovery that a small fragment <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) of an old MS. of the Bundahi*s*, which has
long been in Europe, is evidently a portion of a text of similar
character to TD, and of exactly the same extent. This small fragment
consists of two folios belonging to an old MS. brought from Persia by
the late Professor Westergaard in 1843-44, and which is evidently the
codex mentioned by him in the preface to his Zend-Avesta, p. 8, note 3.
These two folios, which are numbered 130 and 131 in Persian words, now
form the commencement of this old mutilated MS., of which the first 129
folios have been lost. They contain very little more than one page of
the Bundahi*s* text, namely, the last sentences of the last chapter
(corresponding to Bund. XXXIV, 7-9), followed by a colophon occupying
less than two pages. This fragment of the text contains some additional
details not. found in the Indian MSS., as well as a few other variations
of no great importance. It may be translated as follows:—

‘\[. . . . Sâhm <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32) was in those *reigns
of* Aûzôbô, Kavâ*d*, and Mânû*sk*îhar.\] Kaî-Kâyûs, till *his* going to
the sky, seventy-five years, and after that, seventy-five years,
altogether a hundred and fifty years; Kaî-Khûsrôbô sixty

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

years; Kai-Lôharâsp a hundred and twenty years; Kai-Vi*s*tâsp, till the
coming of the religion, thirty years; \[total (mar) one thousand
years <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33). Then the millennium reign
came to Capricornus, and Zaratûha*s*t <span
id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34) the Spîtâmân, with tidings (pêtkhambarîh)
from the creator Aûharmazd, came to King Vi*s*tâsp; *and* Vi*s*tâsp
*was* king,\] after receiving the religion, ninety years.

‘Vohûman, *son* of Spend-dâ*d*, a hundred and twelve years; Hûmâî,
daughter of Vohûman, thirty years; Dârâî, son of Kîhar-â*z*â*d*, that
is, *of the daughter* of Vohûman, twelve years; Dârâî, son of Dârâî,
fourteen years; and Alexander the Rûman <span
id="fr_35"></span>[3](#fn_35) fourteen years.

'The A*s*kânians should bear the title in an uninterrupted sovereignty
two hundred and so many <span id="fr_36"></span>[4](#fn_36) years; and
Artakhshatar, son of Pâpak, and the number of the Sâsânians *bear* it
four hundred and sixty years, until the withering Arabs obtained a
place <span id="fr_37"></span>[5](#fn_37) \[as far as the year 447 of
the Persians; now *it is* the Persian year 527\] <span
id="fr_38"></span>[6](#fn_38).'

The colophon, which follows, states that the MS. was finished on the
thirteenth day of the ninth month A.Y. 936 (A.D. 1567), and was written
by Mitrô-âpân, *son* of Anôshak-rûbân, *son* of Rûstâm. This MS. is,
therefore, of nearly the same age as TD; but there has been no
opportunity of collating the fragment of it, which is still extant, with
the corresponding portion of TD. That it was a MS. of the same character
as TD (that is, one containing the same text as K20, but with much
additional matter) appears clearly

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

from the fragment translated above. Regarding its original extent, it is
possible to make an approximate estimate, by calculating the quantity of
text which the 129 lost folios must have contained, from the quantity
actually existing on folio 130. According to this calculation, the
original extent of the text of the Bundahi*s* in this MS. must have been
very nearly 30,000 words; and it is remarkable that a similar
calculation of the extent of the text in TD, based upon the actual
contents of ten folios out of 103, gives precisely the same result. This
coincidence is a strong argument in favour of the absolute identity of
the text lost from Westergaard's MS. with that actually existing in TD;
it shows, further, that the original extent of the Bundahi*s* may now be
safely estimated at 30,000 words, instead of the 13,000 contained in K20
when that MS. was complete.

That this fragment belonged to a separate MS., and is not the folio
missing from the end of TD, is shown not only by its containing more of
the text than is said to be missing, but also by the first folio of the
fragment being numbered 130, instead of 103, and by its containing
fifteen lines to the page, instead of seventeen, as would be necessary
in order to correspond with TD.

Regarding the age of the Bundahi*s* many opinions have been hazarded,
but as they have been chiefly based upon minute details of supposed
internal evidence evolved from each writer's special misinterpretation
of the text, it is unnecessary to detail them. The only indication of
its age that can be fairly obtained from internal evidence, is that the
text of the Bundahi*s* could not have been completed, in its present
form, until after the Muhammadan conquest of Persia (A.D. 651). This is
shown not only by the statements that the sovereignty 'went to the
Arabs' (Chap. XXXIV, 9), that 'now, *through* the invasion of the Arabs,
they (the negroes) are again diffused through the country of Iran'
(Chap. XXIII, 3), and that 'whoever keeps the year by the revolution of
the moon mingles summer with winter *and* winter with summer' (Chap.
XXV, 19, referring probably to the Muhammadan year not corresponding
with the seasons), but also, more positively

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

by the following translation of an extract from Chap. 39 in TD:—

'And when the sovereignty came to Yazdakar*d* he exercised sovereignty
twenty years, *and* then the Arabs rushed into the country of Iran in
great multitude. Yazdakar*d* did not prosper (lâ *s*âkaftŏ) in warfare
with them, *and* went to Khûrâsân and Tûrkistân to seek horses, men, and
assistance, and was slain by them there. The son of Yazdakar*d* went to
the Hindûs and fetched an army of champions; before it came, conducted
unto Khûrâsân, that army of champions dispersed. The country of Iran
remained with the Arabs, and their own irreligious law was propagated by
them, and many ancestral customs were destroyed; the religion of the
Mazdayasnians was weakened, *and* washing of corpses, burial of corpses,
*and* eating of dead matter were put in practice. From the original
creation until this day evil more grievous than this *has* not happened,
for through their evil deeds—on account of want, foreign habits
(Anîrânîh), hostile acts, bad decrees, and bad religion—ruin, want, and
other evils—have taken lodgment.'

None of these passages could have been written before the Muhammadan
conquest; but the writer, or editor, of the text as it appears in TD,
supplies the means of approximating much more closely to the date of his
work, in a passage in Chap. 41 of TD, in which he mentions the names of
several of his contemporaries (see Chap. XXXIII, 10, 11). Among these,
as already noticed, he mentions 'Zâ*d*-sparham *son* of Yûdân-Yim,' who
must have been the writer of the Selections of Zâ*d*-sparam, a
translation of which is added as an appendix to the Bundahi*s* in this
volume. This writer was the brother of Mânû*sk*îhar son of Yûdân-Yim,
who wrote the Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39),
and from colophons found in certain MSS. of the Dâ*d*istân (which will
be more particularly described in the next section of this introduction)
it appears that this Mânû*sk*îhar was

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

high-priest of Pârs and Kîrmân in A.Y. 250 (A.D. 881). This date may,
therefore, be taken as a very close approximation to the time at which
the Bundahi*s* probably assumed the form we find in TD; but that MS.,
having been written about 650 years later, can hardly have been copied
direct from the original. Whether that original was merely a new edition
of an older Pahlavi work, as may be suspected from the simplicity of its
language, or whether it was first translated, for the most part, from
the Avesta of the Dâmdâ*d* Nask, in the ninth century, we have no means
of determining with certainty. Judging, however, from Chap. I, 1, the
original Bundahi*s* probably ended with the account of the resurrection
(Chap. XXX), and the extra chapters, containing genealogical and
chronological details (matters not mentioned in Chap. I, 1), together
with all allusions to the Arabs, were probably added by the revising
editor in the ninth century. The last, or chronological, chapter may
even have been added at a later date.

A Gu*g*arâti translation, or rather paraphrase, of the Bundahi*s* was
published in 1819 by Edal Dârâb Jamshêd Jâmâsp Âsâ, and a revised
edition of it was published by Peshutan Rustam in 1877 <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40). In the preface to the latter edition it
is stated that the translator made use of two MSS., one being a copy of
a manuscript written in Iran in A.Y. 776 by Rustamji Meherwanji
Mar*g*abân Sheheriâr <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41), and the other
a MS. written in India by Dastûr Jamshêdji Jâmâspji in A.Y. 1139 <span
id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42). It is also mentioned that he was four
years at work upon his translation. The editor of the new edition states
that he has laboured to

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

improve the work by collecting all the further information he could
find, on the various subjects, in many other Pahlavi works. The result
of all this labour is not so much a mere translation of the Bundahi*s*,
as a larger work. upon the same subject, or a paraphrase more
methodically arranged, as may be seen from the following summary of its
contents:—

The headings of the fifty-nine chapters, which form the first part of
the work, are:—Ahuramazd's covenant, account of the sky, of the first
twelve things created, of Mount Albor*g*, of the twelve signs of the
zodiac, of the stars, of the soul, of the first practices adopted by the
creatures of the evil spirit Ahereman, of Ahereman's first breaking into
the sky, of Ahereman's coming upon the primeval ox, of Ahereman's
arrival in the fire, of Ahereman's coming upon Gaiomard, of the coming
of Ahuramazd and Ahereman upon Gaiomard at the time of his creation, of
the lustre residing in both spirits; further account of the arrangement
of the sky, another account of all the mountains, of depressions for
water, of great and small rivers, of the eighteen rivers of fresh water,
of the seven external and seven internal liquids in the bodies of men,
of the period in which water falling on the earth arrives at its
destination, of the three spiritual rivers, of the star Tehestar's
destroying the noxious creatures which Ahereman had distributed over the
earth, of the prophet Zarathost's asking the creator Ahuramazd how long
these noxious creatures will remain in the latter millenniums, of
driving the poison of the noxious creatures out of the. earth, of the
divisions of the land, of the creator Ahuramazd's placing valiant stars
as club-bearers over the heads of the demons, of all the things produced
by the passing away of the primeval ox, of the 282 species of beasts and
birds, of the bird named *K*amro*s*, of the bird named Kar*s*apad and
the hollow of Var*g*amkard, of the birds who are enemies opposed to the
demons and fiends, of the bitter and sweet plants among the fifty-five
kinds of grain and twelve kinds of herbs, of the flowers of the thirty
days, of the revolution of the sun and moon and stars, and how

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

night falls, and how the day becomes light, of the seven regions of the
earth, of depressions, of the creatures of the sea, of the flow and, ebb
of the tide, of the three-legged ass, of the Gâhambârs, of Rapithvan, of
the revolution of the seasons, of the production of mankind from the
passing away of Gaiomard, of the production of offspring from the seed
of men, of all fires, of all the clever work produced in the reign of
King Jamshed and the production of the ape and bear, of the production
of the Abyssinian and negro from Zohâk, of the splendour and glory of
King Jamshed, of the soul of Kersâsp, of Kersâsp's soul being the first
to rise, of the names of the prophet Zarathost's pedigree, of his going
out into the world, of his children, of the orders given by Ahereman to
the demons when the creator Ahuramazd created the creatures, of the
weeping and raging of the evil spirit Ahereman, of the weeping of the
demon of Wrath in the presence of Ahereman when the prophet Zarathost
brought the religion, of the computation of twelve thousand years.

The headings of the thirteen chapters, which form the second part,
are:—Account of the last millenniums, of the appearance of
Ho*s*edar-bâmi, of his going out into the world, of the appearance of
Ho*s*edar-mâh, of So*s*ios, of the fifty-seven years, of giving the
light of the sun to men on the day of the resurrection, of the rising
again of the whole of mankind on that day, of the resurrection, of the
means of resurrection, of the annihilation of the evil spirit Ahereman
and the demons and fiends on the day of resurrection, of the creator
Ahuramazd's making the earth and sky one after the resurrection, of the
proceedings of all creatures after the resurrection.

The third part contains an abstract of the contents of the hundred
chapters of the Sad-dar Bundahi*s*, and concludes with an account of the
ceremonial formula practised when tying the kusti or sacred
thread-girdle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxii:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_7) When this work forms
part of a collection of Pahlavi texts, the whole manuscript is sometimes
called 'the great Bundahi*s*.' There also exists a Saddar Bundahi*s*, or
Bundahi*s* of a hundred chapters, which is a comparatively modern
compilation, detailing the chief customs and religious laws of the
Parsis; in a hundred sections.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxiv:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_8) See Haug's Essays,
&c., second edition, pp. 127, 128.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxiv:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_9) Zend-Avesta, ouvrage
de Zoroastre, &c., par Anquetil Duperron; Paris, 1771. Tome seconde, pp.
343-422, Boun-dehesch.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxv:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_10) Bundehesh, Liber
Pehlvicus. E vetustissimo codice Hayniensi descripsit, duas
inscriptiones regis Saporis Primi adjecit, N. L. Westergaard; Havniæ,
1851.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxv:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_11) Ueber die
Pehlewi-Sprache und den Bundehesh, von Martin Haug; Göttingen, 1854.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxv:3](sbe0504.htm#fr_12) Die Traditionelle
Literatur der Parsen in ihrem Zusammenhange mit den angränzenden
Literaturen, dargestellt von Fr. Spiegel; Wien, 1860.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxv:4](sbe0504.htm#fr_13) Zoroastriche Studien.
Abhandlungen zur Mythologie und Sagengeschichte des alten Iran, von Fr.
Windischmann (nach dem Tode des Verfassers herausgegeben von Fr.
Spiegel); Berlin, 1863.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxvi:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_14) Der Bundehesh, zum
ersten Male herausgegeben, transcribirt, übersetzt, und mit Glossar
versehen, von Ferdinand Justi; Leipzig; 1868.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxviii:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_15) I am indebted to
the late Professor N. L. Westergaard for all information about this MS.,
and also for a tracing of the Pahlavi text of so much of Chap. XXXI as
is contained in it.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xxxi:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_16) This is proved by an
omission in fol. 40, which clearly indicates the loss of a folio in an
intermediate MS.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxxii:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_17) I am indebted to
Mr. Khurshedji Rustamji Cama, of Bombay (who is well known for the
interest he takes in all matters relating to the ancient customs and
history of his fellow-countrymen), for obtaining this information, and
to the owner of the MS. for his liberality in supplying me with all the
details and extracts mentioned in the text.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxxiii:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_18) This Dastûr is
said to have sprung from the laity, and not from a priestly family.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxxiii:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_19) The vowels â and ô
(or û) often interchange in Pahlavi MSS. from Persia, probably owing to
peculiarities of dialect, and the very broad sound of Persian â, like
English a in call.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxxiii:3](sbe0504.htm#fr_20) English words in
italics are additions to complete the sense.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxxiv:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_21) Literally,
'immortal-soulled,' a term implying generally that the person is dead;
but it seems to have been applied to King Khûsrô I (Nôshirvân) during
his lifetime. The time when this priest lived has yet to be discovered.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxxiv:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_22) Reading zektîbûn-i,
equivalent to Pâz. nivîs-i; the MS. has zak tîbnâ.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxxiv:3](sbe0504.htm#fr_23) The hero tribe or
princely race of the Kayânian dynasty, from which later Persian rulers
have fancied themselves descended.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxxvi:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_24) TD contains half a
page more near the beginning, and a page and a half more at the end.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxxvi:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_25) Probably Chap.
XXIII of the translation forms a put either of this chapter or the next.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxxvi:3](sbe0504.htm#fr_26) This word is
doubtful.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxxvii:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_27) The meaning is
doubtful and must depend upon the context.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxxvii:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_28) This chapter
begins with a translation of the first fargard of the Vendidad, and
concludes with an account of buildings erected by various kings.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxxvii:3](sbe0504.htm#fr_29) Containing an
account of the kings reigning in the various millenniums, and concluding
with prophecies similar to those in the Bahman Ya*s*t.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xxxviii:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_30) He writes the
name Zâ*d*-sparham.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xxxix:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_31) I am indebted to
Professor G. Hoffmann, of Kiel, for directing my attention to this
fragment, and also for kindly sending me a facsimile of it. It had been
recognised as a portion of the Bundahi*s* by Dr. Andreas some years ago,
and probably by the owner of the MS., the late Professor Westergaard,
long before that.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xxxix:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_32) See Bund. XXXI, 27.
As the beginning of this sentence is lost in translation is uncertain.
Details not found in K20 and M6 are here enclosed in brackets, and words
added by the translator to complete the sense are printed in italics.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xl:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_33) From the beginning of
Frê*d*ûn's reign, when the millennium of Sagittarius commenced.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xl:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_34) The usual way of
spelling Zaratû*s*t in old MSS; excepting K20 and a few others.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xl:3](sbe0504.htm#fr_35) Here written correctly
Alaksandar-i Arûmâî.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xl:4](sbe0504.htm#fr_36) Reading va and; as the
final letter is d and not *d* it cannot be read nâva*d* as a variant of
nava*d*, 'ninety.'

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xl:5](sbe0504.htm#fr_37) The words are, vad
*g*înâk ayâft khû*s*kô-i Tâ*z*îkânŏ, but the exact meaning is rather
doubtful.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xl:6](sbe0504.htm#fr_38) The last date is
doubtful, as the Pahlavi text gives the ciphers only for 'five and
twenty-seven,' omitting that for 'hundred.' These Persian dates must
either have been added by some former copyist, or Chap. XXXIV must have
been appended to the Bundahi*s* at a later date than the ninth century,
when the preceding genealogical chapters were probably added to the
original work (see [p. xliii](#page_xliii)). The Persian year 627 was
A.D. 1158.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xlii:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_39) It is quite possible
that Mânû*sk*îhar was also the reviser of the Bundahi*s*; see the note
on Dâ*d*akîh-i Ashôvahi*s*tô in Chap. XXXIII, 10.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xliii:1](sbe0504.htm#fr_40) Bundehe*s* ketâb,
iâne duniâ-ni awal-thi te âkher sudhi pedâes-ni sahruât-ni hakikat;
bi*g*i-vâr sudhârine *kh*apâwanâr, Peshutan bin Rustam; Mu*m*bai, 1877.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xliii:2](sbe0504.htm#fr_41) There is no doubt
whatever that the writer of the preface is referring to M6, although his
description is incorrect. M6 was written at Bhrô*k* in India A.Y. 766 by
Pêshôtan Râm Kâmdîn Shaharyâr Nêryôsang Shâhmard Shaharyâr Bâhrâm
Aûrmazdâyr Râmyâr; but some portion of it (probably not the Bundahi*s*)
was copied from a MS. written A.Y. 618 (A.D. 1249) by Rûstam Mihirâpân
Mar*z*apân Dahi*s*ni-ayâr, who must be the copyist mentioned in the
preface to the Gu*g*arâti translation.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xliii:3](sbe0504.htm#fr_42) This is probably
the copy derived from M6, and mentioned in [p. xxx](#page_xxx) as being
now in the library of Dastûr Jâmâspji Minochiharji.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Selections of Zâ*d*-sparam](sbe0505)
