[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0504)  [Next](sbe0506) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

### 4. THE SELECTIONS OF ZÂ*D*-SPARAM.

In some manuscripts of the Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk the ninety-two questions
and answers, which usually go by that name, are preceded and followed by
Pahlavi texts which are each nearly equal in extent to the questions and
answers, and treat of a variety of subjects, somewhat in the manner of a
Rivâyat. Of the texts which follow the questions and answers the
following are the principal:—

Incantations for fever, &c.; indications afforded by natural marks on
the body; about the hamîstakân ('the ever-stationary,' or neutral state
of future existence) and the different grades in heaven; copy of an
epistle <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) from Herbad Mânû*sk*îhar son
of Yûdân-Yim <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44), Which he addressed to
the good people of Sîrkân <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45), about the
decisions pronounced by Herbad Zâ*d*-sparam son of Yûdân-Yim; copy of a
letter from Herbad Mânû*sk*îhar son of Yûdân-Yim to his brother, Herbad
Zâ*d*-sparam, on the same subject, and replying to a letter of his
written from Nîvshâpûhar; copy of a notice by Herbad Mânû*sk*îhar, son
of Yûdân-Yim and high-priest (ra*d*) of Pârs and Kîrmân, of the
necessity of fifteen-fold ablution on account of grievous sin, written
and sealed in the third month A.Y. 250 (A.D. 881); memoranda and
writings called 'Selections of Zâ*d*-sparam son of Yûdân-Yim,' the first
part treating of many of the same subjects as the Bundahi*s*, together

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

with legends regarding Zaratû*s*t and his family; the second part about
the formation of men out of body, life, and soul; and the third part
about the details of the renovation of the universe. The last part of
these Selections is incomplete in all known MSS., and is followed by
some fragments of a further series of questions and answers regarding
the omniscient wisdom, the evil spirit, Kangde*z*, the enclosure formed
by Yim, &c.

A translation of so much of the Selections of Zâ*d*-sparam as treats of
the same subjects as the Bundahi*s*, has been added as an appendix to
the translation of that work in this volume, because the language used
in these Selections seems to have an important bearing upon the question
of the age of the Bundahi*s*. The time when the Selections themselves
were written is fixed with considerable precision by the date (A.D.
881), when their author's brother, Mânû*sk*îhar, issued his public
notice, as mentioned above. But Zâ*d*-sparam uses, in many places,
precisely the same words as those employed in the Bundahi*s*,
interspersed with much matter written in a more declamatory style; it
is, therefore, evident that he had the Bundahi*s* before him to quote
from, and that work must consequently have been written either by one of
his contemporaries, or by an older writer. So far the Selections merely
confirm the information already obtained more directly from TD (see [p.
xxxviii](sbe0504.htm#page_xxxviii)); but the involved style of their
language seems to prove more than this. In fact, in none of the text of
the Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk and its accompaniments is there much of the
simplicity of style and directness of purpose which are the chief
characteristics of most of the language of the Bundahi*s*. So far,
therefore, as style can be considered a mark of age, rather than a mere
personal peculiarity of a contemporary writer, the contrast between the
straightforward language of the Bundahi*s* and the laboured sentences of
Mânû*sk*îhar and Zâ*d*-sparam, sons of Yûdân-Yim, tends to prove that
the bulk of the Bundahi*s* was already an old work in their days, and
was probably saved from oblivion through their writings or influence.
That this original Bundahi*s* or Zandâkâs was an abridged translation of
the Avesta of the

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dâmdâ*d* Nask
appears pretty evident from Zâ*d*-sparam's remarks in Chap. IX, 1, 16 of
his Selections.

The first part of these Selections consists of 'sayings about the
meeting of the beneficent and evil spirits,' and, the first portion of
these 'sayings' (divided into eleven, chapters in the translation) is
chiefly a paraphrase of Caps. I-XVII of the Bundahi*s* (omitting Chaps.
II, V, and XVI). It describes the original state of the two spirits,
their meeting and covenant, with a paraphrase of the Ahânavar formula;
the production of the first creatures, including time; the incursion of
the evil spirit and his temporary success in deranging the creation,
with the reason why he was unable to destroy the primitive man for
thirty years; followed by the seven contests he carried on with the sky,
water, earth, plants, animals, man, and fire, respectively, detailing
how each of these creations was modified in consequence of the incursion
of the evil spirit. In the account of the first of these contests the
Pahlavi translation of one stanza in the Gâthas is quoted verbatim,
showing that the same Pahlavi version of the Yasna was used in the ninth
century as now exists. The remainder of these 'sayings,' having no
particular connection with the Bundahi*s*, has not been translated.

With regard to the Pahlavi text of the Selections, the present
translator has been compelled to rely upon a single manuscript of the
Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk, brought by Westergaard from Kirmân <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) in 1843, and now No. 35 of the collection
of Avesta and Pahlavi MSS. in the University Library at Kopenhagen; it
may, therefore, be called K35. This MS. is incomplete, having lost
nearly one-third of its original bulk, but still contains 181 folios of
large octavo size, written fifteen to seventeen lines to the page; the
first seventy-one folios of the work have been lost, and about
thirty-five folios are also missing from the end; but the whole of the
ninety-two questions and answers, together with one-third of the

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

texts which usually precede them, and three-fifths of those which
usually follow them, are still remaining. This MS. has lost its date,
but a copy <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) of it exists in Bombay
(written when it was complete) which ends with a colophon dated A.Y. 941
(A.D. 1572), as detailed in [p. xxxiii](sbe0504.htm#page_xxxiii); this
may either be the actual date of that copy, or it may have been merely
copied from K35, which cannot be much older. The latter supposition
appears the more probable, as this colophon seems to be left incomplete
by the loss of the last folio in the Bombay copy, and may, therefore,
have been followed by another colophon giving a later date.

This copy of K35 was, no doubt, originally complete, but has lost many
of its folios in the course of time; most of the missing text has been
restored from another MS., but there are still twelve or more folios
missing from the latter part of the work; it contains, however, all that
portion of the Selections which is translated in this volume, but has,
of course, no authority independent of K35. The other MS. in Bombay,
from which some of the missing text was recovered, is in the library of
Dastûr Jâmâspji Minochiharji; it is a modern copy, written at different
periods from forty to sixty years ago, and is incomplete, as it contains
only one-fourth of the texts which usually follow the ninety-two
questions and answers, and includes no Portion of the Selections of
Zâ*d*-sparam.

Another MS. of the Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk and its accompaniments, written
also at Kirmân, but two generations earlier than K35 (say, about A.D.
1530), has been already mentioned (see [p.
xxxiii](sbe0504.htm#page_xxxiii)). It is said still to contain 227
folios, though its first seventy folios are missing; it must, therefore,
begin very near the same place as K35, but extends much further, as it
supplies about half the text still missing from the

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bombay copy of
K35, though it has lost about fourteen folios at the end. This MS. must
be either the original from which K35 was copied, or an independent
authority of equal value, but it has not been available for settling the
text of the Selections for the present translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xlvi:1](sbe0505.htm#fr_43) This long epistle
contains one statement which is important in its bearing upon the age of
certain Pahlavi writings. It states that Nîshahpûhar was in the council
of Anôshak-rûbân Khûsrô, king of kings and son of Kavâ*d*, also that he
was Mobad of Mobads and a commentator. Now this is the name of a
commentator quoted in the Pahlavi Vend. III, 151, V, 112, VIII, 64, and
very frequently in the Nîrangistân; it is also a title applied to
Ar*d*â-Vîrâf (see AV. I. 35). These facts seem to limit the age of the
last revision of the Pahlavi Vendidad, and of the composition of the
Pahlavi Nîrangistân and Ar*d*â-Vîrâf-nâmak to the time of King Khûsrô
Nôshirvân (A.D. 531-579). The statement depends, of course, upon the
accuracy of a tradition three centuries old, as this epistle must have
been written about A.D. 880.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xlvi:2](sbe0505.htm#fr_44) Some Parsis read
this name Gôshnajam, others Yûdân-dam.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xlvi:3](sbe0505.htm#fr_45) Mr. Tehmuras
Dinshawji thinks this is the place now called Sîr*g*an, about thirty
parasangs south of Kirmân, on the road to Bandar Abbâs, which is no
doubt the case.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xlviii:1](sbe0505.htm#fr_46) That is, so far as
the late Professor Westergaard could remember in 1878, when he kindly
lent me the MS. for collation with my copy of the text, already obtained
from more recent MSS. in Bombay, the best of which turned out to be, a
copy of K35.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xlix:1](sbe0505.htm#fr_47) The fact of its
being a copy of K35 is proved by strong circumstantial evidence. In the
first place, it contains several false readings which are clearly due to
mis-shapen letters and accidental marks in K35, so that it is evidently
descended from that MS. But it is further proved to have been copied
direct from that MS., by the last words in thirty-two of its pages
having been marked with interlined circles in K35; the circle having
been the copyist's mark for finding his place, when beginning a new page
after turning over his folios.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. The Bahman Ya*s*t](sbe0506)
