[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0544)  [Next](sbe0546) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

## SELECTIONS

###### OF

## ZÂ*D*-SPARAM.

THEY call these memoranda *and* writings the Selections (*k*î*d*akîhâ)
of Zâ*d*-sparam, son of Yûdân-Yim.

### CHAPTER I.

0\. In propitiation of the creator Aûharmazd and all the angels—who are
the whole of the heavenly and earthly sacred beings (yazdân)—*are* the
sayings of Herbad Zâ*d*-sparam, son of Yûdân-Yim, who is of the
south <span id="fr_908"></span>[1](#fn_902), about the meeting of the
beneficent spirit *and* the evil spirit.

1\. It is in scripture thus declared, that light *was* above and
darkness below, and between those two was open space. 2. Aûharmazd *was*
in the light, and Aharman in the darkness <span
id="fr_909"></span>[2](#fn_903); Aûharmazd *was* aware of the existence
of Aharman and of *his* coming for strife; Aharman was not aware of the
existence of light *and* of Aûharmazd <span
id="fr_910"></span>[3](#fn_904). 3. It happened to Aharman, in the gloom
*and* darkness, *that*

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

he was walking humbly (frô-tanû) on the borders, *and* meditating other
*things* he came up to the top, and a ray of light was seen by him; and
because of *its* antagonistic nature to him he strove that he might
reach it, so that it might also be within his absolute power. 4. And as
he came forth to the boundary, accompanied by certain others <span
id="fr_911"></span>[1](#fn_905), Aûharmazd came forth to the struggle
for keeping Aharman away from His territory; and He did it through pure
words, confounding witchcraft, and cast him back to the gloom.

5\. For protection from the fiend (drû*g*,) the spirits rushed in, the
spirits of the sky, water, earth, plants, animals, mankind, and fire He
*had* appointed, and they maintained it (the protection) three thousand
years. 6. Aharman, also, ever collected means in the gloom; and at the
end of the three thousand years he, came back to the boundary, blustered
(patîstâ*d*), and exclaimed thus: 'I *will* smite thee, I *will* smite
the creatures which thou thinkest *have* produced fame for thee—thee who
art the beneficent spirit—I will destroy everything about them.'

7\. Aûharmazd answered thus: 'Thou art not a doer of everything, O
fiend <span id="fr_912"></span>[2](#fn_906)!'

8\. And, again, Aharman retorted thus: 'I will seduce all material life
into disaffection to thee and affection to myself <span
id="fr_913"></span>[3](#fn_907).'

9\. Aûharmazd perceived, through the spirit of wisdom, thus: 'Even the
blustering of Aharman is capable of performance, if I do not allow
disunion

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (lâ barînînam)
during a period of struggle.' 10. And he demanded of him a period for
friendship <span id="fr_914"></span>[1](#fn_908), for it was seen by him
that Aharman does not rely upon the intervention of any vigorous ones,
*and* the existence of a period is obtaining the benefit of the mutual
friendship *and* just arrangement of both; and he formed it into three
periods, each period being three millenniums. 11. Aharman relied upon
*it*, and Aûharmazd perceived that, though it is not possible to have
Aharman sent down, ever when he wants he goes back to his own requisite,
which is darkness; *and* from the poison which is much diffused endless
strife arises <span id="fr_915"></span>[2](#fn_909).

12\. And after the period was appointed by him, he brought forward the
Ahûnavar *formula* <span id="fr_916"></span>[3](#fn_910); and in his
Ahûnavar these <span id="fr_917"></span>[4](#fn_911) kinds of benefit
were shown:—13. The first is that, of all things, that is proper which
is something declared *as* the will of Aûharmazd; so that, whereas that
is proper which is declared the will of Aûharmazd, where anything exists
which is not within the will of Aûharmazd, it is created injurious from
the beginning, a sin of a distinct nature. 14. The second is this, that
whoever shall do that which is the will of Aûharmazd, his reward *and*
recompense are his own; and of him who shall not do that which is the
will of Aûharmazd, the punishment at the bridge, <span
id="fr_918"></span>[5](#fn_912) owing thereto

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

is his own; which is shown from this <span
id="fr_919"></span>[1](#fn_913) *formula; and* the reward of doers of
good works, the punishment of sinners, and the tales of heaven *and*
hell are from it. 15. Thirdly, *it is* shown that the sovereignty of
Aûharmazd increases that which is for the poor, *and* adversity is
removed; by which *it* is shown that there are treasures for the needy
*one, and* treasures are to be *his* friends; as the intelligent
creations *are* to the unintelligent, so also *are* the treasures of a
wealthy *person* to a needy *one*, treasures liberally given which are
his own. 16. And the creatures of the trained hand of Aûharmazd are
contending *and* angry (âr*d*îk), one with the other, as the renovation
*of the universe* must occur through these three things. 17. That is,
first, true religiousness in one self, *and* reliance upon a man's
original hold on the truly glad tidings (nav-barhâm), that Aûharmazd is
all goodness without vileness, and his will is a will altogether
excellent; *and* Aharman is all vileness without goodness. 18. Secondly,
hope of the reward *and* recompense of good works, serious fear of the
bridge *and* the punishment of crime, strenuous perseverance in good
works, *and* abstaining from sin. 19. Thirdly, the existence of the
mutual assistance of the creatures, or along with and owing to mutual
assistance, *their* collective warfare; it is the triumph of warfare
over the enemy which is one's own renovation <span
id="fr_920"></span>[2](#fn_914).

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

20\. By this formula he (Aharman) was confounded, *and* he fell back to
the gloom <span id="fr_921"></span>[1](#fn_915); *and* Aûharmazd
produced the creatures bodily for the world; first, the sky; the second,
water; the third, earth; the fourth, plants; the fifth, animals; the
sixth, mankind <span id="fr_922"></span>[2](#fn_916). 21. Fire was in
all, diffused originally through the six substances, of which it was as
much the confiner of each single substance in which it was established,
it is said, as an eyelid when they lay one down upon the other.

22\. Three thousand years the creatures were possessed of bodies and not
walking on *their* navels; *and* the sun, moon, *and* stars stood still.
23. In the mischievous incursion, at the end of the period, Aûharmazd
observed thus: 'What advantage is there from the creation of a creature,
although thirstless, which is unmoving *or* mischievous?'

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 24. And in aid of
the *celestial* sphere he produced the creature Time (zôrvan) <span
id="fr_923"></span>[1](#fn_917); and Time is unrestricted, so that he
made the creatures of Aûharmazd moving, distinct from the motion of
Aharman's creatures, for the shedders of perfume (bôi-dâ*d*ân) were
standing one opposite to the other while emitting *it*. 25. And,
observantly of the end, he brought forward to Aharman a means out of
himself, the property of darkness, with which the extreme limits
(vîrûnakŏ) of Time *were* connected by him, an envelope (pôstô) of the
black-pated and ash-coloured kind. 26. And in bringing it forward he
spoke thus: 'Through their weapons the co-operation of the serpent
(a*z*ŏ) dies away, *and* this *which* is thine, indeed thy own daughter,
*dies* through religion; and if at the end of nine thousand years, as it
is said *and* written, is a time of upheaval (madam kar*d*anŏ), *she is*
upheaved, not ended.'

27\. At the same time Aharman came from accompanying Time out to the
front, out to the star station; the connection of the sky with the star
station *was* open, which showed, since it hung down into empty space,
the strong communication of the lights and glooms, the place of strife
in which is the pursuit of both. 28. And having darkness with himself he
brought it into the sky, *and* left the sky so to gloom that the
internal deficiency in the sky extends as much as one-third <span
id="fr_924"></span>[2](#fn_918) over the star station.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_902"></span>[155:1](sbe0545.htm#fr_908) Zâ*d*-sparam
appears to have been dastûr of Sîrkân, about thirty parasangs south of
Kirmân, and one of the most southern districts in Persia (see Ouseley's
Oriental Geography, pp. 138, 139, 141, 143-145).

<span id="fn_903"></span>[155:2](sbe0545.htm#fr_909) See Bund. I, 2-4.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[155:3](sbe0545.htm#fr_910) Or 'of the light of
Aûharmazd' (compare Bund. I, 8, 9).

<span id="fn_905"></span>[156:1](sbe0545.htm#fr_911) Reading pavan
*k*atârânŏ ham-tanû, but the phrase is somewhat doubtful, and rather
inconsistent with Bund. I, 10.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[156:2](sbe0545.htm#fr_912) Bund. I, 0.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[156:3](sbe0545.htm#fr_913) Bund. I, 14.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[157:1](sbe0545.htm#fr_914) Bund. I, 17, 18.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[157:2](sbe0545.htm#fr_915) Or 'the poison of
the serpent, which is much diffused, becomes endless strife.'

<span id="fn_910"></span>[157:3](sbe0545.htm#fr_916) Bund. I, 21.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[157:4](sbe0545.htm#fr_917) The word ân,
'those,' however, is probably a miswriting of the cipher for 'three.'

<span id="fn_912"></span>[157:5](sbe0545.htm#fr_918) The *K*înva*d* or
*K*învar bridge (see Bund. XII, 7).

<span id="fn_913"></span>[158:1](sbe0545.htm#fr_919) The MS. has hûman,
'well-meditating,' instead of denman, 'this;' but the two words are much
alike in Pahlavi writing.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[158:2](sbe0545.htm#fr_920) This commentary on
the Ahûnavar, or Yathâ-ahû-vairyô formula, is rather clumsily
interpolated by Zâ*d*-sparam, and is much more elaborate than the usual
Pahlavi translation and explanation of this formula, which may be
translated as follows:—<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

'As is the will of the living spirit (as is the will of Aûharmazd) so
should be the pastor (so excellent should he be) owing to whatsoever are
the duties and good works of righteousness (the duties and good works
should be as excellent as the will of Aûharmazd). Whose is the gift of
good thought (that is, the reward *and* recompense good thought gives,
it gives also unto him) which among living spirits is the work of
Aûharmazd (that is, they would do that which Aûharmazd requires); there
are *some* who say it is thus: Whose gift is through good thought (that
is, the reward *and* recompense which they will give to good thought,
they would give also unto him); Âtarô-pâ*d* son of Zaratû*s*t said that
by the gift of good thought, when among living spirits, they comprehend
the doing of deeds. The sovereignty is for Aûharmazd (that is, the
sovereignty which is his, Aûharmazd has kept with advantage) who gives
necessaries \[or comfort, or clothing\] to the poor (that is, they would
make intercession for them).'

Additional phrases are sometimes inserted, and some words altered, but
the above is the usual form of this commentary.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[159:1](sbe0545.htm#fr_921) Bund. I, 22.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[159:2](sbe0545.htm#fr_922) Bund. I, 28.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[160:1](sbe0545.htm#fr_923) This is the Av.
zrvâna akarana, 'boundless time or antiquity,' of Vend. XIX, 33, 44. He
is a personification of duration and age, and is here distinctly stated
to be a creature of Aûharmazd. This throws some doubt upon the
statements of Armenian writers, who assert that the two spirits sprang
from Zrvâna.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[160:2](sbe0545.htm#fr_924) Compare Bund. III,
11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sbe0546)
