[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0562)  [Next](sbe0564) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

1\. The clothing of a menstruous woman which they shall take new for her
use is polluted, and that which is in use is not polluted <span
id="fr_1404"></span>[3](#fn_1395). 2. When a bedchamber (shâ*d*-aûrvân)
is overspread, and a carpet (bûp) is laid upon it and a cushion *on* the
two <span id="fr_1405"></span>[4](#fn_1396), *and*

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

a woman sits upon *it* and menstruation occurs, when she puts a foot
from the cushion on to the carpet, and from the carpet out into the
bed-chamber, the carpet and bed-chamber are both polluted, for *they
are* taken newly for her use, *but* of the cushion *there* is no
pollution for this reason, because *it is* in use. 3. And when she sits
on the cushion so that she shall have both the carpet and cushion in
use, the bed-chamber is polluted by itself; and when all three shall be
in use *there* is no pollution whatever <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1](#fn_1397).

4\. Just as she knows that *it is* menstruation, in the place *she is*
in for the purpose <span id="fr_1407"></span>[2](#fn_1398), first the
necklace, then the ear-rings, then the head-fillet (*k*ambar), and then
the *outer* garments (*g*âmak) are to be put off by her. 5. When in the
place she remains in for the purpose, even though she may remain a very
long time for that purpose, yet then the *outer* garments are clean,
*and there* is no need of leather covering and leather shoes <span
id="fr_1408"></span>[3](#fn_1399).

6\. When she knows for certain (aêvar) that *it is* menstruation, until
the complete changing (gûharî*d*anŏ) of all *her* garments, and she
shall *have* sat down in the place for menstruation <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[4](#fn_1400), a prayer is to

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

be retained *inwardly* <span id="fr_1410"></span>[1](#fn_1401). 7. When
worship is celebrated a prayer is to be retained <span
id="fr_1411"></span>[2](#fn_1402) *inwardly*, and should menstruation
occur the prayer is to be spoken out by her. 8. When in speaking *out*
the prayer should menstruation occur, both afterwards, when the time was
certain (a*v*îgûmân), and now *she* is certain <span
id="fr_1412"></span>[3](#fn_1403). 9. When she retains a prayer
*inwardly, and* a call of nature arises, there is no need for her to
speak *out* the prayer, for the formula for the call is to be spoken by
her <span id="fr_1413"></span>[4](#fn_1404).

10\. Hands sprinkled in *ceremonial* ablution (pâ*d*îyâ*v*), when a
menstruous woman sees *them*, become quite unclean (apâ*d*îyâ*v*) by
*her* look <span id="fr_1414"></span>[5](#fn_1405), and even when she
looks hastily, and does not see the *sacred* twigs (baresôm), it is the
same. 11. And *on* the subject of a house (khânak-1 babâ), when a
menstruous *woman* is above *in* it, and the *sacred* twigs

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

stand right below, if even fully fifteen steps below, even then the
*sacred* twigs are unclean (apâ*d*îyâ*v*) <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1](#fn_1406); but when not right *below* fifteen
steps are plenty.

12\. Prepared food which is within three steps of a menstruous woman is
polluted by her, and food which she delivers up (barâ parda*z*ê*d*) from
her morning meal (*k*âsht) is not fit for the evening meal (*s*âm), nor
that which she delivers up from her evening meal for the morning meal;
it is not fit even for the same woman <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[2](#fn_1407); and water which is within three steps
of her, when they shall put *it* into a pail (dûbal) or ablution-vessel
(pâ*d*îyâ*v*dân), and shall do *it* without handling (ayadman), is *fit*
for the hands in *ceremonial* ablution. 13. When she touches the
bedding <span id="fr_1417"></span>[3](#fn_1408) and garments of any one,
Sôshyans <span id="fr_1418"></span>[4](#fn_1409) said that so much space
is to be washed with-bull's urine (gômê*z*) and water; her bedding which
touches the bedding of any one does not make *it* polluted.

14\. A menstruous woman who becomes clean in three nights is not to be
washed till the fifth day; from the fifth day onwards to the ninth day,
whenever

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

she becomes clean, *she* is to sit down in cleanliness one day for the
sake of her depletion (tihîk), and then *she* is *fit* for washing; and
after nine nights the depletion is no matter <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1](#fn_1410).

15\. A woman who *has* brought forth or miscarried (nasâî), during forty
days sees whenever *she* is polluted; but when she knows for certain
that *she* is *free* from menstruation *she* is, thereupon, to be
associated with meanwhile (vada*s*), from the forty days <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[2](#fn_1411), onward; but when she knows for
certain that *there is something* of it, she is to be considered
meanwhile as menstruous.

16\. A menstruous woman when she *has* sat one month as menstruous, and
becomes clean on the thirtieth day, when at the very same time she
became quite clean she also becomes again menstruous, her depletion
(tîhîk) is from *its* beginning, and till the fifth day washing is not
allowable. 17. And when she is washed from the menstruation, *and has*
sat three days in cleanliness, and again becomes. menstruous as from the
beginning, four days are to be watched through by her, and the fifth day
is for washing <span id="fr_1421"></span>[3](#fn_1412). 18. When she
*has* become *free*

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

from the second menstruation she is not in cleanliness *for* nine days
and nights,—these days *and* nights are for watching,—*and* then *she*
is to be washed; when the nine days *and* nights are completed, on the
same day washing is good <span id="fr_1422"></span>[1](#fn_1413).

19\. Of leucorrhœa (*k*îharak) <span id="fr_1423"></span>[2](#fn_1414),
when it *has* quite changed colour, that which comes on before *and*
also that which is after menstruation, the pollution is just like *that
of* menstruation.

20\. When she *has* become so completely clean from menstruation that
her washing may be as usual (dastôbarag hâe), she does not make the
*sacred* twigs (baresôm), *nor* even other things, polluted *when*
beyond three steps.

21\. On account of severe cold it is allowable *for her* to sit out
towards <span id="fr_1424"></span>[3](#fn_1415) the fire; and while she
washes a prayer (vâ*g*) is to be taken *inwardly* by her <span
id="fr_1425"></span>[4](#fn_1416), and the washing of her hands, except
with bull's urine (gômê*z*), is not proper till *then*; and when *they
are* washed by her, two hundred noxious creatures are to be destroyed by
her as atonement for sin.

22\. A woman who goes beyond the period of menstruation <span
id="fr_1426"></span>[5](#fn_1417), and, afterwards, sees *she* is
polluted, when her pregnancy is certain—except when her

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

miscarriage (nasâî yehevûntanŏ) is evident—is then to be washed with
bull's urine and water; when her pregnancy is not certain *she* is to be
considered as menstruous. 23. Some say <span
id="fr_1427"></span>[1](#fn_1418), moreover, that when miscarriage is
certainly manifest *she* is, meanwhile, to be considered as menstruous.
24. Some say that when *she* is doubtful about the miscarriage she is to
be washed with ceremony <span id="fr_1428"></span>[2](#fn_1419).

25\. And for any one <span id="fr_1429"></span>[3](#fn_1420) who comes
in contact with a menstruous woman, or with the person whom it is
necessary to wash with water and bull's urine, *it* is the root of a sin
of sixty stîrs <span id="fr_1430"></span>[4](#fn_1421). 26. And for
whomever knowingly has sexual intercourse with a menstruous woman *it*
is the root of a sin of fifteen Tanâpûhars and sixty stîrs <span
id="fr_1431"></span>[5](#fn_1422).

27\. Of a menstruous *woman* who sees a fire the sin is one Farmân <span
id="fr_1432"></span>[6](#fn_1423), and when she goes within three steps
*it* is one Tanâpûhar, and when she puts a hand on the fire itself <span
id="fr_1433"></span>[7](#fn_1424) *it* is a sin of fifteen Tanâpûhars;
and *in* like manner *as to* the ashes <span
id="fr_1434"></span>[8](#fn_1425) and *water* goblet <span
id="fr_1435"></span>[9](#fn_1426). 28. When she looks at water *it* is a

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

sin of one Farmân; when she sits in water *it* is a sin of fifteen
Tanâpûhars; and when through disobedience she walks out in the rain
every single drop is a sin of fifteen Tanâpûhars for her. 29. And the
sun and other luminaries are not to be looked at by her, and animals and
plants are not to be looked at by her, and conversation with a righteous
man is not to be held by her; for a fiend so violent is that fiend of
menstruation <span id="fr_1436"></span>[1](#fn_1427), *that*, where
another fiend does not smite anything with a look (akhsh), it smites
with a look.

30\. *As to* a house <span id="fr_1437"></span>[2](#fn_1428) in which is
a menstruous woman, the fire of that house is not to be kindled; food
which is delivered up from before a menstruous woman is not proper for
the same woman <span id="fr_1438"></span>[3](#fn_1429). 31. A tray-cloth
(khvânŏ *g*âmak) which stands before *her*, when it is not in contact
with her, is not polluted; a table-napkin (pata*s*khûr) when apart from
*her* thigh, *and* contact does not occur, is proper <span
id="fr_1439"></span>[4](#fn_1430).

32\. When *one* <span id="fr_1440"></span>[5](#fn_1431), wishes to
consecrate the sacred cakes (drôn) <span
id="fr_1441"></span>[6](#fn_1432), when *one* holds up the *sacred*
twigs

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (baresôm) <span
id="fr_1442"></span>[1](#fn_1433) from the twig-stand (baresôm-dân), and
menstruation occurs, and just as it came to *one's* knowledge *one* puts
down the *sacred* twigs and goes out, the *sacred* twigs are not
polluted.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

33\. And during her menstruation *she* is to be so seated that, from her
body, *there* are fifteen steps of three feet to water, fifteen steps to
fire, fifteen steps to the *sacred* twigs, and three steps to a
righteous man <span id="fr_1443"></span>[1](#fn_1434). 34. And her food
is to be carried forth in iron or leaden *vessels*; and the person
(valman) who shall carry forth the food stands at three steps away from
her <span id="fr_1444"></span>[2](#fn_1435). 35. When worship is
celebrated, every time at the dedication (shnûmanê) <span
id="fr_1445"></span>[3](#fn_1436) of the consecration of sacred cakes
(drôn ya*s*t) *it* is to be uttered aloud *by her;* some say the Ithâ
*and* Ashem-vohû <span id="fr_1446"></span>[4](#fn_1437).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[276:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1404) Pahl. Vend. XVI,
5 says, 'when in the place she remains in for the purpose, she does not
make the clothing she wears on her body polluted, it remains for use
within the place.' The meaning is, probably, that clothing already set
apart for the purpose docs not become further polluted, so as to be
unfit for her use. It appears also (Pahl. Vend. XVI, 5) that on the spot
where menstruation first appears, not even the twigs uplifted in the
sacred ceremony are polluted, unless the circumstances are abnormal.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[276:4](sbe0563.htm#fr_1405) This phrase,
about the carpet and cushion, is omitted in K20 by mistake.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[277:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1406) §§ 2, 3 are
merely corollaries from § 1.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[277:2](sbe0563.htm#fr_1407) Or, possibly, 'on
the spot *she is* in on the occasion;' although it would appear from § 5
that the place referred to is the dashtânistân, or place of retirement
for the unclean.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[277:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1408) Reading ma*s*k va
*s*almîhâ, but both reading and meaning are doubtful. The first word may
be mu*s*kŏ, 'musk,' and the other can be read sharmgâh, but, if so, the
construction of the sentence is defective, as it stands in the MSS.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[277:4](sbe0563.htm#fr_1409) The dashtânistân,
a comfortless room or cell provided in every Parsi house for unclean
persons to retire to, where they can see neither sun, moon, stars, fire,
water, sacred vessels, nor righteous men; it ought to be fifteen steps
(39½ feet) from fire, <span id="page_278">p. 278</span> water, and the
sacred twigs, and three steps (8 feet) from righteous men (see § 33 and
Vend. XVI, 1-10).

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[278:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1410) This kind of
prayer (Av. vâ*k*, 'a word or phrase,' Pahl. vâ*g*, Pers. bâ*z*) is a
short formula, the beginning of which is to be muttered in a kind of
whisper, or (according to the Pahlavi idiom) it 'is to be taken' and
'retained' inwardly (as a protection while eating, praying, or
performing other necessary acts) by strictly abstaining from all
conversation, until the completion of the act, when the prayer or vâ*g*
'is to be spoken out,' that is, the conclusion of the formula is to be
uttered aloud, and the person is then free to speak as he likes.
Different formulas are used on different occasions.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[278:2](sbe0563.htm#fr_1411) K20 has, 'she
retains a prayer.' See Pahl. Vend, XVI, 5.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[278:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1412) The meaning is,
however, uncertain.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[278:4](sbe0563.htm#fr_1413) The Pahlavi text
is as follows: Amat vâ*g* yakhsenunê*d*, pê*s*înkâr (Pers. pê*s*yâr)
barâ yatûnê*d*, a*s* vâ*g* gûftanŏ kâr lôît mamana*s* nask-i pavan
*k*ami*s*n yemaleluni*s*nŏ. Compare Pahl. Vend. XVI, 5.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[278:5](sbe0563.htm#fr_1414) See Pahl. Vend.
XVI, 10.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[279:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1415) Pahl. Vend. XVI,
10 says, 'everything, when at the right distance, is proper, except only
that one *case*, when uncleanness is above and cleanness also right
below; although it be even much below, yet it is not proper.' In such a
case the prescribed distance of fifteen steps is not sufficient;
therefore, the dashtânistân should be on the ground floor, not over an
underground water-tank, nor within fifteen steps of the water in such a
tank.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[279:2](sbe0563.htm#fr_1416) Or, possibly, ham
nê*s*man may mean 'a companion woman,' when two or more are secluded at
the same time. Pahl. Vend. XVI, 17 says, 'food delivered up by a
menstruous woman is of no use whatever, it is not proper; in *parts*
free from pollution (gavî*dv*a*s*nŏ), in those likewise it is not
proper;' the reading gavî*dv*a*s*nŏ (proposed by Dastûr Hoshangji) is,
however, doubtful.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[279:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1417) Or 'clothing,'
vistarg.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[279:4](sbe0563.htm#fr_1418) See Chap. I, 3.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[280:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1419) See Pahl. Vend.
XVI, 22. The Hebrew law (Lev. xv. 19) prescribes a fixed period of seven
days, except in abnormal cases.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[280:2](sbe0563.htm#fr_1420) The same period
of seclusion as appointed by the Hebrew law, after the birth of a man
child (see Lev. xii. 2-4). The Avesta law (Vend. V, 135-159) prescribes
only twelve nights’ seclusion, divided into two periods of three and
nine nights respectively, as the Hebrew woman's seclusion is divided
into periods of seven and thirty-three days.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[280:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1421) The substance of
§§ 16, 17 is given in Pahl, Vend. XVI, 22, but in language even more
obscure than here. The washing mentioned here is merely for the first
menstruation; that for the second one being prescribed in § 18.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[281:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1422) In such abnormal
cases the Hebrew law (Lev. xv. 25-28) prescribes seven days’ seclusion
after recovery.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[281:2](sbe0563.htm#fr_1423) Av. *k*ithra, see
explanation of *k*îharak-hômand (Av. *k*ithravan*d*) in Pahl. Vend. XVI,
1, 34.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[281:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1424) Dastûr Jâmâspji
reads val bavan-i âtâsh, 'to the part of the fire.' From what follows it
would seem doubtful whether this distant approach to the fire is
allowable until she is ready for washing.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[281:4](sbe0563.htm#fr_1425) See § 6, note.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[281:5](sbe0563.htm#fr_1426) Or, 'goes up from
the place of menstruation.'

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[282:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1427) Literally, 'there
is *one* who says thus.'

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[282:2](sbe0563.htm#fr_1428) See Chap. II, 65.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[282:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1429) Reading aî*s*
instead of adîna*s*, 'then for him.'

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[282:4](sbe0563.htm#fr_1430) That is, the sin
is a Khôr (see Chap. I, 2).

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[282:5](sbe0563.htm#fr_1431) According to the
Avesta (Vend. XV, 23, 24) he becomes a peshôtanu (Pahl. tanâpûhar). The
Hebrew law (Lev. xv. 24) makes him unclean for seven days.

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[282:6](sbe0563.htm#fr_1432) See Chap. I, 2.
That it was sinful for her to look at fire, even in Avesta times,
appears from Vend. XVI, 8.

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[282:7](sbe0563.htm#fr_1433) Literally, 'on
the body of the fire.'

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[282:8](sbe0563.htm#fr_1434) That libû*s*yâ
means 'ashes' appears from Pahl. Vend. V, 150; literally it is
Huzvâri*s* for 'clothing or covering,' and is so used in Pahl. Vend. VI,
106, VII, 122. Metaphorically, ashes are the clothing of the fire.

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[282:9](sbe0563.htm#fr_1435) Reading dûbalak;
but the word is doubtful. Possibly it <span id="page_283">p. 283</span>
should be read gôbarak for gâv-bar, 'bull's produce,' referring to the
bull's urine which, with ashes, is prescribed (Vend. V, 149) as the
first food for a woman after miscarriage.

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[283:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1436) The demoness
*G*êh (see Bund. III, 3-9).

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[283:2](sbe0563.htm#fr_1437) By khânak,
'house, abode,' must here be understood merely the woman's place of
seclusion. K20 inserts âtâ*s* dên after mûn, which renders it possible
(by assuming another preposition) to translate as follows: '*As to* a
house in which is a fire, the fire in that house is not to be kindled by
a menstruous woman.'

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[283:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1438) See § 12.

<span id="fn_1430"></span>[283:4](sbe0563.htm#fr_1439) Fit to use again.

<span id="fn_1431"></span>[283:5](sbe0563.htm#fr_1440) Perhaps we should
read *'she'* throughout this section, as a woman can perform. these
rites among women (see Chap. X, 35).

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[283:6](sbe0563.htm#fr_1441) The drôn (Av.
draona, corrupted into drûn, or darûn by <span id="page_284">p.
284</span> Pâz. writers) is a small round pancake or wafer of unleavened
bread, about the size of the palm of the hand. It is made of wheaten
flour and water, with a little clarified butter, and is flexible. A drôn
is converted into a frasast by marking it on one side, before frying,
with nine superficial cuts (in three rows of three each) made with a
finger-nail while thrice repeating the words humat hûkht huvar*s*t,
'well-thought, well-said, well-done,' one word to each of the nine cuts.
Any drôn or frasast that is torn must not be used in any ceremony. In
the drôn ceremony two drôns are placed separately by the priest upon a
very low table before him, on its left side, the nearer one having a
small piece of butter (gâu*s* hudh*a*u) upon it; two frasasts are
similarly placed upon its right-hand side, the farther one having a
pomegranate twig (urvarãm) upon it; and between this and the farther
drôn an egg is placed. The sacred twig (baresôm) must also be present on
their stand to the left of the priest, and a fire or lamp must stand
opposite him, on the other side of the table. The priest recites a
certain formula of consecration (chiefly Yas. III, 1-VIII, 9), during
which he uplifts the sacred twigs, and mentions the name of the angel,
or of the guardian spirit of a deceased person, in whose honour the
ceremony is performed. After consecration, pieces are broken off the
drôns by the officiating priest, and are eaten by himself and those
present, beginning with the priests (see Haug's Essays, pp. 396, 407,
408, AV. p. 147).

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[284:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1442) The baresôm (Av.
baresma) consists of a number of slender rods or tâî (Pahl. tâk),
formerly twigs of some particular trees, but now thin metal wires are
generally used. The number of these twigs varies according to the nature
of the ceremony, but is usually from five to thirty-three. These twigs
are laid upon the crescent shaped tops of two adjacent metal stands,
each called a mâh-rû, 'moon-face,' and both together forming the
baresôm-dân or 'twig-stand.' The baresôm is prepared for the sacred
rites by the recital of certain prayers by the officiating priest,
during which he washes the twigs with water, and ties them together with
a kûstîk or girdle formed of six thread-like ribbons split out of a
leaflet of the date-palm and twisted together; this girdle, being <span
id="page_285">p. 285</span> passed twice round the twigs, is secured
with a right-handed and left-handed knot on one side, and is then passed
round a third time and secured with a similar double knot on the other
side, exactly as the kûstîk or sacred thread-girdle is secured round the
waist of a Parsi man or woman (see Haug's Essays, pp. 396-399).

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[285:1](sbe0563.htm#fr_1443) See Vend. XVI, 9,
10. All the ceremonial apparatus must be kept as far removed as the
sacred twigs.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[285:2](sbe0563.htm#fr_1444) See Vend. XVI,
11-14, which states that the food is to be carried forth on iron, lead,
or the basest metal.

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[285:3](sbe0563.htm#fr_1445) This is the time
when the name of the angel or spirit is mentioned, in whose honour the
cakes are consecrated (see § 32, note on drôn, and Chap. VII, 8).

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[285:4](sbe0563.htm#fr_1446) The Ithâ is Yas.
V (so called from its first word), which forms a part of the drôn ya*s*t
or formula of consecration (see § 32, note on drôn). The Ashem-vohû is
probably that in Yas. VIII, 9, which concludes the consecration. The
same details are given in Pahl. Vend. XVI, 17. These prayers also form a
portion of all ceremonial worship, including the Ya*z*i*s*n.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](sbe0564)
