[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0523)  [Next](sbe0525) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XV.

1\. On the nature of men it says in revelation, that Gâyômar*d*, in
passing away <span id="fr_276"></span>[4](#fn_275), gave forth seed;
that seed was thoroughly purified by the motion of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the, light of the sun, and Nêryôsang <span
id="fr_277"></span>[1](#fn_276) kept charge of two portions, and
Spendarma*d* <span id="fr_278"></span>[2](#fn_277) received one portion.
2. And *in* forty years, with the shape of a one stemmed
Rîvâs-*plant* <span id="fr_279"></span>[3](#fn_278), *and* the fifteen
years of *its* fifteen leaves, Matrô and Matrôyâô <span
id="fr_280"></span>[4](#fn_279) grew up from the earth in such a manner
that their arms rested behind on *their* shoulders (dôsh), and one
joined to the other they were connected together and both alike. 3. And
the waists of both of them were brought close *and* so connected
together that it was not clear which is the male and which the female,
and which is the *one* whose living soul (nismô) of Aûharmazd is not
away <span id="fr_281"></span>[5](#fn_280). 4. As it is said thus:
'Which is created before, the soul (nismô) or the body? And Aûharmazd
said that the soul is created before, and the body after, for him who
was

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

created; it is given into the body that it may produce activity, and the
body is created only for activity;' hence the conclusion is this, that
the soul (rûbân) is created before and the body after. 5. And both of
them changed from the shape of a plant into the shape of man, *and* the
breath (nismô) went spiritually into them, which is the soul (rûbân);
and now, moreover, in that similitude a tree had grown up whose fruit
was the ten varieties of man <span id="fr_282"></span>[1](#fn_281).

6\. Aûharmazd spoke to Mashya *and* Mashyôî thus: 'You are man, you are
the ancestry of the world, and you are created perfect in devotion <span
id="fr_283"></span>[2](#fn_282) by me; perform devotedly the duty of the
law, think good thoughts, speak good words, do good deeds, and worship
no demons!' 7. Both of them first thought this, that one of them should
please the other, as he is a man for him; and the first deed done by
them was this, when they went out they washed <span
id="fr_284"></span>[3](#fn_283) themselves thoroughly; and the first
words spoken by them were these, that Aûharmazd created the water and
earth, plants and animals, the stars, moon, and sun, and all prosperity
whose origin and effect are from the manifestation of
righteousness <span id="fr_285"></span>[4](#fn_284). 8. And, afterwards,
antagonism rushed into their minds, and their minds were

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

thoroughly corrupted, and they exclaimed that the evil spirit created
the water and earth, plants and animals, *and* the other things as
*afore*said. 9. That false speech was spoken through the will of the
demons, *and* the evil spirit possessed himself of this first enjoyment
from them; through that false speech they both became wicked, and their
souls are in hell until the future existence.

10\. And they had gone thirty days without food <span
id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_285), covered with clothing of herbage
(giyâh); *and* after the thirty days they went forth into the
wilderness, came to a white-haired goat, and milked the milk from the
udder with their mouths. 11. When they had devoured the milk Mâshya
*said* to Mâshyôî thus: 'My delight was owing to it when I had not
devoured the milk, and my delight is more delightful now when it is
devoured by my vile body.' 12. That second false speech enhanced the
power of the demons, and the taste of the food was taken away by them,
so that out of a hundred parts one part remained.

13\. Afterwards, in another thirty days and nights they came to a sheep,
fat <span id="fr_287"></span>[2](#fn_286) *and* white-jawed, and they
slaughtered *it*; and fire was extracted by them out of the wood of the
lote-plum <span id="fr_288"></span>[3](#fn_287) and box-tree, through
the guidance of the heavenly angels, since both woods were most
productive of fire for them;

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and the fire was stimulated by their mouths; and the first fuel kindled
by them was dry grass, kendâr, lotos, date palm leaves, *and* myrtle;
and they made a roast of the sheep. 14. And they dropped three handfuls
of the meat into the fire, *and* said: 'This is the share of the
fire <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_288).' One piece of the rest they
tossed to the sky, *and* said: 'This is the share of the angels.' A
bird, the vulture, advanced *and* carried *some* of it away from before
*them*, as a dog ate the first meat. 15. And, first, a clothing of skins
covered them; afterwards, it is said, woven garments were prepared
*from* a cloth woven <span id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_289) in the
wilderness. 16. And they dug out a pit in the earth, and iron was
obtained by them and beaten out with a stone, and without a forge they
beat out a cutting edge <span id="fr_291"></span>[3](#fn_290) from it;
and they cut wood with it, *and* prepared a wooden shelter from the sun
(pê*s*-khûr).

17\. Owing to the gracelessness which they practised, the demons became
more oppressive, and they themselves carried on unnatural malice between
themselves; they advanced one against the other, *and* smote and tore
*their* hair *and* cheeks <span id="fr_292"></span>[4](#fn_291). 18.
Then the demons shouted out of the darkness

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

thus: 'You are man; worship the demon! so that your demon of malice may
repose.' 19. Mâshya went forth and milked a cow's milk, *and* poured
*it* out towards the northern quarter; through that the demons became
more powerful, and *owing to* them they both became so dry-backed that
in fifty winters they had no desire for intercourse, and though they had
had intercourse they would have had no children. 20. And on the
completion of fifty years the source of desire arose, first *in* Mâshya
and then *in* Mâshyôî, for Mâshya said to Mâshyôî thus: 'When I see thy
shame my desires arise.' Then Mâshyôî spoke thus: 'Brother Mâshya! when
I see thy great desire I am also agitated <span
id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_292).' 21. Afterwards, it became their mutual
wish that the satisfaction of their desires should be accomplished, as
they reflected thus: 'Our duty even for those fifty years was this.'

22\. From them was born in nine months a pair, male and female; *and*
owing to tenderness for offspring <span id="fr_294"></span>[2](#fn_293)
the mother devoured one, and the father one. 23. And, afterwards,
Aûharmazd took tenderness for offspring away from them, so that *one*
may nourish a child, and the child may remain.

24\. And from them arose seven pairs, male *and*

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

female, *and* each was a brother and sister-wife; and from every one of
them, in fifty years, children were born, and they themselves died in a
hundred years. 25. of those seven pairs one was Sîyâkmak, the name of
the man, and Na*s*âk <span id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_294) of the woman;
and from them a pair was born, whose names were Fravâk of the man and
Fravâkaîn of the woman. 26. From them fifteen pairs were born, every
single pair of whom became a race (sar*d*ak); and from them the constant
continuance of the generations of the world arose.

27\. Owing to the increase (zâyi*s*n) of the whole fifteen races, nine
races proceeded on the back of the ox Sarsaok <span
id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_295), through the wide-formed ocean, to the
other six regions (kêshvar), and stayed there; and six races of men
remained in Khvanîras. 28. Of those six races the name of the man of one
pair was Tâ*z* and of the woman Tâ*z*ak, and they went *to* the plain of
the Tâ*z*îkân (Arabs); and of one pair Hôshyang <span
id="fr_297"></span>[3](#fn_296) was the name of the man and Gû*z*ak of
the woman, and from them arose the Airânakân (Iranians); and from one
pair the Mâzendarân <span id="fr_298"></span>[4](#fn_297) have arisen.
29. Among the number (pavan aê mar) were those who are in the countries

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

of Sûrâk <span id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_298), those who are in the
country of Anêr <span id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_299), those who are in
the countries of Tûr, those who are in the country of Salm which is
Arûm, those who are in the country of Sênî, that which is *K*înîstân,
those who are in the country of Dâî <span
id="fr_301"></span>[3](#fn_300), *and* those who are in the country of
Sînd <span id="fr_302"></span>[4](#fn_301). 30. Those, indeed,
throughout the seven regions are all from the lineage of Fravâk, *son*
of Sîyâkmak, *son of* Mâshya.

31\. As there were ten varieties of man <span
id="fr_303"></span>[5](#fn_302), *and* fifteen races from Fravâk, there
were twenty-five races all from the seed of Gâyômar*d*; *the varieties
are such* as *those* of the earth, of the water, the breast-eared, the
breast-eyed, the one-legged, those also who have wings like a bat,
*those* of the forest, with tails, *and* who have hair on the body <span
id="fr_304"></span>[6](#fn_303).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_275"></span>[52:4](sbe0524.htm#fr_276) See Chap. IV, 1.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[53:1](sbe0524.htm#fr_277) Av. Nairyô-sangha of
Yas. XVII, 68, LXX, 92, Vend. XIX, 111, 112, XXII, 22, &c.; the angel
who is said to be Aûharmazd's usual messenger to mankind.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[53:2](sbe0524.htm#fr_278) The female archangel
who is supposed to have special charge of the earth (see Chap. I, 26).

<span id="fn_278"></span>[53:3](sbe0524.htm#fr_279) A plant allied to
the rhubarb, the shoots of which supply an acid juice used by the
Persians for acidulating preserves and drinks.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[53:4](sbe0524.htm#fr_280) These names are
merely variants of the Mâshya and Mâshyôî of the latter part of this
chapter (nom. dual, m. and f., of Av. mashya, 'mortal'). This is shown
by the Pandnâmak-i Zaratû*s*t, saying: 'and my human nature is from
Matrôîh *and* Matrô-yâôîh, *from* which first generation and seed from
Gâyômar*d* I have sprung.' And the names are also found in the more
Persian forms Maharîh and Maharîyâôyîh (see the note to § 22).
Windischmann considered the meaning to be that 'they grew up on the day
Mitrô of the month Mitrô,' that is, the sixteenth day of the seventh
month of the Parsi year; this is not confirmed, however, by Zâ*d*-sparam
in his Selections, Chap. X, 4 (see App. to Bund.)

<span id="fn_280"></span>[53:5](sbe0524.htm#fr_281) That is, whether
they had souls or not. That nismô is the Huzvâri*s* for rûbân, 'soul,'
appears clearly in § 4, where both words are used for the same thing.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[54:1](sbe0524.htm#fr_282) This evidently
refers to another tree, which is supposed to have produced the ten
varieties of human monstrosities (see § 31).

<span id="fn_282"></span>[54:2](sbe0524.htm#fr_283) This would be a
translation of the Avesta phrase, 'the best of Ârmaiti (the spirit of
the earth).'

<span id="fn_283"></span>[54:3](sbe0524.htm#fr_284) Comparing mê*g*î*d*
with Pers. ma*g*îd; but the verb is very ambiguous, as it may mean,
'they feasted themselves,' or 'they made water.'

<span id="fn_284"></span>[54:4](sbe0524.htm#fr_285) The last phrase
appears to be quoted from the Pahlavi Hâ*d*ôkht Nask, I, 2.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[55:1](sbe0524.htm#fr_286) Reading akhûri*s*n
instead of the khûri*s*n of all MSS. which is hardly intelligible.
Perhaps âv-khûri*s*n, 'drinking water,' ought to be read, as it is
alluded to in Chap. XXX, 1.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[55:2](sbe0524.htm#fr_287) Comparing gefar with
Av. garewa and Pers. *g*arb, but this identification may not be correct.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[55:3](sbe0524.htm#fr_288) The kûnâr, a thorny
tree, allied to the jujube, which bears a small plum-like fruit.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[56:1](sbe0524.htm#fr_289) Most of this
sentence is omitted in K20 by mistake.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[56:2](sbe0524.htm#fr_290) Reading khê*s*-1-i
tad, which Pahlavi words might be easily misread ashâbê ta*d*, as given
in Pâzand in the text. That Pâz. tadha stands for Pahl. ta*d*ak (Pers.
tadah, 'spun, woven') is quite certain.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[56:3](sbe0524.htm#fr_291) Or 'an axe,'
according as we read têkh or tash. The order of the foregoing words,
barâ tapâk-1, 'without a forge,' appears to have been reversed by
mistake.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[56:4](sbe0524.htm#fr_292) Reading rô*d* as
equivalent to Pers. rûî, 'face,' but it ought to be rôd. Perhaps the
word is lût, 'bare,' and the translation should be, 'tore *their* hair
bare.'

<span id="fn_292"></span>[57:1](sbe0524.htm#fr_293) This is merely a
paraphrase of the original.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[57:2](sbe0524.htm#fr_294) Or, 'the
deliciousness of children' (shîrînîh-i farzand). Justi has, 'owing to an
eruption on the children the mother deserted one,' &c.; but the legend
of devouring the first children is still more clearly mentioned in the
Pahlavi Rivâyat, which forms the first book of the Dâ*d*istân-i Dînîk
(preceding the ninety-two questions and answers to which that name is
usually applied) as follows: Maharîh va Maharîyâôyîh dûshâram râî
nazdistô farzand-i naf*s*man barâ va*s*tamûnd, 'Mashya and Mâshyôî,
through affection, at first ate up their own offspring.'

<span id="fn_294"></span>[58:1](sbe0524.htm#fr_295) Or 'Va*s*âk.'

<span id="fn_295"></span>[58:2](sbe0524.htm#fr_296) See Chaps. XVII, 4,
XIX, 13; the name is here written Srisaok in the MSS., and is a Pâzand
reading in all three places.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[58:3](sbe0524.htm#fr_297) Av. Haoshyangha of
Âbân Yt. 21, Gô*s* Yt. 3, Fravardîn Yt. 137, Râm Yt. 7, Ashi Yt. 24, 26,
Zamyâd Yt. 26. His usual epithet is paradhâta (Pahl. pê*s*-dâ*d*), which
is thus explained in the Pahlavi Vend. XX, 7: 'this early law
(pês-dâ*d*îh) was this, that he first set going the law of sovereignty.'
For this reason he is considered to be the founder of the earliest, or
Pê*s*dâdian, dynasty. See Chaps. XXXI, 1, XXXIV, 3, 4.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[58:4](sbe0524.htm#fr_298) The people of the
southern coast of the Caspian, the Mâzainya daêva, 'Mâzainyan demons or
idolators,' of the Avesta.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[59:1](sbe0524.htm#fr_299) Not Syria (which is
Sûristân, see Chap. XX, 10), but the Sûrîk of the Pahlavi Vend. I, 14,
which translates Av. Sughdha, the land east of the Oxus (see Chap. XX,
8). Windischmann reads it as Pâz. Erâk.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[59:2](sbe0524.htm#fr_300) Probably for Av.
anairya, 'non-Aryan,' which seems specially applied to the lands east of
the Caspian.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[59:3](sbe0524.htm#fr_301) The countries of
Tûr, Salm, Sênî, and Dâî are all mentioned successively in Fravardîn Yt.
143, 144, in their Avesta forms Tûirya, Sairima, Sâini and Dâhi. The
country of Tûr was part of the present Turkistân, that of Salm is
rightly identified with Arûm (the eastern Roman Empire, or Asia Minor)
in the text; the country of Sênî (miswritten Sênd), being identified
with *K*înîstân, was probably the territory of Samarkand, and may
perhaps be connected with Mount Kînŏ (see Chap. XII, 2, 13); and the
land of Dâî must be sought somewhere in the same neighbourhood.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[59:4](sbe0524.htm#fr_302) Bactria or any part
of north-western India may be intended; wherever Brahmans and Buddhists
existed (as they did in Bactria) was considered a part of India in
Sasanian times.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[59:5](sbe0524.htm#fr_303) Grown on a separate
tree (see § 5).

<span id="fn_303"></span>[59:6](sbe0524.htm#fr_304) Only seven varieties
of human monsters are here enumerated, <span id="page_60">p. 60</span>
for the last three details seem to refer to one variety, the monkeys.
The Parsi MS. of miscellaneous texts, M7 (fol. 120), says, 'The names of
the ten species of men are the breast-eyed, the three-eyed, the
breast-eared, the elephant-eared, the one-legged, the web-footed, the
leopard-headed, the lion-headed, the camel-headed, *and* the
dog-headed.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](sbe0525)
