[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090105)  [Next](1090107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.xv"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="xix.xv-p1.1"></span>Homily XIII.</span>

<span id="xix.xv-p2"></span>A further thanksgiving to God for the change
in the late melancholy aspect of affairs. Reminiscence of those who were
dragged away, and punished because of the sedition. Exposition on the
subject of the creation of man, and of his having received a natural
law. Of the complete accomplishment of abstinence from oaths.

<span id="xix.xv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.xv-p3.1"></span>With</span> the same introduction and prelude
that I began yesterday and the day before, I shall begin to-day. Now
again I will say, “Blessed be God!” What a day did we see last
Wednesday! <span id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) and what in the
present! On that day how heavy was the gloom! How bright the calm of the
present! That was the day when that fearful tribunal was <span
id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span id="xix.xv-Page_426"></span>set in the
city, and shook the hearts of all, and made the day to seem no better
than night; not because the beams of the sun were extinguished, but
because that despondency and fear darkened your eyes. Wherefore, that we
may reap the more pleasure, I wish to relate a few of the circumstances
which then occurred; for I perceive that a narrative of these things
will be serviceable to you, and to all who shall come afterwards.
Besides, to those who have been delivered from shipwreck, it is sweet to
remember the waves, and the tempest, and the winds, when they are come
into port. And to those who have fallen into sickness, it is an
agreeable thing, when the sickness is over, to talk over with others the
fevers by which they were nearly brought to the grave. When terrors have
passed away, there is a pleasure in relating those terrors; the soul no
longer fearing them, but deriving therefrom more cheerfulness. The
remembrance of past evils always makes the present prosperity to appear
more strikingly.

<span id="xix.xv-p5"></span>2. When the greater portion of the city had
taken refuge from the fear and danger of that occasion, in secret
places, in deserts, and in hollows; <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) terror besetting them in all
directions; and the houses were empty of women, and the forum of men,
and scarce two or three appeared walking together across it, and even
these going about as if they had been animated corpses: at this period,
I proceeded to the tribunal of justice, for the purpose of seeing the
end of these transactions; and there, beholding the fragments of the
city collected together, I marvelled most of all at this, that although
a multitude was around the doors, there was the profoundest silence, as
though there had been no man there, all looking upon one another; not
one daring to enquire of his neighbour, nor to hear anything from him;
for each regarded his neighbour with suspicion; since many already,
having been dragged away, beyond all expectation, from the midst of the
forum, were now confined within. Thus we all alike looked up to heaven,
and stretched out our hands in silence, expecting help from above, and
beseeching God to stand by those who were brought to judgment, to soften
the hearts of the judges, and to make their sentence a merciful one. And
just as when some persons on land, beholding others suffering shipwreck,
cannot indeed go near to them, and reach out the hand, and relieve their
distress, being kept back from them by the waves; yet away on the shore,
with outstretched hands and tears, they supplicate God that He may help
the drowning; so there in like manner, did all silently and mentally
call upon God, pleading for those at the tribunal, as for men surrounded
by the waves, that He would stretch out His hand, and not suffer the
vessel to be overwhelmed, nor the judgment of those under trial to end
in an utter wreck. Such was the state of things in front of the doors;
but when I entered within the court, other sights I saw which were still
more awful; soldiers armed with swords and clubs, and strictly keeping
the peace for the judges within. For since all the relatives of those
under trial, whether wives, or mothers, or daughters, or fathers, stood
before the doors of the seat of justice; in order that if any one
happened to be led away to execution, yet no one inflamed at the sight
of the calamity might raise any tumult or disturbance; the soldiers
drove them all afar off; thus preoccupying their mind with fear.

<span id="xix.xv-p7"></span>3. One sight there was, more pitiable than
all; a mother, and a sister of a certain person, who was among those
under trial within, sat at the very vestibule of the court of justice,
rolling themselves on the pavement, and becoming a common spectacle to
all the bystanders; veiling their faces, and shewing no sense of shame,
but that which the urgency of the calamity permitted. No maid servant,
nor neighbour, nor female friend, nor any other relative accompanied
them. But hemmed in by a crowd of soldiers, alone, and meanly clad, and
grovelling on the ground, about the very doors, they were in more
pitiable case than those who were undergoing judgment within, and
hearing as they did the voice of the executioners, the strokes of the
scourge, the wailing of those who were being scourged, the fearful
threats of the judges, they themselves endured, at every scourging,
sharper pains than those who were beaten. For since, in the confessions
of others, there was a danger of accusations being proved, if they heard
any one scourged that he might mention those who were guilty, and
uttering cries, they, looking up to heaven, besought God to give the
sufferer some strength of endurance, lest the safety of their own
relations should be betrayed by the weakness of others, while incapable
of sustaining the sharp anguish of the strokes. And again, the same
thing occurred as in the case of men who are struggling with a tempest.
For just as when they perceive the violence of a wave lifting up its
head from afar, and gradually increasing, and ready to overwhelm the
vessel, they are <span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="xix.xv-Page_427"></span>almost dead with terror, before it comes
near the ship; so also was it with these. If at any time they heard
voices, and cries that reached them, they saw a thousand deaths before
their eyes, being in terror, lest those who were urged to bear witness,
giving way to their torments, should name some one of those who were
their own relatives. And thus, one saw tortures both within and without.
Those within the executioners were tormenting; these women, the despotic
force of nature, and the sympathy of the affections. There was
lamentation within, and without! inside, on the part of those who were
found guilty, and outside on the part of their relatives. Yea, rather
not these only, but their very judges inwardly lamented, and suffered
more severely than all the rest; being compelled to take part in so
bitter a tragedy.

<span id="xix.xv-p8"></span>4. As for me, while I sat and beheld all
this, how matrons and virgins, wont to live in seclusion, were now made
a common spectacle to all; and how those who were accustomed to lie on a
soft couch, had now the pavement for their bed; and how they who had
enjoyed so constant an attendance of female servants and eunuchs, and
every sort of outward distinction, were now bereft of all these things;
and grovelling at the feet of every one, beseeching him to lend help by
any means in his power to those who were undergoing examination, and
that there might be a kind of general contribution of mercy from all; I
exclaimed, in those words of Solomon, “Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity.” <span id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) For I saw both this
and another oracle fulfilled in every deed, which saith, “All the glory
of man is as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower
falleth away.” <span id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) For then
indeed, wealth, and nobility, and notoriety, and the patronage of
friends, and kinship and all worldly things, were found worthless; the
sin, and transgression of the law which had taken place, having put all
these succours to flight. And just as the mother of young birds, when
the nestlings have been carried away, coming and finding her nest empty,
is unable to rescue her captive brood; but by hovering around the hands
of the fowler, in this way displays her grief; even so did these women
then do, when their children were snatched away from their dwellings,
and shut up within, as it were in a net, or a trap. They could not
indeed come in and deliver the prisoners, but they manifested their
anguish by wallowing on the ground near the very doors; by lamentation
and groans; and by endeavouring to approach as near as possible to those
who had captured them. These things then beholding, I cast in my mind
That Dread Tribunal; and I said within myself, “If now, when men are the
judges, neither mother, nor sister, nor father, nor any other person,
though guiltless of the deeds which have been perpetrated, can avail to
rescue the criminals; who will stand by us when we are judged at the
dread Tribunal of Christ? Who will dare to raise his voice? Who will be
able to rescue those who shall be led away to those unbearable
punishments. Notwithstanding they were the first men of the city who
were then brought to trial, and the very chief of the nobility, yet they
would have been glad if it could be granted them to lose all their
possessions, yea, if need were, their liberty itself, so that they might
continue to enjoy this present life.

<span id="xix.xv-p11"></span>5. But to proceed. The day now hastening to
its close, and late <span id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552) evening
arriving, and the final sentence of the court being expected, all were
in still greater agony, and besought God that He would grant some delay
and respite; and incline the soul of the judges to refer the facts that
had been investigated to the decision of the Emperor; since perchance
some advantage might arise from this reference. <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) Moreover, by the people general
supplications <span id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554) were sent up to
the Merciful God; imploring that He would save the remnants of the city;
and not suffer it entirely to be razed from its foundations. Nor could
one see any one joining in this cry but with tears. Nevertheless, none
of these things then moved the judges within, although they heard. One
thing only they considered, that there might be a rigid enquiry into the
deeds that had been perpetrated.

<span id="xix.xv-p15"></span>6. At last having loaded the culprits with
chains, and bound them with iron, they sent them away to the prison
through the midst of the forum. Men that had kept their studs of horses,
who had been presidents of the games, <span
id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555) who could reckon up a thousand
different offices of distinction which they had held, had their goods
confiscated, and seals might be seen placed upon all their doors. <span
id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span id="xix.xv-Page_428"></span>Their
wives also being ejected from their parents’ home, each had literally to
play the part of Job’s wife. For they went “wandering <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556) from house to house and from place
to place, seeking a lodging.” <span id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557)
And this it was not easy for them to find, every one fearing and
trembling to receive, or to render assistance in any way to the
relatives of those who were under impeachment. Nevertheless, though such
events had happened, the sufferers were patient under all; since they
were not deprived of the present life. And neither the loss of wealth,
nor dishonour, nor so much public exposure, nor any other matter of that
nature, caused them vexation. For the greatness of the calamity, and the
circumstance of their having expected still worse things, when they
suffered these, had prepared the soul for the exercise of a wise
fortitude. And now they learnt, how simple a thing is virtue for us, how
easy and expeditious of performance, and that from our neglect only it
seems to be laborious. They who before this time could not bear the loss
of a little money with meekness, now they were subject to a greater
fear, although they had lost all their substance, felt as if they had
found a treasure, because they had not lost their lives. So that if the
sense of a future hell took possession of us, and we thought of those
intolerable punishments, we should not grieve, even though for the sake
of the law of God we were to give both our substance, and our bodies and
lives too, knowing that we should gain greater things; deliverance from
the terrors that are hereafter.

<span id="xix.xv-p19"></span>7. Perchance the tragedy of all I have told
you, has greatly softened your hearts. Do not however take it amiss. For
since I am about to venture upon some more subtle thoughts and require a
more sensitive state of mind on your part, I have done this
intentionally, in order that by the terror of the description your minds
might have shaken off all listlessness, and withdrawn themselves from
all worldly cares, and might with the more readiness convey the force of
the things about to be spoken into the depths of your soul.

<span id="xix.xv-p20"></span>Sufficiently indeed, then, our discourse of
late <span id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558) evinced to you, that a
natural law of good and evil is seated within us. But that our proof of
it may be more abundantly evident, we will again to-day apply ourselves
strenuously to the same subject of discourse. For that God from the
beginning, when He formed man, made him capable of discriminating both
these, all men make evident. Hence when we sin, we are all ashamed at
the presence of our inferiors; and oftentimes a master, on his way to
the house of a harlot, if he then perceives any one of his more
respectable servants, turns back, reddening with shame, from this
untoward path. Again, when others reproach us, fixing on us the names of
particular vices, we call it an insult; and if we are aggrieved, we drag
those who have done the wrong to the public tribunal. Thus we can
understand what vice is and what virtue is. Wherefore Christ, for the
purpose of declaring this, and shewing that He was not introducing a
strange law, or one which surpassed our nature, but that which He had of
old deposited beforehand in our conscience, after pronouncing those
numerous Beatitudes, thus speaks; “All things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them.” <span
id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559) “Many words,” saith He, “are not
necessary, nor laws of great length, nor a diversity of instruction. Let
thine own will be the law. Dost thou wish to receive kindness? Be kind
to another. Dost thou wish to receive mercy? Show mercy to thy
neighbour. Dost thou wish to be applauded? Applaud another. Dost thou
wish to be beloved? Exercise love. Dost thou wish to enjoy the first
rank? First concede that place to another. Become thyself the judge,
thyself the lawgiver of thine own life. And again; “Do not to another
what thou hatest.” <span id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560) By the
latter precept, he would induce to a departure from iniquity; by the
former, to the exercise of virtue. “Do not thou to another,” he
saith, <span id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561) “what thou hatest.”
Dost thou hate to be insulted? Do not insult another. Dost thou hate to
be envied? Envy not another. Dost thou hate to be deceived? Do not
deceive another. And, in a word, in all things, if we hold fast these
two precepts, we shall not need any other instruction. For the knowledge
of virtue He hath implanted in our nature; but the practice of it and
the correction He hath entrusted to our moral choice. <span
id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562)

<span id="xix.xv-p26"></span>8. Perhaps what is thus said, is obscure;
wherefore I will again endeavour to make it more plain. In order to know
that it is a good thing to exercise temperance, we need <span
id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span id="xix.xv-Page_429"></span>no words,
nor instruction; for we ourselves have the knowledge of it in our
nature, and there is no necessity for labour or fatigue in going about
and enquiring whether temperance is good and profitable; but we all
acknowledge this with one consent, and no man is in doubt as to this
virtue. So also we account adultery to be an evil thing, and neither is
there here any need of trouble or learning, that the wickedness of this
sin may be known; but we are all self-taught in such judgments; and we
applaud virtue, though we do not follow it; as, on the other hand, we
hate vice, though we practise it. And this hath been an exceeding good
work of God; that He hath made our conscience, and our power of choice
already, and before the action, claim kindred with virtue, and be at
enmity with wickedness.

<span id="xix.xv-p27"></span>9. As I said then, the knowledge of each of
these things resides within the conscience of all men, and we require no
teacher to instruct us in these things; but the regulation of our
conduct is left to our choice, and earnestness, and efforts. And why was
this? but because if He had made everything to be of nature, we should
have departed uncrowned and destitute of reward; and even as the brutes,
who receive no reward nor praise for those advantages which they have
naturally, so neither should we enjoy any of these things; for natural
advantages are not the praise and commendation of those who have them,
but of the Giver. For this reason, then, He did not commit all to
nature; and again, He did not suffer our will to undertake the whole
burden of knowledge, and of right regulation; lest it should despair at
the labour of virtue. But conscience suggests to it what ought to be
done; and it contributes its own exertions for the accomplishment. That
it is a good thing to be temperate, we all understand without
difficulty; for the knowledge is of nature: but we should not be able
without difficulty, without bridling lust, and employing much exertion,
to practise the rule of temperance; for this does not come to us by
nature as the knowledge does, but requires also a willing mind and
earnestness. And not only in this respect has He made the burden lighter
for us, but also in another way again, by letting even some good
dispositions exist naturally within us. For we are all naturally
disposed to feel indignation along with those who are contemptuously
treated, (whence it arises that we become the enemies of those who are
insolent, though we ourselves may have suffered no part of the
grievance,) and to sympathize in the pleasure of those who enjoy
assistance and protection; and we are overcome by the calamities of
others, as well as by mutual tenderness. <span
id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563) For although calamitous events may
seem to induce a certain pusillanimity, <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[1565](#fn_1564) we entertain nevertheless a common
fondness for each other. And to this effect a certain wise man speaks
significantly; “Every animal loveth his like, and man his
neighbour.” <span id="fr_1565"></span>[1566](#fn_1565)

<span id="xix.xv-p31"></span>10. But God hath provided many other
instructors for us besides conscience; viz., fathers for children,
masters for servants, husbands for wives, teachers for pupils,
law-givers and judges for those who are to be governed, and friends for
friends. And frequently too we gain no less from enemies than friends;
for when the former reproach us with our offences, they stir us up, even
against our will, to the amendment of them. So many teachers hath He set
over us, in order that the discovery of what is profitable, and the
regulation of our conduct, might be easy to us, the multitude of those
things which urge us on toward it not permitting us to fall away from
what is expedient for us. For although we should despise parents, yet
while we fear magistrates, we shall in any case be more submissive than
otherwise. And though we may set them at nought <span
id="fr_1566"></span>[1567](#fn_1566) when we sin, we can never escape
the rebuke of conscience: and if we dishonour and repel this, yet whilst
fearing the opinion of the many, we shall be the better for it. And
though we are destitute of shame with regard to this, the fear of the
laws will press on us so as to restrain us, however reluctantly.

<span id="xix.xv-p33"></span>11. Thus fathers and teachers take the
young in hand, and bring them into order; <span
id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567) and lawgivers and magistrates,
those who are grown up. And servants, as being more inclined to
listlessness, in addition to what has been previously mentioned, have
their masters to constrain them to temperance; and wives have their
husbands. And many are the walls which environ our race on all sides,
lest it should too easily slide away, and fall into wickedness. Beside
all these too; sicknesses and calamities instruct us. For poverty
restrains, and losses sober us, and danger subdues us, and there are
many other things of this sort. Doth neither father, nor teacher, nor
prince, nor lawgiver, nor judge <span id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="xix.xv-Page_430"></span>make thee fear? Doth no friend move thee to
shame, nor enemy sting thee? Doth no master chastise? Doth no husband
instruct? Doth no conscience correct thee? Still, when bodily sickness
comes, it often sets all right; and a loss has made the audacious man to
become gentle. And what is more than this, heavy misfortunes, which
befal not only ourselves but others too, are often of great advantage to
us; and we who ourselves suffered nothing, yet beholding others enduring
punishment, have been no less sobered by it than they.

<span id="xix.xv-p38"></span>12. And with respect to right deeds, any
one may see that this happens; for as when the bad are punished others
become better, so whenever the good achieve any thing right, many are
urged onward to a similar zeal: a thing which hath also taken place with
respect to the avoiding of oaths. For many persons, observing that
others had laid aside the evil practice of oaths, took a pattern from
their diligence, and got the better of the sin; wherefore we are the
more disposed to touch again on the subject of this admonition. For let
no one tell me that “many” have accomplished this; this is not what is
desired, but that “all” should do so; and until I see this I cannot take
breath. <span id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568) That Shepherd had a
hundred sheep, and yet when one of them had wandered away, he took no
account of the safety of the ninety and nine, until he found the one
that was lost, and restored it again to the flock. <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569) Seest thou not that this also
happens with respect to the body; for if by striking against any
obstacle, we have only turned back a nail, the whole body sympathizes
with the member. Say not this; that only a certain few have failed; but
consider this point, that these few being unreformed, will corrupt many
others. Although there was but one who had committed fornication among
the Corinthians, yet Paul so groaned as if the whole city were lost. And
very reasonably, for he knew that if that member were not chastened, the
disease progressing onward would at length attack all the rest. I saw,
but lately, in the court of justice, those distinguished men bound and
conducted through the forum; and while some were wondering at this
extraordinary degradation, others said there was nothing to wonder at;
for that, where there is matter of treason, <span
id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570) rank must go for nothing. Is it not
then much more true that rank must be of no avail where is impiety?

<span id="xix.xv-p42"></span>13. Thinking therefore of these things, let
us arouse ourselves; for if ye bring not your own endeavours to the
task, every thing on our part is to no purpose. And why so? Because it
is not with the office of teaching, as it is with other arts. For the
silversmith, when he has fabricated a vessel of any kind, and laid it
aside, will find it on the morrow just as he left it. And the worker in
brass, and the stone-cutter, and every other artificer, will each again
take his own work in hand, whatever it is, just in the state he quitted
it. But it is not so with us, but altogether the reverse; for we have
not lifeless vessels to forge, but reasonable souls. Therefore we do not
find you such as we leave you, but when we have taken you, and with
manifold labour moulded, reformed you and increased your ardour on your
departing from this place, the urgency of business, besetting you on
every side, again perverts you, and causes us increased difficulty.
Therefore, I supplicate and beseech you to put your own hand to the
work; and when ye depart hence, to shew the same earnest regard for your
own safety, that I have here shewn for your amendment.

<span id="xix.xv-p43"></span>14. Oh! that it were possible that I could
perform good works as your substitute, and that you could receive the
rewards of those works! Then I would not give you so much trouble. But
how can I do this? The thing is impossible; for to every man will He
render according to his own works. Wherefore as a mother, when she
beholds her son in a fever, while she witnesses his sufferings <span
id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571) from choking and inflammation,
frequently bewails him, and says to him, “O my son, would that I could
sustain thy fever, and draw off its flame upon myself!” so now I say,
Oh! that by labouring as your substitute, I could do good works for you
all! But no, this is not to be done. But of his own doings must each man
give the account, and one cannot see one person suffer punishment in the
room of another. For this reason I am pained and mourn, that on That
Day, when ye are called to judgment, I shall not be able to assist you,
since, to say the truth, no such confidence of speech with God belongs
to me. But even if I had much confidence, I am not holier than Moses, or
more righteous than Samuel; of whom it is said, that though they had
attained to so great virtue, they could not in any way avail to assist
the Jews; inasmuch as that people had given themselves over to excessive
negligence. <span id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572) Since, then, from
our own works we shall be <span id="page_431">p. 431</span> <span
id="xix.xv-Page_431"></span>punished or saved; let us endeavour, I
beseech you, in conjunction with all the other precepts, to fulfill this
one; that, finally departing this life with a favourable hope, we may
obtain those good things which are promised, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom and with Whom, to
the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory both now and ever, world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[425:1549](1090106.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="xix.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p4"></span> τετρ€δα. *Feriam quartam*, the fourth day
of the week. The day referred to was probably one of the days of silence
mentioned in the beginning of Hom. XI., where, first line of sec. 2,
read “ourselves.”

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[426:1550](1090106.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="xix.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p6"></span> φ€ραγγας, usually “ravines.” There were,
however, caves near Antioch.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[427:1551](1090106.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="xix.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p9"></span> [Eccl. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002)<span id="xix.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[427:1552](1090106.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="xix.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p10"></span> [Isa.
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007)<span id="xix.xv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[427:1553](1090106.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="xix.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p12"></span> βαθυτ€της, which seems to imply darkness.
See Luc. xxiv. 1.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[427:1554](1090106.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="xix.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p13"></span> Or. “delay.” ὑπ™ρθεσις. But ὑπερτίθεμαι is
“to refer” in Herodotus, as i. 8, and elsewhere.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[427:1555](1090106.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="xix.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p14"></span> λιταὶ. The term was originally used of any
kind of prayer, but about this time was beginning to be applied to a
special kind of penitential prayer. St. Basil, A.D. 375, ep. 207 (al.
63), writes to the Neocæsareans in defence of λιτανεῖαι, to which they
objected as newly introduced; and the prayers here mentioned seem to be
something distinct from the common service. See Bingham, b. xiii. c. 1,
sec. 10. The passage he quotes from St. Augustin, Hom. CLXXII. *de
Temp*. is attributed by the Benedictine editor to Cæsarius, after some
<span class="c12"><span id="xix.xv-p14.1"></span> mss</span>.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[427:1556](1090106.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="xix.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p16"></span> ‡γωνοθ™τας. Those who bore this office
were men of distinction, and of wealth, as they usually furnished the
spectacles at their own expense. Such were the Asiarchs, mentioned [Acts
xix. 31](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#031)<span
id="xix.xv-p16.1"></span>, and Mart. of St. Polycarp, c. 12. See note in
ed. Jacobson.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[428:1557](1090106.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="xix.xv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p17"></span> Chrysostom here alludes to the history of
Job as given in the Septuagint. Job’s wife is there made to address him
in a long speech, of which the words, “wandering from house to house,”
&c., are a part.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[428:1558](1090106.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="xix.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p18"></span> [Job. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#009)<span id="xix.xv-p18.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[428:1559](1090106.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="xix.xv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p21"></span> πρώην, which seems to refer to the last
Homily, as also χθšς at the beginning. This reference may, however,
include also Hom. XI.

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[428:1560](1090106.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="xix.xv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p22"></span> [Matt. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span id="xix.xv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[428:1561](1090106.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="xix.xv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p23"></span> [Tobit iv.
16](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#016)<span id="xix.xv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[428:1562](1090106.htm#fr_1561) <span
id="xix.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p24"></span> So Sav.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[428:1563](1090106.htm#fr_1562) <span
id="xix.xv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p25"></span> “The light of reason does not, any more
than that of Revelation, force men to submit to its authority.” Butler,
*Analogy*, part ii. c. i. sec. 1, where the relation of Christianity to
natural religion is investigated. See also his Sermons, II. and III. on
Human Nature, for the sense in which the term nature is here used. See
also Aristotle Eth. vi. 5, on φρόνησις.

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[429:1564](1090106.htm#fr_1563) <span
id="xix.xv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p28"></span> καὶ seems to be out of place. Without it
the sense is, “are afflicted in the calamities of others through mutual
tenderness.” Or the true reading may be καὶ τὴν, “and we have a mutual
tenderness,” but six <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.xv-p28.1"></span>mss</span>. agree.

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[429:1565](1090106.htm#fr_1564) <span
id="xix.xv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p29"></span> That is, on the part of those who witness
the calamity. In allusion to the disposition of many to forsake their
friends in adversity.

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[429:1566](1090106.htm#fr_1565) <span
id="xix.xv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p30"></span> Eccles. xiii. 19<span
id="xix.xv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[429:1567](1090106.htm#fr_1566) <span
id="xix.xv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p32"></span> διαπτύσωμεν.

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[429:1568](1090106.htm#fr_1567) <span
id="xix.xv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p34"></span> Compare Herbert’s Poems, No. xvii.

<span id="xix.xv-p35"></span>“Lord, with what care hast Thou begirt us
round!

<span id="xix.xv-p36"></span>Parents first season us: then schoolmasters

<span id="xix.xv-p37"></span>Deliver us to laws;” &c.

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[430:1569](1090106.htm#fr_1568) <span
id="xix.xv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p39"></span> *i.e*., “to stop this exhortation;” an
allusion to the exercise of running.

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[430:1570](1090106.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="xix.xv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p40"></span> [Matt.
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#013)<span id="xix.xv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[430:1571](1090106.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="xix.xv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p41"></span> καθοσίωσις, so called as being against the
*sacred* person of the Emperor. See Ducange.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[430:1572](1090106.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="xix.xv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p44"></span> Or, throttlings, ‡γχομ™νῳ.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[430:1573](1090106.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="xix.xv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p45"></span> [Jer. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)<span id="xix.xv-p45.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIV](1090107)
