[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090109)  [Next](1090111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.xix"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="xix.xix-p1.1"></span>Homily XVII.</span>

<span id="xix.xix-p2"></span>*Of the Commissioners (Hellebichus
Commander of the Troops,* <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690)
*and Cæsarius Master of the Offices <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691) ) sent by the Emperor Theodosius
for the inquisition of the offenders, on account of the overturning of
the Statues.*

<span id="xix.xix-p5"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.xix-p5.1"></span>Most</span> opportunely have we all this day
sung together, “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only doeth
wondrous things.” <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692) For
marvellous, and beyond all expectation, are the things which have
happened? A whole city, and so great a population, when just about to be
overwhelmed—to sink under the waves, and to be utterly and instantly
destroyed—He hath entirely rescued from shipwreck in a single moment of
time! Let us give thanks then, not only that God hath calmed the
tempest, but that He suffered it to take place; not only that He rescued
us from shipwreck, but that He allowed us to fall into such distress;
and such an extreme peril to hang over us. Thus also Paul bids us “in
every thing give thanks.” <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693) But
when he says, “In every thing give thanks,” he means not only in our
deliverance from evils, but also at the time when we suffer those evils.
“For all things work together for good to them that love God.” <span
id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694) Let us be thankful to Him for this
deliverance from trials; and let us never forget them. Let us devote
ourselves to prayer, to continual supplications, and to much piety.

<span id="xix.xix-p9"></span>2. When the sad conflagration of these
calamities was first kindled, I said, that it was a season not for
doctrine, but for prayer. <span id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695) The
very same thing I now repeat, when the fire has been extinguished—that
it is now especially, and more than before, a time for prayer; that now
is the season especially for tears and compunction, for an anxious soul,
for much diligence, and for much caution. For at that time the very
nature of our tribulation restrained us, however unwillingly, and
disposed us to sobriety; and led us to become more religious; but now
when the bridle is removed, and the cloud has passed away, there is fear
lest we should fall back again into sloth, or become relaxed by this
respite; and lest one should have reason to say of us too, “When He slew
them, then they sought Him, and returned, and enquired early after
God.” <span id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696) Wherefore also Moses
admonished the Jews, saying, “When thou shalt have eaten, and drunk, and
art full, remember the Lord thy God.” <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697) The goodness of your disposition
will now be rendered manifest, if you continue in the practice of the
same piety. For at that time, many imputed your earnestness to fear, and
the approach of calamity; but now, it will be purely your own
achievement, if you still persevere in maintaining this earnestness.
Since with a boy too, as long as he is guided <span id="page_453">p.
453</span> <span id="xix.xix-Page_453"></span>by some tutor whom he
fears, if he lives with sobriety and meekness, there is nothing to
admire, for all persons ascribe the sobriety of the stripling to his
fear of the tutor. But when he remains in the same seemly behaviour,
after the restraint from that quarter is done away with, all persons
give him credit too for the sobriety that was seen in his earlier age.
Thus also let us act; let us continue in the same state of godly fear,
in order that for our former diligence too we may gain much praise from
God.

<span id="xix.xix-p13"></span>3. We had expected innumerable woes; that
our property would be plundered, that the houses would have been burnt
together with their inmates, that the city would have been plucked up
from the midst of the world, that its very fragments would have been
utterly destroyed, and that its soil would have been placed under the
plough! But, lo! all these things existed only in expectation, and did
not come into operation. And this is not the only wonder, that God hath
removed so great a danger, but that He hath also greatly blessed us, and
adorned our city; and by this trial and calamity hath made us more
approved! But how, I will state. When those who were sent by the Emperor
erected that fearful tribunal for making inquisition into the events
which had taken place, and summoned every one to give account of the
deeds which they had perpetrated, and various anticipations of death
pervaded the minds of all, then the monks who dwelt on the mountain-tops
shewed their own true philosophy. For although they had been shut up so
many years in their cells, yet at no one’s entreaty, by no one’s
counsel, when they beheld such a cloud overhanging the city, they left
their caves and huts, and flocked together in every direction, as if
they had been so many angels arriving from heaven. Then might one see
the city likened to heaven, while these saints appeared everywhere; by
their mere aspect consoling the mourners, and leading them to an utter
disregard of the calamity. For who on beholding these would not deride
death, would not despise life. And not only was this wonderful, but that
when they drew nigh to the magistrates themselves, they spoke to them
with boldness on behalf of the accused, and were all ready to shed their
blood, and to lay down their heads, so that they might snatch the
captured from the terrible events which they expected. They also
declared that they would not depart until the judges should spare the
population of the city, or send them themselves together with the
accused to the Emperor. “He,” said they, “who rules over our portion of
the world is a godly man, a believer, one who lives in the practice of
piety. We therefore shall assuredly reconcile him. We will not give you
leave, nor permit you to embrue the sword, or take off a head. But if ye
do not desist, we also are quite resolved to die with them. We confess
that the crimes committed are very heinous; but the iniquity of those
deeds does not surpass the humanity of the Emperor.” One of them is also
reported to have uttered another saying, full of wisdom, to this
effect: <span id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698) “The Statues which
have been thrown down are again set up, and have resumed their proper
appearance; and the mischief was speedily rectified; but if ye put to
death the image of God, how will ye be again able to revoke the deed! or
how to reanimate those who are deprived of life, and to restore their
souls to their bodies?” Many things too they said to them of the
Judgment.

<span id="xix.xix-p15"></span>4. Who could but be astonished? Who could
but admire the moral wisdom of these men? When the mother of one of the
accused, uncovering her head, and exposing her grey hairs, laid hold of
the horse of the judge by the bridle, and running beside him through the
forum, thus entered with him the place of justice, we were all struck
with astonishment, we all admired that exceeding tenderness and
magnanimity. <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699) Ought we not,
then, to have been much more impressed with wonder at the conduct of
these men? For if she had even died for her son, it would have been
nothing strange, since great is the tyranny of nature, and irresistible
is the obligation arising from the maternal pangs! But these men so
loved those whom they had not begotten, whom they had not brought up,
yea rather, whom they had never seen, whom they had not heard of, whom
they had never met, whom they knew only from their calamity, that if
they had possessed a thousand lives, they would have chosen to deliver
them all up for their safety. Tell me not that they were not
slaughtered, that they did not pour forth their blood, but that they
used as much boldness with their judges as it was likely that no other
men would do, but such as had already renounced their own lives; and
that with this sentiment they ran from the mountains to the tribunal.
For, indeed, if they had not before prepared themselves against every
sort of slaughter, they would not have been able to speak thus freely to
the judges, or to have manifested such magnanimity. For they remained
all day long sitting before <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="xix.xix-Page_454"></span>the doors of the place of justice, being
prepared to snatch from the hands of the executioners those who were
about to be led off to punishment!

<span id="xix.xix-p17"></span>5. Where now are those who are clad in
threadbare cloaks, and display a long beard, and carry staves in the
right hand; the philosophers of the world, <span
id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700) who are more abject in disposition
than the dogs under the table; and do every thing for the sake of the
belly? All these men then forsook the city, they all hasted away, and
hid themselves in caves! But they only, who truly by works manifest the
love of wisdom, appeared as fearlessly in the forum, as if no evil had
overtaken the city. And the inhabitants of the city fled away to the
mountains and to the deserts, but the citizens of the desert hastened
into the city; demonstrating by deeds what, on the preceding days, I
have not desisted from saying, that the very furnace will not be able to
harm the man who leads a virtuous life. Such a thing is philosophy of
soul, rising superior to all things, and to all prosperous or adverse
events; for neither is it enfeebled by the former, nor beaten down and
debased by the latter, but abides on the same level through the whole
course of things, shewing its own native force and power! Who, indeed,
was not convicted of weakness by the difficulty of the present crisis?
Those who had held the first offices in our city, who were in places of
power, who were surrounded with immense wealth, and who were in high
favour with the Emperor, leaving their houses utterly deserted, all
consulted their own safety, and all friendship and kindred were found
worthless, and those whom they formerly knew, at this season of
calamity, they desired not to know, and prayed to be unknown of them!
But the monks, poor as they were, having nothing more than a mean
garment, who had lived in the coarsest manner, who seemed formerly to be
nobodies, men habituated to mountains and forests; as if they had been
so many lions, with a great and lofty soul, whilst all were fearing and
quaking, stood forth and relieved the danger, and that, not in the
course of many days, but in a brief moment of time! And as distinguished
warriors without coming into close conflict with their adversaries, but
merely by making their appearance in the ranks, and shouting, put the
foe to rout, so also these in one day descended, and said their say, and
removed the calamity, and returned to their own tabernacles. So great is
the moral wisdom that was brought among men by Christ.

<span id="xix.xix-p19"></span>6. And why do I speak of the rich, and of
those in authority? When those very persons who had been invested with
power to judge the criminals; who acted with the highest authority, were
entreated by these selfsame monks to grant a sentence of pardon, they
said, they had no power over the result; for that it was unsafe and
dangerous, not only to insult the Emperor, but even to dismiss those who
had insulted him, when taken, without punishment. But these men were too
powerful for any one to resist; and besieging them by magnanimity and
perseverance, they induced these officers by their importunity to
exercise a power which they had not received from the Emperor; and even
succeeded in persuading the judges, when men had been manifestly
convicted of the guilt, not to declare the sentence of condemnation, but
to defer the final result to the decision of the Emperor; and they
promised certainly to persuade him to grant a pardon to those who had
transgressed against him; and they were about to set out on a journey to
him. But the judges, reverencing the moral wisdom of these men, and
being struck with their loftiness of spirit, did not permit them to
undertake this long journey, but promised that if they should only
receive their words in writing, they would themselves depart and
successfully importune <span id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701) the
Emperor to dismiss all anger (which, indeed, we are now expecting that
he will). For when sentence should have been given, they, on being
admitted into court, uttered words of the highest wisdom, and besought
the Emperor by letters to shew mercy; and they reminded him of the
Judgment, and said that they would lay down their own heads, if his
mercy was not granted. And the judges took down these words in writing,
and departed. This, more than the brightest crown, will adorn our city.
And what has here taken place, the Emperor will now hear; yea, the great
City will hear, and the whole world will hear, that the monks who dwell
at the city of Antioch, are men who have displayed an apostolic
boldness; and now when their letters are read at court, all men will
admire their magnanimity; all men will call our city blessed; and we
shall shake off our evil reputation; and it will be known every where,
that what has happened was not the work of the inhabitants of the city,
but of strangers and corrupt-minded men; and that this testimony of the
monks will be a sufficient evidence of the character of the city.

<span id="xix.xix-p21"></span><span id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span
id="xix.xix-Page_455"></span>7. Therefore, beloved, let us not be
distressed, but let us entertain favourable hopes; for if their boldness
toward men has been able to prevent such a danger, then what will not
their boldness toward God effect? These things also let us tell the
Greeks, when they dare to dispute with us respecting their philosophers!
From hence it is manifest that their stories of former days are false,
but that the things of old reported among us are true; that is, the
things concerning John, and Paul, and Peter, and all the rest. For
inasmuch as these monks have succeeded to the piety of those men, they
have consequently exhibited their boldness. Inasmuch as they were
brought up in the same laws, they have consequently imitated their
virtues. So that we stand in no need of writings for the purpose of
shewing the apostolical virtues, whilst the very facts cry aloud, and
the masters are shewn forth by the scholars. We have no need of
disputation to display the trifling of the Greeks, and the
little-mindedness of their philosophers, whilst their deeds now loudly
proclaim, as they did aforetime, that all with them is a fable, a
stage-play, a piece of acting.

<span id="xix.xix-p22"></span>8. And the same magnanimity was displayed
by the priests too, as well as the monks, and they shared among them the
charge of our safety. One <span id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702) of
them, indeed, proceeded to court, esteeming all things as secondary to
the love of you; and being himself ready, if he could not persuade the
Emperor, to lay down his own life. And these, who remained here, have
displayed the same virtues as the monks themselves; and holding fast the
judges with their own hands, they would not let them enter into the
court, before they gave a promise respecting the result of the trial.
And when they saw them making signs of refusal, they again exerted
themselves with much boldness; and as soon as they saw that they did
consent, embracing their feet and knees, and kissing their hands, they
gave an exceeding proof of either virtue, of liberty and meekness. For
that theirs was not the boldness of presumption, they plainly signified
by their kissing the knees, and embracing the feet of the judges. Again,
in proof that this was not flattery, nor a kind of fawning servility,
nor the fruit of a slavish spirit, their former acts attested their
boldness. And these are not the only good results we have reaped from
the trial, but also an abundance of sobriety and meekness; and our city
has become all at once a monastery. <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) Not thus would any one have adorned
it, had he erected golden statues in the forum, as it has now been
adorned and distinguished, in producing those beautiful images of
virtue, and displaying its true riches!

<span id="xix.xix-p25"></span>9. But it may be that the things which the
Emperor hath decreed are painful. No! not even these are really
burdensome, but have brought much advantage with them. For what is
there, I ask, which is oppressive in any of them? that the Emperor hath
shut up the Orchestra, that he hath forbidden the Hippodrome, that he
hath closed and stopped up these fountains of iniquity. May they never
again be opened! From thence did the roots of wickedness shoot forth to
the injury of the city! <span id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704) From
thence sprung those who blast its character; men who sell their
voices <span id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705) to the dancers, and
who for the sake of three obols prostitute their salvation to them,
turning all things upside down! Art thou distressed, O beloved! for
these things? Truly it were fitting that for these thou shouldest be
glad, and rejoice, and express thy thanks to the Emperor, since his
castigation hath proved a correction, his punishment a discipline, his
wrath a means of instruction! But that the Baths are shut up? Neither is
this an intolerable hardship, that those who lead a soft, effeminate,
and dissolute life, should be brought back, though unwillingly, to the
love of true wisdom.

<span id="xix.xix-p28"></span>10. But is it complained of, that the
Emperor hath taken away the dignity of the city, and hath no more
permitted it to be called a metropolis? <span
id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706) But what was he to do? Could he
praise what had been done, and acknowledge it as a favour? Then who
would not have blamed him, for not shewing even the outward form of
indignation? Seest thou not that fathers do many things of a similar
nature towards their children? They turn away from them, and forbid them
the table. This also hath the Emperor done by imposing such punishments
as have nothing in them hurtful, but carry with them much correction.
Think what we expected, and what has taken place, and then we shall
especially discern the favour of God! Dost thou grieve that the dignity
of the city is taken away? Learn what the dignity of a city is; and then
thou wilt know clearly, that if the inhabitants do not betray it, no one
else will be able to take away the dignity of a city! Not the fact that
it is a metropolis; nor that it contains large and beautiful
buildings; <span id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707) nor that <span
id="page_456">p. 456</span> <span id="xix.xix-Page_456"></span>it has
many columns, and spacious porticoes and walks, nor that it is named in
proclamations before other cities, but the virtue and piety of its
inhabitants; this is a city’s dignity, and ornament, and defence; since
if these things are not found in it, it is the most insignificant in the
world, though it may enjoy unlimited honour from Emperors! Dost thou
wish to learn the dignity of thy city? Dost thou wish to know its
ancestry? I will tell it exactly; not only that thou mayest know, but
that thou mayest also emulate. What then is after all the dignity of
this city of ours? “It came to pass, that the disciples were first
called Christians at Antioch.” <span
id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708) This dignity, none of the cities
throughout the world possesses, not even the city of Romulus herself!
For this it can look the whole world in the face; on account of that
love toward Christ, that boldness and virtue. <span
id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709) Dost thou wish farther to hear of a
different dignity and commendation belonging to this city? A grievous
famine was once approaching, and the inhabitants of Antioch determined,
as far as each person had the means, to send relief to the Saints
dwelling at Jerusalem. <span id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710) Behold
a second dignity, charity in a time of famine! The season did not make
them niggardly, nor the expectation of the calamity backward in helping;
but when all are apt to be scraping up what is not their own, then they
distributed their own, not merely to those who were near, but also to
those who were living afar off! Seest thou here the faith towards God,
and the love towards their neighbour? Wouldest thou learn another
dignity of this city? Certain men came down from Judæa to Antioch,
defiling <span id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711) the doctrine
preached, and introducing Jewish observances. <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712) The men of Antioch did not bear
this novelty in silence. They did not hold their peace, but having come
together, and made an assembly, they sent Paul and Barnabas to
Jerusalem, and caused the Apostles to provide that pure doctrines,
cleared from all Jewish imperfection, might be distributed throughout
all parts of the world! This is the dignity of the city! this is its
precedence! this makes it a metropolis, not in the earth, but in heaven;
forasmuch as that all other honours are corruptible, and fleeting, and
perish with the present life, and often come to their end before the
close of it, as they have done in the present instance! To me, a city
that hath not pious citizens is meaner than any village, and more
ignoble than any cave.

<span id="xix.xix-p36"></span>11. And why do I speak of a city? For that
thou mayest exactly understand that virtue alone is the ornament of the
inhabitants, I will not speak to thee of a city, but I will endeavour to
demonstrate this by bringing forward what is more venerable than any
city—the Temple of God which was in Jerusalem. For this was the Temple
in which were sacrifices and prayers and services; where was the Holy of
Holies, and the Cherubim, the Covenant, <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713) and the golden pot; <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714) the great symbols of God’s
providence towards that people; where oracles from heaven were
constantly being received, where prophets became inspired, where the
fashioning was not the work of human art, but proceeded from the wisdom
of God, where the walls were on every side resplendent with much gold,
and where, in surpassing excellence, costliness of material and
perfection of art met together, and demonstrated that there was no other
temple like this upon earth! Yea rather, not only the perfection of art,
but also the wisdom of God assisted in that building. For Solomon had
learned all, not intuitively and from himself, but from God; <span
id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715) and having received the design of
it from the heavens, he then marked it out and erected it. Nevertheless,
this Temple, thus beautiful and marvellous and sacred, when those who
used it were corrupted, was so dishonoured, despised, and profaned, that
even before the captivity it was called “a den of robbers, a cave of
hyænas;” <span id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716) and afterwards it
was delivered over to hands that were barbarous, polluted, and profane!

<span id="xix.xix-p41"></span>12. Wouldest thou learn the same truth
respecting cities? What could be more illustrious than the cities of
Sodom? For the houses and the buildings were splendid, and so were their
walls; and the country was fat and fertile, and “like the Paradise of
God.” <span id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717) But the tent of Abraham
was mean and small, and had no fortification. Yet when a foreign war
took place, the strangers broke down and took the walled cities, and
departed, carrying away their inhabitants captives. Abraham, however,
the citizen of the desert, they could not resist when he attacked them!
And so it was likely to be. For he had true piety: a power much greater
than numbers and the defence of walls. If thou art a Christian, no
earthly city is thine. Of our City “the Builder and Maker is God.” <span
id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718) Though we <span id="page_457">p.
457</span> <span id="xix.xix-Page_457"></span>may gain possession of the
whole world, we are withal but strangers and sojourners in it all! We
are enrolled in heaven: our citizenship is there! Let us not, after the
manner of little children, despise things that are great, and admire
those which are little! Not our city’s greatness, but virtue of soul is
our ornament and defence. If you suppose dignity to belong to a city,
think how many persons must partake in this dignity, who are
whoremongers, effeminate, depraved and full of ten thousand evil things,
and at last despise such honour! But that City above is not of this
kind; for it is impossible that he can be a partaker of it, who has not
exhibited every virtue.

<span id="xix.xix-p44"></span>13. Let us not therefore be senseless; but
then let us grieve when any one deprives us of our dignity of soul, when
we commit sin, when we have offended the common Lord of all; since as
regards the things that have now befallen us, so far are they from
injuring the city, that if we are watchful, they will greatly benefit
us. For even already our city seems to be like a decorous, noble,
sober-minded matron. Fear hath made her gentler and more dignified, and
hath delivered her from those miscreants who were concerned in the late
audacious deeds. Let us therefore not give way to womanish lamentations.
For I have heard many about the forum saying, “Alas! for thee, Antioch!
What hath befallen thee! How art thou dishonoured!” Truly when I heard,
I smiled at the puerile mind which could give vent to these words! Such
words were not becoming now; but when thou seest men dancing, drunken,
singing, blaspheming, swearing, perjuring themselves, and lying, then
apply such a saying as this: “Alas! for thee, O city, what hath befallen
thee!” But if thou seest the forum containing a few meek, modest, and
temperate persons, then pronounce the city, “Blessed!” For the fewness
will never be able to injure it in any respect, if there be virtue
withal; as on the other hand, numbers will never profit it at all,
whilst iniquity is there. “If,” saith the prophet, “the number of the
sons of Israel be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be
saved;” <span id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) that is to say,
“Multitude will never prevail with Me.” So also Christ spoke. He called
cities wretched; not because of their littleness, nor because they were
not of metropolitan rank. <span id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720) And
Jerusalem itself again, He calls wretched for the very same reason,
speaking thus; “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem; thou that killest the prophets,
and stonest them which are sent unto thee!” <span
id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721) For what advantage, I ask, does a
multitude bring, if their system of living be vicious? Nay, on the
contrary, even injury results from it. What else, indeed, hath wrought
the evils which have lately sprung up? Was it not the sloth, the
recklessness, and the depravity of the inhabitants? Did the dignity of
the city, did the magnificence of its architecture, or the circumstance
that it was a metropolis, do it any service? If with the king who is on
earth, nothing could protect it when it had done thus amiss, but all
these privileges are taken away; much more with the Lord of angels will
its dignity fail to protect it? For at that Day, it will nought avail
us, that we have dwelt in a metropolis, that has many spacious
porticoes, and other dignities of this kind! And why do I say, at That
Day? For as regards the present life, what can it benefit thee that this
thy city is a metropolis? Pray, has any one restored a distressed family
by means of this? or received any revenue from this dignity? or
dispelled sadness? or got rid of any bodily infirmity? or put away a
vice of the soul? Beloved! let us not trifle, nor regard the opinions of
the multitude, but understand what is indeed the dignity of a city; what
it is that makes a city truly a metropolis?

<span id="xix.xix-p48"></span>14. I say all this, though I expect that
the city will again regain even this outward distinction, and appear in
its own proper place of precedence. For the Emperor is both
philanthropic and godly. But I am desirous that if it should be
restored, ye may not think too much of this; nor be boastful of it; nor
place the honour of our city to that account. When you wish to pronounce
an encomium on the city, tell me not of the suburb of Daphne, <span
id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722) nor of the height and multitude of
its cypresses, nor of its fountains of waters, nor of the great
population who inhabit the city, nor of the great freedom with which its
market-place is frequented even to midnight, nor of the abundance of its
wares! All these are things of the outward sense, and remain only as
long as the present life. But if you are able to mention virtue,
meekness, alms-giving, nocturnal vigils, prayers, sobriety, true wisdom
of soul; commend the city for these things! To those who inhabit the
desert, the presence of these things makes it <span id="page_458">p.
458</span> <span id="xix.xix-Page_458"></span>more illustrious than any
city; and again the vilest of all places, <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) should these things not be found
with its citizens. Let us make this estimate not in the case of cities
only, but also of men. And if you see a big man, who has been brought
into good condition, tall, and surpassing others in length of limb, do
not admire him, until you have ascertained what the man’s soul is. Not
from the outward comeliness, but from the beauty that. appertains to the
soul, should we pronounce any persons blessed! David was little, and
short of stature; nevertheless, one so short and little, and bare of all
arms, brought down at one blow so large an army, and that tower of
flesh; and this without hurling spear, or letting fly arrow, or
unsheathing sword, but doing all with a small pebble! For this reason a
certain one exhorts, saying, “Commend not a man for his beauty, neither
abhor a man for his outward appearance. The bee is little among such as
fly, but her fruit is the chief of sweet things.” <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724)

<span id="xix.xix-p52"></span>15. Thus also let us speak both of a city,
and of men, and utter such wisdom one to another, and be continually
thankful to God, as well for present as for past mercies; and call upon
Him in common with all our might, that those who now dwell in
prison <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725) may be discharged, and
that those who are about to be sent into exile may return back again.
They too are our members. With us they have buffetted the waves, with us
they have withstood the storm! Let us, then, beseech the merciful God,
that with us they may enjoy the calm! Let no one say, “What farther
concerns me? I am freed from danger; such an one may perish; such
another may be destroyed!” Let us not provoke God by this indifference;
but lament, as if we ourselves were in the same peril. So let us
supplicate God with intense earnestness, fulfilling that saying of Paul,
“Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which
suffer adversity, as being yourselves also in the body. <span
id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) Weeping also with them that weep;
condescending to men of low estate.” <span
id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) This will also be of the greatest
advantage to ourselves; for nothing useth so much to delight God, as
that we should be very ready to mourn for our own members. Him therefore
let us supplicate in common, both for things present, and for things to
come; in order that He may deliver us from punishment hereafter. For the
things present, whatever they are, are endurable, and have an end; but
the torments there are immortal, and interminable! And while we are
consoled, let us also ourselves endeavour to fall no more into such
sins, knowing that hereafter <span id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728)
we shall enjoy no pardon! Let us, then, all in common prostrate
ourselves before God; and both while we are here, and when we are at
home, let us say, “Thou, O Lord, art righteous in all things which Thou
hast done towards us; for Thou hast brought upon us by a just judgment
whatever Thou hast brought.” <span id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729)
If “our sins rise up against us, undertake for us, for thy Name’s
sake;” <span id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) and do not permit us
any more to experience such grievous troubles. “Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil, for Thine is the kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[452:1691](1090110.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="xix.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p3"></span> στρατηλ€της. See Dufresne. This title was
given to one who had the general command of the troops in a province, or
division of the empire.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[452:1692](1090110.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="xix.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p4"></span> Μ€γιστρος. See Dufresne. Also Tillemont,
*Hist. des Emp. Theod*. art. 33. Montfaucon has already called in
question the judgment of Tillemont’s note on these Homilies, placing
this before XI. It does not appear that this was delivered immediately
on the arrival of the Commissioners, but on occasion of some fresh news
from the Emperor after the trials.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[452:1693](1090110.htm#fr_1692) <span
id="xix.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p6"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)<span id="xix.xix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[452:1694](1090110.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="xix.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p7"></span> [1 Thess. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018)<span id="xix.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[452:1695](1090110.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="xix.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p8"></span> [Rom. viii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="xix.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[452:1696](1090110.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="xix.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p10"></span> Hom. II. 1.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[452:1697](1090110.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="xix.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p11"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034)<span id="xix.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[452:1698](1090110.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="xix.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p12"></span> [Deut.
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#012)<span id="xix.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[453:1699](1090110.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="xix.xix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p14"></span> The name of this monk was Macedonius (see
Theodoret *Hist. Relig*. No. xiii. where it is added that he spoke
through an interpreter).

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[453:1700](1090110.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="xix.xix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p16"></span> See Lib. ad Helleb.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[454:1701](1090110.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="xix.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p18"></span> τῶν žξωθεν. “Of those without;” a common
phrase with St. Chrysostom to denote those without the pale of the
Church.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[454:1702](1090110.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="xix.xix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p20"></span> δυσωπήσειν: same word as is rendered
above “induced by importunity.” Literally, “to put out of countenance;”
to make another ashamed not to grant a request.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[455:1703](1090110.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="xix.xix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p23"></span> The bishop, spoken of in the opening of
Hom. III. and in Hom. XXI.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[455:1704](1090110.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="xix.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p24"></span> The state of monasteries at that time may
be gathered from Theodoret’s *Historia Religiosa*; the Collations of
Cassian; the ascetic works, and parts of the correspondence of St.
Basil; the *Historia Lausiaca* of Palladius, and many parts of St.
Macarius.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[455:1705](1090110.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="xix.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p26"></span> Such was the case, too, with the tumults
at Alexandria. See Libanius, *Or. de Sed*.

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[455:1706](1090110.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="xix.xix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p27"></span> *i.e*., their applause.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[455:1707](1090110.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="xix.xix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p29"></span> It appears that the metropolitan dignity
of Antioch was transferred to Laodicea.

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[455:1708](1090110.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="xix.xix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p30"></span> For such topics of praise, see the
Antiochicus of Libanius, who however also extols the virtue of the
citizens.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[456:1709](1090110.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="xix.xix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p31"></span> [Acts xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span id="xix.xix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[456:1710](1090110.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="xix.xix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p32"></span> These expressions imply that the name
Christian was fastened on the disciples of Jesus by way of derision and
reproach.

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[456:1711](1090110.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="xix.xix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p33"></span> [Acts
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029)<span id="xix.xix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[456:1712](1090110.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="xix.xix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p34"></span> Making turbid, *i.e*., by additions,
ἐπιθολοῦντες.

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[456:1713](1090110.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="xix.xix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p35"></span> See [Acts xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)<span id="xix.xix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[456:1714](1090110.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="xix.xix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p37"></span> *i.e*., the Tables, [Ex. xxxiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028)<span id="xix.xix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[456:1715](1090110.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="xix.xix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p38"></span> That contained the manna. [Exod.
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#033), [Heb.
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004)<span id="xix.xix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[456:1716](1090110.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="xix.xix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p39"></span> [1 Kings
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#029), [2 Chr.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#003)<span id="xix.xix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[456:1717](1090110.htm#fr_1716) <span
id="xix.xix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p40"></span> [Jer. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011)<span id="xix.xix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[456:1718](1090110.htm#fr_1717) <span
id="xix.xix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p42"></span> [Gen. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010)<span id="xix.xix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[456:1719](1090110.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="xix.xix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p43"></span> [Heb. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#010)<span id="xix.xix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[457:1720](1090110.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="xix.xix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p45"></span> [Isa.
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022), [Rom.
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027)<span id="xix.xix-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[457:1721](1090110.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="xix.xix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p46"></span> It is possible that a clause may have
been omitted here. If not, the next sentence refers back beyond this.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[457:1722](1090110.htm#fr_1721) <span
id="xix.xix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p47"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="xix.xix-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[457:1723](1090110.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="xix.xix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p49"></span> See Hom. I. contr. Jud. (6). The same is
to be said of the Synagogue. For though there be no idol there, yet
devils inhabit the place. Which I say not only of the Synagogue that is
here, but also of that in Daphne, where is that more abominable pit
which they call Matrona’s, &c. See also [2 Macc.
4.33](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#033)<span id="xix.xix-p49.1"></span>,
and Libanius Antioch. Reiske. t. i. pp. 302, 352. For some account of
Daphne, see Introduction to the Homily on St. Babylas in this volume.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[458:1724](1090110.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="xix.xix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p50"></span> Ben. καὶ π€λιν π€ντων εὐτελ™στεραν. Sav.
πόλιν, “and a city the vilest.” The former seems favoured by ἐκείνης
following, and would be the more forcible, supposing the audience duly
affected. The imperfect construction of the original is kept.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[458:1725](1090110.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="xix.xix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p51"></span> [Sir.
11:2](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#003)<span id="xix.xix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[458:1726](1090110.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="xix.xix-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p53"></span> The whole Senate of Antioch were
imprisoned till the Emperor’s pleasure should be known. See Libanius’
Or. to Hellebichus, whom he praises for providing them tolerable
lodging.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[458:1727](1090110.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="xix.xix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p54"></span> [Heb. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#003)<span id="xix.xix-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[458:1728](1090110.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="xix.xix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p55"></span> [Rom.
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016)<span id="xix.xix-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[458:1729](1090110.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="xix.xix-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p56"></span> *i.e*., if not thus amended.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[458:1730](1090110.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="xix.xix-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p57"></span> [Neh. ix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#033)<span id="xix.xix-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[458:1731](1090110.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="xix.xix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p58"></span> [Jer. xiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007)<span id="xix.xix-p58.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVIII](1090111)
