[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090027)  [Next](1090029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span> <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="v.ii-Page_87"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>INTRODUCTION TO THE LETTERS TO THEODORE.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>These two letters, which are the earliest of
Chrysostom’s extant works, are addressed to a friend who had been a
member of the little ascetic brotherhood which Chrysostom and Basil
formed, soon after they had abandoned secular life, as described in the
first book of the Treatise on the Priesthood. Theodore, like Maximus,
afterwards Bishop of Isaurian Seleucia, who was another member of the
same fraternity, had been a fellow student with Chrysostom and Basil in
the school of Libanius, <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) but was
a few years younger than either of them. The strain upon his powers of
religious devotion had proved too much for him; he had withdrawn from
the ascetic brotherhood, and relapsed for a season into worldly habits,
being fascinated by the beauty of a young lady named Hermione, whom he
was anxious to marry. His fall was regarded with almost as much sorrow
and dismay by his austere friends as if he had plunged into deadly vice.
Prayers were continually offered, and great efforts made for his
restoration, amongst which must be reckoned the two letters which are
here translated. They are the productions of a youthful enthusiast, and
as such allowances must be made for them; but they abound in passages of
great beauty and power, especially upon the infinite love and
forbearance of God, as encouraging to repentance and withholding from
despair and recklessness into which Theodore seems to have been inclined
to sink. The appeal of Chrysostom, combined with the efforts of his
other friends, was not in vain. Theodore once more renounced the world
and his matrimonial intentions, and retired into the seclusion of the
fraternity. In A.D. 383, when he was about thirty-three years of age, he
was ordained priest, and in 392 he became Bishop of Mopsuestia, where he
died in A.D. 428 at the age of seventy-eight. Chrysostom seems to have
retained his affection to him to the last, and during his own exile at
Cucusus, A.D. 404–7, wrote a letter to him which is full of expressions
of fervent admiration and regard. He was a most voluminous writer, and
may be regarded as the ablest representative of the school of Biblical
interpretation founded by Diodorus of Tarsus, under whom he had studied,
together with Chrysostom and Basil. A fierce controversy raged during
the fifth and sixth centuries respecting the orthodoxy of some of his
writings which some accused of preparing the way for Nestorianism. When
this had died down his name was comparatively forgotten, and it is only
in modern times that his great merits as a commentator, who boldly
applied the historical and grammatical methods of examination to the
books of Holy Scripture, have been fully recognized.

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>Tillemont was of opinion that of the two
letters of Chrysostom the second only was addressed to Theodore, who was
afterwards Bishop of Mopsuestia. Montfaucon, however, Dupin, and Savile,
maintain that both were addressed to him, and their view is confirmed by
the fact that Leontius of Byzantium (in Nest. et. Eutych. lib. iii. c.
7) and Isidore of Seville (de Script. [Eccl. c.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#000)<span id="v.ii-p4.1"></span>.)
mention two letters of Chrysostom to Theodore of Mopsuestia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[87:220](1090028.htm#fr_219) <span
id="v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span> See introduction to the “Treatise on the
Priesthood.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter I](1090029)
