[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090006)  [Next](1090008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v-p1.2"></span>.—*Chrysostom as a Monk. <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.v-p1.3"></span>a.d.</span> 374–381.*</span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>After the death of his mother, Chrysostom
fled from the seductions and tumults of city life to the monastic
solitude of the mountains south of Antioch, and there spent six happy
years in theological study and sacred meditation and prayer. Monasticism
was to him (as to many other great teachers of the church, and even to
Luther) a profitable school of spiritual experience and self-government.
He embraced this mode of life as “the true philosophy” from the purest
motives, and brought into it intellect and cultivation enough to make
the seclusion available for moral and spiritual growth. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span>He gives us a lively description of the
bright side of this monastic life. The monks lived in separate cells or
huts (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>κ€λυβαι</span>),
but according to a common rule and under the authority of an abbot. They
wore coarse garments of camel’s hair or goat’s hair over their linen
tunics. They rose before sunrise, and began the day by singing a hymn of
praise and common prayer under the leadership of the abbot. Then they
went to their allotted task, some to read, others to write, others to
manual labor for the support of the poor. Four hours in each day were
devoted to prayer and singing. Their only food was bread and water,
except in case of sickness. They slept on straw couches, free from care
and anxiety. There was no need of bolts and bars. They held all things
in common, and the words of “mine and thine,” which cause innumerable
strifes in the world, were unknown among the brethren. If one died, he
caused no lamentation, but thanksgiving, and was carried to the grave
amidst hymns of praise; for he was not dead, but “perfected,” and
permitted to behold the face of Christ. For them to live was Christ, and
to die was gain.

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span>Chrysostom was an admirer of active and
useful monasticism, and warns against the dangers of idle contemplation.
He shows that the words of our Lord, “One thing is needful;” “Take no
anxious thought for the morrow;” “Labor not for the meat that
perisheth,” do not inculcate total abstinence from work, but only undue
anxiety about worldly things, and must be harmonized with the apostolic
exhortation to labor and to do good. He defends monastic seclusion on
account of the prevailing immorality in the cities, which made it almost
impossible to cultivate there a higher Christian life.

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span>In this period, from 374 to 381, Chrysostom
composed his earliest writings in praise of monasticism and
celibacy. <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) The letters “to the
fallen Theodore,” have already been mentioned. The three books against
the Opponents of Monasticism were occasioned by a decree of the Arian
Emperor Valens in 373, which aimed at the destruction of that system and
compelled the monks to discharge their duties to the state by military
or civil service. Chrysostom regarded this decree as a sacrilege, and
the worst kind of persecution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9:10](1090007.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span> On the origin and character of early
monasticism, see <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.v-p3.1"></span>Schaff</span>, *Ch. Hist*. vol. III., 147 sqq.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[9:11](1090007.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span> In the first volume, first part, of <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.v-p7.1"></span> Migne’s</span> edition, col.
277–532.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chrysostom as Deacon, Priest and Preacher at Antioch. A.D.
381–398.](1090008)
