[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090088)  [Next](1090090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.v"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c34"><span
id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>to the beloved brother john, innocent.</span>

<span id="xviii.v-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="xviii.v-p2.1"></span>Although</span> the innocent man ought to
expect all good things, and to crave mercy from God, nevertheless we
also, counselling resignation, have sent an appropriate letter by the
hands of Cyriacus the deacon; so that insolence may not have more power
in oppressing, than a good conscience has in retaining hope. For thou
who art the teacher and pastor of so many people needest not to be
taught that the best men are ever frequently put to the test whether
they will persevere in the perfection of patience, and not succumb to
any toil of distress: and certainly conscience is a strong defence
against all things which unjustly befall us: and unless any one conquer
these by patient endurance he supplies an argument for evil surmising.
For he ought to endure all things who trusts first of all in God, and
then in his own conscience; seeing that the noble and good man can be
specially trained to endurance, inasmuch as the holy Scriptures guard
his mind; and the sacred lessons which we deliver to the people abound
in examples, testifying as they do that nearly all the saints have been
continually oppressed in divers ways, and are tested as by a kind of
scrutiny, and so attain to the crown of patience. Let conscience itself
console thy love, most honoured brother, which in affliction supplies
the consolation of virtue. For under the eye of the Master Christ, the
conscience, having been purged, will find rest in the haven of peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Innocent, Bishop, to Presbyters and Deacons, and to All the
Clergy and People of the Church of Constantinople, the Brethren Beloved
Who Are Subject to the Bishop John, Greeting.](1090090)
