[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090099)  [Next](1090101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.ix"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="xix.ix-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="xix.ix-p2"></span>*Recapitulation of former exhortations. Sin
brought death and grief into the world, and they tend to its cure. Grief
serviceable only for the destruction of sin. Remarks upon the passage,*
<span id="xix.ix-p2.1"></span>*[Gen.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#000)<span id="xix.ix-p2.2"></span>. 1.
“In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.” It is argued
that God’s forethought for man in the work of creation affords grounds
of comfort; and that mercy is shewn even in chastisement, as in the
saying, “Adam, where art thou?” Concluding admonition on the avoidance
of oaths.*

<span id="xix.ix-p3"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.ix-p3.1"></span>Yesterday,</span> I discoursed unto your Charity
in many words, and upon many subjects; and if out of this variety, it be
not possible for you to retain all, I wish more particularly to recall
to memory the observation, that God hath implanted the affection grief
in our natures for no other reason but because of sin, and He hath made
this evident from actual experience. For whilst we are grieved and
distressed through the loss of wealth; or by reason of sickness, and
death, and the other evils that befall us, we not only reap no
consolation from our sorrow, but we also increase the force of these
calamities. But if we are in pain and sorrow <span
id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) for our sins, we diminish the
weight of sin; we make that little which is great; and very often we
blot it all out entirely. Ye should continually remember this, I repeat,
in order that ye may mourn for sin only, and for nothing besides; and
the additional fact, that sin, though it brought death and sadness into
our life, is again destroyed <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332)
by both these; which I have recently made evident. Therefore, let us
fear nothing so much as sin and transgression. Let us not fear
punishment, and then we shall escape <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) punishment. Even as the Three
Children were not afraid of the furnace, and so escaped from the
furnace. Such indeed it becomes the servants of God to be. For if those
who were brought up under the Old dispensation, when death was not yet
slain, <span id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) nor his “brazen gates
broken down,” nor his “iron bars smitten in sunder;” <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335) so nobly encountered their
end, <span id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336) how destitute of all
defence or excuse shall we be, if, after having had the benefit of such
great grace, we attain not even to the same measure of virtue as they
did, now when death is only a name, devoid of reality. For death is
nothing more than a sleep, a journey, a migration, a rest, a tranquil
haven; an escape from trouble, and a freedom from the cares of this
present life!

<span id="xix.ix-p10"></span>2. But here let us dismiss the subject of
consolation; it is the fifth day we are engaged in speaking words of
comfort to your Charity, and we might now seem to be troublesome. For
what hath been already said is sufficient <span id="page_391">p.
391</span> <span id="xix.ix-Page_391"></span>for those who give heed;
but to those who are pusillanimous it will be no gain, even though we
were to add to what we have said. It is now time to direct our teaching
to the exposition of the Scriptures. For as, if we had said nothing in
reference to the present calamity, one might have condemned us for
cruelty, and a want of humanity; so, were we always discoursing of this,
we might justly be condemned for pusillanimity. Commending then your
hearts to God, who is able to speak <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337) into your minds, and to expel all
grief from within, let us now take up our accustomed manner of
instruction; and that especially since every exposition of Scripture is
matter of comfort and relief. So that, although we may seem to be
desisting from the topic of consolation, we shall again light upon the
same subject by means of Scriptural exposition. For that all Scripture
furnishes consolation to those who give attention to it, I will make
manifest to you from its own evidence. <span
id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338) For I shall not go about among the
Scripture narratives to search out certain arguments consolatory; but in
order that I may make the proof of the matter which I have undertaken
plainer, we will take in hand the book which has to day been read to us;
and bringing forward, if you will, the introduction and commencement of
it, which may especially seem to present no trace of consolation, but to
be altogether foreign to topics of comfort, I will make that which I
affirm evident.

<span id="xix.ix-p13"></span>3. What then is this introduction? “In the
beginning God made the heaven and the earth, and the earth was
invisible, and unformed, <span id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339) and
darkness was upon the face of the abyss.” <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340) Do these words seem to some of you
incapable of affording consolation under distress? Is it not an
historical narrative, and an instruction about the creation?

<span id="xix.ix-p16"></span>Would you then that I show the consolation
that is hidden in this saying? Arouse yourselves then, and attend with
earnestness to the things which are about to be spoken. For when thou
hearest that God made the heaven, the earth, the sea, the air, the
waters, the multitude of stars, the two great lights, the plants, the
quadrupeds, the swimming and the flying animals, and all things without
exception which thou seest, for thee, and for thy safety and honour;
dost thou not straightway take comfort and receive this as the strongest
proof of the love of God, when thou thinkest that He produced such a
world as this, so fair, so vast and wonderful, for such a puny being as
thyself! When therefore thou hearest that, “In the beginning God made
the heaven and the earth,” run not hastily over the declaration; but
traverse in thy mind the breadth of the earth; and reflect how He hath
spread out <span id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341) so sumptuous and
exquisite a table for us, and provided us with such abundant
gladness. <span id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342) And this is,
indeed, the most marvellous thing, that He gave us not such a world as
this in payment for services done; or as a recompense for good works;
but at the very time He formed us, He honoured our race with this
kingdom. For He said, “Let us make man after our image, and after our
likeness.” <span id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343) What is the sense
of this, “after our image, and after our likeness?” The image of
government <span id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344) is that which is
meant; and as there is no one in heaven superior to God, so let there be
none upon earth superior to man. This then is one, and the first
respect, in which He did him honour; by making him after His own image;
and secondly, by providing us with this principality, not as a payment
for services, but making it entirely the gift of His own love toward
man; and thirdly, in that He conferred it upon us as a thing of nature.
For of governments there are some natural, and others which are
elective;—natural as of the lion over the quadrupeds, or as that of the
eagle over the birds; elective, as that of an Emperor over us; for he
doth not reign over his fellow-servants by any natural authority.
Therefore it is that he oftentimes loses his sovereignty. For such are
things which are not naturally inherent; <span
id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345) they readily admit of change and
transposition. But not so with the lion; he rules by nature over the
quadrupeds, as the eagle doth over birds. The character of sovereignty
is, therefore, constantly allotted to his race; and no lion hath ever
been seen deprived of it. Such a kind of sovereignty God bestowed upon
us from the beginning, and set us over all things. And not only in this
respect did He confer honour upon our nature, <span
id="fr_1346"></span>[1347](#fn_1346) but also, by the very eminence of
the spot in which we <span id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span
id="xix.ix-Page_392"></span>were placed, fixing upon Paradise as our
choice dwelling, and bestowing the gift of reason, and an immortal soul.

<span id="xix.ix-p23"></span>4. But I would not speak of these things:
for I say that such was the abundance of God’s care, that we may know
His goodness, and His love towards man, not only from the way in which
He hath honoured, but also from the way in which He hath punished us.
And this, I especially exhort you to consider with attention, that God
is alike good, not only whilst He is treating us with honour and
beneficence, but also whilst He is punishing and chastising. And whether
we should have to carry on our contest and combat against the heathen,
or against the heretics, respecting the lovingkindness and goodness of
God, we shall make His goodness evident, not only from the cases in
which He bestows honour, but also from the cases in which He inflicts
punishment. For if He is good only whilst honouring us, and not good
whilst punishing us, He were but half good. But this is not the case.
God forbid! Among men this may probably happen, when they inflict
punishments in anger and passion; but God being free from passion,
whether He exercise kindness, or whether He punish, He is alike good.
Nor less does the threat of hell serve to show His goodness, than the
promise of the kingdom. <span id="fr_1347"></span>[1348](#fn_1347) But
how? I answer. If He had not threatened hell, if He had not prepared
punishment, there are not many who would have attained the
kingdom. <span id="fr_1348"></span>[1349](#fn_1348) For the promise of
good things doth not so strongly induce the multitude to virtue; as doth
the threat of evil things compel by fear, and arouse them to the care of
the soul. So that, although hell be the opposite of the kingdom of
heaven, yet each hath respect to the same end—the salvation of men; the
one alluring to itself, the other driving them towards its opposite, and
by the operation of fear correcting those who are carelessly disposed.

<span id="xix.ix-p26"></span>5. I do not enlarge upon this subject
without reason; but because there are many who often, when famines, and
droughts, and wars take place, or when the wrath of an Emperor overtakes
them, or when any other unexpected events of this kind happen, deceive
the simpler class by saying, that these things are unworthy of the
Providence of God.

<span id="xix.ix-p27"></span>I am therefore compelled to dwell on this
part of my discourse, that we may not be beguiled by words, but that we
may plainly perceive, that whether He brings upon us a famine, or a war,
or any calamity, whatsoever, He doth it out of His exceeding great care
and kindness. For even those fathers, who especially love their
offspring, will forbid them the table, and inflict stripes, and punish
them by disgrace, and in endless other ways of this kind correct their
children when they are disorderly; yet are they nevertheless fathers,
not only while doing them honour, but when acting thus; yea, they are
preeminently fathers when they act thus. <span
id="fr_1349"></span>[1350](#fn_1349) But if men, who are frequently
carried away beyond what is meet by the force of angry feelings, are yet
held to punish those whom they love, not from cruelty and inhumanity,
but from a kind care and regard; much rather is it proper to be thus
minded concerning God; who in the exceeding abundance of His goodness,
far transcends every degree of paternal fondness. And that you may not
suppose that what I say is a mere conjecture, let us, I pray you, direct
our discourse to the Scripture itself. When man, then, had been deceived
and beguiled by the wicked demon, let us observe how God treated him,
after his committing so great a sin. Did He then altogether destroy him?
Yet the reason of the thing in justice demanded this, that one who had
displayed nothing that was good, but, after enjoying so much favour, had
waxed wanton even from the very first, should be made away with, and
utterly destroyed; yet God acted not so; neither did He regard with
disgust and aversion him who had been so ungrateful towards his
Benefactor, but He comes to him as a physician cometh to a sick man.

<span id="xix.ix-p29"></span>6. Do not, O beloved, pass over
unthinkingly, what has just been said! but consider what an act it was,
not to send an angel, or archangel, or any other of his fellow-servants,
but that the Lord Himself should have descended to him who had fallen
from the right way, and should have raised him when thus cast down; and
should have approached him, One to one, <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350) as a friend comes to a friend when
he is unfortunate, and is plunged in great distress! For that He acted
thus out of His great kindness, the very words too which He spake to him
evidently show His ineffable affection. And why do I say, *all* the
words? The first utterance signifies at once His tenderness. For He said
not, what it was probable a person treated so contemptuously would say,
“O wicked, yea most wicked man! When thou hadst enjoyed so great favour
from Me, and hadst been honoured with such a sovereignty, being exalted
above all the crea<span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="xix.ix-Page_393"></span>tures upon the earth for no merit of thine
own; and having received in actual deeds the pledges of My care, and a
true manifestation of My Providence, didst thou esteem a wicked and
pestiferous demon, the enemy of thy salvation, to be worthy of more
credit than thy Lord and Benefactor? What proof did he give of regard
for thee, like that which I have done? Did I not make for thee the
heaven, the earth, the sea, the sun, the moon, and all the stars? For
truly none of the angels needed this work of creation; but for thee, and
for thy recreation, I made so great and excellent a world; and didst
thou esteem mere words alone, a false engagement, and a promise full of
deceit, as more worthy to be believed than the kindness and providence
that was manifested by deeds; that thou gavest thyself over to him, and
didst trample My laws under foot!” These words, and more of this kind,
one who had been treated contemptuously would probably say. But God
acted not so; but quite in the contrary manner. For by His first word He
at once raised him up from his dejection, and gave the fearful and
trembling man confidence, by being the first Himself to call him, or
rather, not by merely calling him first, but by addressing him by his
own familiar appellation, and saying, “Adam, where art thou?” Thus He
shewed His tenderness, and the great regard He had for him. For ye must
all know, that this is a mark of intimate friendship. <span
id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351) And thus those who call upon the
dead are wont to do, continually repeating their names. And so, on the
other hand, those who entertain hatred and enmity against any, cannot
bear to mention the very names of those who have aggrieved them. Saul,
for instance, though he had sustained no injury from David, but had
wronged him exceedingly, since he abhorred and hated him, could not
endure to mention his proper name; but when all were seated together,
not seeing David to be present, what said he? He said not, “Where is
David? but, ‘Where is the son of Jesse?’” <span
id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352) calling him by his father’s name.
And again, the Jews did the same with respect to Christ, for since they
abhorred and hated Him, they did not say, “Where is Christ?” <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353) but, “Where is that man?” <span
id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354)

<span id="xix.ix-p35"></span>7. But God, willing to show even by this
that sin had not quenched His tenderness, nor disobedience taken away
His favor toward him, and that He still exercised His Providence and
care for the fallen one, said, “Adam, where art thou?” <span
id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) not being ignorant of the place
where he was, but because the mouth of those who have sinned is closed
up; sin turning the tongue backward, and conscience taking hold of it;
so that such persons remain speechless, held fast in silence as by a
kind of chain. And God wishing therefore to invite him to freedom of
utterance, and to give him confidence, and to lead him to make an
apology for his offences, in order that he might obtain some
forgiveness, was Himself the first to call; cutting off much of Adam’s
distress by the familiar appellation, and dispelling his fear, and
opening by this address the mouth that was shut. Hence also it was that
he said, “Adam, where art thou?” “I left thee,” saith he, “in one
situation, and I find thee in another. I left thee in confidence and
glory; and I now find thee in disgrace and silence!” And observe the
care of God in this instance. He called not Eve;—He called not the
serpent,—but him who had sinned in the lightest degree of all, he brings
first to the tribunal, in order that beginning from him who was able to
find some degree of excuse, He might pass a more merciful sentence, even
against her who had sinned the most. And judges, indeed, do not deign to
make inquiry in their own person of their fellow-servants, and those who
are partakers of a common nature with them, but putting forward some one
of their attendants to intervene, they instruct him to convey their own
questions to the criminal; and through him they say and hear whatever
they wish, when they examine the offenders. <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) But God had no need of a go-between
in dealing with man; but Himself in His own person at once judges and
consoles him. And not only this is wonderful, but also that he corrects
the crimes that had been committed. For judges in general, when they
find thieves and grave-robbers, <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) do not consider how they may make
them better, but how they may make them pay the penalty of the offences
committed. But God, quite on the contrary, when He finds a sinner,
considers not how He may make him pay the penalty, but how He may amend
him, and make him better, and invincible <span
id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) for the <span id="page_394">p.
394</span> <span id="xix.ix-Page_394"></span>future. So that God is at
the same time a Judge, a Physician, and a Teacher; for as a Judge He
examines, and as a Physician He amends, and as a Teacher He instructs
those who have sinned, directing them unto all spiritual wisdom.

<span id="xix.ix-p40"></span>8. But if one short and simple speech thus
demonstrates the care of God, what if we should read through this whole
judgment, and unfold its entire records? Seest thou how all Scripture is
consolation and comfort? But of these records we will speak at a
befitting season; before that, however, it is necessary to state at what
time this Book was given; for these things were not written in the
beginning, nor at once when Adam was made, <span
id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359) but many generations afterwards;
and it were worth while to enquire for what reason this delay took
place, and why at length they were given to the Jews only, and not to
all men; and why written in the Hebrew tongue; and why in the wilderness
of Sinai? For the Apostle doth not mention the place merely in a cursory
manner; but shews that in that circumstance too there was a great
subject of contemplation for us, when he saith to us: “For these are two
covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage.” <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360)

<span id="xix.ix-p43"></span>9. Other things too besides these it were
to our purpose to enquire into. But I see that the time doth not permit
us to launch our discourse upon so wide a sea; wherefore prudently
reserving these to a fit season, we would again address you on the
subject of abstinence from oaths; and we would entreat your Charity to
use much diligence respecting this matter. For what is it but an
absurdity, that not even a servant dares to call his master by name, nor
to mention him unceremoniously, and casually, but that he should
everywhere bandy about the name of the Lord of Angels familiarly with
much irreverence! And if it be necessary to take the book of the Gospel,
thou receivest it with hands that have been first washed; and fearfully
and tremblingly, with much reverence and devotion; and dost thou
unceremoniously bandy about upon thy tongue the Lord of the Gospel? Dost
thou desire to learn how the Powers above pronounce that Name; with what
awe, with what terror, with what wonder? “I saw the Lord,” saith the
prophet, “sitting upon a throne, high, and lifted up; around Him stood
the Seraphim; and one cried unto another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of Sabaoth; the whole earth is full of His glory!” <span
id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361) Perceivest thou, with what dread,
with what awe, they pronounce that Name, whilst glorifying and praising
Him? But thou, in thy prayers and supplications, callest upon Him with
much listlessness; when it would become thee to be full of awe, and to
be watchful and sober! But in oaths, where it is wholly unsuitable that
this wonderful Name should be introduced, there thou makest a long
string of divers forms of imprecation! What pardon then, or what excuse
shall we have, howsoever we may plead this “custom”? It is said, that a
certain heathen orator, by a kind of foolish habit, was continually
moving his right shoulder as he went along. <span
id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362) He conquered this habit, however,
by fastening sharp knives on each side over his shoulders, so that the
fear of being cut controlled the member in its unseasonable movement by
fear of the wound! Do thou too, then, act thus with regard to thy
tongue, and instead of the knife, suspend over it the fear of God’s
chastisement, and thou wilt assuredly get the better! For it seems
impossible, utterly impossible, that those should ever be overcome, who
are solicitous and earnest about this, and really make it their
business.

<span id="xix.ix-p46"></span>10. Ye applaud what is now said, but when
ye have amended, ye will applaud in a greater degree not only us, but
also yourselves; and ye will hear with more pleasure what is spoken; and
ye will call upon God with a pure conscience, who is so sparing of thee,
O man! that He saith, “Neither shalt thou swear by <span
id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363) thy head.” <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364) But thou so despisest Him as to
swear even by His glory. “But what shall I do,” saith one, “with those
who impose necessity on me?” What kind of necessity can there be, O man?
Let all men understand that thou wilt choose to suffer anything rather
than transgress the law of God; and they will abstain from compelling
thee. For as a proof that it is not an oath which rendereth a man worthy
of credit, but the testimony of his life, the uprightness of his
conversation, and his good reputation, many have often split their
throats with swearing, and yet have been able to convince no one;
whereas others by a mere expression of assent, have been esteemed more
deserving <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="xix.ix-Page_395"></span>of belief than they who swore never so much.
Knowing, therefore, all these things, and placing before our eyes the
punishment that is in store for those who swear, as well as for those
who swear falsely, let us abstain from this evil custom, that advancing
from hence to the correction of what remains, we may enjoy the
blessedness of the life to come, which God grant that we may all be
found worthy to obtain, by the grace and love toward man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, through Whom and with Whom to the Father with the Holy
Ghost be glory, and power, and honour, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[390:1332](1090100.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="xix.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p4"></span> St. Greg. Nyss. *de Beat*. iii. t. i. 781.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[390:1333](1090100.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="xix.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p5"></span> Or. *in funere Pulcheriæ*, t. iii. 460.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[390:1334](1090100.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="xix.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p6"></span> διαφευξόμεθα

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[390:1335](1090100.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="xix.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p7"></span> [Hos. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014)<span id="xix.ix-p7.1"></span>,
which, however, is less clear in LXX.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[390:1336](1090100.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="xix.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p8"></span> [Ps.
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016), [Isa.
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#002)<span id="xix.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[390:1337](1090100.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="xix.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p9"></span> Or, “defied death,” κατετόλμησαν τῆς
τελευτῆς.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[391:1338](1090100.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="xix.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p11"></span> See [Isa. xl.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)<span id="xix.ix-p11.1"></span>, Heb.
and LXX.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[391:1339](1090100.htm#fr_1338) <span
id="xix.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p12"></span> αὐτόθεν.

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[391:1340](1090100.htm#fr_1339) <span
id="xix.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p14"></span> Or, *unfurnished*, E.V., *without form,
and void*. This rendering came in with the Genevan Bible. All the
previous translations had *void*, and *empty*. Perhaps by the term
*void*, was meant just the same as the Septuagint ‡κατασκεύαστος. The
word *Bohu*, which occurs [Deut.
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010), [Ps.
107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040)<span id="xix.ix-p14.1"></span>,
is in both cases rendered a waste, or wilderness. See Dr. Buckland’s
Bridgewater Treatise, c. 2, and notes.

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[391:1341](1090100.htm#fr_1340) <span
id="xix.ix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p15"></span> [Gen. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#012)<span id="xix.ix-p15.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[391:1342](1090100.htm#fr_1341) <span
id="xix.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p17"></span> ‡νῆκεν, “sent up,” *i.e*., “caused to
grow.”

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[391:1343](1090100.htm#fr_1342) <span
id="xix.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p18"></span> εὐφροσύνην. Comp. [Acts xiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span id="xix.ix-p18.1"></span>.
*Filling our hearts with food and gladness*.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[391:1344](1090100.htm#fr_1343) <span
id="xix.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p19"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="xix.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[391:1345](1090100.htm#fr_1344) <span
id="xix.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p20"></span> This of course does not exclude, but
rather implies, an *intrinsic* resemblance. See St. Cyr. *Cat*. xii.
(3), and xiv. (5); St. Aug. *De C. D*. xi. 26, xii. 23; *Conf*. xiii.
12; St. Greg. Nyss. on the text, t. ii. p. 22 sqq.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[391:1346](1090100.htm#fr_1345) <span
id="xix.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p21"></span> So “nature” was usually understood. Arist.
Eth. ii. 1. “Nothing that is by nature is made otherwise by habit;
*e.g*., a stone tends downwards by nature, and cannot be habituated to
tend upwards.”

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[391:1347](1090100.htm#fr_1346) <span
id="xix.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p22"></span> Or, kind.

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[392:1348](1090100.htm#fr_1347) <span
id="xix.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p24"></span> [Gal. iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span id="xix.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[392:1349](1090100.htm#fr_1348) <span
id="xix.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p25"></span> [1 Tim. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)<span id="xix.ix-p25.1"></span>. St.
Greg. Nyss. on the Beatitudes, *Or*. 3, t. i. p. 781, explains *Blessed
are they that mourn*; first, of those whom the fear of hell causes to
mourn for their sins; secondly, of those who mourn for their present
exclusion from the good things they hope for hereafter. See on [Rom.
xiv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013)<span
id="xix.ix-p25.2"></span>, Hom. XXV.

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[392:1350](1090100.htm#fr_1349) <span
id="xix.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p28"></span> [Heb. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009)<span id="xix.ix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[392:1351](1090100.htm#fr_1350) <span
id="xix.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p30"></span> μόνον πρὸς μόνον. There being no third
party present.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[393:1352](1090100.htm#fr_1351) <span
id="xix.ix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p31"></span> Thus Thetis, *Il*. i. 361, and throughout
Homer ἐκ τ̓ ὀνόμαζε expresses affection; the scholiast, however, explains
the word of merely speaking at length, which seems almost absurd.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[393:1353](1090100.htm#fr_1352) <span
id="xix.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p32"></span> [1 Kings xx.
27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#027)<span id="xix.ix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[393:1354](1090100.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="xix.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p33"></span> From this peculiar illustration it would
seem, that St. Chrysostom supposed the term Christ to have been one of
the familiar names by which our Saviour was known. But the term Jesus of
Nazareth seems to have been His more general and distinctive
appellation; though it by no means follows that He was not as familiarly
known by the title of Christ among His followers, and addressed as such,
especially after Peter’s confession. (See [John
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022), [Matt.
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#017),
[63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)<span id="xix.ix-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[393:1355](1090100.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="xix.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p34"></span> [John vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#011)<span id="xix.ix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[393:1356](1090100.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="xix.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p36"></span> [Gen. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#009)<span id="xix.ix-p36.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[393:1357](1090100.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="xix.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p37"></span> What it was to be brought to the bar in
those days may be seen in Hom. XIII.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[393:1358](1090100.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="xix.ix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p38"></span> A common crime then, probably from the
richness of burials. See on [Rom. vi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)<span id="xix.ix-p38.1"></span>,
Hom. XI.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[393:1359](1090100.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="xix.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p39"></span> ‡χείρωτον, *i.e*., to the adversary. See
Hom. I, and εὐχšίρωτον, Hom. VIII. (2).

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[394:1360](1090100.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="xix.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p41"></span> γενομ™νου. This seems the usual meaning,
as Plut. *Mor*. p. 109 (cit. Steph.) ‡λλ̓ οἴει σὺ διαφορὰν εἶναι ἢ μὴ
γ™νεσθας ἢ γ™νομενον ‡πογ™νεσθαι; but Luc. ix. 36, γ™νεσθαι seems to
mean the completion of an event. He is speaking, however, of the whole
Bible, or at least the Pentateuch, not merely of the history of the
Fall, as appears from the sequel. Hom. VIII. 2, and the general argument
of those which follow.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[394:1361](1090100.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="xix.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p42"></span> [Gal. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)<span id="xix.ix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[394:1362](1090100.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="xix.ix-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p44"></span> [Is. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)<span id="xix.ix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[394:1363](1090100.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="xix.ix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p45"></span> Demosthenes. Libanius says that it was in
speaking he did this, and that he cured himself by hanging a sword
before his shoulder in his private practice. Life of Dem. in *Orat.
Att*. t. iv. and so Plutarch. St. Chrys. mentions him also on St. Matt.
Hom. XVII. Ben. p. 232a., βαδίζων may possibly be applied to the course
of a speech.

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[394:1364](1090100.htm#fr_1363) <span
id="xix.ix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p47"></span> κατὰ, “against,” and so on St. Matt. Hom.
XVII., Ben. p. 228e., but Griesbach gives no reading except ἐν.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[394:1365](1090100.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="xix.ix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p48"></span> [Matt. v.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#036)<span id="xix.ix-p48.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VIII](1090101)
