[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090110)  [Next](1090112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.xx"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="xix.xx-p1.1"></span>Homily XVIII.</span>

<span id="xix.xx-p2"></span>*The former subject of the Sedition
continued; also of fasting; and upon the Apostolic saying, “Rejoice in
the Lord always.”* <span id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731)

<span id="xix.xx-p4"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.xx-p4.1"></span>I have</span> observed many persons rejoicing,
and saying one to another, “We have conquered; we have prevailed; the
half of the fast is spent.” But I exhort such persons not to rejoice on
this account, that the half of the fast is gone, but to consider whether
the half of their sins be gone; and if so, then to exult. For this is a
fit subject of gratification. This is what is to be sought after, and
for which all things are done, that we may correct our defects; and that
we may not quit the fast the same persons as we entered upon it, but in
a cleansed state; and <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="xix.xx-Page_459"></span>that having laid aside all that belongs to
evil habits, we may thus keep the sacred feast, since if the case be
otherwise, we shall be so far from obtaining any advantage, that the
completion of the fast will be the greatest injury to us. Let us,
therefore, not rejoice that we have gone through the length of the fast,
for this is nothing great; but let us rejoice, if we have got through it
with fresh attainments, so that when this is over, the fruit of it may
shine forth. For the gain of winter is more especially manifested after
the season is gone by. Then, the flourishing corn, and the trees teeming
with leaves and fruit, proclaim, by their appearance, the benefit that
has accrued to them from the winter! Let the same thing also take place
with us. For during the winter, we have enjoyed divers and frequent
showers, having been during the fast partakers of a continued course of
instruction, and have received spiritual seeds, and cut away the thorns
of luxury.

<span id="xix.xx-p5"></span>2. Wherefore let us persevere, retaining
with all diligence what we have heard; that when the fast is over, the
fruit of the fast may abound, and that by the good things we gathered
from the fast, we may remember the fast itself. <span
id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) If thus we fashion ourselves, we
shall, when the fast returns, welcome it again with pleasure. For I see
many who are so feeble-minded, that at the present season they are
anxious about the following Lent; and I have heard many saying, that
after their liberation from the fast, they are insensible to any
pleasure from this remission, on account of their anxiety about the
coming year. What can be more feeble-minded than this? I ask; and what
is the cause of this? It is, that when the fast is arrived, we do not
take pains that the concerns of the soul may be well ordered, but we
limit the fast solely to an abstinence from food. Since, were we to reap
the full benefit of it in a reformation of conduct, we should wish the
fast to come round every day, receiving in very deed an experience of
its good effects; and we should never cast away the desire of it, or be
dejected and anxious whilst expecting it.

<span id="xix.xx-p7"></span>3. For there is nothing whatever that will
be able to afflict one who is well ordered in mind, and careful about
his own soul; but he will enjoy a pure and continued pleasure. And that
this is true ye have to-day heard from Paul, who exhorts us, saying,
“Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice.” <span
id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) I know indeed that to many this
saying seems impossible. “For how is it possible,” says some one, “that
he who is but a man, can continually rejoice? To rejoice is no hard
matter, but to rejoice continually, this seems to me to be impossible.”
For many are the causes of sadness, which surround us on all sides. A
man has lost either a son, or a wife, or a beloved friend, more
necessary to him than all kindred; or he has to sustain the loss of
wealth; or he has fallen into sickness; or he has to bear some other
change of fortune; or to grieve for contemptuous treatment which he did
not deserve; or famine, or pestilence, or some intolerable exaction, or
circumstances in his family trouble him;—nay, there is no saying how
many circumstances of a public or private nature are accustomed to
occasion us grief. How then, he may say, is it possible to “rejoice
always?” Yea, O man! it is possible; and if it were not so, Paul would
not have given the exhortation; nor would a man endowed with spiritual
wisdom have offered such counsel; and for this reason I have constantly
said to you, and will not cease to say, that what ye could no where have
learnt from any other, that wisdom ye may here meditate. For mankind are
universally desirous of pleasure, <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) and of rejoicing; and for this,
they do all, say all, and undertake all things. Therefore it is, that
the merchant goes on a voyage, in order that he may amass wealth; and he
amasses wealth, to the end that he may rejoice over what he has
treasured up. The soldier also for this reason exercises his warfare,
and the husbandman his husbandry; for this each man plies his art. Those
also who love dominion, love it for this end, that they may obtain
glory; and they desire to obtain glory, that they may rejoice; and any
one may perceive that each of our undertakings is directed to this
point, and that every man looking to this makes haste to go towards it
through a variety of means.

<span id="xix.xx-p10"></span>4. For as I said, all love gladness, but
all are not able to attain it, since they know not the way which leads
to it; but many suppose that the source of it is in being rich. But if
this were its source, no one possessed of wealth would ever be sad. But
in fact many of the rich think life not worth living, and would
infinitely prefer death when they experience any hardship; and of all
men these are the most liable to excessive sadness. For you should not
look to their tables, or their flatterers, and parasites, but to the
trou<span id="page_460">p. 460</span> <span
id="xix.xx-Page_460"></span>ble that comes of such things, the insults,
the calumnies, the dangers, and the distresses, and what is far worse,
that they meet these reverses unpractised, and know not how to take them
philosophically, or to bear with fortitude what befalls them; whence it
happens that calamities do not appear to them such as they are in their
own nature, but even things which are really light come to seem
intolerable; whereas, with regard to the poor, the contrary takes place;
things that are irremediable seem easy to be borne, since they are
familiar with many such. For it is not so much the nature of the events
as the disposition of the sufferers, that makes the evils which come
upon us seem great or small. And that I may not go a long way off for
examples of both these facts, I will speak to you of what has lately
befallen ourselves. Behold then how all the poor escaped, and the
populace are delivered from the danger, and enjoy an entire freedom! but
those who manage the affairs of the city, the men who keep their studs
of horses, and preside over the public games, and such as have borne
other public charges, <span id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) they
are now the inmates of the prison, and fear the worst; and they alone
pay the penalty of the deeds that have been perpetrated by all, and are
in a state of constant terror; and they are now the most wretched of
men, not because of the greatness of the danger, but on account of the
luxury in which hitherto they have lived! Many, at least when exhorted
by us, and counselled to sustain these adverse affairs with fortitude,
said this, “We never practised any thing of the kind, and do not know
how to exercise such philosophy; this is why we need so much
consolation.”

<span id="xix.xx-p12"></span>5. Others again suppose, that to enjoy good
health is the source of pleasure. But it is not so. For many of those
who enjoy good health have a thousand times wished themselves dead, not
being able to bear the insults inflicted on them. Others again affirm,
that to enjoy glory, and to have attained to power, and to administer
the highest offices, and to be flattered by multitudes, is productive of
continual gladness. But neither is this the case. And why do I speak of
other offices of power? For although we were to mount up in thought to
royalty itself, and to him who lives in that station, we should find it
encompassed with a diversity of troubles, and having so many necessary
causes the more of sadness, in proportion as it is surrounded with a
greater weight of affairs. And what need is there to speak of wars, and
battles, and the insurrections of barbarians? Oftentimes he has reason
to fear those by whom he is surrounded at home. For many of those
monarchs who have escaped from the hands of their enemies, have not
escaped the conspiracies of their own body-guards. And kings have of
necessity as many causes of sadness as there are waves on the ocean. But
if monarchy is unable to render life devoid of grief, then what else can
possibly achieve this? Nothing, indeed, of this life; but this saying of
Paul alone, brief and simple as it is, will of itself open to us this
treasure.

<span id="xix.xx-p13"></span>6. For many words are not needed, nor a
long round of argument, but if we only consider his expression, we shall
find the way that leads to it. He does not simply say, “Rejoice always;”
but he adds the cause of the continual pleasure, saying, “Rejoice in the
Lord always.” He who rejoices “in the Lord,” can not be deprived of the
pleasure by any thing that may happen. For all other things in which we
rejoice are mutable and changeable, and subject to variation. And not
only does this grievous circumstance attend them, but moreover while
they remain they do not afford us a pleasure sufficient to repel and
veil the sadness that comes upon us from other quarters. But the fear of
God contains both these requisites. It is steadfast and immoveable, and
sheds so much gladness that we can admit no sense of other evils. For
the man who fears God as he ought, and trusts in Him, gathers from the
very root of pleasure, and has possession of the whole fountain of
cheerfulness. And as a spark falling upon a wide ocean quickly
disappears, so whatever events happen to the man who fears God, these,
falling as it were upon an immense ocean of joy, are quenched and
destroyed! This indeed is most to be wondered at, that whilst things
which minister sadness are present, the man should remain joyful. For if
there was nothing to produce grief, it would be no great matter to him
that he was able continually to rejoice. But that at a time when he is
urged to sadness by the pressure of many things, he is superior to all
these, and is blithe in the midst of sorrow, this is truly a matter for
astonishment! And as no one would have wondered that the three Children
were not burnt, if they had remained far off from the furnace of
Babylon! (for the circumstance that astonished all was, that having been
so long in such close contact with the fire, they left it more free from
hurt than those who had not been in contact with it); so also we are
able to say of the saints, that if no temptation had fastened itself
upon <span id="page_461">p. 461</span> <span
id="xix.xx-Page_461"></span>them, we should not have wondered at their
continual rejoicing. But the point worthy of admiration, and that which
surpasses human nature, is this, that being encircled on all sides with
innumerable waves, their condition is easier than that of those who
enjoy an entire calm!

<span id="xix.xx-p14"></span>7. From what has been said, it is evident
that amongst those who are outside the church it is impossible to find
any situation in life, encircled with continual gladness from the things
without. But that the believer cannot possibly be deprived of the
enjoyment of a continued pleasure is what I will now proceed to prove,
to the end that ye may not only learn, but also emulate this painless
condition of life. For suppose a man having nothing for which to condemn
himself, but cherishing a good conscience, and yearning after the future
state, and the fulfilment of those good hopes; what, I ask, will be able
to throw such a person into sadness? Does not death seem the most
insupportable of all things? Yet the expectation of this is so far from
grieving him, that it makes him the more joyful; for he knows that the
arrival of death is a release from labour, and a speeding toward the
crowns and rewards laid up for those who have contended in the race of
piety and virtue. But is it the untimely end of his children? Nay, he
will also bear this nobly, and will take up the words of Job, “The Lord
gave, the Lord hath taken away; as it seemed good unto the Lord, so is
it come to pass. Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever.” <span
id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) But if death and loss of children
cannot grieve, much less can the loss of money, or dishonour, or
reproaches, or false accusations, at any time affect a soul so great and
noble; no, nor anguish of body, since the Apostles were scourged, yet
they were not made sad. This, indeed, was a great thing; but what is
much more, instead of being made sad, they considered their very
scourgings, as a ground of additional pleasure. “And they departed from
the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
suffer shame for the name of Christ.” <span
id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737) Did any person insult and revile
such a one? Well, he was taught by Christ to rejoice in these revilings.
“Rejoice,” <span id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738) saith He, “and be
exceeding glad, when they shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake; for great is your reward in heaven.” <span
id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739) But suppose a man hath fallen into
disease? Well, he hath heard another admonishing, and saying, “In
disease and poverty trust thou in Him; for as gold is tried in the fire,
so are acceptable men in the furnace of humiliation.” <span
id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740) Since, therefore, neither death,
nor loss of money, nor bodily disease, nor dishonour, nor reproach, nor
any other thing of that nature, will be able to grieve him, but makes
him even the more joyful, what foundation for sadness will he have at
any time?

<span id="xix.xx-p20"></span>8. “What then,” says some one, “used not
the Saint to be in sadness? Do you not hear Paul saying, “I have great
heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart?” <span
id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741) This, indeed, is the thing to
wonder at, that sorrow brought a gain, and a pleasure that resulted from
the gain; for as the scourge did not procure them anguish, but gladness;
so also again the sorrow procured them those great crowns. And this is
the paradox; that not only the sadness of the world, but also its joy,
contains extreme loss; but in the case of spiritual things, it is
exactly the reverse; and not the joy only, but the sadness too contains
a rich treasure of good things! But how, I proceed to explain. In the
world, a person often rejoices, on beholding an enemy in trouble; and by
this joy he draws on himself a great punishment. Again, another person
mourns, on seeing a brother fall; and because of this sadness he will
procure for himself much favour with God. Seest thou how godly sorrow is
better and more profitable than the joy of the world? Thus also Paul
sorrowed for sinners, and for those who disbelieved in God; and this
sorrow was the means of laying up a great reward for him. But that I may
make what I say more clear, and that ye may know that although what I
assert is very strange, it is nevertheless true, viz. that grief is
often capable of refreshing distressed souls, and of rendering a
burdened conscience light: consider how often women, when they have lost
their most beloved children, break their hearts, and perish, if they are
forbidden to mourn, and to shed tears. But if they do all which those
who are sad, are wont to do, they are relieved, and receive consolation.
And what wonder that this should be the case with women, when you may
even see a prophet affected in a similar manner? Therefore he was
continually saying, “Suffer me—I will weep bitterly—labour not to
comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people.” <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) So that, oftentimes, sadness is the
bearer of consolation; and if it is so with regard to this world. much
more with regard to spiritual things. <span id="page_462">p. 462</span>
<span id="xix.xx-Page_462"></span>Therefore he says, “Godly sorrow
worketh repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of.” <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) This indeed seems to be obscure;
but what he says is to this effect: “If thou grievest over wealth, thou
art nothing profited. If for sickness, thou hast gained nothing, but
hast increased thy affliction.”

<span id="xix.xx-p24"></span>9. And I have heard many, after such
experience, blame themselves, and say, What advantage is it that I have
grieved? I have not recovered my money, and I have injured myself. But
if thou hast grieved on account of sin, thou hast blotted it out, and
hast reaped the greatest pleasure. If thou hast grieved for thy brethren
who have fallen, thou hast both encouraged and comforted thyself, and
hast also restored them; and even if thou wert not to profit them, thou
hast an abundant recompense. And that thou mayest learn that this
grieving for those who have fallen, though we should not at all benefit
them, still brings us a large reward, hear what Ezekiel says; or rather,
what God Himself speaks through him. For when He had sent certain
messengers to overturn the city, and to consume all the dwellings with
sword and fire, along with their inhabitants, He thus charges one of
them: “Set a mark upon the forehead of the men that groan, and are in
anguish.” And after charging the others, and saying, “Begin ye from mine
holy ones,” He goes on to add, “But upon whomsoever the sign is, touch
them not.” <span id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) For what reason,
tell me? Because although they avail nothing, they nevertheless lament
the things which are done, and deplore them. And again, He accuses
others, saying, That in their luxury, and gluttony, and enjoyment of
great security, when they beheld the Jews carried away into captivity,
they did not grieve, nor partake of their sadness. And hear what He
says, reproaching them: “They suffered nothing in the affliction of
Joseph:” <span id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) meaning by Joseph
the whole people. And again: “The inhabitants of Ænan went not forth to
bewail the house next unto them.” <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) For although they are justly
punished, God willeth that we should condole with them, and not rejoice
or insult. “For if I that punish,” saith He, “do not this rejoicingly;
nor take pleasure in their punishment; for “I do not at all will the
death of the sinner;” <span id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747) it is
right that thou shouldest imitate thy Lord; and shouldest mourn for this
very thing, that the sinner hath provided matter and occasion for a just
punishment.” So that if any one entertains a godly sorrow, he will
thence reap a great advantage.

<span id="xix.xx-p29"></span>10. Since therefore those who are scourged
are more blessed than the scourgers, and those in tribulation among us
than those who are free from it outside the Christian pale; and those
who are sad are more blessed than those in pleasure; what further source
of tribulation shall we have? On this account we should call no man
happy, save him only who lives according to God. These only the
Scripture terms blessed. For “blessed,” it is said, “is the man who hath
not walked in the counsel of the ungodly. Blessed is he whom Thou
chastenest, and teachest him out of Thy law. Blessed are the undefiled
in the way. Blessed are all they who trust in Him. Blessed is the people
whose God is the Lord. Blessed is he whom his soul condemneth not.
Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) And again, Christ speaks thus:
“Blessed are they that mourn; blessed are the humble; blessed are the
meek; blessed are the peacemakers; blessed are they who are persecuted
for righteousness’ sake.” <span id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749)
Seest thou how the divine laws everywhere pronounce blessed none of the
rich, or of the well-born, or of the possessors of glory, but the man
who has gotten hold of virtue. For what is required of us is, that in
every thing we do or suffer, the fear of God should be the foundation;
and if you implant this as the root, not merely will ease, and honour,
and glory, and attention, produce fruits that shall be pleasurable to
thee; but hostilities also, and calumnies, and contempt, and disgrace,
and torments, and all things without exception. And just as the roots of
trees are bitter in themselves, and yet produce our sweetest fruits, so,
verily, godly sorrow will bring us an abundant pleasure. They know, who
have often prayed with anguish, and shed tears, what gladness they have
reaped; how they purged the conscience; how they rose up with favourable
hopes! For as I am always saying, it is not the nature of the things,
but our disposition, which is wont to make us sad or joyful. If then we
can render the latter such as it ought to be, we shall have a pledge for
all gladness. And just as, with the body, it is not so much the nature
of the air, or the things it meets from without, as its own internal
condition, that either injures or assists it, so also it is in the case
of the soul; and much more so; for in the one case, there is the
necessity of nature; in the other, the whole is seated in the power of
choice. Therefore Paul, when he had endured innumerable
evils—shipwrecks, wars, persecutions, plots, the assaults of robbers,
and things too numerous to be <span id="page_463">p. 463</span> <span
id="xix.xx-Page_463"></span>recounted, dying also daily deaths—was so
far from grieving or being discontented, that he gloried, and rejoiced,
and said, “I now rejoice in my sufferings, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh.” <span
id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) And again: “And not only so, but we
glory in tribulations.” <span id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751) Now,
glorying signifies an extension of pleasure.

<span id="xix.xx-p34"></span>11. If then thou desirest joy, seek not
after riches, nor bodily health, nor glory, nor power, nor luxury, nor
sumptuous tables, nor vestures of silk, nor costly lands, nor houses
splendid and conspicuous, nor any thing else of that kind; but pursue
that spiritual wisdom which is according to God, and take hold of
virtue; and then nought of the things which are present, or which are
expected, will be able to sadden thee. Why do I say to sadden? Verily,
the things that make others sad, will prove to thee an accession of
pleasure. For scourges, and death, and losses, and slanders, and the
being evil entreated, and all such things, when they are brought upon us
for God’s sake, and spring from this root, will bring into our souls
much pleasure. For no one will be able to make us miserable, if we do
not make ourselves such; nor, on the other hand, blessed, if we do not
make ourselves such, following up the grace of God.

<span id="xix.xx-p35"></span>12. And that ye may learn that he only is
blessed, who feareth the Lord, I will now demonstrate this to you, not
by what has happened in past times, but by what has befallen ourselves.
Our city was in danger of being utterly effaced; and no man among the
rich, or eminent, or illustrious, dared to appear in public, but all
fled, and hurried out of the way. But they who feared God, the men who
passed their time in monasteries, hastened down with much boldness, and
set all free from this terror; and the terrible events that had taken
place, and the threats which had been expected to be put into execution,
were so far from causing them to fear, or from throwing them into
anxiety, that although they were placed far off from the calamity, and
had no share in it, they cast themselves willingly into the midst of the
fire, and rescued all; and as for death, which seems universally
terrible and awful, they awaited it with the utmost readiness, and ran
to meet it with more pleasure than others do towards principalities and
honours. And why, but because they knew, that this is the greatest
principality and honour? And they shewed in very deed that he only is
blessed who lays hold of the wisdom which is from above, that he
undergoes no change and sustains no adversity, but enjoys a continued
tranquillity, and laughs to scorn all things which seem to be sorrowful.
At the present time at least, those who were once in power are oppressed
by much sadness, inhabiting the prison, and loaded with chains, and
daily expecting to be put to death. But these men on the contrary enjoy
the purest pleasure; and if it be their lot to suffer anything terrible,
this, and the very things which seem formidable to others, are welcome
to them, for they know well towards what point they are running, and
what lot will await them when they depart hence. But whilst they live
with so much exactness, and smile at death, they nevertheless grieve for
others, and reap therefrom, in turn, the greatest advantage. Let us then
be in earnest to take care of our souls, and nothing which may come
unlooked for can make us sad. And on behalf of those who are in prison,
let us beseech God that He will deliver them from their present
calamity. For it was in God’s power at once to release us from this dire
evil, and not to suffer even the smallest part of it to remain; but in
order that we may not again go back to our former negligence, He hath
provided that the torrent of these evils should subside gently and by
little and little, holding us fast to the same pious resolutions.

<span id="xix.xx-p36"></span>13. And that this is true, and that many
would have gone back to their former supineness, if we had been released
from the whole difficulty at once, is manifest from this circumstance;
that whilst yet the remnants of the calamity are left, whilst the
sentence of the Emperor is yet doubtful, and those who conducted the
affairs of the city are all in prison, <span
id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) many of our fellow inhabitants,
through their inordinate desire of bathing, run to the river, there
making endless merriment, behaving wantonly, leaping, dancing, and
dragging women after them. What pardon can such be worthy of? What kind
of excuse can they offer? Or rather, what kind of punishment and
vengeance do they not deserve? The head of the city is in the public
prison; our members are in exile; the sentence concerning them is
doubtful; and dost thou, I ask, dance, sport, and laugh? “Why, we could
not endure,” says some one, “to remain without the bath?” O shameless
disposition, sordid and perverted! How many months, I ask, how many
years, have past? Thou hast not been as yet shut out from the bath for
twenty days; and thou art as much distressed and discontented, as if
thou hadst continued without washing for a <span id="page_464">p.
464</span> <span id="xix.xx-Page_464"></span>whole year! Tell me, was
this thy state, when thou wert expecting an attack from the military,
when thou wert daily anticipating bring put to death, when thou fleddest
to the deserts, and wast hurrying to the mountain tops? If any one had
then proposed to thee to remain “a year” without the bath, so that thou
mightest be rescued from the impending distress, wouldest thou not
readily have accepted the proposal, and submitted to it? When,
therefore, it were becoming that thou shouldest give thanks to God, Who
hath freed thee from all these things without any loss, dost thou again
grow wanton and contemptuous; and when the fear has passed away, turn
back afresh to a worse state of negligence? Have these dire events
really touched thee, and yet art thou so desirous of the baths? Why, if
the bath had been permitted, would not the calamity of those who are yet
in confinement have been sufficient to persuade those who are not in the
same grievous condition to be forgetful of every luxury? Life itself is
at stake, and dost thou remember the baths, and desire to be luxurious?
Dost thou despise the danger because thou hast now escaped it? Take heed
lest thou entangle thyself in the necessity of a greater punishment, and
call back in larger measure the wrath which is removed, and experience
the very thing which Christ declared concerning the devils. For He says,
that “when the unclean spirit is gone out, and afterwards findeth the
house void and swept, he taketh seven other spirits more wicked than
himself, and entereth into the soul, and the last state of that man is
worse than the first.” <span id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753)
Therefore let us also fear, lest now we are liberated from our former
evils, we afterwards by our listlessness draw upon us those which are
greater! I know that ye yourselves <span
id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754) are free from this folly; but ye
should restrain, punish, and sober those who walk disorderly, that ye
may always rejoice even as Paul commanded, that both for our own good
works, and for our forethought for others, we may enjoy both here and in
the life to come an abundant recompense; through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom, and with Whom, to the
Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, honour, and adoration, now and
ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[458:1732](1090111.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="xix.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p3"></span> [Phil. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004)<span id="xix.xx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[459:1733](1090111.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="xix.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p6"></span> See end of Hom. VI.

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[459:1734](1090111.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="xix.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p8"></span> [Phil. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004)<span id="xix.xx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[459:1735](1090111.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="xix.xx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p9"></span> See Arist. Eth. 1, ch. 5, and Plat.
Phileb., where the general aim of human action is discussed. Speaking
popularly, St. Chrysostom does not enquire by what name it is most
correct to call the real object of our desires. He is satisfied with
shewing that the highest pleasure, satisfaction, joy, or whatever it may
be called, is found in God. And this is a better beginning, for
practical purposes, than a philosophical definition. But see Hooker, b.
i. c. vii. and Butler, ser. xi. xii. xiii.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[460:1736](1090111.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="xix.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p11"></span> Proof of wealth.

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[461:1737](1090111.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="xix.xx-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p15"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="xix.xx-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[461:1738](1090111.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="xix.xx-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p16"></span> [Acts v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="xix.xx-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[461:1739](1090111.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="xix.xx-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p17"></span> Sav. *Blessed are ye, &c*. as in text.

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[461:1740](1090111.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="xix.xx-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p18"></span> [Matt.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)<span id="xix.xx-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[461:1741](1090111.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="xix.xx-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p19"></span> [Sir.
2:4](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#005)<span id="xix.xx-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[461:1742](1090111.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="xix.xx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p21"></span> [Rom. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002)<span id="xix.xx-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[461:1743](1090111.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="xix.xx-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p22"></span> [Isa. xxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#004)<span id="xix.xx-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[462:1744](1090111.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="xix.xx-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p23"></span> [2 Cor. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="xix.xx-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[462:1745](1090111.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="xix.xx-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p25"></span> [Ezek. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004)<span id="xix.xx-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[462:1746](1090111.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="xix.xx-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p26"></span> [Amos vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006)<span id="xix.xx-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[462:1747](1090111.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="xix.xx-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p27"></span> [Mich. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004)<span id="xix.xx-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[462:1748](1090111.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="xix.xx-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p28"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)<span id="xix.xx-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[462:1749](1090111.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="xix.xx-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p30"></span> [Ps.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001), [Ps.
94:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012), [Ps.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001), [Ps.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#013), [Ps.
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012), [Sir.
14:2](../../../bib/apo/sir014.htm#002), [Ps.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)<span id="xix.xx-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[462:1750](1090111.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="xix.xx-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p31"></span> [Matt. v.
3-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="xix.xx-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[463:1751](1090111.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="xix.xx-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p32"></span> [Coloss. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span id="xix.xx-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[463:1752](1090111.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="xix.xx-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p33"></span> [Rom. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="xix.xx-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[463:1753](1090111.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="xix.xx-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p37"></span> See Libanius ad Helleb.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[464:1754](1090111.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="xix.xx-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p38"></span> [Luke
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#024),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#026)<span id="xix.xx-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[464:1755](1090111.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="xix.xx-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p39"></span> That is, those present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIX](1090112)
