[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090076)  [Next](1090078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.ii"></span> <span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="xvii.ii-Page_287"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>INTRODUCTION TO THE LETTERS TO OLYMPIAS.</span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="xvii.ii-p2.1"></span>The</span> deaconess Olympias to whom seventeen
of Chrysostom’s extant letters are addressed was the most eminent of his
female friends. She belonged to a Pagan family of high rank, and was
born about 368. Her father Seleucus who was a count of the Empire died
when she was a young girl and she was brought up under the guardianship
of an uncle Procopius, who has a devout Christian and a friend of
Gregory of Nazianzus. Gregory took great interest in her, speaking of
her in his letters as “his own Olympias” and delighting to be addressed
by her as “father.” Her governess Theodosia, sister of St. Amphilochius
of Iconium, was a woman whom Gregory exhorted her to imitate as the very
pattern of Christian goodness. The orphan girl had great personal
beauty, and was the heiress of a large fortune. Naturally therefore she
had many suitors, and in 384 at the age of sixteen she was wedded to
Nebridius, a young man of high rank and irreproachable character. The
marriage however does not seem to have been a happy one, and perhaps in
this fact as well as in the death of her husband about two years after
their union, Olympias saw a divine intimation that she should not
entangle herself again in the worldly cares and anxieties incident to
married life. The Emperor Theodosius wished to unite her to a young
Spaniard, Elpidius, a kinsman of his own, and irritated by her refusal,
ordered her property to be confiscated until she should have attained
her thirtieth year, unless she consented to the proposed union. Olympias
however remained inflexible and in a letter of dignified sarcasm thanked
the Emperor for relieving her from a heavy burden. “He could not have
conferred a greater blessing upon her unless he had ordered her wealth
to be bestowed upon the Churches and the poor.” Theodosius perceiving
the uselessness, if not regretting the injustice, of his harsh decree,
cancelled it, and left her in the undisturbed enjoyment of her property.
Henceforward her time and wealth were devoted to the service of
religion. She ministered to the necessities of the sick and poor, and
supported the work of the Church in Greece, Asia Minor and Syria with
such lavish donations, not only of her money but of her land, that even
Chrysostom, who might be called the great preacher of almsgiving, warned
her against indiscriminate liberality, reminding her that as her wealth
was a trust committed to her by God she ought to be discreet in the
management of it. This salutary advice gained him the ill-will of many
avaricious bishops and clergy who had profited, or hoped to profit, by
her gifts. She in her turn requited the Archbishop for his spiritual
care by many little feminine attentions to his bodily wants, especially
by seeing that he was supplied with wholesome food, and did not
overstrain his feeble constitution by a too rigid abstinence. She
herself however practised the most austere asceticism, renouncing the
luxury of the bath, wearing none but old coarse clothing, and subjecting
herself to severe restrictions in respect of food and sleep.

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span>After the expulsion of Chrysostom from
Constantinople 404, through the intrigues of his enemies, Olympias
suffered much from the persecution to which all his followers were
subjected. She was accused of having been concerned in causing the fire
which broke out immediately after his departure, and destroyed the
Cathedral Church and the Senate House. <span id="page_288">p. 288</span>
<span id="xvii.ii-Page_288"></span>Her intrepid demeanour before the
præfect who tried in vain to frighten her into a confession of guilt, or
induce her to acknowledge Arsacius who had been intruded into the See by
an arbitrary exercise of imperial power, excited general admiration; and
the tidings of her fortitude were a great consolation to the exiled
archbishop in the midst of much bodily suffering, and mental distress.
It is not quite certain whether she was driven from Constantinople or
voluntarily retired from it; nor have we any definite information
concerning the remainder of her life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To My Lady.](1090078)
