[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090086)  [Next](1090088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="xviii.iii-Page_309"></span><span class="c30"><span
id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>correspondence of st. chrysostom with the
bishop of rome.</span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c34"><span
id="xviii.iii-p3.1"></span>letter from st. john chrysostom to innocent,
bishop of rome.</span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p4"></span>To my lord, the most reverend and
divinely beloved bishop Innocent, John sends greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xviii.iii-p5"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xviii.iii-p5.1"></span>I suppose</span> that even before receiving
our letter your Piety has heard of the iniquity which has been
perpetrated here. For the magnitude of our distress has left scarcely a
single portion of the world uninformed of this grievous tragedy: for
report carrying the tidings of what has happened to the very extremities
of the earth, has everywhere caused great mourning and lamentation. But
inasmuch as we ought not to mourn, but to restore order, and to see by
what means this most grievous storm of the Church may be stayed, we have
deemed it necessary to persuade my lords, the most honoured and pious
bishops Demetrius, Pansophius, Pappus and Eugenius to leave their own
churches, and venture on this great sea voyage, and set out on a long
journey from home, and hasten to your Charity, and, after informing you
clearly of everything, to take measures for redressing the evils as
speedily as possible. And with them we have sent the most honoured and
beloved of our Deacons, Paulus and Cyriacus, but we also ourselves, in
the form of a letter, will briefly instruct your Charity concerning the
things which have come to pass. For Theophilus, who has been entrusted
with the presidency of the Church in Alexandria, having been commanded
to repair alone to Constantinople, certain men having brought an
accusation against him to the most devout Emperor, arrived bringing with
him no small multitude of Egyptian Bishops, as if wishing to show from
the outset, that he came for war and antagonism; moreover when he set
foot in the great and divinely beloved Constantinople he did not enter
the Church according to the custom and the law which has prevailed from
ancient time, he held no intercourse with us, and admitted us to no
share in his conversation, his prayers, or his society: but as soon as
he disembarked, having hurried past the vestibule of the Church, he
departed and lodged somewhere outside the city, and although we
earnestly entreated him, and those who had come with him, to be our
guests (for everything had been made ready, and lodgings provided, and
whatever was suitable) neither they, nor he consented. We seeing this,
were in great perplexity, not being able to discover the cause of this
unjust hostility; nevertheless we discharged our part, doing what became
us, and continually beseeching him to meet us and to say for what cause
he hazarded so great a contest at the outset, and threw the city into
such confusion. But as he did not choose to state the reason, and those
who accused him were urgent, our most devout Emperor summoned us and
commanded us to go outside the walls to the place where Theophilus was
sojourning, and hear the argument against him. For they accused him of
assault, and slaughter and countless other crimes; but knowing as we did
the laws of the fathers, and paying respect and deference to the man,
and having also his own letters which prove that lawsuits ought not to
be taken beyond the border, but that affairs of the several provinces
should be treated within the limits of the province, we would not accept
the office of judge, but deprecated it with great earnestness. But he,
as if striving to aggravate the former insults, having summoned my
arch<span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="xviii.iii-Page_310"></span>deacon, by a stretch of arbitrary power,
as if the Church were already widowed, and had no bishop, by means of
this man seduced all the clergy to his own side; and the Churches became
destitute, as the clergy in each were gradually withdrawn, and
instructed to hand in petitions against us, and trained to prepare
accusations. And having done this he sent and summoned us to trial,
although he had not yet cleared himself of the charges brought against
him, a proceeding directly contrary to the canons and to all the laws.

<span id="xviii.iii-p6"></span>2. But we being aware that we were not
cited to a trial (for otherwise we would have presented ourselves any
number of times) but to the presence of an enemy and an adversary, as
was clearly proved by all which occurred both before and after,
despatched certain bishops to him, Demetrius of Pesinus, Eulysius of
Apamea, Lupicinus of Appiaria, <span id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959)
and the presbyters Germanus and Severus, who replied with the moderation
which became us, and said, that we did not decline to be judged, but to
appear before an open enemy, and manifest adversary. For how could one
who had not yet received any bills of indictment against me, and had
acted from the outset in the manner described, and severed himself from
the Church, from communion, and from prayer, and was training accusers,
and seducing the clergy, and desolating the Church, how, I say, could he
with justice mount the throne of the judge which was not in any sense
befitting him? For it is not suitable that one who belongs to Egypt
should act as judge of those who are in Thrace, and this a man who is
himself under an accusation, and an enemy and adversary. Nevertheless
he, in no way abashed, but hurrying on to the completion of his design,
although we had declared our readiness to clear ourselves of the charges
in the presence of a hundred yea or a thousand bishops, and to prove
ourselves innocent as indeed we are, would not consent: but in our
absence, when we were appealing to a synod, and demanding a trial, and
not shrinking from a hearing of our cause, but only from open enmity, he
both received our accusers and absolved those who had been
excommunicated by me, and from them, who had not yet cleared themselves
of the offences laid to their charge, he received complaints <span
id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960) against me, and had minutes made of
the proceedings, all which things are contrary to law, and the order of
the canons. But what need is there of a long story? He did not cease
doing and contriving everything until, with all possible display of
arbitrary power and authority, he ejected us from the city and the
church, when the evening was far advanced and all the people were
streaming after us. Being drawn by the public informer <span
id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) through the midst of the city, and
dragged along by force I was taken down to the sea, and thrust on board
ship, and made a night voyage, because I appealed to a synod for a just
hearing of my cause. Who could hear these things without tears, even if
he had a heart of stone?

<span id="xviii.iii-p10"></span>But seeing, as I said before, that we
ought not merely to lament the evils which have been done, but also to
amend them, I beseech your Charity to rouse yourself and have
compassion, and do everything so as to put a stop to the mischief at
this point. For even after what I have mentioned he did not desist from
his deeds of iniquity, but sought to renew the former attack. For when
the most devout Emperor had turned out those who shamelessly rushed into
the Church, and many of the Bishops present seeing their iniquity had
retreated into their own dioceses, flying from the incursion of these
men as from a fire devouring all things, we were again invited to the
city, and to the Church, from which we had been unjustly expelled, more
than thirty bishops introducing us, and our most pious Emperor sending a
notary for this purpose, while Theophilus immediately took to flight.
For what purpose, and from what cause? When we entered the city we
besought our most pious Emperor to convene a synod for prosecuting the
offenders in the late transactions. Being conscious therefore of what he
had done, and dreading conviction, the imperial letters having been sent
in every direction, convoking all men from all quarters, Theophilus
secretly at midnight flung himself into a boat, and so made his escape,
taking all his company with him.

<span id="xviii.iii-p11"></span>3. But even then we did not desist,
supported as we were by a clear conscience, from making the same
supplication again to the most devout Emperor: and he, acting as became
his piety, sent to Theophilus again, summoning him from Egypt, and his
associates, in order to give an account of the late proceedings, and
informing him that he was not to suppose that the one-sided deeds which
he had so unjustly perpetrated in our absence, and in violation of so
many canons, would suffice for his defence. He did not however submit to
the royal mandate, but remained at home, alleging an insurrection of the
people in excuse, and the unseasonable zeal of cer<span id="page_311">p.
311</span> <span id="xviii.iii-Page_311"></span>tain persons who were
attached to him, as he pretended: and yet before the arrival of the
imperial letters this same people had deluged him with abuse. But we do
not make much of these matters now, but have said what we have said as
wishing to prove the fact that he was arrested in his mischievous
course. Yet even after these things we did not rest, but were urgent in
our demand that a tribunal should be formed for the purpose of enquiry
and defence: for we said that we were ready to prove that we ourselves
were guiltless, but that they had flagrantly transgressed. For there
were some Syrians amongst those present with him at that time, who were
left behind here; and we accosted them expressing our readiness to plead
our cause, and frequently importuned them on this behalf, demanding that
the minutes (of the late transactions) should be given up to us, or that
the formal bills of indictment, or the nature of the charges, or the
accusers themselves, should be made known; and yet we did not obtain any
of these things, but were again expelled from the Church. How am I to
relate the events which followed, transcending as they do every kind of
tragedy? What language will set forth these events? what kind of ear
will receive them without shuddering? For when we were urging these
things, as I said before, a dense troop of soldiers, on the great
Sabbath itself, <span id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962) as the day was
hastening towards eventide, having broken into the Churches violently
drove out all the clergy who were with us, and surrounded the sanctuary
with arms. And women from the oratories <span
id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) who had stripped themselves for
baptism just at that time, fled unclothed, from terror at this grievous
assault, not being permitted to put on the modest apparel which befits
women; indeed many received wounds before they were expelled, and the
baptismal pools were filled with blood, and the sacred water reddened by
it. Nor did the distress cease even at this point; but the soldiers,
some of whom as we understand were unbaptized, having entered the place
where the sacred vessels were stored, saw all the things which were
inside it, and the most holy blood of Christ, as might happen in the
midst of such confusion, was spilt upon the garments of the soldiers
aforesaid: and every kind of outrage was committed as in a barbarian
siege. And the common people were driven to the wilderness, and all the
people tarried outside the city, and the Churches became empty in the
midst of this great Festival, and more than forty bishops who associated
with us were vainly and causelessly expelled together with the people
and clergy. And there were shrieks and lamentations, and torrents of
tears were shed everywhere, in the market places, in the houses, in the
desert places, and every part of the city was filled with these
calamities; for owing to the immoderate extent of the outrage not only
the sufferers, but also they who did not undergo anything of the kind
sympathized with us, not only those who held the same opinions as ours,
but also heretics, and Jews, and Greeks, and all places were in a state
of tumult and confusion, and lamentation, as if the city had been
captured by force. And these things were perpetrated contrary to the
intention of our most pious Emperor, under cover of night, the Bishops
contriving them, and in many places conducting the attack, nor were they
ashamed to have sergeants <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964)
instead of deacons marching in front of them. And when day dawned all
the city was migrating outside the walls under trees and groves,
celebrating the festival, like scattered sheep.

<span id="xviii.iii-p15"></span>4. All which happened afterwards I leave
you to imagine; for as I said before it is not possible to describe each
separate incident. The worst of it is that these evils, great and
serious as they are, have not even now been suppressed nor is there any
hope of their suppression; on the contrary the mischief is extending
itself every day, and we have become a laughing stock to the multitude,
or rather I should say, no one laughs even if he is infinitely lawless,
but all men mourn, as I was saying, this new kind of lawlessness, the
finishing stroke of all our ills.

<span id="xviii.iii-p16"></span>What is one to say to the disorders in
the other Churches? For the evil did not stop even here, but made its
way to the east. For as when some evil humor is discharged from the
head, all the other parts are corrupted, so now also these evils, having
originated in this great city as from a fountain, confusion has spread
in every direction, and clergy have everywhere made insurrection against
bishops, there has been schism between bishop and bishop, people and
people, and will be yet more; every place is suffering from the throes
of calamity, and the subversion of the whole civilized world. Having
been informed then of all these things, my lords, most honourable and
devout, exhibit the courage and zeal which becomes you, so as to put a
stop to this great assault of lawlessness which has been made upon the
Churches. For if this <span id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span
id="xviii.iii-Page_312"></span>custom were to prevail, and it became
lawful for any persons who desired it to enter strange dioceses, so
widely separated, and expel those whom one wished to remove, and do
whatever they pleased according to their own arbitrary power, be assured
that all things will go to ruin, and an implacable kind of war will
overrun the whole world, all men attacking others, and being in turn
attacked. Therefore to prevent such confusion overtaking the whole earth
yield to our entreaties that ye will signify by writing that these
lawless transactions executed in our absence, and after hearing one side
only, although we did not decline a trial, are invalid, as indeed they
are by the very nature of the case, and that those who are convicted of
having committed such iniquities must be subjected to the penalty of the
ecclesiastical laws; and for ourselves, who have not been detected or
convicted, or proved liable to punishment may we continue to have the
benefit of your correspondence, and your love, and all other things
which we have enjoyed aforetime. But if even now those who have
committed such lawless acts are willing to disclose the charges on the
strength of which they have unjustly expelled us, neither memoranda, nor
formal bills of indictment being given, nor the accusers having
appeared: yet if an impartial tribunal is formed, we will submit to be
tried, and will make our defence, and prove ourselves guiltless of the
things laid to our charge, as indeed we are: for the things which they
have done are outside the bounds of every kind of order, and every kind
of ecclesiastical law and canon. And why do I say ecclesiastical canon?
Not even in the heathen courts would such audacious deeds ever have been
committed, or rather not even in a barbarian court, neither Scythians,
nor Sarmatians would ever have judged a cause in this fashion, deciding
it after hearing one side only, in the absence of the accused, who only
deprecated enmity, not a trial of his case, who was ready to call any
number of judges, asserting himself to be innocent and able to clear
himself of the charges in the face of the world, and prove himself
guiltless in every respect.

<span id="xviii.iii-p17"></span>Having considered therefore all these
things, and having been clearly informed of all particulars by my lords,
our most devout brethren the bishops, may you be induced to exert your
zeal on our behalf; for in so doing ye will confer a favour not upon
ourselves alone but also upon the Church at large, and ye will receive
your reward from God who does all things for the peace of the Churches.
Fare thee well always, and pray for me, most honoured and holy master.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_959"></span>[310:960](1090087.htm#fr_959) <span
id="xviii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p7"></span> Pesinus was in Galatia, Apamea in
Bithynia, Appiaria I have not identified.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[310:961](1090087.htm#fr_960) <span
id="xviii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p8"></span> *Libellos*, a technical word signifying
a formal petition of complaint or accusation.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[310:962](1090087.htm#fr_961) <span
id="xviii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p9"></span> *Curiosus*, an official whose duty it
was to investigate charges, and inform the Emperor of offenders.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[311:963](1090087.htm#fr_962) <span
id="xviii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p12"></span> *i. e*., Easter Eve.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[311:964](1090087.htm#fr_963) <span
id="xviii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.iii-p13.1"></span>οἶκοι ἐυκτήριοι</span>. Churches were
sometimes so called, more often, however, private chapels as
distinguished from parish churches. The meaning here is not very
obvious; perhaps some chambers attached to the Church, where catechumens
prayed before baptism, are referred to.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[311:965](1090087.htm#fr_964) <span
id="xviii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p14"></span> Campiductores—their special business
was to drill recruits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Innocent, Bishop of Rome, Greeting in the Lord.](1090088)
