[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090029)  [Next](1090031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>Letter II.</span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="v.iv-p2.1"></span>If</span> it were possible to express tears and
groans by means of writing I would have filled the letter, which I now
send to you, with them. Now I weep not because you are anxious
concerning your patrimony, but because you have blotted out your name
from the list of the brethren, because you have trampled upon the
covenant which you had made with Christ. This is the reason why I
shudder, this is the cause of my distress. On this account do I fear and
tremble, knowing that the rejection of this covenant will bring great
condemnation upon those who have enlisted for this noble warfare, and
owing to indolence have deserted their proper rank. And that the
punishment for such is heavier than for others is manifest for this
reason. For no one would indite a private individual for shunning
military service; but when once a man has become a soldier, if he be
caught deserting the ranks, he runs a risk of suffering the most extreme
penalty. There is nothing strange, beloved Theodore, in a wrestler
falling, but in his remaining in a fallen condition; neither is it a
grievous thing for the warrior to be wounded, but to despair after the
blow has been struck, and to neglect the wound. No merchant, having once
suffered shipwreck, and lost his freight, desists from sailing, but
again crosses the sea and the billows, and the broad ocean, and recovers
his former wealth. We see athletes also who after many falls have gained
the wreath of victory; and often, before now, a soldier who has once ran
away has turned out a champion, and prevailed over the enemy. Many also
of those who have denied <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_112"></span>Christ owing to the pressure of torture, have
fought again, and departed at last with the crown of martyrdom upon
their brows. But if each of these had despaired after the first blow, he
would not have reaped the subsequent benefits. Even so now, beloved
Theodore, because the enemy has shaken thee a little from thy position,
do not thou give thyself an additional thrust into the pit, but stand up
bravely, and return speedily to the place from which thou hast departed,
and deem not this blow, lasting but for a little while, any reproach.
For if you saw a soldier returning wounded from war you would not
reproach him; for it is a reproach to cast away one’s arms, and to hold
aloof from the enemy; but as long as a man stands fighting, even if he
be wounded and retreat for a short time, no one is so unfeeling or
inexperienced in matters of war, as to find any fault with him.
Exemption from wounds is the lot of non-combatants; but those who
advance with much spirit against the enemy may sometimes be wounded and
fail; which is exactly what has now occurred in your case; for suddenly,
while you attempted to destroy the serpent you were bitten. But take
courage, you need a little vigilance, and then not a trace of this wound
will be left; or rather by the grace of God thou wilt crush the head of
the Evil One himself; nor let it trouble thee that thou art soon
impeded, even at the outset. For the eye, the keen eye of the Evil One
perceived the excellence of thy soul, and guessed from many tokens that
a brave adversary would wax strong against him; for he expected that one
who had promptly attacked him with such great vehemence would easily
overcome him, if he persevered. Therefore he was diligent, and watchful,
and mightily stirred up against thee, or rather against his own head, if
thou wilt bravely stand thy ground. For who did not marvel at thy quick,
sincere, and fervent change to good? For delicacy of food was
disregarded, and costliness of raiment was despised, all manner of
parade was put down, and all the zeal for the wisdom of this world was
suddenly transferred to the divine oracles; whole days were spent in
reading, and whole nights in prayer; no mention was made of thy family
dignity, nor any thought taken of thy wealth; but to clasp the knees and
hasten to the feet of the brethren thou didst recognize as something
nobler than high birth. These things irritated the Evil One, these
things stirred him up to more vehement strife; but yet he did not give a
deadly blow. For if after a long time, and continual fastings, and
sleeping on the bare ground and the rest of the discipline he overthrew
you, even then there was no need to despair; nevertheless one would have
said that the damage was great if defeat had taken place after many
toils, and labour, and victories; but inasmuch as he upset you as soon
as you had stripped for the contest with him, all that he accomplished
was to render you more eager to do battle with him. For that fell pirate
attacked thee just as thou wast sailing out of the harbor, not when thou
hadst returned from thy trading voyage, bringing a full cargo. And as
when one has attempted to stay a fierce lion, and has only grazed his
skin, he has done him no injury but only stirred him up the more against
himself, and rendered him more confident and difficult to capture
afterwards: even so the common enemy of all has attempted to strike a
deep blow, but has missed it, and consequently made his antagonist more
vigilant and wary for the future.

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>2. For human nature is a slippery thing, quick
to be cheated, but quick also to recover from deceit and as it speedily
falls, so also does it readily rise. For even that blessed man, I mean
David the chosen king and prophet, after he had accomplished many good
deeds, betrayed himself to be a man, for once he fell in love with a
strange woman, nor did he stop there but he committed adultery on
account of his passion, and he committed murder on account of his
adultery; but he did not try to inflict a third blow upon himself
because he had already received two such heavy ones, but immediately
hastened to the physician, and applied the remedies, fasting, tears,
lamentation, constant prayer, frequent confession of the sin; and so by
these means he propitiated God, insomuch that he was restored to his
former position, insomuch that after adultery and murder the memory of
the father was able to shield the idolatry of the son. For the son of
this David, Solomon by name, was caught by the same snare as his father,
and out of complaisance to women fell away from the God of his
fathers. <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) Thou seest how great an
evil it is not to master pleasure, not to upset the ruling principle in
nature, and for a man to be the slave of women. This same Solomon then,
who was formerly righteous and wise but who ran a risk of being deprived
of all the kingdom on account of his sin, God permitted to keep the
sixth part of the government on account of the renown of his
father. <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307)

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span>Now if thy zeal had been concerned with
worldly eloquence, and then thou hadst given it up in despair, I should
have reminded thee of the law courts and the judgment seat and the
victories achieved there and the former <span id="page_113">p.
113</span> <span id="v.iv-Page_113"></span>boldness of thy speech, and
should have exhorted thee to return to your labours in that behalf: but
inasmuch as our race is for heavenly things, and we take no account of
the things which are on earth, I put thee in remembrance of another
court of justice, and of that fearful and tremendous seat of judgment;
“for we must all be made manifest before the judgment seat of
Christ.” <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) “And He will then sit
as judge who is now disregarded by thee. What shall we say then, let me
ask at that time? or what defence shall we make, if we continue to
disregard Him? What shall we say then? Shall we plead the anxieties of
business? Nay He has anticipated this by saying, “What shall it profit a
man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul?” <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) Or that we have been deceived by
others? But it did not help Adam in his defence to screen himself behind
his wife, and say “the woman whom thou gavest me, she deceived
me;” <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) even as the serpent was no
excuse for the woman. Terrible, O beloved Theodore, is that tribunal,
one which needs no accusers and waits for no witnesses; for “all things
are naked and laid open to Him” <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311)
who judges us, and we must submit to give an account not of deeds only
but also of thoughts; for that judge is quick to discern the thoughts
and intents of the heart. <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) But
perhaps you will allege weakness of nature as the excuse, and inability
to bear the yoke. And what kind of defence is this, that you have not
strength to bear the easy yoke, that you are unable to carry the light
burden? Is recovery from fatigue a grievous and oppressive thing? For it
is to this that Christ calls us, saying, “Come unto me all ye that
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; take my yoke upon
you and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; for my yoke is
easy and my burden is light.” <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313)
For what can be lighter I ask, than to be released from anxieties, and
business, and fears, and labors, and to stand outside the rough billows
of life, and dwell in a tranquil haven?

<span id="v.iv-p13"></span>3. Which of all things in the world seems to
you most desirable and enviable? No doubt you will say government, and
wealth, and public reputation. And yet what is more wretched than these
things when they are compared with the liberty of Christians. For the
ruler is subjected to the wrath of the populace and to the irrational
impulses of the multitude, and to the fear of higher rulers, and to
anxieties on behalf of those who are ruled, and the ruler of yesterday
becomes a private citizen to-day; for this present life in no wise
differs from a stage, but just as there, one man fills the position of a
king, a second of a general, and a third of a soldier, but when evening
has come on the king is no king, the ruler no ruler, and the general no
general, even so also in that day each man will receive his due reward
not according to the outward part which he has played but according to
his works. Well! is glory a precious thing which perishes like the power
of grass? or wealth, the possessors of which are pronounced unhappy?
“For woe” we read, “to the rich;” <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) and again, “Woe unto them who trust in
their strength and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches!” <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) But the Christian never
becomes a private person after being a ruler, or a poor man after being
rich, or without honour after being held in honour; but he abides rich
even when he is poor, and is exalted when he strives to humble himself;
and from the rule which he exercises no human being can depose him, but
only one of those rulers who are under the power of this world’s
potentate of darkness.

<span id="v.iv-p16"></span>“Marriage is right,” you say; I also assent
to this. For “marriage,” we read, “is honourable and the bed undefiled;
but fornicators and adulterers God will judge;” <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) but it is no longer possible for thee
to observe the right conditions of marriage. For if he who has been
attached to a heavenly bridegroom deserts him, and joins himself to a
wife the act is adultery, even if you call it marriage ten thousand
times over; or rather it is worse than adultery in proportion as God is
greater than man. Let no one deceive thee saying: “God hath not
forbidden to marry;” I know this as well as you; He has not forbidden to
marry, but He has forbidden to commit adultery, may you be preserved
from ever engaging thyself in marriage! And why dost thou marvel if
marriage is judged as if it were adultery, when God is disregarded?
Slaughter has brought about righteousness, and mercy has been a cause of
condemnation more than <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_114"></span>slaughter; because the latter has been
according to the mind of God but the former has been forbidden. It was
reckoned to Phinees for righteousness that he pierced to death the woman
who committed fornication, together with the fornicator; <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) but Samuel, that saint of God although
he wept and mourned and entreated for whole nights, could not rescue
Saul from the condemnation which God issued against him, because he
saved, contrary to the design of God, the king of the alien tribes whom
he ought to have slain. <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) If then
mercy has been a cause of condemnation more than slaughter because God
was disobeyed, what wonder is it if marriage condemns more than adultery
when it involves the rejection of Christ? For, as I said at the
beginning, if you were a private person no one would indict you for
shunning to serve as a soldier; but now thou art no longer thy own
master, being engaged in the service of so great a king. For if the wife
hath not power over her own body, but the husband, <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) much more they who live in Christ must
be unable to have authority over their body. He who is now despised, the
same will then be our judge; think ever on Him and the river of fire:
“For a river of fire” we read, “winds before His face;” <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) for it is impossible for one who has
been delivered over by Him to the fire to expect any end of his
punishment. But the unseemly pleasures of this life no-wise differ from
shadows and dreams; for before the deed of sin is completed, the
conditions of pleasure are extinguished; and the punishments for these
have no limit. And the sweetness lasts for a little while but the pain
is everlasting.

<span id="v.iv-p22"></span>Tell me, what is there stable in this world?
Wealth which often does not last even to the evening? Or glory? Hear
what a certain righteous man says: “My life is swifter than a
runner.” <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) For as they dash away
before they stand still, even so does this glory take to flight before
it has fairly reached us. Nothing is more precious than the soul; and
even they who have gone to the extremity of folly have not been ignorant
of this; for “there is no equivalent of the soul” is the saying of a
heathen poet. <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) I know that thou
hast become much weaker for the struggle with the Evil One; I know that
thou art standing in the very midst of the flame of pleasures; but if
thou wilt say to the enemy “We do not serve thy pleasures, and we do not
bow down to the root of all thy evils;” if thou wilt bend thine eye
upward, the Saviour will even now shake out the fire, and will burn up
those who have flung thee into it, and will send to thee in the midst of
the furnace a cloud, and dew, and a rustling breeze, so that the fire
may not lay hold of thy thought or thy conscience. Only do not consume
thyself with fire. For the arms and engines of besiegers have often been
unable to destroy the fortification of cities, but the treachery of one
or two of the citizens dwelling inside has betrayed them to the enemy
without any trouble on his part. And now if none of thy thoughts within
betray thee, should the Evil One bring countless engines against thee
from without he will bring them in vain.

<span id="v.iv-p25"></span>4. Thou hast by the grace of God many and
great men who sympathize with thy trouble, who encourage you to the
fight, who tremble for thy soul,—Valerius the holy man of God,
Florentius who is in every respect his brother, Porphyrius who is wise
with the wisdom of Christ, and many others. These are daily mourning,
and praying for you without ceasing; and they would have obtained what
they asked for, long ago, if only thou hadst been willing to withdraw
thyself a little space out of the hands of the enemy. Now then is it not
strange that, whilst others do not even now despair of thy salvation,
but are continually praying that they may have their member restored to
them, thou thyself, having once fallen, art unwilling to get up again,
and remainest prostrate, all but crying aloud to the enemy: “Slay me,
smite me, spare not?” “Does he who falls not rise up again?” <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) speaks the divine oracle. But thou art
striving against this and contradicting it; for if one who has fallen
despairs it is as much as to say that he who falls does not rise up
again. I entreat thee do not so great a wrong to thyself; do not pour
upon us such a flood of sorrow. I do not say at the present time, when
thou hast not yet completed thy twentieth year, but even if, after
achieving many things, and spending thy whole life in Christ thou hadst,
in extreme old age, experienced this attack, even then it would not have
been right to despair, but to call to mind the robber who was justified
on the cross, the labourers who wrought about the eleventh hour, and
received the wages of the whole day. But as it is not well that those
who have fallen near the very extremity of life should abandon hope, if
they be sober minded, so on the other hand it is not safe to feed upon
this hope, and say, “Here for a while, I will enjoy the sweets of life,
but afterwards, when I have worked for a short time, I shall receive the
wages of the whole working time. For I recollect hearing you often say,
when many were exhorting you to frequent the schools; <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) “But what if I bring my life to a bad
end in a short space of time, how shall I depart to Him who has said
‘Delay not to turn to the Lord, nor put off day after day?’” <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) Recover this thought, and stand in
fear of the thief; for by this name Christ calls our departure hence,
because it comes upon us unawares. Consider the anxieties of life which
befall us, both those which are personal to ourselves, and which are
common to us with others, the fear of rulers, the envy of citizens, the
danger which <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_115"></span>often hangs over us imperilling even life
itself, the labours, the distresses, the servile flatteries, such as are
unbecoming even to slaves if they be earnest minded men, the fruit of
our labours coming to an end in this world, a fact which is the most
distressing of all. It has been the lot indeed of many to miss the
enjoyment of the things for which they have laboured, and after having
consumed the prime of their manhood in labours and perils, just when
they hoped that they should receive their reward they have departed
taking nothing with them. For if, after undergoing many dangers, and
completing many campaigns, one will scarcely look upon an earthly king
with confidence, how will any one be able to behold the heavenly king,
if he has lived and fought for another all his time.

<span id="v.iv-p29"></span>5. Would you have me speak of the domestic
cares of wife, and children and slaves? It is an evil thing to wed a
very poor wife, or a very rich one; for the former is injurious to the
husband’s means, the latter to his authority and independence. It is a
grievous thing to have children, still more grievous not to have any;
for in the latter case marriage has been to no purpose, in the former a
bitter bondage has to be undergone. If a child is sick, it is the
occasion of no small fear; if he dies an untimely death, there is
inconsolable grief; and at every stage of growth there are various
anxieties on their account, and many fears and toils. And what is one to
say to the rascalities of domestic slaves? Is this then life, Theodore,
when one’s soul is distracted in so many directions, when a man has to
serve so many, to live for so many, and never for himself? Now amongst
us, O friend, none of these things happen, I appeal to yourself as a
witness. For during that short time when you were willing to lift your
head above the waves of this world, you know what great cheerfulness and
gladness you enjoyed. For there is no man free, save only he who lives
for Christ. He stands superior to all troubles, and if he does not
choose to injure himself no one else will be able to do this, but he is
impregnable; he is not stung by the loss of wealth; for he has learned
that we “brought nothing into this world, neither can we carry anything
out;” <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) he is not caught by the
longings of ambition or glory; for he has learned that our citizenship
is in heaven; <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) no one annoys him
by abuse, or provokes him by blows; there is only one calamity for a
Christian which is, disobedience to God; but all the other things, such
as loss of property, exile, peril of life, he does not even reckon to be
a grievance at all. And that which all dread, departure hence to the
other world,—this is to him sweeter than life itself. For as when one
has climbed to the top of a cliff and gazes on the sea and those who are
sailing upon it, he sees some being washed by the waves, others running
upon hidden rocks, some hurrying in one direction, others being driven
in another, like prisoners, by the force of the gale, many actually in
the water, some of them using their hands only in the place of a boat
and a rudder, and many drifting along upon a single plank, or some
fragment of the vessel, others floating dead, a scene of manifold and
various disaster; even so he who is engaged in the service of Christ
drawing himself out of the turmoil and stormy billows of life takes his
seat upon secure and lofty ground. For what position can be loftier or
more secure than that in which a man has only one anxiety, “How he ought
to please God?” <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) Hast thou seen
the shipwrecks, Theodore, of those who sail upon this sea? Wherefore, I
beseech thee, avoid the deep water, avoid the stormy billows, and seize
some lofty spot where it is not possible to be captured. There is a
resurrection, there is a judgment, there is a terrible tribunal which
awaits us when we have gone out of this world; “we must all stand before
the judgment-seat of Christ.” <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) It
is not in vain that we are threatened with hell fire, it is not without
purpose that such great blessings have been prepared for us. The things
of this life are a shadow, and more naught even than a shadow, being
full of many fears, and many dangers, and extreme bondage. Do not then
deprive thyself both of that world, and of this, when you may gain both,
if you please. Now that they who live in Christ will gain the things of
this world Paul teaches us when he says: “But I spare you;” <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) and again “But this I say for your
profit.” <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) Seest thou that even
here he who cares for the things of the Lord is superior to the man who
has married? It is not possible for one who has departed to the other
world to repent; no athlete, when he has quitted the lists, and the
spectators have dispersed, can contend again.

<span id="v.iv-p36"></span>Be always thinking of these things, and break
in pieces the sharp sword of the Evil One, by means of which he destroys
many. And this is despair, which cuts off from hope those who have been
overthrown. This is the strong weapon of the enemy, and the only way in
which he holds down those who have been made captives is by binding them
with this chain, which, if we choose, we shall speedily be able to break
by the grace of God. I know that I have exceeded the due measure of a
<span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_116"></span>letter, but forgive me; for I am not willingly
in this condition, but have been constrained by my love and sorrow,
owing to which I forced myself to write this letter also, <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) although many would have prevented me.
“Cease labouring in vain and sowing upon rock” many have been saying to
me. But I hearkened to none of them. For there is hope I said to myself
that, God willing, my letter will accomplish something; but if that
which we deprecate should take place, we shall at least have the
advantage of escaping self reproach for keeping silence, and we shall
not be worse than sailors on the sea, who, when they behold men of their
own craft drifting on a plank, because their ship has been broken to
pieces by the winds and waves, take down their sails, and cast anchor,
and get into a boat and try to rescue the men, although strangers, known
to them only in consequence of their calamity. But if the others were
unwilling to be rescued no one would accuse those of their destruction
who attempted to save them. This is what we offer; but we trust that by
the grace of God you also will do your part, and we shall again see you
occupying an eminent place in the flock of Christ. In answer to the
prayers of the saints may we speedily receive thee back, dear friend,
sound in the true health. If thou hast any regard for us, and hast not
utterly cast us out of thy memory, please vouchsafe a reply to our
letter; for in so doing thou wilt give us much pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_306"></span>[112:307](1090030.htm#fr_306) <span
id="v.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span> [1 Kings
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004)<span id="v.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[112:308](1090030.htm#fr_307) <span
id="v.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span> [1 Kings
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013)<span id="v.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[113:309](1090030.htm#fr_308) <span
id="v.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span> [2 Cor. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="v.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[113:310](1090030.htm#fr_309) <span
id="v.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span> [Matt. xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)<span id="v.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[113:311](1090030.htm#fr_310) <span
id="v.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span> [Gen. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#012)<span id="v.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[113:312](1090030.htm#fr_311) <span
id="v.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span> [Heb. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[113:313](1090030.htm#fr_312) <span
id="v.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p11"></span> [Heb. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="v.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[113:314](1090030.htm#fr_313) <span
id="v.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p12"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="v.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[113:315](1090030.htm#fr_314) <span
id="v.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p14"></span> [Luke vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024)<span id="v.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[113:316](1090030.htm#fr_315) <span
id="v.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p15"></span> [Ps. xlix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006)<span id="v.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[113:317](1090030.htm#fr_316) <span
id="v.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p17"></span> [Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="v.iv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[114:318](1090030.htm#fr_317) <span
id="v.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p18"></span> [Num. xxv.
7-11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007)<span id="v.iv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[114:319](1090030.htm#fr_318) <span
id="v.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p19"></span> [1 Sam.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#000)<span id="v.iv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[114:320](1090030.htm#fr_319) <span
id="v.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p20"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004)<span id="v.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[114:321](1090030.htm#fr_320) <span
id="v.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p21"></span> [Dan. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span id="v.iv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[114:322](1090030.htm#fr_321) <span
id="v.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p23"></span> [Job ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#025)<span id="v.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[114:323](1090030.htm#fr_322) <span
id="v.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p24"></span> Homer Il. ix. 401.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[114:324](1090030.htm#fr_323) <span
id="v.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p26"></span> [Jer. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004)<span id="v.iv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[114:325](1090030.htm#fr_324) <span
id="v.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p27"></span> *i.e*., schools of Pagan philosophy:
probably those over which Libanius presided in Antioch.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[114:326](1090030.htm#fr_325) <span
id="v.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p28"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
5.8](../../../bib/apo/sir005.htm#008)<span id="v.iv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[115:327](1090030.htm#fr_326) <span
id="v.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p30"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007)<span id="v.iv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[115:328](1090030.htm#fr_327) <span
id="v.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p31"></span> [Phil. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="v.iv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[115:329](1090030.htm#fr_328) <span
id="v.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p32"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#001)<span id="v.iv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[115:330](1090030.htm#fr_329) <span
id="v.iv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p33"></span> [Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="v.iv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[115:331](1090030.htm#fr_330) <span
id="v.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p34"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028)<span id="v.iv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[115:332](1090030.htm#fr_331) <span
id="v.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p35"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)<span id="v.iv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[116:333](1090030.htm#fr_332) <span
id="v.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p37"></span> This seems to imply a previous letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter to a Young Widow.](1090031)
