[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090087)  [Next](1090089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c34"><span
id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>to innocent, bishop of rome, greeting in the
lord.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="xviii.iv-p2.1"></span>Our</span> body it is true is settled in one
place, but the pinion of love wings its way round every part of the
world. Even so we also although we be separated by a journey of such
great extent are nigh to your Piety, and in daily communion with you,
beholding with the eyes of love the courage of your soul, the sterling
nature of your disposition, your firmness and inflexibility, the great
consolation, constant and abiding, which you bestow upon us. For in
proportion as the billows mount higher, and concealed reefs increase,
and the hurricanes are many does your vigilance wax stronger: and
neither the great length of the journey between us, nor the large amount
of time consumed, nor the difficulty in dealing with events has disposed
you to become supine: but ye continue to imitate the best class of
pilots who are on the alert at those times most especially when they see
the waves crested, the sea swelling, the water dashing vehemently, and
the deepest darkness in day-time. Therefore also we feel great gratitude
towards you, and we long to send you showers of letters, thus affording
ourselves the greatest gratification. But since we are deprived of this,
owing to the desolation of the place; (for not only of those who arrive
from your regions, but even of those who dwell in our part of the world
no one could easily have intercourse with us, both on account of the
distance, the spot in which we are confined being situated at the very
extremity of the country, and also the terror of robbers acting as a bar
to the whole journey:) we beseech you rather to pity us because of our
long silence, than to condemn us for indolence on that account. For as a
proof that our silence has not been due to negligence, we have now at
last after a long time secured our most honoured and beloved John the
presbyter, and Paul the deacon, and we send a letter through them, and
continue to express our gratitude to you, that you have surpassed even
affectionate parents in your good will and zeal concerning us. And
indeed so far as your Piety is concerned all things would have been duly
amended, and the accumulation of evils and offences have been swept
away, and the Churches would have enjoyed peace and a glassy calm, and
all things would have floated along with a smooth stream, and the
despised laws and violated decrees of the fathers would have been
vindicated. But since in reality none of these things has taken place,
they who perpetrated the former deeds striving to aggravate their <span
id="page_313">p. 313</span> <span id="xviii.iv-Page_313"></span>former
iniquities, I omit any detailed narrative of their subsequent
proceedings: for the narrative would exceed the limits not merely of a
letter but even of a history; only this I beseech your vigilant soul,
even if they who have filled everything with confusion be impenitently
and incurably corrupt, let not those who have undertaken to cure them
become faint-hearted or despondent, when they consider the magnitude of
the thing to be accomplished. For the contest now before you has to be
fought on behalf of nearly the whole world, on behalf of Churches
humbled to the ground, of people dispersed, of clergy assaulted, of
bishops sent into exile, of ancestral laws violated. Wherefore we
beseech your Diligence, once, twice, yea many times, in proportion as
the storm increases, to manifest still greater zeal. For we expect that
something more will be done for the purpose of amending these wrongs.
But even if this should not take place, ye at least have your crown made
ready for you by the merciful God, and the resistance offered by your
love will be no small consolation to those who are wronged: for now that
we are passing the third year of our sojourn in exile exposed to famine,
pestilence, wars, continual sieges, indescribable solitude, daily death,
and Isaurian swords, we are not a little encouraged and comforted by the
constant and abiding nature of your disposition and confidence, and by
revelling in your abundant and genuine love. This is our wall of
defence, this is our security, this our calm haven, this our treasure of
infinite blessings, this our gladness, and ground of much joy. And even
if we should be carried off again to some spot more desolate than this,
we shall carry this love away with us as no small consolation of our
sufferings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Beloved Brother John, Innocent.](1090089)
