[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090107)  [Next](1090109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.xvii"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="xix.xvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XV.</span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p2"></span>*Again on the calamity of the city of
Antioch. That fear is every way profitable. That sorrow is more useful
than laughter. And upon the saying, “Remember that thou walkest in the
midst of snares.”* <span id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614) *And that
it is worse to exact an oath, than to commit murder.*

<span id="xix.xvii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.xvii-p4.1"></span>To-day</span>, and on the former
Sabbath, <span id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615) it had behoved us to
enter on the subject of fasting; nor let any one suppose that what I
said was unseasonable. <span id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616) For on
the days of the fast, counsel and admonition on that subject are indeed
not at all necessary; the very presence of these days exciting even
those who are the most remiss to the effort of fasting. But since many
men, both when about to enter upon the fast, as if the belly were on the
point of being delivered over to a sort of lengthened seige, lay in
beforehand a stock of gluttony and drunkenness; and again, on being set
at liberty, going forth as from a long famine and a grievous prison, run
to the <span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="xix.xvii-Page_439"></span>table with unseemly greediness, just as if
they were striving to undo again the advantage gained through the fast,
by an excess of gluttony; it might have been needful, that then as well
as now, we should agitate the subject of temperance. Nevertheless, we
have neither lately said any thing of that kind, neither shall we now
speak upon it. For the fear of the impending calamity suffices, instead
of the strongest admonition and counsel, to sober the soul of every one.
For who is there so miserable and degraded, as to be drunken in such a
tempest? Who is there so insensible, when the city is thus agitated, and
such a shipwreck is threatened, as not to become abstemious and
watchful, and more thoroughly reformed by this distress than by any
other sort of admonition and counsel? For discourse will not be able to
effect as much as fear does. And this very thing it is now possible to
shew from the events which have taken place. How many words then did we
spend before this in exhorting many that were listless, and counselling
them to abstain from the theatres, and the impurities of these places!
And still they did not abstain; but always on this day they flocked
together to the unlawful spectacles of the dancers; and they held their
diabolical assembly in opposition <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617) to the full congregation of God’s
Church; so that their vehement shouts, borne in the air from that place,
resounded against the psalms which we were singing here. But behold, now
whilst we were keeping silence, and saying nothing on the subject, they
of themselves have shut up their orchestra; and the Hippodrome has been
left deserted! Before this, many of our own people used to hasten to
them; but now they are all fled hither from thence to the church, and
all alike join in praising our God!

<span id="xix.xvii-p8"></span>2. Seest thou what advantage is come of
fear? If fear were not a good thing, fathers would not have set
tutors <span id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618) over their children;
nor lawgivers magistrates for cities. What can be more grievous than
hell? Yet nothing is more profitable than the fear of it; for the fear
of hell will bring us the crown of the kingdom. Where fear is, there is
no envy; where fear is, the love of money does not disturb; where fear
is, wrath is quenched, evil concupiscence is repressed, and every
unreasonable passion is exterminated. And even as in a house, where
there is always a soldier under arms, no robber, nor house-breaker, nor
any such evil doer will dare to make his appearance; so also while fear
holds possession of our minds, none of the base passions will readily
attack us, but all fly off and are banished, being driven away in every
direction by the despotic power of fear. And not only this advantage do
we gain from fear, but also another which is far greater. For not only,
indeed, does it expel our evil passions, but it also introduces every
kind of virtue with great facility. Where fear exists, there is zeal in
alms-giving, and intensity of prayer, and tears warm and frequent, and
groans fraught with compunction. For nothing so swallows up sin, and
makes virtue to increase and flourish, as a perpetual state of dread.
Therefore it is impossible for him who does not live in fear to act
aright; as, on the other hand, it is impossible that the man who lives
in fear can go wrong.

<span id="xix.xvii-p10"></span>3. Let us not then grieve, beloved, let
us not despond on account of the present tribulation, but let us admire
the well-devised plan of God’s wisdom. For by these very means through
which the devil hoped to overturn our city, hath God restored and
corrected it. The devil animated certain lawless men to treat the very
statues of the Emperor contemptuously, in order that the very
foundations of the city might be razed. But God employed this same
circumstance for our greater correction; driving out all sloth by the
dread of the expected wrath: and the thing has turned out directly
opposite to what the devil wished, by the means which he had himself
prepared. For our city is being purified every day; and the lanes and
crossings, and places of public concourse, are freed from lascivious and
voluptuous songs; and turn where we will there are supplications, and
thanksgivings, and tears, instead of rude laughter; there are words of
sound wisdom instead of obscene language, and our whole city has become
a Church, the workshops being closed, and all being engaged throughout
the day in these general prayers; and calling upon God in one united
voice with much earnestness. What preaching, what admonition, what
counsel, what length of time had ever availed to accomplish these
things?

<span id="xix.xvii-p11"></span>4. For this then let us be thankful, and
let us not be petulant or discontented; for that fear is a good thing,
what we have said hath made manifest. But hear Solomon thus uttering a
lesson of wisdom concerning it; Solomon, who was nourished in every
luxury, <span id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="xix.xvii-Page_440"></span>and enjoyed much security. What then does
he say? “It is better to go to the house of mourning than to the house
of laughter.” <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619) What sayest
thou, I ask? Is it better to go where there is weeping, lamentation, and
groans, and anguish, and so much sadness, than where there is the dance,
the cymbals, and laughter, and luxury, and full eating and drinking?
Yes, verily, he replies. And tell me why is it so, and for what reason?
Because, at the former place, insolence is bred, at the latter,
sobriety. And when a person goes to the banquet of one more opulent, he
will no longer behold his own house with the same pleasure, but he comes
back to his wife in a discontented mood; and in discontent he partakes
of his own table; and is peevish towards his own servants, and his own
children, and every body in his house; perceiving his own poverty the
more forcibly by the wealth of others. And this is not the only evil;
but that he also often envies him who hath invited him to the feast, and
returns home having received no benefit at all. But with regard to the
house of mourning, nothing of this sort can be said. On the contrary,
much spiritual wisdom is to be gained there, as well as sobriety. For
when once a person hath passed the threshold of a house which contains a
corpse, and hath seen the departed one lying speechless, and the wife
tearing her hair, mangling her cheeks, and wounding her arms, he is
subdued; his countenance becomes sad; and every one of those who sit
down together can say to his neighbour but this, “We are nothing, and
our wickedness is inexpressible!” <span
id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620) What can be more full of wisdom
than these words, when we both acknowledge the insignificance of our
nature, and accuse our own wickedness, and account present things as
nothing? Giving utterance, though in different words, to that very
sentiment of Solomon—that sentiment which is so marvellous and pregnant
with Divine wisdom—“Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.” <span
id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621) He who enters the house of
mourning, weeps forthwith for the departed, even though he be an enemy.
Seest thou how much better that house is than the other? for there,
though he be a friend, he envies; but here, though he be an enemy, he
weeps. This is a thing which God requires of us above all, that we
should not insult over those who have occasioned us grief. And not only
may we gather these advantages, but others also which are not less than
these. For each one is also put in mind of his own sins, and of the
fearful Tribunal; of the great Account, and of the Judgment; and
although he may have been suffering a thousand evils from others, and
have a cause for sadness at home, he will receive and take back with him
the medicine for all these things. For reflecting that he himself, and
all those who swell with pride, will in a little while suffer the same
thing; and that all present things, whether pleasant or painful, are
transitory; he thus returns to his house, disburdened of all sadness and
envy, with a light and buoyant heart; and hence he will hereafter be
more meek, and gentle, and benignant to all; as well as more wise; the
fear of things to come having made its way into his soul, and consumed
all the thorns.

<span id="xix.xvii-p15"></span>6. All this Solomon perceived when he
said, “It is better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of
drinking.” <span id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622) From the one grows
listlessness, from the other an earnest anxiety. From the one, contempt;
from the other, fear; a fear which conducts us to the practice of every
virtue. If fear were not a good thing, Christ would not have expended
such long and frequent discourses on the subject of punishment, and
vengeance to come. Fear is nothing less than a wall, and a defence, and
an impregnable tower. For indeed we stand in need of much defence,
seeing that there are many ambushments on every side. Even as this same
Solomon again says admonishingly, “Perceive that thou goest in the midst
of snares, and that thou walkest on the battlements of cities.” <span
id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623) Oh with how many good things is
this saying pregnant! Yea, not less than the former! Let us then, write
it, each of us, upon our minds, and carry it about ever in our memories,
and we shall not easily commit sin. Let us write it there, having first
learnt it with the utmost exactness. For he does not say,
“Observe” <span id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624) that thou goest in
the midst of snares; but, “Perceive!” And for what reason did he say,
“Discern?” <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625) He tells us that
the snare is concealed; for this is indeed a snare, when the destruction
does not appear openly, and the injury is not manifest, which lies
hidden on all sides. Therefore he says, “Perceive!” Thou needest much
reflection and diligent scrutiny. For even as boys conceal traps with
earth, so the devil covers up our sins with the pleasures of this life.

<span id="xix.xvii-p20"></span>7. But “perceive;” scrutinizing
diligently; <span id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="xix.xvii-Page_441"></span>and if any kind of gain falls in thy way,
look not only at the gain, but inspect it carefully, lest somewhere
death and sin lurk within the gain; and shouldest thou perceive this,
fly from it. Again, when some delight or pleasure may chance to present
itself, look not only at the pleasure; but lest somewhere in the depth
of the pleasure some iniquity should lie enveloped, search closely, and
if thou discoverest it, hasten away! And should any one counsel, or
flatter, or cajole, or promise honours, or any other such thing
whatever, let us make the closest investigation; and look at the matter
on all sides, lest something pernicious, something perilous, should
perchance befall us through this advice, or honour, or attention, and we
run upon it hastily and unwittingly. For if there were only one or two
snares, the precaution would be easy. But now, hear how Solomon speaks
when he wishes to set forth the multitude of these; “Perceive that thou
goest in the midst of snares;” he does not say, that thou “goest by”
snares, but “in the midst” of snares. On either side are the pit-falls;
on either side the deceits. One goes into the forum; one sees an enemy;
one is inflamed by the bare sight of him! one sees a friend honoured;
one is envious! One sees a poor man; one despises and takes no notice of
him! One sees a rich man; one envies him! One sees some one injuriously
treated; one recoils in disgust! One sees some one acting injuriously;
one is indignant! One sees a handsome woman, and is caught! Seest thou,
beloved, how many snares there are? Therefore it is said, “Remember that
thou goest in the midst of snares.” There are snares in the house,
snares at the table, and snares in social intercourse. Very often a
person unwittingly, in the confidence of friendship, gives utterance to
some particular of those matters which ought not to be repeated again,
and so great a peril is brought about, that the whole family is thereby
ruined!

<span id="xix.xvii-p21"></span>8. On every side then let us search
closely into these matters. Often has a wife, often have children, often
have friends, often have neighbours, proved a snare to the unheeding!
And why, it is asked, are there so many snares? That we may not fly low,
but seek the things that are above. For just as birds, as long as they
cleave the upper air, are not easily caught; so also thou, as long as
thou lookest to things above, wilt not be easily captured, whether by a
snare, or by any other device. The devil is a fowler. Soar, then, too
high for his arrows. <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626) The man
who hath mounted aloft will no longer admire any thing in the affairs of
this life. But as when we have ascended to the top of the mountains, the
city and its walls seem to us to be but small, and the men appear to us
to be going along upon the earth like ants; so when thou hast ascended
to the heights of spiritual wisdom, nothing upon the earth will be able
to fascinate thee; but every thing, yea even riches, and glory, and
honour, and whatever else there be of that kind, will appear
insignificant when thou regardest heavenly things. According to Paul all
the glories of the present life appeared trifling, and more unprofitable
than dead things. Hence his exclamation, “The world is crucified unto
me.” <span id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627) Hence also his
admonition, “Set your affections on things above.” <span
id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628) Above? What kinds of things do you
speak of pray? Where the sun is, where the moon is? Nay, saith he. But
where then? Where angels are? where archangels? where the cherubim?
where the seraphim are? Nay, saith he. But where then? “Where Christ
sitteth at the right hand of God.”

<span id="xix.xvii-p25"></span>9. Let us obey then, and let us think of
this continually, that even as to the bird caught in the snare, wings
are of no service, but he beats them about vainly, and to no purpose; so
also to thee there is no utility in thy reasonings, <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629) when once thou art powerfully
captivated by wicked lust, but struggle as much as thou mayest, thou art
captured! For this reason wings are given to birds; that they may avoid
snares. For this reason men have the power of thinking; that they may
avoid sin. What pardon then, or what excuse will be ours, when we become
more senseless than the brutes? For the bird which has once been
captured by the snare, yet afterwards escaped, and the deer which has
fallen into the net, but has broken through it, are hard to be captured
again with the like; since experience becomes a teacher of caution to
every one. But we, though often snared in the same nets, fall into the
same again; and though honoured with reason, we do not imitate the
forethought and care of the irrational animals! Hence how often do we,
from beholding a woman, suffer a thousand evils; returning home, and
entertaining an inordinate desire, and experiencing anguish for many
days; yet, nevertheless, we are not made discreet; but when we have
scarcely cured one wound, we again fall into the same mischief, and are
caught by the same means; and for the sake of the brief pleasure of a
glance, we sustain a kind of lengthened and continual torment. But if we
learn con<span id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span
id="xix.xvii-Page_442"></span>stantly to repeat to ourselves this
saying, <span id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630) we shall be kept from
all these grievous evils.

<span id="xix.xvii-p28"></span>10. The beauty of woman is the greatest
snare. Or rather, not the beauty of woman, but unchastened gazing! For
we should not accuse the objects, but ourselves, and our own
carelessness. Nor should we say, Let there be no women, but Let there be
no adulteries. We should not say, Let there be no beauty, but Let there
be no fornication. We should not say, Let there be no belly, but let
there be no gluttony; for the belly makes not the gluttony, but our
negligence. We should not say, that it is because of eating and drinking
that all these evils exist; for it is not because of this, but because
of our carelessness and insatiableness. Thus the devil neither ate nor
drank, and yet he fell! Paul ate and drank, and ascended up to heaven!
How many do I hear say, Let there be no poverty! Therefore let us stop
the mouths of those who murmur at such things. For it is blasphemy to
utter such complaints. To such then, let us say, Let there be no
meanness of spirit. For poverty brings innumerable good things into our
state of life, and without poverty riches would be unprofitable. Hence
we should accuse neither the one nor the other of these; for poverty and
riches are both alike weapons which will tend to virtue, if we are
willing. As then the courageous soldier, whichever weapon he takes,
displays his own virtue, so the unmanly and cowardly one is encumbered
by either. And that thou mayest learn that this is true, remember, I
pray, the case of Job; who became both rich, and likewise poor, and
handled both these weapons alike, and conquered in both. When he was
rich, he said, “My door was open to every comer.” <span
id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631) But when he had become poor, “The
Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away. As it seemed good unto the
Lord, so hath it come to pass.” <span
id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632) When he was rich, he shewed much
hospitality; when he was poor, much patience. And thou, then,—art thou
rich? Display much bountifulness! Hast thou become poor? Shew much
endurance and patience! For neither is wealth an evil, nor poverty in
itself; but these things, either of them, become so according to the
free choice of those who make use of them. Let us school ourselves then
to entertain no such opinions on these subjects; nor let us accuse the
works of God, but the wicked choice of men. Riches are not able to
profit the little-minded: nor is poverty able ever to injure the
magnanimous.

<span id="xix.xvii-p31"></span>11. Let us then discern the snares, and
walk far off from them! Let us discern the precipices, and not even
approach them! This will be the foundation of our greatest safety not
only to avoid things sinful, but those things which seem indeed to be
indifferent, and yet are apt to make us stumble towards sin. For
example; to laugh, to speak jocosely, does not seem an acknowledged sin,
but it leads to acknowledged sin. Thus laughter often gives birth to
foul discourse, and foul discourse to actions still more foul. Often
from words and laughter proceed railing and insult; and from railing and
insult, blows and wounds; and from blows and wounds, slaughter and
murder. If, then, thou wouldest take good counsel for thyself, avoid not
merely foul words, and foul deeds, or blows, and wounds, and murders,
but unseasonable laughter, itself, and the very language of banter;
since these things have proved the root of subsequent evils. Therefore
Paul saith, “Let no foolish talking nor jesting proceed out of thy
mouth.” <span id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633) For although this
seems to be a small thing in itself, it becomes, however, the cause of
much mischief to us. Again, to live in luxury does not seem to be a
manifest and admitted crime; but then it brings forth in us great
evils,—drunkenness, violence, extortion, and rapine. For the prodigal
and sumptuous liver, bestowing extravagant service upon the belly, is
often compelled to steal, and to seize the property of others, and to
use extortion and violence. If, then, thou avoidest luxurious living,
thou removest the foundation of extortion, and rapine, and drunkenness,
and a thousand other evils; cutting away the root of iniquity from its
extremity. Hence Paul saith, that “she who liveth in pleasure is dead
while she liveth.” <span id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634) Again, to
go to the theatres, or to survey the horse-race, or to play at dice,
does not seem, to most men, to be an admitted crime; but it introduces
into our life an infinite host of miseries. For spending time in the
theatres produces fornication, intemperance, and every kind of impurity.
The spectacle of the horse-race also brings about fightings, railings,
blows, insults, and lasting enmities. And a passion for dice-playing
hath often caused blasphemies, injuries, anger, reproaches, and a
thousand other things more fearful still.

<span id="xix.xvii-p34"></span>12. Therefore, let us not only avoid
sins, but those things too which seem to be indifferent, yet by degrees
lead us into these misdeeds. He, indeed, who walks by the side of a
precipice, even though he may not fall <span id="page_443">p. 443</span>
<span id="xix.xvii-Page_443"></span>over, trembles; and very often he is
overset by this same trembling, and falls to the bottom. So also he who
does not avoid sins from afar, but walks near them, will live in fear,
and will often fall into them. Besides, he who eagerly looks at strange
beauties, although he may not commit adultery, hath in so doing
entertained lust; and hath become already an adulterer according to the
declaration of Christ; <span id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635) and
often by this very lust he is carried on to the actual sin. Let us then
withdraw ourselves far from sins. Dost thou wish to live soberly? Avoid
not only adultery, but also the licentious glance! Dost thou wish to be
far removed from foul words? Avoid not only foul words, but also
inordinate laughter, and every kind of lust. Dost thou wish to keep far
from committing murders? Avoid railing too. Dost thou wish to keep aloof
from drunkenness? Avoid luxury and sumptuous tables, and pluck up the
vice by the roots.

<span id="xix.xvii-p36"></span>13. The licentiousness of the tongue is a
great snare, and needs a strong bridle. Therefore also some one saith.
“His own lips are a powerful snare to a man, and he is snared by the
words of his own mouth.” <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636)
Above all the other members, then, let us control this; let us bridle
it; and let us expel from the mouth railings, and contumelies, and foul
and slanderous language, and the evil habit of oaths. For again our
discourse hath brought us to the same exhortation. But I had arranged
with your charity, yesterday, that I would say no more concerning this
precept, forasmuch as enough has been said upon it on all the foregoing
days. But what is to become of me? I cannot bear to desist from this
counsel, until I see that ye have put it in practice; since Paul also,
when he saith to the Galatians, “Henceforth let no man trouble
me,” <span id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637) appears again to have
met and addressed them. <span id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638) Such
are the paternal bowels; although they say they will depart, yet they
depart not, until they see that their sons are chastened. Have ye heard
to-day what the prophet speaks to us concerning oaths; “I lifted up mine
eyes, and I saw,” saith he, “and, behold, a flying sickle, the length
thereof twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits; and he said
to me, What seest thou? and I said, I see a flying sickle, twenty cubits
in length, and ten cubits in breadth. It shall also enter into the
house,” saith he, “of every one that sweareth in my name, and shall
remain <span id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639) in the midst, and
shall pull down the stones and the wood.” <span
id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640) What, forsooth, is this which is
here spoken? and for what reason is it in the form of a “sickle,” and
that a “flying sickle,” that vengeance is seen to pursue the swearers?
In order that thou mayest see that the judgment is inevitable, and the
punishment not to be eluded. For from a flying sword some one might
perchance be able to escape, but from a sickle, falling upon the neck,
and acting in the place of a cord, <span
id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641) no one can escape. And when wings
too are added, what further hope is there of safety? But on what account
doth it pull down the stones and the wood of the swearer’s house? In
order that the ruin may be a correction to all. For since it is
necessary that the earth must hide the swearer when dead; the very sight
of his ruined house, now become a heap, will be an admonition to all who
pass by and observe it, not to venture on the like, lest they suffer the
like; and it will be a lasting witness against the sin of the departed.
The sword is not so piercing as the nature of an oath! The sabre is not
so destructive as the stroke of an oath! The swearer, although he seems
to live, is already dead, and hath received the fatal blow. And as the
man who hath received the halter, <span
id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642) before he hath gone out of the city
and come to the pit, <span id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643) and seen
the executioner standing over him, is dead from the time he passed the
doors of the hall of justice: so also the swearer.

<span id="xix.xvii-p45"></span>14. All this let us consider, and let us
not put our brethren on oath. What dost thou, O man? At the sacred table
thou exactest an oath, and where Christ lies slain, there thou slayest
thine own brother. Robbers, indeed, murder on the highways; but thou
slayest the son in the presence of the mother: committing a murder more
accursed than Cain himself; for he slew his brother in solitude and only
with present death; but thou slayest thy brother in the midst of the
church, and that with the deathless death that is to come! For think you
that the church was made for this purpose, that we might swear? Yea, for
this it was made, that we might pray! Is the Table placed there, that we
may make adjurations? It is placed there to this end, that we may loose
sins, not that we may bind them. But thou, if thou heedest nothing else,
reverence at least that book, which thou reachest forth in putting the
oath; and open the Gospel, which thou takest in hand when thou biddest
swear; and when thou <span id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span
id="xix.xvii-Page_444"></span>hearest what Christ there declares
concerning oaths, shudder and desist! What then does He there say
concerning oaths? “But I say unto you, Swear not at all.” <span
id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644) And dost thou convert the Law <span
id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645) which forbids swearing into an
oath. Oh, what contempt! Oh, what outrage! For thou doest just the same
thing as if any one should bid the lawgiver, who prohibits murder,
become himself a party to the murder. Not so much do I lament and weep,
when I hear that some persons are slain <span
id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646) upon the highway, as I groan, and
shed tears, and am horrified, when I see any one coming near this Table,
placing his hands upon it, and touching the Gospels, and swearing! Art
thou in doubt, I ask, concerning money, and wouldest thou slay a soul?
What gainest thou to match the injury thou doest to thine own soul, and
to thy neighbour? If thou believest that the man is true, do not impose
the obligation of the oath; but if thou knowest him to be a liar, do not
force him to commit perjury. “But that I may have a full assurance:”
saith one. Verily, when thou hast not sworn him, then thou wilt receive
a good and full assurance. <span id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647)

<span id="xix.xvii-p50"></span>15. For now, when thou hast returned
home, thou wilt be continually the prey of conscience, whilst reasoning
thus with thyself; “Was it to no purpose, then, that I put him upon his
oath? Was he not really perjured? Have I not become the cause of the
sin?” But if thou dost not put him upon his oath, thou wilt receive much
consolation on returning home, rendering thanks to God, and saying,
“Blessed be God, that I restrained myself, and did not compel him to
swear vainly, and to no purpose. Away with gold! Perish the money!” for
that which specially gives us assurance is, that we did not transgress
the law, nor compel another to do it. Consider, for Whose sake thou
didst not put any one on his oath; and this will suffice thee for
refreshment and consolation. Often, indeed, when a fight takes place, we
bear being insulted with fortitude, and we say to the insulter, “What
shall I do with thee? Such an one hinders me, who is thy patron; he
keeps back my hands.” And this is sufficient to console us. So when thou
art about to put any one on his oath, restrain thyself; and stop; and
say to him who is about to swear, “What shall I do with thee? God hath
forbidden me to put any one on oath. He now holds me back.” This
suffices both for the honour of the Lawgiver, and for thy safety, and
for keeping him in fear who is ready to swear. For when he seeth that we
are thus afraid to put others on oath, much more will he himself be
afraid to swear rashly. Wouldest thou say thus, thy return to thine own
home would be with much fulness of assurance. Hear God, therefore, in
His Commandments, that He may Himself hear thee in thy prayers! This
word shall be written in heaven, and shall stand by thee on the Day of
Judgment, and shall discharge many sins.

<span id="xix.xvii-p51"></span>16. This also let us consider not only
with respect to an oath, but to every thing. And when we are about to do
any good action for God’s sake, and it is found to bring loss with it,
let us look not merely at the loss connected with the matter, but at the
gain which we shall reap by doing it for God. That is to say, Hath any
one insulted thee? Bear it nobly! And thou wilt do so, if thou thinkest
not of the insult merely, but of the dignity of Him who commands thee to
bear it, and thou bearest it meekly. Hast thou given an alms? Think not
of the outlay, but of the produce which arises from the outlay. Hast
thou been mulcted of money? Give thanks, and regard not only the pain
which is the result of the loss, but the gain which comes of
thanksgiving. If we thus regulate ourselves, none of those heavy events
which may befal us will give us pain; but from those things which may
seem to be grievous, we shall be even gainers, and loss will be sweeter
and more desired than wealth, pain than pleasure, and mirth and insult
than honour. Thus all things adverse will turn to our gain. And here we
shall enjoy much tranquillity, and there we shall attain the kingdom of
heaven; which God grant that we may all be deemed worthy to
obtain, <span id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648) by the grace and
<span id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="xix.xvii-Page_445"></span>lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through Whom and with Whom, to the Father with the Holy Spirit, be
glory, dominion, and honour, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[438:1615](1090108.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="xix.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p3"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
9.13](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#013)<span id="xix.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[438:1616](1090108.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="xix.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p5"></span>*i.e*., Saturday.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[438:1617](1090108.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="xix.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p6"></span> As being at the close of the week, when
the fast was just going to be intermitted, or at least relaxed.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[439:1618](1090108.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="xix.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p7"></span> Or, “right opposite.” ‡ντικαθίστασαν. The
word may be taken to imply that those spectacles were held in the
immediate neighbourhood of the church. Stage plays, and players, and all
who took part in the public games, were excluded from communion. The
act, considered little short of idolatry, with which it was connected,
was denounced in several Councils. See Bingham, b. xvi. c. 4, sec. 10.

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[439:1619](1090108.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="xix.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p9"></span> παιδαγωγοὺς. See Hom. vi. 1, p. 114,
where the “teachers” are different from these. The paidagogos had the
moral supervision of the child; part of his duty was to conduct him
daily to school. See [Galatians iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span id="xix.xvii-p9.1"></span>,
revised version.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[440:1620](1090108.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="xix.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p12"></span> [Eccles. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#003)<span id="xix.xvii-p12.1"></span>.
This may be a proverbial misquotation; St. Chrysostom afterwards adopts
the LXX., *house of drinking*; but his remarks are equally suitable to
the E.V. *feasting*. Laughter is mentioned in verse 4.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[440:1621](1090108.htm#fr_1620) <span
id="xix.xvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p13"></span> This seems to be a proverbial saying,
from the next sentence.

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[440:1622](1090108.htm#fr_1621) <span
id="xix.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p14"></span> [Eccles. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002)<span id="xix.xvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[440:1623](1090108.htm#fr_1622) <span
id="xix.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p16"></span> [Eccles. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#003)<span id="xix.xvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[440:1624](1090108.htm#fr_1623) <span
id="xix.xvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p17"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
9.13](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#013)<span id="xix.xvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[440:1625](1090108.htm#fr_1624) <span
id="xix.xvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p18"></span> βλ™πε, “see,” as anything obvious.

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[440:1626](1090108.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="xix.xvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p19"></span> ™πίγνωθι, “perceive,” implies taking
pains to discover.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[441:1627](1090108.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="xix.xvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p22"></span> See on [Rom. iii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031)<span id="xix.xvii-p22.1"></span>,
Hom. VIII.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[441:1628](1090108.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="xix.xvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p23"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="xix.xvii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[441:1629](1090108.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="xix.xvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p24"></span> [Col. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span id="xix.xvii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[441:1630](1090108.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="xix.xvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p26"></span> λογισμοῖ.

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[442:1631](1090108.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="xix.xvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p27"></span>*i.e*., [Ecclesiasticus
9.20](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#020)<span id="xix.xvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[442:1632](1090108.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="xix.xvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p29"></span> [Job xxxi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#032)<span id="xix.xvii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[442:1633](1090108.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="xix.xvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p30"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="xix.xvii-p30.1"></span>.
This last clause is added in LXX. and Vulg.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[442:1634](1090108.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="xix.xvii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p32"></span> A quotation made up of two passages, in
[Eph. 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029), [Eph.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#004)<span id="xix.xvii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[442:1635](1090108.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="xix.xvii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p33"></span> [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="xix.xvii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[443:1636](1090108.htm#fr_1635) <span
id="xix.xvii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p35"></span> [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="xix.xvii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[443:1637](1090108.htm#fr_1636) <span
id="xix.xvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p37"></span> [Prov. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#002)<span id="xix.xvii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[443:1638](1090108.htm#fr_1637) <span
id="xix.xvii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p38"></span> [Gal. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span id="xix.xvii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[443:1639](1090108.htm#fr_1638) <span
id="xix.xvii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p39"></span> He may mean [Acts xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023)<span id="xix.xvii-p39.1"></span>,
but this seems to have been earlier. Or perhaps that he spoke afterwards
to those who held the like error. See on Acts, Hom. XXXIX.

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[443:1640](1090108.htm#fr_1639) <span
id="xix.xvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p40"></span> καταλύσει in LXX. means this, though it
is possible St. Chrys. may have taken it in the transitive sense, “shall
destroy.”

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[443:1641](1090108.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="xix.xvii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p41"></span> [Zech.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004)<span id="xix.xvii-p41.1"></span>.
St. Chrysostom, it should be observed, here only quotes a portion of
these verses. See Hom. IX. fin.

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[443:1642](1090108.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="xix.xvii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p42"></span> From its hooked shape: ξίφος is rather
the pointed weapon for stabbing; μ€χαιρα the edged weapon for cutting.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[443:1643](1090108.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="xix.xvii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p43"></span> σταρτίον.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[443:1644](1090108.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="xix.xvii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p44"></span> β€ραθρον. Into which his body would be
thrown.

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[444:1645](1090108.htm#fr_1644) <span
id="xix.xvii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p46"></span> [Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="xix.xvii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[444:1646](1090108.htm#fr_1645) <span
id="xix.xvii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p47"></span> Upon oaths, see Bingham, b. xxi. c. vii.
sec. 4, sqq., who however does not mention this use of the *altar*.

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[444:1647](1090108.htm#fr_1646) <span
id="xix.xvii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p48"></span> σφαζομ™νους. The present participle is
accounted for by the fact that robbers took advantage of those troubles.
See Libanius, *Or. de Sedit. ad fin*.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[444:1648](1090108.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="xix.xvii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p49"></span> πληροφορία. This word occurs [Heb.
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#011), [Heb.
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022), [1 Thess.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005), [Col.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002)<span id="xix.xvii-p49.1"></span>.
The elliptical sense of the word will be understood by a reference to
these passages.

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[444:1649](1090108.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="xix.xvii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p52"></span> Of remission of sins in the Holy
Eucharist, see Theodorus in Cat. on [1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="xix.xvii-p52.1"></span>.
“He that practiseth the greatest and strongly forbidden sins, ought to
abstain from the mysteries; for to such an one it is not good to partake
of them, until he first abstain from his sins, through fear of the laws
laid down. But of other things, such as must befall men….if we fall into
such, it is not well to deprive ourselves of the mysteries, but to come
in the greater fear….inasmuch as remission also comes to us from thence,
when we abstain from what is in our power, and are found not neglectful
of the rest; beside spiritual aid for the easier amendment of life. For
all things that are added to us by the death of Christ, the same it is
just should be accomplished by the symbols of His death.” Ed. Cramer, p.
222. This is implied in our own service, in the prayer after
communicating, and in the final answers of the catechism. So too in the
Roman Canon of the Mass, “Deliver me, by this Thy Holy Body and Blood,
from all my iniquities and all evils.” Lit. of St. Basil, after the
Gospel.…“We pray and beseech Thy goodness, O Thou Lover of men, that
this Mystery which Thou didst institute for our salvation, be not unto
judgment to us, nor to Thy people, but to the wiping away of our sins,
and the remission of our negligences.” Renaudot, t. i. pp. 9, 58. Lit of
St. Cyril, in *Orat. Pacis*.…”that we may offer Thee this holy,
reasonable, spiritual, unbloody Sacrifice for the remission of our sins,
and the pardon of the ignorances of Thy people.” *Ib*. p. 39, and Goar,
p. 164. So Lit. St. Greg. after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, Ren.
p. 106. Lit. St. Marc. pp. 143, 158; Canon *Univ. Ethiop*. p. 502; Lit.
of St. Chrys., Prayer of Oblation, Goar, p. 74. See also the note on
Tertullian referred to, p. 266, note z, and St. Irenæus, Fragm. ed.
Pfaff, p. 27. “That they who partake of these pledges (‡ντιτύπων) may
obtain remission of sins and eternal life.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVI](1090109)
