[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](log02)  [Next](log04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# II.

# THE VARIETIES OF LEGENDS IN GENESIS.

IN the great mass of our materials two groups are distinctly
recognisable:

1\. The legends of the origin of the world and of the progenitors of the
human race, the stories down to the tower of Babel, their locality being
remote and their sphere of interest the whole world;

2\. The legends of the patriarchs of Israel: Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and the latter's sons, the locality and the sphere of interest being
Canaan and adjacent lands.

Even in their character the two groups are most plainly distinguished:
the narratives of the first group speak of God in a way different from
that of the legends of the patriarchs. In the latter the divinity
appears always enveloped in mystery, unrecognised or speaking out of
Heaven, or perhaps only in a dream. In the earlier legends, on the
contrary, God walks intimately among men and no one marvels at it: in
the legend of Paradise men dwell in God's house; it is assumed that he
is in the habit of visiting them every evening; he even closes the ark
for Noah, and appears to him in person, attracted by his sacrifice.
Furthermore, in the legends of the patriarchs the real actors are always
men; if the divinity appears, it is regarded as an

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

exception. But in the primitive legends the divinity is the leading
actor (as in the creation), or at least among those chiefly concerned
(as in the story of Paradise, of the union of men and of angels, of the
Deluge and the Tower of Babel). This distinction is, to be sure, only
relative, for some of the legends of the patriarchs (notably those
connected with Hebron and Penuel) represent the divinity as appearing in
the same way. On the other hand, the story of Cain and Abel and that of
the cursing of Canaan, in which human beings are the chief actors, are
among the primitive legends. However, the distinction applies on the
whole to the two groups. This prominence of the action of the divinity
in the primitive legends indicates that these have a more decidedly
"mythical" character: that they are faded myths.

### SOME LEGENDS ARE FADED MYTHS.

"Myths"--let no one shrink from the word--are stories of the gods, in
contradistinction to the legends in which the actors are men. Stories of
the gods are in all nations the oldest narratives; the legend as a
literary variety has its origin in myths. Accordingly, when we find that
these primitive legends are akin to myths, we must infer that they have
come down to us in comparatively ancient form. They come from a period
of Israel's history when the childlike belief of the people had not yet
fully arrived at the conception of a divinity whose operations are
shrouded in mystery. On the other hand, these original myths have
reached us in comparatively faded colors. This we can perceive in the
narratives themselves, where we are able in

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

some points to reconstruct an older form of the story than the one
transmitted to us: notably Genesis vi. 1-4 is nothing but a torso.

We are led to similar conclusions when we compare the primitive legends
with the allusions to the myths which we find in the poets and prophets
of the Old Testament and the later apocalyptic writers; <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) as, for instance, the myths of Jahveh's
combat with Rahab or Leviathan, of the fall of Helal, and so on. The
same result very clearly follows a comparison of the primitive legends
of Genesis with the myths of the Orient, especially of the biblical
story of the creation and the Deluge with the Babylonian versions of the
same subjects. The colossal outlines, the peculiarly brilliant colors
which characterise these myths in the original form are lost in a
measure in the biblical legends of the beginnings of things. The
equivalence of the divine beings and the objects or realms of nature,
the combat of the gods with one another, the birth of the gods, are some
of the features which have disappeared in the version of Genesis.

### MONOTHEISM HOSTILE TO MYTHS.

In all this we can see the essential character of the religion of
Israel. The fundamental trait of the religion of Jahveh is unfavorable
to myths. For this religion from its very beginning tends toward
monotheism. But for a story of the gods at least two gods are essential.
Therefore the Israel which we observe in the Old Testament could not
tolerate genuine and unmodified myths, at least not in prose.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The poet was excused for occasional allusions to
myths. Hence in poetry we find preserved traces of a point of view older
than that of the tradition of Genesis, one frankly familiar with myths.
But the primitive legends preserved to us are all dominated by this
unspoken aversion to mythology.

The monotheism of Israel tolerates only those myths that represent God
as acting alone, as in the story of the creation, and even then there is
no real "story," where action and counter-action give rise to a new
situation or action. Or at the most, the story deals with action between
God and men, where, however, men are too weak in the true Israelitish
conception to be worthy rivals of God, to produce in their clash with
God a real epic action; as soon as God intervenes all is decided. If in
such a case a "story" is to be told, men must perform their part first.
This is the method of the legends of Paradise and of the Tower of Babel.
With the story of the Deluge it is different, God taking part from the
beginning; but as a result of this the continued interest of the hearer
is not maintained. Furthermore, it should be noted that the legends
preserved to us with mythical elements are much less numerous than the
legends of the patriarchs in which this element is absent. This fact
also may fairly be regarded as a result of the Israelitish aversion to
mythology.

### THE SIGNIFICANCE OF MYTHS.

It is not proposed to present here a theory of the origin and primitive
significance of myths. Only a few observations may be permitted. A
certain series of myths may be interpreted on the assumption

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

that some natural phenomenon that is wont to occur frequently or
regularly in the actual world has furnished the colors for the painting
of one similar but gigantic phenomenon in primitive times. Thus the
creation of the world is painted as Spring on a grand scale, and the
overflows of the rivers of Mesopotamia gave rise to the story of the
Deluge.

Many myths attempt to answer questions, being intended to give
instruction. This is the case with the primitive legends of Genesis: the
story of creation raises the question, Whence come heaven and earth? and
at the same time, Why is the Sabbath sacred? The story of Paradise
treats the question, Whence are man's reason and his mortality? and
along with this, Whence are man's body and mind? Whence his language?
Whence the love of the sexes? Whence does it come that woman brings
forth with so much pain, that man must till the stubborn field, that the
serpent goes upon its belly, and so on? The legend of Babel asks the
question, Whence is the variety of nations in language and location? The
answers to these questions constitute the real content of the respective
legends. In the case of the legend of the Deluge this is different, but
there is an ætiological, or explanatory feature at the close: Why is
there never such a flood again? And what is the meaning of the rainbow?

All these questions interest not Israel alone, but the whole world. We
know that ancient Israel in general was not inclined to philosophic
speculation, but that it always took most interest in immediate and
Israelitish affairs. But here is a place in which the ancient race is
able to treat universal human problems, the profoundest questions of
mankind.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

\[paragraph continues\] This they have done in unique fashion in the
stories of the creation and of Eden: these are the beginnings of
theology and of philosophy. It is no wonder that especial emphasis has
been laid upon these features, and that every generation, since Genesis
has been known, has read into it its own deepest thoughts.

### THE LEGENDS OF THE [PATRIARCHS](errata.htm#0).

The primitive legends are followed in Genesis by the legends of the
patriarchs. The distinctive feature of these legends is that they tell
of the progenitors of races, especially of Israel. At the foundation of
these legends lies the theory that all races, Israel included, have come
in each case from the family of a single ancestor, which gradually
expanded. This theory is not supported by observed facts, for no human
eye observes the origin of races; on the contrary, it is the remnant of
a primitive poetic conception of tribal life.

In earliest times the individual man counts for little. There is much
more interest in the destinies of the race: the tribe, the nation, are
regarded as real entities much more than at the present day. Thus it
comes that the destinies of the race are regarded as being the destinies
of a person: the race sighs, triumphs, is dejected, rebels, dies, comes
to life again, etc. Thus too the relations of races are regarded as the
relations of individuals: two races it is said, are brothers, i. e., are
closely related and equal; if one of them is regarded as richer,
stronger, or nobler, it is said to be the firstborn brother, or it comes
of a better mother, while the other is younger, or comes of a concubine.
Israel being

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

divided into twelve tribes, we are told that the tribal ancestor of
Israel had twelve sons. Some of these tribes having a closer union with
one another, they are said to come from one mother. The relation of
mother and son exists between Hagar and Ishmael; the more distant
relation of uncle and nephew between Abraham and Lot.

Originally these persons were the tribes themselves. This method of
expression is still entirely current later in the pathetic poetry of the
prophets: Edom builds his nest on high, Moab dies to the sound of
trumpets, Asshur falls upon Israel like a lion upon his prey, Jerusalem
and Samaria are two unchaste sisters, Edom has treated his brother
Israel with enmity, etc. Such personifications must have been very
familiar to the earliest ages. But as the world became more prosaic and
these expressions were no longer understood in the simple narrative, the
question was asked, who these persons, Jacob, Judah, Simeon, really
were, and the answer given that they were the patriarchs and the later
races and tribes their sons; an answer which seems to be a matter of
course, since it was customary to refer to the individual Israelites and
Ammonites as "Sons of Israel" and "Sons of Ammon."

### PATRIARCHS REPRESENT TRIBES.

We are not putting a new meaning into the legends which treat of such
race-individuals, when we regard their heroes, Ishmael, Jacob, Esau, and
others, as tribes and try to interpret the stories about them as tribal
events; we are simply getting at their meaning as it was understood in
primitive times in Israel.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

On the other hand, we must go about this attempt with caution, for we
must reckon with the possibility that some of these figures do not
originally represent tribes, but only came to be regarded as patriarchs
in a later time, and further, after the figures of the patriarchs had
once become established as the heroes of epic legends, that legends of
other sorts and wanting the basis of tribal history became attached to
these. We may certainly regard as personifications of tribes those
figures whose names are known to us in other connexions as names of
tribes; such are, notably: Ishmael, Ammon, Moab, the twelve tribes and
their divisions. Sometimes it is perfectly evident from the narratives
themselves that we have to do with tribes, as in the case of Cain and
Abel, Jacob and Esau, Ham and Japhet. Accordingly, many of the
narratives treating such ancestors are originally the experiences of
races or tribes.

Once in ancient times, so we may assume, there were conflicts over wells
between the citizens of Gerar and the neighboring Bedouins, ending in a
compromise at Beersheba. The legend depicts these affairs as a war and a
treaty between Abimelech, king of Gerar, and the patriarchs called in
the legend Abraham or Isaac. (xxi, 22 ff., 26.)

Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, is seduced by Shechem, and in punishment
Shechem is treacherously assaulted by Dinah's brothers; Jacob, however,
abjures the brothers and curses them. The history at the bottom of this
is probably as follows: Dinah, an Israelitish family, is overpowered by
the Canaanitish city of Shechem and then treacherously avenged by Simeon
and Levi, the most closely

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

related tribes, but the other tribes of Israel renounce them and allow
the two tribes to be destroyed.

The legend of Tamar, also, depicts in part early relations in the tribe
of Judah: Judah allied it-self with Canaanites, in the legend Hirah of
Adullam and Judah's wife, Bathshua; a number of Judan-Canaanitish tribes
(Er and Onan) perished early; finally two new tribes arose (Perez and
Zerah). In the Esau-Jacob legend also there are quite evidently
historical reminiscences: Esau and Jacob are brother tribes, Esau a
tribe of hunters, Jacob a tribe of shepherds; Esau is the elder, but by
sale or fraud he loses his birthright, that is, the older and better
known tribe of Esau was compelled to give way to the later and
originally weaker tribe of Jacob and has now the poorer land.

A similar rivalry is assumed by the legend between the Judæan tribes of
Perez and Zerah and between Ephraim and Manasseh. Reuben, the first-born
among the Israelitish tribes, loses his birthright on account of sin:
the tribe of Reuben, which was the leading tribe in the earliest times,
afterwards forfeited this position. Cain, the husbandman, slew his
brother Abel, the herdsman, but was compelled to leave the land which
they had before occupied in common. Shem, Japhet, and Canaan are
originally brothers; but Japhet has now a much more extensive territory
than the others, and Canaan is the servant of both.

We hear of many migrations. From the north Abraham migrates to Canaan,
after him Rebeccah, to marry Isaac, and finally comes Jacob; the initial
point of the migration is given as Ur-Kasdim and Haran the city of Nahor
(xxiv. 10). In the legend

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of Joseph there is described a migration of Israelitish tribes to Egypt;
the account of the trip of Abraham to Egypt has a similar basis.

Now it is in the nature of legend that we do not catch sight of these
old occurrences clearly by its means, but only as through a mist. Legend
has woven a poetic veil about the historical memories and hidden their
outlines. In most cases the time of the event is not to be derived from
the legend itself; often even the place is not to be distinguished, and
sometimes not even the personality of the actor. Who can tell what race
it was that came to Canaan from Aram-Naharajim? Where the real home of
Jacob and Esau was, of Cain and Abel, of Shem and Japhet, the legend has
forgotten. What tribes parted at Bethel, in case there is any historical
basis to the legend of the separation of Lot and Abraham? And so,
although the things of the past are hidden rather than revealed in these
legends, he would be a barbarian who would despise them on this account,
for often they are more valuable than would be prosaic reports of actual
occurrences. For instance, if we had good historical data regarding
Ishmael we should not value them highly, for this "wild ass" rendered
little service to mankind; but as it is, touched by the hand of poetry,
he is immortal.

In these legends the clearest matter is the character of races: here is
Esau, the huntsman of the steppes, living with little reflexion from
hand to mouth, forgetful, magnanimous, brave, and hairy as a goat; and
there is Jacob the herdsman, a smooth man, more cunning and accustomed
to look into the future. His uncle Laban is the type of the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Aramæan, avaricious and deceitful, but to
outward appearances an excellent and upright man, never at loss for an
excuse. A more noble figure is Abraham, hospitable, peaceful, a model of
piety.

Moreover it is clear to us in many cases in what spirit the incidents
are regarded: we perceive most easily how the legend despises the
unchastity of Canaan, how it mocks at Esau and Laban, how it rejoices
that Lot, with all his avarice, obtained after all the worse land, etc.

### ANTIQUITY OF THE LEGENDS.

These legends have not hitherto received full justice, even when it has
been recognised that they are legends. Even the most superficial reader
can distinguish for himself the chief original sources in Genesis from
which the present redaction was constructed, now commonly called the
writings of the Elohist, of the Jahvist, and of the Priestly Code. Since
the sources of the Elohist and the Jahvist were written down in the
ninth or eight century B. C., some commentators have been disposed to
think that the legends themselves originated in the main in the age of
the Israelitish kingdom and furnished therefore no revelations of
primitive history. But in reality these legends are much older. The
tribal and race names which they preserve are almost all forgotten in
other records: we know nothing of Shem, Ham, and Japhet, of Abel and
Cain, of Esau and Jacob, nothing of Hagar and scarcely anything of
Ishmael, from the historical records of Israel. Hence we must conclude
that these races all belong to prehistoric times. This is particularly
evident in the case of Jacob and Esau,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

who were, to be sure, identified later with Israel and Edom. But this
very lapping of names, as well as many features of the legend which are
not applicable to Israel and Edom, as, for instance, the treaties
between the city of Gerar and the sons of Abraham (or Isaac) concerning
the possession of certain wells, especially that of Beersheba, show us
that the old narrative originally had in mind entirely different races;
in the legend Jacob is not disposed to war; in history Israel conquered
Edom in war; in the legend Esau is stupid, in history he is famous for
his wisdom.

Another proof of the age of these tribal legends may be found in the
history of the legend in Israel. The legends in the Book of Judges have
ceased to speak of tribes as persons (excepting Judges i.), but they
tell of heroes, of individual leaders of the tribes. The latest story
that preserves the old style and to which an historical date can be
assigned is the legend of the capture of Shechem, the Dinah legend of
Genesis. Sometime in the earlier portion of the period of Judges, then,
this naive style of narrative disappeared so far as we can ascertain;
from that time on such narratives are merely transmitted, but no longer
constructed new.

### CLASSIFICATION OF LEGENDS.

We call these legends "historical" when they reflect historical
occurrences, "ethnographic" when they contain chiefly descriptions of
race and tribal relations. Thus we characterise the legend of the treaty
of Beersheba and the various legends of migrations as "historical," but
those of Jacob and Esau as "ethnographic."

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### ÆTIOLOGICAL LEGENDS.

Alongside these narratives of Genesis are also "ætiological" legends,
that is, those that are written for a purpose, or to explain something.
There is no end of the questions which interest a primitive people. The
instinct for asking questions is innate in man: he wants to know of the
origin of things. The child looks into the world with wide eyes and
asks, Why? The answer which the child gives itself and with which it is
for the time satisfied, is perhaps very childish, and hence incorrect,
and yet, if it is a bright child the answer is interesting and touching
even for the grown man. In the same way a primitive people asks similar
questions and answers them as best it can. These questions are usually
the same that we ourselves are asking and trying to answer in our
scientific researches. Hence what we find in these, legends are the
beginnings of human science; only humble beginnings, of course, and yet
venerable to us because they are beginnings, and at the same time
peculiarly attractive and touching, for in these answers ancient Israel
has uttered its most intimate feelings, clothing them in a bright garb
of poetry. Some of these questions are the following:

### ETHNOLOGICAL LEGENDS.

There is a desire to know the reasons for the relations of tribes. Why
is Canaan the servant of his brethren? Why has Japhet such an extended
territory? Why do the children of Lot dwell in the inhospitable East?
How does it come that Reuben has lost his birthright? Why must Cain
wander

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

about a restless fugitive? Why is sevenfold vengeance proclaimed against
the slayer of Cain? Why is Gilead the border between Israel and the
Aramæans? Why does Beersheba belong to us and not to the people of
Gerar? Why is Shechem in possession of Joseph? Why have we a right to
the holy places at Shechem and Machpelah? Why has Ishmael become a
Bedouin people with just this territory and this God? How does it come
that the Egyptian peasants have to bear the heavy tax of the fifth,
while the fields of the priests are exempt? And with especial frequency
the question was asked, How does Israel come to have this glorious land
of Canaan?

The legends tell in many variations how it came about that the
patriarchs received this particular land: God gave it to Abraham because
of his obedience; when on the occasion of the separation at Bethel Lot
chose the East, the West fell to Abraham; Jacob obtained the blessing of
the better country from Isaac by a deception; God promised it to Jacob
at Bethel, and so on.

Such ethnological legends, which tell a fictitious story in order to
explain tribal relations, are of course very difficult to distinguish
from historical legends which contain the remnant of a tradition of some
actual event. Very commonly ethnological and ethnographic features are
combined in the same legend: the relations underlying the story are
historical, but the way in which they are explained is poetic.

The usual nature of the answer given to these questions by our legends
is that the present relations are due to some transaction of the
patriarchs:

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the tribal ancestor bought the holy place, and accordingly it belongs to
us, his heirs; the ancestors of Israel and Aram established Gilead as
their mutual boundary; Cain's ancestor was condemned to perpetual
wandering by the word of God, and so on. A favorite way is to find the
explanation in a miraculous utterance of God or some of the patriarchs,
and the legend has to tell how this miraculous utterance came to be made
in olden times. And this sort of explanation was regarded as completely
satisfactory, so that there came to be later a distinct literary variety
of "charm" or "'blessing." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

Childish as these explanations now seem to us, and impossible as it was
for the men of old to find out the true reasons of such things, yet we
must not overlook the profundity of many of these poetic legends: they
are all based on the assumption that the tribal and national relations
of that day were not due to chance, but that they were all the results
of events of the primitive world, that they were in a way "predestined."
In these legends we have the first rudiments of a philosophy of history.

### ETYMOLOGICAL LEGENDS.

Along with the above we find etymological legends or features of
legends, as it were, beginnings of the science of language. Ancient
Israel spent much thought upon the origin and the real meaning of the
names of races, mountains, wells, sanctuaries, and cities. To them names
were not so unimportant as to us, for they were convinced that names
were somehow closely related to the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

things. It was quite impossible in many cases for the ancient people to
give the correct explanation, for names were, with Israel as with other
nations, among the most ancient possessions of the people, coming down
from extinct races or from far away stages of the national language.
Many of our current names such as Rhine, Moselle, Neckar, Harz, Berlin,
London, Thames, Seine, etc., are equally unintelligible to those not
trained in philology. It is probable that the very fact of the oddity
and unintelligibility of these names attracted the attention of the
ancient race. Early Israel as a matter of course explains such names
without any scientific spirit and wholly on the basis of the language as
it stood. It identifies the old name with a modern one which sounds more
or less like it, and proceeds to tell a little story explaining why this
particular word was uttered under these circumstances and was adopted as
the name. We too have our popular etymologies. How many there are who
believe that the noble river which runs down between New Hampshire and
Vermont and across Massachusetts and Connecticut is so named because it
"connects" the first two and "cuts" the latter two states! Manhattan
Island, it is said, was named from the exclamation of a savage who was
struck by the size of a Dutch hat worn by an early burgher, "Man hat
on!" Many are the stories told to explain why a famous London highway is
called "Rotten Row" (*Route en roi*).

The Lombards, we are told by another legend, were originally called
Winili. But on an occasion the women of the tribe put on beards as a
disguise, and Wodan looking out of his window in the morning

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

exclaimed, "What are those 'long beards' (Langobarden)?" (Grimm, *German
Legends*, No. 390.)

The famous Thuringian castle, the Wartburg, is said to have derived its
name from the fact that the landgrave, having strayed thither during a
hunt, exclaimed, "*Wart, Berg, du sollst mir eine Burg werden*" (Wait,
mountain, thou shalt become my fortress).

Similar legends are numerous in Genesis and in later works. The city of
Babel is named from the fact that God there confused human tongues
(*balal*, xi. 9); Jacob is interpreted as "heelholder" because at birth
he held his brother, whom he robbed of the birthright, by the heel (xxv.
26); Zoar means "trifle," because Lot said appealingly, "It is only a
trifle" (xix. 20, 22); Beersheba is "the well of seven," because Abraham
there gave Abimelech seven lambs (xxi. 28 ff.); Isaac (*Jishak*) is said
to have his name from the fact that his mother laughed (*sahak*) when
his birth was foretold to her (xviii. 12), and so forth.

In order to realise the utter naïveté) of most of these interpretations,
consider that the Hebrew legend calmly explains the Babylonian name
Babel from the Hebrew vocabulary, and that the writers are often
satisfied with merely approximate similarities of sounds: for instance
Cain (more exactly *Kajin*) from *kaniti*, "I have acquired." (iv. I),
Reuben from *rah beonji*, "he hath regarded my misery" (xxix. 32), etc.
Every student of Hebrew knows that these are not satisfactory
etymologies. Investigators have not always fully perceived the naive
character of this theory of etymology, but have allowed themselves to be
misled into patching

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

up some very unsatisfactory etymologies with modern appliances. In one
case many theologians even are wont to declare one of these
explanations, a very ingenious one indeed (Jahveh = "I am that I am,"
Ex. iii. 14) as an established etymology. But etymologies are not
acquired by revelation. The etymological legends are especially valuable
to us because they are especially clear illustrations of the ætiological
variety of legend.

### CEREMONIAL LEGENDS.

More important than these etymological legends are those whose purpose
is to explain the regulations of religious ceremonials. Such ceremonial
regulations play a great part in the life of primitive races, but many
of these customs had become in part or altogether unintelligible to the
one who observed them in the earliest times of which we have authentic
record. For customs are far more persistent than opinions, and religious
customs are particularly conservative. And even we, whose religious
service has undergone a vigorous purging in the Reformation and again at
the hands of rationalism, see and hear in our churches many things which
we understand only in part or not at all.

Ancient Israel reflected deeply upon the origin of these religious
practices. And if the grown people became too blunted by custom to be
able to perceive the strange and unintelligible features of the custom,
they were roused from their indifference by the questions of the
children. When the children see their father perform all sorts of
curious customs during the Feast of the Passover, they will ask--thus it
is expressly told, Ex. xii. 26; xiii. 14--What

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

does this mean? and then the story of the Passover is to be told them. A
similar direction is given with relation to the twelve stones in the
Jordan (Josh. iv. 6), which the father is to explain to the children as
memorials of the passage of the Jordan. In these examples, then, we see
clearly how such a legend is the answer to a question. Similarly,
questions are asked with regard to the origin of circumcision, and of
the Sabbath. Why do we not eat the muscle of the thigh? Why do they
anoint the holy stone of Bethel and deliver the tithes there? Why do we
not sacrifice a child at Jeruel as Jahveh commands, but in its stead a
ram (Gen. xxii.)? Why do our people "limp," that is, perform a certain
dance, at the festival in Penuel (xxxii. 32)?

No Israelite could have given the real reason for all these things, for
they were too old. But to relieve this embarrassment myth and legend
step in. They tell a story and explain the sacred custom: long ago an
event occurred from which this ceremony very naturally sprang, and we
perform the ceremony representing the event in commemoration of it. But
this story that explains the custom is always laid in primitive times.
Thus the ancient race gives the entirely correct impression that the
customs of their religious service originated in the immemorial past:
the trees of Shechem and Hebron are older than Abraham! We perform the
rite of circumcision in memory of Moses, whose firstborn was circumcised
as a redemption for Moses whose blood God demanded (Ex. iv. 24 ff.). We
rest on the seventh day because God at the creation of the world rested
on the seventh day (a myth, because

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

\[paragraph continues\] God himself is the actor in it). The muscle of
the thigh is sacred to us because God struck Jacob on this muscle while
wrestling with him at Penuel (xxxii. 33). The stone at Bethel was first
anointed by Jacob because it was his pillow in the night when God
appeared to him (xxviii. 11 ff.). At Jeruel--this is the name of the
scene of the sacrifice of Isaac, xxii. 1-19 (cf. the *Commentary*, p.
218 ff.) --God at first demanded of Abraham his child, but afterward
accepted a ram. We "limp" at Penuel in imitation of Jacob, who limped
there when his hip was lamed in the wrestling with God (xxxii. 32). And
so on.

In all this matter we are constantly hearing of certain definite places,
such as Bethel, Penuel, Shechem, Beersheba, Lacha-roi, Jeruel, etc., and
of the trees, wells, and stone monuments at these places. These are the
primitive sanctuaries of the tribes and families of Israel. Primitive
times felt that there was some immediate manifestation of the nature of
the divinity in these monuments, but a later time, which no longer
regarded the connexion as so clear and so self-evident, raised the
question, Why is this particular place and this sacred memorial so
especially sacred? The regular answer to this question was, Because in
this place the divinity appeared to our ancestor. In commemoration of
this theophany we worship God in this place. Now in the history of
religion it is of great significance that the ceremonial legend comes
from a time when religious feeling no longer perceived as self-evident
the divinity of the locality and the natural monument and had forgotten
the significance of the sacred ceremony. Accordingly the legend has to
supply

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

an explanation of how it came about that the God and the tribal ancestor
met in this particular place.

Abraham happened to be sitting under the tree in the noonday heat just
as the men appeared to him, and for this reason the tree is sacred (xix.
1 ff.). The well in the desert, Lacha-roi, became the sanctuary of
Ishmael because his mother in her flight into the desert met at this
well the God who comforted her (xvi. 7 ff.). Jacob happened to be
passing the night in a certain place and resting his head upon a stone
when he saw the heavenly ladder; therefore this stone is our sanctuary
(xxviii. 10 ff). Moses chanced to come with his flocks to the holy
mountain and the thornbush (Ex. iii. 1 ff.). Probably every one of the
greater sanctuaries of Israel had some similar legend of its origin.

We can easily imagine that any such legend of a sanctuary was originally
told on the occasion of the festival concerned and on the original spot,
just as the Feast of the Passover and the legend of the exodus, the
feast of Purim and the legend of Esther, the Babylonian Easter festival
and the Babylonian hymn of the creation, belong together, and as with us
Christmas and Easter are not to be thought of without their stories.
These ceremonial legends are so valuable to us because we discover from
them what were the sacred places and customs of Israel and at the same
time they give us a very vivid realisation of ancient religious feeling:
they are our chief sources of information regarding the oldest religion
of Israel. Genesis is full of them, and but few are found in the later
books. Almost everywhere in Genesis where a certain place is named, and
at least wherever God appears at a definite place, it is

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

based on such a legend. In these legends we have the beginning of the
history of religion.

### GEOLOGICAL AND OTHER LEGENDS.

Aside from the foregoing we may distinguish a number of other sorts of
legends, of which at least the geological deserves mention. Such
geological legends undertake to explain the origin of a locality. Whence
comes the Dead Sea with its dreadful desert? The region was cursed by
God on account of the terrible sin of its inhabitants. Whence comes the
pillar of salt yonder with its resemblance to a woman? That is a woman,
Lot's wife, turned into a pillar of salt in punishment for attempting to
spy out the mystery of God (xix. 26). But whence does it come that the
bit of territory about Zoar is an exception to the general desolation?
Because Jahveh spared it as a refuge for Lot (xix. 17-22).

All these ætiological legends, then, are remote from the standards of
the modern sciences to which they correspond; we regard them with the
emotion with which a man looks back upon his childhood. But even for our
science they have a great value, for they furnish us in their
descriptions or implications of definite conditions the most important
material for the knowledge of the ancient world.

### MIXED LEGENDS.

Very frequently various types of legend are combined in one. The flight
of Hagar (xvi.) is to be called ethnographic because it depicts the life
of Ishmael; ethnologic, because it undertakes to explain these
conditions; in one feature it is allied

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

to the ceremonial legends, its explanation of the sacredness of
Lacha-roi; furthermore it has etymological elements in its
[interpretation](errata.htm#1) of the names Lacha-roi and Ishmael.--The
legend of Paradise treats all at once a number of questions.--The legend
of Bethel explains at once the worship at Bethel and the name of the
place.--The legends of Beersheba (xxi., xxii. ff., xxvi.) contain
remnants of history, telling of a tribal treaty established there, and
at the same time certain religious features, as the explanation of the
sanctity of the place, and finally some etymological elements.--The
legend of Penuel explains the sanctity of the place, the ceremony of
limping, and the names Penuel and Israel. And so on. Etymological
elements, it may be noted, never appear alone in Genesis, but always in
connexion with other features.

### ORIGIN OF THE LEGENDS.

In many cases the origin of the legends will have been revealed with
what has already been considered. Thus, in most etymological legends it
can be shown quite clearly that those features in the legend which
explain the name were invented for this very purpose. The incident of
Abraham's giving Abimelech seven (sheba) lambs at Beersheba (xxi., 28
ff.) was surely invented to explain this name; also the laughing (sahak)
of Isaac's mother (xviii. 12-15), etc. The narrative of Judah, Er, Onan
(xxxviii.) and the others is plainly nothing but a history of the
Israelite families, just as the legend of Dinah (xxxiv.) is merely a
reflexion of the attack upon Shechem. But, on the other hand, the
investigator is to be warned not to be too quick to jump at the
conclusion

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

that he always has the origin of the legend in this oldest
interpretation attainable by us. On the contrary, we have to reckon with
the possibility that the features of the story which are intelligible to
us were injected into it later, and that the legend itself is older than
any meaning we can see in it.

Finally, there are legends which cannot be classified under any of the
heads given above. Of such are large portions of the legend of Joseph;
also the chief feature of the story of Jacob and Laban; the deceits and
tricks cannot be understood from the standpoint of either history or
ætiology.

The preceding classification of legends is based of course upon the
chief or dominant features. Along with these go the purely ornamental or
aesthetic features, twining about the others like vines over their
trellises. The art of these legends is revealed especially in this
portrayal of the subject matter given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[15:1](log03.htm#fr_1) Compare the material
gathered in my work *Creation and Chaos*, 1895.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[27:1](log03.htm#fr_2) Cp. Genesis xlix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Literary Form of the Legends](log04)
