[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](log01)  [Next](log03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# I.

# THE SIGNIFICANCE AND SCOPE OF THE LEGENDS.

ARE the narratives of Genesis history or legend? For the modern
historian this is no longer an open question; nevertheless it is
important to get a clear notion of the bases of this modern position.

The writing of history is not an innate endowment of the human mind; it
arose in the course of human history and at a definite stage of
development. Uncivilised races do not write history; they are incapable
of reproducing their experiences objectively, and have no interest in
leaving to posterity an authentic account of the events of their times.
Experiences fade before they are fairly cold, and fact and fancy mingle;
only in poetical form, in song and saga, are unlettered tribes able to
report historical occurrences. Only at a certain stage of civilisation
has objectivity so grown and the interest in transmitting national
experiences to posterity so increased that the writing of history
becomes possible. Such history has for its subjects great

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

public events, the deeds of popular leaders and kings, and especially
wars. Accordingly some sort of political organisation is an antecedent
presumption to the writing of history.

Only in a later, in the main a much later, time is the art of writing
history, learned through the practice of writing national histories,
applied to other spheres of human life, whence we have memoirs and the
histories of families. But considerable sections of the people have
never risen to the appreciation of history proper, and have remained in
the stage of the saga, or in what in modern times is analogous to saga.

Thus we find among the civilised peoples of antiquity two distinct kinds
of historical records side by side: history proper and popular
tradition, the latter treating in naive poetical fashion partly the same
subjects as the former, and partly the events of older, prehistoric
times. And it is not to be forgotten that historical memories may be
preserved even in such traditions, although clothed in poetic garb.

Even so did history originate in Israel. In the period from which the
Book of Genesis is transmitted to us the art of history had been long
established and highly developed according to ancient standards, having
for themes, here as everywhere, the deeds of kings and especially wars.
A monument of this history is found in the narratives of the Second Book
of Samuel.

But in a people with such a highly developed poetical faculty as Israel
there must have been a place for saga too. The senseless confusion of
"legend" with "lying" has caused good people to

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

hesitate to concede that there are legends in the Old Testament. But
legends are not lies; on the contrary, they are a particular form of
poetry. Why should not the lofty spirit of Old Testament religion, which
employed so many varieties of poetry, indulge in this form also? For
religion everywhere, the Israelite religion included, has especially
cherished poetry and poetic narrative, since poetic narrative is much
better qualified than prose to be the medium of religious thought.
Genesis is a more intensely religious book than the Book of Kings.

There is no denying that there are legends in the Old Testament;
consider for instance the stories of Samson and of Jonah. Accordingly it
is not a matter of belief or skepticism, but merely a matter of
obtaining better knowledge, to examine whether the narratives of Genesis
are history or legend.

The objection is raised that Jesus and the Apostles clearly considered
these accounts to be fact and not poetry. Suppose they did; the men of
the New Testament are not presumed to have been exceptional men in such
matters, but shared the point of view of their time. Hence we are not
warranted in looking to the New Testament for a solution of questions in
the literary history of the Old Testament.

### CRITERIA FOR LEGEND AND HISTORY.

Now, since legend and history are very different in both origin and
nature, there are many criteria by which they may be distinguished. One
of the chief points of difference is that legend is originally oral
tradition, while history is usually found in written form; this is
inherent in the nature of the two

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

species, legend being the tradition of those who are not in the habit of
writing, while history, which is a sort of scientific activity,
presupposes practice in writing. At the same time the writing down of an
historical tradition serves to fix it, whereas oral tradition cannot
remain uncorrupted for any length of time and is therefore inadequate to
be the vehicle of history.

Now it is evident that Genesis contains the final sublimation into
writing of a body of oral traditions. The tales of the patriarchs do not
have the air of having been written down by the patriarchs themselves;
on the contrary many passages reveal clearly the great interval of time
that lies between the period of the patriarchs and that of the
narrators. We read frequently the expression "even to this day," as in
Genesis xix. 38; the kings of Edom are enumerated down to the time of
David, xxxvi. 31 ff.; the sentence "in those days the Canaanites dwelt
in the land" must have been written at a time when this race had long
since passed away.

But the whole style of the narrative, as is to be shown hereafter, can
be understood only on the supposition of its having been oral tradition;
this state of the case can be realised especially through the many
variants, to be treated in the following pages. But if the contents of
Genesis is oral tradition, it is, as the preceding considerations show,
legend also.

### DIFFERENT SPHERES OF INTEREST.

Another distinguishing feature of legend and history is their different
spheres of interest. History treats great public occurrences, while
legend deals

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

with things that interest the common people, with personal and private
matters, and is fond of presenting even political affairs and personages
so that they will attract popular attention. History would be expected
to tell how and for what reasons David succeeded in delivering Israel
from the Philistines; legend prefers to tell how the boy David once slew
a Philistine giant.

How does the material of Genesis stand in the light of this distinction?
With the exception of a single chapter (Chapter xiv), it contains no
accounts of great political events, but treats rather the history of a
family. We hear a quantity of details, which certainly have for the
greater part no value for political history, whether they are attested
or not: that Abraham was pious and magnanimous, and that he once put
away his concubine to please his wife; that Jacob deceived his brother;
that Rachel and Leah were jealous,--"unimportant anecdotes of country
life, stories of springs, of watering-troughs, and such as are told in
the bed-chamber," attractive enough to read, yet everything but
historical occurrences. Such minor incidents aroused no public interest
when they took place; the historian does not report them, but popular
tradition and legend delight in such details.

### EYE-WITNESS AND REPORTER.

In the case of every event that purports to be a credible historical
memorandum, it must be possible to explain the connexion between the
eye-witness of the event reported and the one who reports it. This is
quite different in the case of legend, which depends for its material
partly upon tradition and

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

partly upon imagination. We need only apply this test to the first
narratives of Genesis in order to recognise their character straightway.
No man was present at the creation of the universe; no human tradition
extends back to the period of the origin of our race, of the first
peoples and the primitive languages.

In former times, before the deciphering of hieroglyphs and cuneiform
writing, it was possible for Israelitic tradition to be regarded as so
old that it did not seem absurd to look to it for such reminiscences of
prehistoric ages; but now when creation has widened so mightily in our
view, when we see that the People of Israel is one of the youngest in
the group to which it belongs, there is an end of all such conjectures.
Between the origin of the primitive races of southwestern Asia and the
appearance of the People of Israel upon the stage of life had rolled
unnumbered millenniums; hence there is no room for serious discussion
over historical traditions said to be possessed by Israel regarding
those primitive times.

The accounts of the patriarchs also give rise to the most serious
doubts. According to the tradition the period of the patriarchs is
followed by the four hundred years during which Israel lived in Egypt.
Nothing is reported from this latter period; historical recollection
seems to have been utterly blotted out. And yet we have an abundance of
unimportant details regarding the period of the patriarchs. How is it
conceivable that a people should preserve a great quantity of the very
minutest details from the history of its primitive ancestors and at the
same time forget its own national history

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

for a long period following? It is not possible for oral tradition to
preserve an authentic record of such details so vividly and for so long
a time. And then, consider these narratives in detail. The question how
the reporter could know of the things which he relates cannot be raised
in most cases without exciting laughter. How does the reporter of the
Deluge pretend to know the depth of the water? Are we to suppose that
Noah took soundings? How is anyone supposed to know what God said or
thought alone or in the councils of Heaven? (Cp. Genesis i. 2, 18, vi.
3-6 ff., xi. 6 ff.)

### THE CRITERION OF INCREDIBILITY.

The clearest criterion of legend is that it frequently reports things
which are quite incredible. This poetry has another sort of probability
from that which obtains in prosaic life, and ancient Israel considered
many things to be possible which to us seem impossible. Thus many things
are reported in Genesis which go directly against our better knowledge:
we know that there are too many species of animals for all to have been
assembled in any ark; that Ararat is not the highest mountain on earth;
that the "firmament of heaven," of which Genesis i. 6 ff. speaks, is not
a reality, but an optical illusion; that the stars cannot have come into
existence after plants, as Genesis ii. 10-14 reports; that the rivers of
the earth do not come chiefly from four principal streams, as Genesis
ii. thinks, that the Tigris and the Euphrates have not a common source,
that the Dead Sea had been in existence long before human beings came to
live in Palestine, instead of originating in historical times, and so
on.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Of the many etymologies in Genesis the majority are to be rejected
according to the investigations of modern philology. The theory on which
the legends of the patriarchs are based, that the nations of the earth
originated from the expansion of a single family, in each case from a
single ancestor, is quite infantile. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)
Any other conclusion is impossible from the point of view of our modern
historical science, which is not a figment of imagination but is based
upon the observation of facts. And however cautious the modern historian
may be in declaring anything impossible, he may declare with all
confidence that animals--serpents and she-asses, for instance--do not
speak and never have spoken, that there is no tree whose fruit confers
immortality or knowledge, that angels and men do not have carnal
connexion, and that a world-conquering army cannot be defeated--as
Genesis xiv. declares--with three hundred and eighteen men.

### WANING ANTHROPOMORPHISM.

The narratives of Genesis being mostly of a religious nature are
constantly speaking of God. Now the manner in which narratives speak of
God is one of the surest means of determining whether they are
historical or poetic. Here too the historian cannot avoid having a
universal point of view. We believe that God works in the universe in
the silent and secret background of all things; sometimes his influence
seems almost tangible, as in the case of exceptionally great and
impressive events and personalities; we divine his control in the
marvellous

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

interdependence of things; but nowhere does he appear as an operative
factor beside others, but always as the last and ultimate cause of
everything. Very different is the point of view of many of the
narratives in Genesis. We find God walking about in the Garden of Eden;
with his own hands he fashions man and closes the door of the ark; he
even breathes his own breath into man's nostrils, and makes unsuccessful
experiments with animals; he scents the sacrifice of Noah; he appears to
Abraham and Lot in the guise of a wayfarer, or, as an angel, calls
directly out of Heaven. Once, indeed, God appears to Abraham in his
proper form, having the appearance of a burning torch and of a smoking
baking-pot (the Revised Version in English has here "furnace"). The
speeches of God in Genesis are remarkable for the fact that his words
are not heard in the obscure moments of intensest human excitement, in
the state of ecstasy, as was the case with the prophets when they heard
the voice of God, but that God speaks in all respects as does one man to
another. We are able to comprehend this as the naive conception of the
men of old, but we cannot regard belief in the literal truth of such
accounts as an essential of religious conviction.

And these arguments are immensely strengthened when we compare the
narratives which on inner evidence we regard as poetry with the
specimens which we know of strict Israelitish history. For these
violations of probability and even of possibility are not found
throughout the Old Testament, but only in certain definite portions
possessing a uniform tone, whereas they are not to be found in other
portions which for other reasons we regard as more

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

strictly historical. Consider especially the central portion of the
Second Book of Samuel, the history of the rebellion of Absalom, the most
exquisite piece of early historical writing in Israel. The world that is
there portrayed is the world that we know. In this world iron does not
float and serpents do not speak; no god or angel appears like a person
among other persons, but everything happens as we are used to seeing
things happen. In a word, the distinction between legend and history is
not injected into the Old Testament, but is to be found by any attentive
reader already present in the Old Testament.

Moreover, it should not be forgotten that many of the legends of the Old
Testament are not only similar to those of other nations, but are
actually related to them by origin and nature. Now we cannot regard the
story of the Deluge in Genesis as history and that of the Babylonians as
legend; in fact, the account of the Deluge in Genesis is a younger
version of the Babylonian legend. Neither can we reject all other
cosmogonies as fiction and defend that of Genesis as history; on the
contrary the account of Genesis i., greatly as it differs in its
religious spirit from other cosmogonies, is by its literary method
closely related to them.

### LEGEND IS POETRY.

But the important point is and will remain the poetic tone of the
narratives. History, which claims to inform us of what has actually
happened, is in its very nature prose, while legend is by nature poetry,
its aim being to please, to elevate, to inspire and to move. He who
wishes to do justice to such

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

narratives must have some æsthetic faculty, to catch in the telling of a
story what it is and what it purports to be. And in doing so he is not
expressing a hostile or even skeptical judgment, but simply studying
lovingly the nature of his material. Whoever possesses heart and feeling
must perceive, for instance in the case of the sacrifice of Isaac, that
the important matter is not to establish certain historical facts, but
to impart to the hearer the heartrending grief of the father who is
commanded to sacrifice his child with his own hand, and then his
boundless gratitude and joy when God's mercy releases him from this
grievous trial. And every one who perceives the peculiar poetic charm of
these old legends must feel irritated by the barbarian--for there are
pious barbarians--who thinks he is putting the true value upon these
narratives only when he treats them as prose and history.

The conclusion, then, that one of these narratives is legend is by no
means intended to detract from the value of the narrative; it only means
that the one who pronounces it has perceived somewhat of the poetic
beauty of the narrative and thinks that he has thus arrived at an
understanding of the story. Only ignorance can regard such a conclusion
as irreverent, for it is the judgment of reverence and love. These
poetic narratives are the most beautiful possession which a people
brings down through the course of its history, and the legends of
Israel, especially those of Genesis, are perhaps the most beautiful and
most profound ever known on earth.

A child, indeed, unable to distinguish between reality and poetry, loses
something when it is told that its dearest stories are "not true." But
the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

modern theologian should be further developed. The evangelical churches
and their chosen representatives would do well not to dispute the fact
that Genesis contains legends--as has been done too frequently--but to
recognise that the knowledge of this fact is the indispensable condition
to an historical understanding of Genesis. This knowledge is already too
widely diffused among those trained in historical study ever again to be
suppressed. It will surely spread among the masses of our people, for
the process is irresistible. Shall not we Evangelicals take care that it
be presented to them in the right spirit?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[8:1](log02.htm#fr_0.md) Compare my Commentary on
Genesis, pp. 78 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Varieties of Legends in Genesis](log03.md)
