[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](log03)  [Next](log05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

# III.

# THE LITERARY FORM OF THE LEGENDS.

THE beauty of the legends of Genesis has always been a source of delight
to readers of refined taste and it is not mere chance that painters have
been so fond of choosing the subjects of their works from Genesis.
Scholars have more rarely expressed appreciation of the beauty of these
narratives, often perhaps for personal reasons, and perhaps often
because the æsthetic point of view seemed to them incompatible with the
dignity of science. However, we do not share this prejudice, but, on the
contrary, are of the opinion that one who ignores the artistic form of
these legends not only deprives himself of a great pleasure, but is
unable properly to satisfy the scientific demands of the understanding
of Genesis. Nay, more: it is no insignificant question for science to
answer, in what the peculiar beauty of the legends consists,--a problem
whose solution requires a thorough investigation of the contents and the
religion of Genesis.

### GENESIS IS PROSE.

The first question is, whether the form of the diction is prose or
poetry. Aside from Genesis xlix. which is a poem and not a narrative,
and on that

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

ground alone is out of place in Genesis, all that the book contains is
prose in form. Detailed investigations of the nature of this prose have
not been carried on. Meanwhile, at least this may be said, that this
prose is not the common colloquial language of every-day life, but is
more artistic in its composition and has some sort of rhythmical
construction. Hebrew prosody is still a sealed book to us, but in
reading Genesis aloud one feels an agreeable harmony of rhythmically
balanced members. The translator of Genesis is constrained to imitate
this balancing of sentences.

Since the legends were already very old when they were written down, as
will be shown here-after, it is a matter of course that the language of
Genesis is somewhat archaic; this too must be reproduced in the
translation. In certain passages, the climaxes of the stories, the
language rises into poetry, as is the case with the German *Märchen*
where the spells and charms are in poetic form. In the case of some of
the legends we know variants both Biblical and extra-Biblical, notably
of the stories of creation, of the Garden of Eden and of the Flood,
which are in strictly metrical form. Inasmuch as these poetical variants
are known to be older than the prose versions transmitted in Genesis, we
are warranted in the conjecture that the poetic form of these legends is
older than any prose form whatever. The older and strictly rhythmical
form, which we must suppose to have been sung, would differ from the
later prose form, which was recited, as does the ancient German epic
from the later *Volksbuch* (book of popular legends), or as do the
Arthurian poems of Christian of Troyes

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

from the prose versions of Mallory's *Morte d’Arthur* or the Welsh
*Mabinogion*.

### GENESIS A FOLK-BOOK.

A second question is, whether these poetic versions are popular
traditions or the productions of individual poets. Modern investigators
have answered the general principle of the question to the effect that
Genesis is popular oral tradition written down. We are able to explain
clearly how such popular traditions originate. Of course, in the
ultimate beginning it was always an individual who improvised or devised
this or that poem. But it is characteristic of such popular traditions
that we are never able to observe them in the germ, any more than we can
in the case of language, but that they appear, wherever we hear of them,
as primitive possessions inherited from the patriarchs. Between the poet
who first conceived them and the time when they were fixed for
transmission to posterity a long period elapsed, and in this period the
legends were repeated from generation to generation and passed through
many hands. Yet however faithfully such legends are transmitted, they
are inevitably altered in the course of the centuries. And thus they
finally become the common product of the people. This transformation of
the legends was unconscious, at least in its earlier stages. Only in the
more recent modifications is it reasonable to assume the operation of
conscious art.

Both narrators and auditors regarded the legends as "true" stories. That
this is true of the legends of the Old Testament is shown in the
historical books of the Bible, where the narrators proceed by

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

almost imperceptible degrees from legends to genuine historical
narratives. It follows also from the legends themselves, which go about
in all seriousness to account for actual conditions: because the woman
was made from man's rib, therefore he longs for union with her; here we
see that this story was no mere poetical figure to the one who told it,
but an event that had actually happened. And furthermore, it is to be
expected from the nature of the case; legends come from ages and stages
of civilisation which have not yet acquired the intellectual power to
distinguish between poetry and reality. It is therefore no slight error
when modern investigators declare the legend of Paradise to be an
allegory which was never intended to represent actual occurrences.

Moreover, for the very reason that the legend is the product of the
whole people, it is the expression of the people's mind. And this is a
point of greatest importance for our interpretation of the legends of
Genesis. We are warranted in regarding the judgments and sentiments
presented in Genesis as the common possession of large numbers of
people.

### THE CONTENTS OF GENESIS IN PRIMITIVE FORM.

Accordingly, we should attempt in considering Genesis to realise first
of all the form of its contents when they existed as oral tradition.
This point of view has been ignored altogether too much hitherto, and
investigators have instead treated the legendary books too much as
"books." If we desire to understand the legends better we must recall to
view the situations in which the legends were recited. We

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

hear of such situations Ex. xii. 26 f., xiii. 14 f., Joshua iv. 6: when
the children ask about the reason of the sacred ceremony then the father
answers them by telling the story. Similarly we can imagine how the
story of Sodom was told with the Dead Sea in view, and the legend of
Bethel on the summit of Bethel. But the common situation which we have
to suppose is this: In the leisure of a winter evening the family sits
about the hearth; the grown people, but more especially the children,
listen intently to the beautiful old stories of the dawn of the world,
which they have heard so often yet never tire of hearing repeated.

Many of the legends, as will be shown later, have such a marked artistic
style that they can scarcely be regarded in this form as products of the
collective people. On the contrary, we must assume that there was in
Israel, as well as among the Arabs, a class of professional
story-tellers. These popular story-tellers, familiar with old songs and
legends, wandered about the country, and were probably to be found
regularly at the popular festivals.

We have already seen (page [38](#page_38)) that the transmitted prose
narrative was perhaps preceded by a narrative in regular rhythmical form
and intended for singing. In the case of these songs the circumstances
of their presentation may have been different. From the precedent of the
Babylonian poem of the creation, which in its form is an Easter hymn in
praise of Marduk, we may infer that the legends regarding forms of
worship go back to hymns for the sanctuary which were perhaps sung by
the priest at the sacred festivals and on the sacred ground ([p.
33](log03.htm#page_33)). But however this may be, the legends regarding

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

sanctuaries as we have them now had certainly ceased to be sung, and, as
their peculiarly colorless attitude shows, were not connected with the
sacred place in this form, but belong already to popular tradition.

### THE REAL UNIT IN GENESIS.

A new and fundamental question is: What unit is really the constituent
unit in Genesis, the one which we should first apply ourselves to? For
there are a number of different units in Genesis. The most comprehensive
unit is the whole Pentateuch, then Genesis, and then the single
collections of legends that preceded it; then the individual legends of
which the book was composed. Among these a distinction has to be made
between the independent individual legends, such, for example, as those
of the flight of Hagar and the sacrifice of Isaac, and on the other hand
certain groups of several legends constituting legend-cycles, such as
the cycle which treats the destinies of Abraham and Lot down to the
birth of their sons, or the one comprising Jacob's experiences with Esau
and with Laban, or the one of which Joseph is the hero. All of these
various units must be considered. But the first question is, Which of
these units is most important for our purposes, that is, which of them
was the original unit in oral tradition?

This is a question that arises in many similar cases: Which is the
elemental unit: the song-book, the individual group of songs in it, or
the individual song? Is it the gospel, the address, or the individual
utterance that is reported of Jesus? The

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

whole apocalypse, the separate apocalyptic documentary sources, or the
individual vision? For the proper understanding of Genesis, also, it is
of critical importance that this question be clearly met and correctly
answered. Hitherto investigators have seemed to regard it as a matter of
course that the original sources were the constituent units, though the
true view has not been without witnesses. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

Popular legends in their very nature exist in the form of individual
legends; not until later do compilers put several such legends together,
or poets construct of them greater and artistic compositions. Thus it is
also with the Hebrew popular legends. The legends of Genesis even in
their present form give clear evidence of this. Every single legend that
is preserved in an early form is a complete whole by itself; it begins
with a distinct introduction and ends with a very recognisable close.
Compare certain specific cases: Abraham wishes to sue for a wife for his
son; being too old himself he sends out his oldest servant--thus the
story opens. Then we are told how the old servant finds the right maiden
and brings her home. Meantime the aged master has died. The young master
receives the bride, and "he was comforted for the death of his father."
Everyone can see that the story ends here.

Abraham is directed by God to sacrifice his son; this is the exposition
(from xxii. on), which makes an entirely new start. Then we are told how
Abraham

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

was resolved upon the deed and very nearly accomplished it, but at the
last moment the sacrifice was prevented by God himself: Isaac is
preserved to Abraham. "Then they returned together to Beersheba." We see
that the narrative always opens in such a way that one recognises that
something new is about to begin; and it closes at the point where the
complication that has arisen is happily resolved: no one can ask, What
followed?

Similarly, the unity of the separate legends is shown in the fact that
they are in each case filled with a single harmonious sentiment. Thus,
in the story of the sacrifice of Isaac, emotion is predominant; in that
of Jacob's deception of Isaac, humor; in the story of Sodom, moral
earnestness; in the story of Babel, the fear of Almighty God.

Many stories are entirely spoiled by following them up immediately with
new ones which drive the reader suddenly from one mood to another. Every
skilful story-teller, on the contrary, makes a pause after telling one
such story, giving the imagination time to recover, allowing the hearer
to reflect in quiet on what he has heard while the chords that have been
struck are permitted to die away. Any one, for instance, who has
followed the story of Isaac sympathetically, feels at the close the need
of repose in which to recover from the emotion aroused. Those stories
especially which aim to give a reason for some present condition (Cp.
pp. [17](log03.htm#page_17), and [25](log03.htm#page_25)-36) require a
pause at the close so that the hearer may compare the prophecy and its
present fulfilment; as evidence of this consider the close of the story
of Eden, of the Flood, or of the drunkenness of Noah.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### LEGEND CYCLES.

In later times there were formed of these individual legends greater
units, called legend cycles, in which the separate legends are more or
less artistically combined. But even here it is not at all difficult in
most cases to extricate the original constituent elements from one
another. Thus the legend cycle which treats Abraham and Lot separates
clearly into the following stories: (1) The migration of Abraham and Lot
to Canaan; (2) their separation at Bethel; (3) the theophany at Hebron;
(4) the destruction of Sodom; (5) the birth of Ammon and Moab; (6) the
birth of Isaac. The legend cycle of Jacob-Esau-Laban divised clearly
into the legends of Jacob and Esau, of Jacob and Laban, the legends of
the origin of the twelve tribes, with various legends interspersed of
the origin of ritual observances. In the stories connected with Joseph,
also, those of Joseph's intercourse with his brothers are clearly
distinguished from those of Potiphar's wife, of Pharaoh's dreams, and
those of the agricultural conditions of Egypt (Gen. xlvii. 13-26).

This leads to the practical conclusion for the exegete that each
individual legend must be interpreted first of all from within. The more
independent a story is, the more sure we may be that it is preserved in
its original form. And the connexion between individual legends is of
later origin in many cases, if it be not simply an hallucination of the
exegete.

As an example of a primitive legend which is almost wholly without
antecedent assumptions, take the story of Hagar's flight, Gen. xvi., for
which we

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

need to know only that there is a man named Abraham with a wife named
Sarah; everything else is told by the legend itself. An example of a
later narrative is that of the suit for the hand of Rebeccah (chap.
xxiv.): this legend is based upon a whole series of individual elements
which belong to other legends, as the kinship and migration of Abraham,
the promise of Jahveh at the migration, the facts that Isaac was his
only son and the son of his old age, and so forth. Hence it is the
individual legend with which we shall have to deal first in this
treatise.

### LENGTH OF LEGENDS.

What are the limits of such a story? Many of the stories of Genesis
extend over scarcely more than ten verses. This is the case with the
stories of Noah's drunkenness, of the tower of Babel, of Abraham's
journey to Egypt, of Hagar's flight or the exile of Ishmael, of the
trial of Abraham, of Jacob at Bethel and at Penuel. After these very
brief stories we can group a series of more detailed stories occupying
about a chapter, such as the story of Paradise, of Cain's parricide, of
the Flood, of the theophany at Hebron, of the betrothal of Rebeccah, of
the fraud perpetrated upon Isaac by Jacob. Finally the legend cycles
exceed this limit of space.

This matter of the compass of the legends constitutes a decided
distinction between them and our modern productions. Even the most
complex legend groups of Genesis, such as that of Joseph, are of very
modest extent by modern standards, while the older legends are
absolutely abrupt to modern taste. Now, of course, the brief compass of
the old legends is at the same time an index of

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

their character. They deal with very simple occurrences which can be
adequately described in a few words. And this compass accords also with
the artistic ability of the narrator and the comprehension of the
hearer. The earliest story-tellers were not capable of constructing
artistic works of any considerable extent; neither could they expect
their hearers to follow them with undiminished interest for days and
even weeks continuously. On the contrary, primitive times were satisfied
with quite brief productions which required not much over half an hour.
Then when the narrative is finished the imagination of the hearer is
satisfied and his attention exhausted.

On the other hand, our narratives show us that later times were no
longer satisfied with the very brief stories of primitive construction;
a more fully developed æsthetic faculty demands more scope for its
expression. Thus greater compositions arose. This growth in the compass
of legends was favored by the circumstance of their being written down;
written productions are naturally more discursive than oral ones,
because the eye in reading can more easily grasp larger conceptions than
the ear in hearing. Accordingly, this too is a measure of the relative
age of legends, though a measure which must be used with caution: the
briefer a legend, the greater the probability that we have it in its
original form.

### SIMPLICITY AND CLEARNESS OF PRIMITIVE LITERARY ART.

The brevity of the legends is, as we have seen, a mark of the poverty of
primitive literary art; but at

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the same time this poverty has its peculiar advantages. The narrow
limits within which the narrator moves compel him to concentrate his
entire poetic power into the smallest compass; so that, while these
creations are small, they are also condensed and effective. And the
moderate grasp which these small works of art have to reckon upon in
their hearers results also in making the narratives as clear and
synoptic as possible.

To make this last fact more evident, consider in the first place the
balance of parts. Not only the longer of these narratives, but
especially the briefest also are outlined with extraordinary sharpness.
Thus, the story of Noah's drunkenness is constructed as follows:
Exposition, Noah's drunkenness. I. The occurrences: (1) Canaan's
shamelessness; (2) the filial respect of Shem and Japhet; II. The
judgments: (1) concerning Canaan; (2) concerning Shem and Japhet.--Or
take the story of the Garden of Eden, chap. iii.: I. The sin: (1) the
serpent tempts Eve; (2) the woman and the man sin; (3) as consequence,
the loss of their innocence; II. The examination; III. The punishments:
(1) the curse upon the serpent, (2) upon the woman, (3) upon the man;
IV. Conclusion: the expulsion from the garden.

By means of such plain and beautiful analyses the narratives gain in
clearness, that is, in the prerequisite of all aesthetic charm: the
whole is analysed into divisions and subdivisions which are themselves
easily grasped and the relation of which to one another is perfectly
plain. And these outlines are never painfully forced, but seem to have
come quite as a matter of course from the nature of the subject.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Consider, for instance, in the story of Eden,
how perfectly the outline corresponds to the contents: in the fall the
order is: Serpent, woman, man; the examination begins with the last
result and reverses the process, the order here being: Man, woman,
serpent; the punishment falls first upon the chief sinner, and
accordingly the original order is here resumed: Serpent, woman, man.
Hence the modern reader is advised to heed the systematic arrangement of
parts, since the analysis will at the same time give him the course of
the action.

Furthermore, the narrator of the legend, unlike the modern novelist,
could not expect his hearers to be interested in many persons at once,
but on the contrary, he always introduces to us a very small number. Of
course the minimum is two, because it takes at least two to make a
complication of interests: such are the cases of the separation of
Abraham and Lot, of Esau's sale of his birthright, and of the story of
Penuel; there are three personages in the story of the creation of the
woman (God, the man and the woman), in the story of Cain's fratricide
(God, Cain and Abel), in the story of Lot in the cave, and of the
sacrifice of Isaac; there are four in the story of Eden, of Abraham's
journey into Egypt, of Hagar's flight, of the deception practised upon
Isaac by Jacob.

There are indeed narratives in which more personages take part, as in
the case of the detailed story of the suit for the hand of Rebeccah, and
especially in the stories of the twelve sons of Jacob. Yet even here the
narrators have not been neglectful of clearness and distinctness. In
very many cases where a number of persons appear, the many are treated
as

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

one: they think and wish the same things and act all alike: thus in the
story of the Flood and of the tower of Babel all mankind are treated as
one person, so also with the brothers Shem and Japhet, with the three
men at Hebron and at Sodom (according to the original version of the
story), Lot's son-in-law at Sodom, the courtiers of Pharaoh, the
citizens of Shechem (Gen. xxxiv. 24), the brothers of Dinah (xxxiv. 25),
the citizens of Temnah (xxxviii. 24), and in many other cases. This is
in accord with the conditions of antiquity, in which the individual was
much less sharply distinguished from the mass of the people than in
modern times. At the same time, however, this condensation of several
persons into one is due to the inability of the narrator to catch and
depict the actual distinctions among individuals.

How limited in those days the capacity of even an artistically developed
narrator to depict character is shown in the conspicuous instance of the
story of Joseph: the narrative presents Joseph and the eleven in
conflict; among the others the story distinguishes Joseph's full
brother, Benjamin, the youngest; of the remaining ten Reuben (Judah) is
recognised separately. But this is the extent of the narrator's power to
characterise; the remaining nine lack all individuality; they are simply
"the brothers."

Further simplicity is attained by means of the arrangement of parts,
which, as we have noted, resolves the story into a number of little
scenes. And in these scenes it is rare that all the persons of the story
appear at once, but only a few, usually only two, are shown us at once.
Compare the

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

scenes of the story of the suit for Rebeccah; the first scene shows
Abraham and his servant, the second shows the servant alone on the
journey and at the well, the third the servant and the maiden, the
fourth the maiden and her family, the fifth, and principal, scene shows
the servant together with the maiden in her home, the sixth the servant
returning home with the maiden, the last their arrival at the tent of
Isaac. Or, another instance, the story of the exile of Ishmael (xxiv. 4
ff.) shows in succession: Sarah hearing the daughter of Ishmael, and
persuading Abraham; Abraham expelling Hagar; then Hagar alone in the
wilderness with the child, and finally her rescue by the angel. The
story of Jacob's deception (xxvii.) treats first of Isaac and Esau, then
of Rebeccah and Jacob, next of Jacob before Isaac, and of Esau before
Isaac, of Esau's hatred of Jacob, and finally of Rebeccah's advice to
Jacob.

The narrative takes especial pains to motivate this succession of
scenes; and yet it does not hesitate to simply drop a personage on
occasion, as in the case of the serpent after the temptation, or of
Rebeccah after the death of Isaac. By means of this analysis the
narrative gains great clearness; the hearer is not constrained to keep a
confusing group of people in view, but he sees them in succession; thus
he has time to inspect them at leisure and to familiarise himself with
them. Only once, at the climax of the action, do all the persons appear
together: thus in the story of Eden, in that of Noah's drunkenness, and
in the story of Joseph at the close. But even here the narrators
considered grouping necessary. They would not have been able to conduct
a conversation

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

between a number of persons at once. Thus at the end of the story of
Eden God does not reprove all the participants in one common address;
but he turns first to the serpent, then to the woman, then to the man.
And elsewhere also it is the nature of the style to divide up the
conversation into so many dialogues.

### CHIEF AND SUBORDINATE PERSONAGES.

The survey of the various personages is further facilitated by a very
distinct separation of leading and subordinate parts. The hearer does
not have to ask many questions to learn which of the personages should
receive his especial attention; the narrator makes this very plain to
him simply by speaking most of the chief personage. Thus in most of the
legends of the patriarchs the patriarchs themselves are as a matter of
course the chief personages. In the following cases the personages of
their respective stories are arranged in the order in which they
interest the narrator: Cain, Abel; Abraham, Sarah, Pharaoh (Genesis xii.
10-20); Abraham, Lot; Hagar, Sarah, Abraham (chap. xvi.); the servant
and Rebeccah are the chief personages in chap. xxiv., the others being
all of second rank; in chap. xxvii. the chief personages are Jacob and
Esau, while the parents are secondary; in the story of Jacob and Laban
these are the chief personages, the women secondary. In this
classification sympathy and veneration are not to be confused with
interest; the artistic interest of the narrator is greater in Cain than
in Abel, in Hagar than in Sarah; in chap. xxiv, the servant is the chief
personage while Abraham has only a subordinate part.--In many cases it

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

is the destinies of a single leading personage that we pursue,
noticeably in the case of the stories of Joseph.

### DESCRIPTION OF CHARACTERS.

In attempting to discover the method by which characters are depicted we
are first struck by the brevity with which subordinate personages are
treated. Modern literary creations have accustomed us to expect that
every personage introduced be characterised if possible with at least a
few touches as an independent individual. The method of the primitive
saga-man is entirely different. The personages whom he considers
altogether or temporarily subordinate receive little or no
characterisation. In view of the primitive feeling on the subject it is
a matter of course that not much attention was paid to slaves. The
attendants of Esau (xxxii. ff.) or of Laban (xxxi. 23) are introduced
merely to show their masters' importance, and have no further
significance. The narrators did not even consider it necessary to
mention the sin of the two chamberlains of Pharaoh (xli. 1), or the
feelings of Dinah (xxxiv.), or those of Sarah on the journey to Egypt
(xii. 10 ff.). Hirah, the friend of Judah (xxxviii. 1, I2, 20), is not
characterised; the sin of Er (xxxvii. 7) is not specified; nothing is
told of Shuah, the wife of Judah (xxxviii. 2-12), that is really
characteristic; the same is true of Joseph's steward (xliii. 16), of
Potiphar, and others.

And even the characterisation of the chief personages is remarkably
brief according to our notions. Only a few traits are ascribed to them,
often but one. Cain is jealous of his brother, Canaan is

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

shameless, Shem and Japhet respectful. In the story of the separation of
Lot and Abraham, the former is greedy, the latter conciliatory. In the
story of Hebron, Abraham is hospitable, and in the migration he is
obedient to the will of God. In the story of Penuel, Jacob is strong and
brave, in the affair with Esau he is crafty, in the story of Joseph he
is fond of the children of Rachel. In the somewhat complex story of the
Fall the serpent is crafty and evil, the man and the woman are guileless
as children, the woman is fond of dainties and gullible, the man follows
his wife. Even in the case of God each individual story as a rule speaks
of but one single quality: in most of the legends he is the gracious
helper, in others, as the stories of Paradise and Babel, he is the lofty
sovereign whose concern is to keep men within bounds.

We are struck by this paucity in the legends, since we are familiar in
modern compositions with portraits made up of many separate traits and
painted with artistic detail. The art of the primitive story-tellers is
very different. True, it is based upon the actual conditions of
primitive ages in one respect: the men of antiquity were in general more
simple than the many-sided men of modern times. Yet it would be an error
to suppose that men in those earlier days were as simple as they are
represented to be in the legends; compare in evidence of this the
character sketches of a somewhat maturer art in the Second Book of
Samuel. With this example in mind we shall recognise also that there is
some other ground for the brevity of the legends of Genesis than that
abbreviation of the real which is inevitable in every artistic
reproduction of life.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### POPULAR LEGENDS TREAT MEN AS TYPES.

It is, on the contrary, a peculiar popular conception of man that we
meet in Genesis. This conception was unable to grasp and represent many
sides of man, much less all; it could see but a little. But so much the
more need had it to catch the essential traits of the individual,
wherefore it constructed types. Thus in the story of the flight of
Hagar, Hagar is the type of the slave (xvi.) who is too well treated,
Sarah of the jealous wife, Abraham the type of the conciliatory husband.
Rachel and Leah are types of the favorite and of the unloved wife; in
the story of the migration of Abraham to Egypt, or the story of Joseph,
Pharoah acts like the typical Oriental king in such cases; his courtiers
are courtiers and nothing more; Abraham's servant, chap. xxiv., is an
old and tried servant; Isaac, in the story of the deception, is a blind
old man, and Rebeccah a cunning, partial mother; Abraham in his
migration and in chap. xxii. is the type of the pious and obedient man.
A number of figures are the types of the races which are said to be
descended from them: the shameless Canaan, the generous but stupid Esau,
the crafty Laban, the still more crafty Jacob (cp. [p.
23](log03.htm#page_23)).

Doubtless it is another sign of the lack of creative grasp when the
legends thus present to our eyes species instead of individuals; but the
narrators have made a virtue of necessity. Within the limited sphere
assigned to them they give us extraordinary achievements. The types
which they had the opportunity to observe they have depicted with a
confidence and a clearness similar to those displayed in the national
types preserved to us by the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Egyptian painters. And for this very reason many
of the old legends still fascinate the modern reader, and even the
unlearned reader; they often reproduce universally human conditions and
relations which are intelligible without interpretation unto this day.
To the special student, however, they yield much greater pleasure, for
to him they furnish the most intimate revelations regarding primitive
conditions and sentiments.

As a natural conclusion from this simplicity of the characters
represented we recognise that the art of these popular legends was far
from undertaking to show any development in the characters, such as
improvement or degeneration. Not that primitive times ignored the
possibilities of such changes; the denunciations of the prophets as well
as historical evidence prove the contrary. But the art of the
story-teller is far from equal to the task of depicting such an inward
change. All that modern exegetes claim to have found in Genesis in this
line is simply imported into the sources: Jacob's dishonest character
did not change at all; and Joseph's brethren are not at all reformed in
the course of the story, but simply punished.

While, therefore, the individual legends recognise in the main only one
quality of the personages involved, the legend cycles are able to give
more detailed descriptions, although after a peculiar manner. The
characteristic instance is, of course, the portrayal of the figure of
Joseph in the cycle of legends devoted to his history. Here each
individual legend brings out one or two sides of his nature: one legend
(xxxvii.) tells us that he was loved by his father and therefore hated
by his

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

brethren, and that he had dreams; another (xxxix.) tells us that
everything throve under his hand, and that he was fair and chaste; a
third (xl.) that he could interpret dreams; and a fourth (xli.) that he
was crafty; and so on. Combining all these individual traits we get
finally a complete portrait.

Furthermore, the narrators are exceedingly grudging in the outward
description of their personages: they reveal nothing regarding hair,
complexion, eyes or garb. In all this they seem to take the normal
Hebrew type for granted. And wherever they deviate from this rule in
their description it is done for specific reasons: Esau. is red and
hairy (xxv. 25) clearly because he is a type of the Edomite; Joseph
wears his long garment with sleeves (xxxvii. 3) as a badge of the love
of his father; Leah had "tender eyes" and Rachel is beautiful of form
(xxix. 17) to explain why Jacob rejects Leah and loves Rachel.

Now if we ask what principle the story-teller follows when he does
emphasise definite characteristics of his personages, we discover that
the characterisation is generally subordinated to the action. The
particular quality of the person is emphasised that is necessary for the
development of the action; all others are ignored. The story of the
deception practised by Jacob tells how the latter, following his
mother's counsel, induces his father to bless him instead of Esau: here
Jacob is crafty, he practises deception; Esau is stupid, he lets himself
be cheated; Isaac is easily deceived, is blind; Rebeccah is cunning, she
gives the deceitful advice and is partial to Jacob. This is further
portrayed in a more detailed narrative: Jacob is a shepherd who

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

dwells at home with his mother, Esau a hunter whose venison the father
is fond of. The modern story-teller would add a quantity of further
traits to give color and life to the figures, but the primitive
story-teller rejected all such details. It is very easy to see what the
aesthetic interest of the narrator was: he cared above all things for
the action; the portrayal of figures was for him only a secondary
matter.

### METHODS OF THE NARRATORS.

What means do the narrators use for the representation of the character
of their heroes? The modern artist is very apt to explain in extended
descriptions the thoughts and feelings of his personages. When one turns
from such a modern story-teller to the study of Genesis, one is
astonished to find in it so few utterances regarding the inner life of
the heroes. Only rarely are the thoughts of even a leading personage
expressly told, as in the case of the woman when she was looking
desirously at the tree of knowledge, or of Noah, when he sent forth the
birds "to see whether the waters were dried up off the earth," or the
thoughts of Lot's sons-in-law, who judged that their father-in-law was
jesting; the thoughts of Isaac, who feared at Gerar that he might be
robbed of his wife (xxvi. 7); or the cunning thoughts with which Jacob
proposed to evade the revenge of his brother Esau (xxxii. 9), and so on.
But how brief and unsatisfactory even this appears compared with the
psychological descriptions of modern writers!

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

And even such examples as these are not the rule in the legends of
Genesis. On the contrary, the narrator is usually content with a very
brief hint, such as, "He grew wroth" (iv. 5; xxx. 2; xxxi. 36; xxxiv. 7;
xxxix. 19; xl. 2), or, "He was afraid" (xxvi. 7; xxviii. 17; xxxii. 8),
"He was comforted" (xxiv. 16), "He loved her" (xxiv. 67; xxix. 18; xxx.
3; xxxvii. 3), "She became jealous" (xxx. 1), "He was filled with fear"
(xxvii. 33), "He eyed him with hatred" (xxvii. 41; xxxvii. 4), and
else-where. But even these brief hints are far from frequent; on the
contrary, we find very often not the slightest expression regarding the
thoughts and feelings of the person concerned, and this in situations
where we cannot avoid a certain surprise at the absence of such
expressions. The narrator tells us nothing of the reasons why God
forbade man to partake of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, nor of the
reasons of the serpent for wishing to seduce mankind. He says nothing of
the feelings with which Abraham left his home, or Noah entered the ark.
We do not learn that Noah was angry at Canaan's shamelessness, that
Jacob was disappointed when Laban cheated him with Leah, that Hagar was
glad when she received the promise that Ishmael should become a great
nation; we are not even told that mothers rejoice when they hold their
firstborn son in their arms. Particularly striking is the case of the
story of the sacrifice of Isaac: what modern writer would fail under
such circumstances to portray the spiritual state of Abraham when his
religious devotion wins the hard victory over his parental love, and
when his sadness is finally turned into rejoicing!

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### THOUGHT EXPRESSED BY ACTIONS.

Now what is the reason for this strange proceeding? We can find it in an
instance like that of xix. 27 ff. In sight of the city of Sodom Abraham
had heard certain remarkable utterances from the three men; they had
said that they were going down to Sodom to examine into the guilt of the
city. This strange remark he let run in his head; in the morning of the
following day he arose and went to the same place to see whether
anything had happened in Sodom during the night. And in fact, he sees in
the valley below a smoke, whence he must infer that something has taken
place; but this smoke hides the region, and he cannot make out what has
happened. For the story-teller this little scene is plainly not of
interest because of the thing that happens, but because of the thoughts
which Abraham must have thought, and yet he does not tell us what these
thoughts were. He merely reports to us the outward incidents, and we are
obliged to supply the really important point ourselves. This
story-teller, then, has an eye for the soul-life of his hero, but he
cannot conceive these inward processes with sufficient clearness to
express them in definite words.

This is a typical instance for Genesis. In very many situations where
the modern writer would expect a psychological analysis, the primitive
story-teller simply presents an action. The spiritual state of the man
and woman in Paradise and after the Fall is not analysed, but a single
objective touch is given by which we may recognise it. The narrator says
nothing of the thoughts of Adam when

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the woman handed him the forbidden fruit, but merely, that he ate it; he
does not discourse to us on Abraham's hospitable disposition, but he
tells us how he entertained the three men. He does not say that Shem and
Japhet felt chastely and respectfully, but he has them act chastely and
respectfully; not that Joseph had compassion upon his brethren, but that
he turned away and wept (xlii. 24; xliii. 30); not that Hagar, when
mistreated by Sarah, felt offended in the depths of her maternal pride,
but that she ran away from her mistress (xvi. 6); not that Laban was
dazzled by the gold of the stranger, but that he made haste to invite
him (xxiv. 30); not that obedience to God triumphed in Abraham over
parental love, but that he arose straightway (xxii. 3); not that Tamar
remained faithful to her husband even beyond the grave, but that she
took measures to rear I up children from his seed (xxxviii).

From all this we see on what the story-teller laid the chief emphasis.
He does not share the modern point of view that the most interesting and
worthy theme for art is the soul-life of man; his childlike taste is
fondest of the outward, objective facts. And in this line his
achievements are excellent. He has an extraordinary faculty for
selecting just the action which is most characteristic for the state of
feeling of his hero. How could filial piety be better represented than
in the story of Shem and Japhet? Or mother-love better than by the
behavior of Hagar? She gave her son to drink--we are not told that she
herself drank. How could hospitality be better depicted than in the
actions of Abraham at Hebron? And there is nothing less than genius in
the simple manner in which the innocence and

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the consciousness of the first men is illustrated by their nakedness and
their clothing.

These simple artists had not learned how to reflect; but they were
masters of observation. It is chiefly this admirable art of indirectly
depicting men through their actions which makes the legends so vivid.
Little as these primitive men could talk about their soul-life, we gain
the impression that they are letting us look into the very hearts of
their heroes. These figures live before our eyes, and hence the modern
reader, charmed by the luminous clearness of these old legends, is quite
willing to forget their defects.

### SOUL-LIFE NOT IGNORED.

But even when the story-teller said nothing of the soul-life of his
heroes, his hearer did not entirely fail to catch an impression of it.
We must recall at this point that we are dealing with orally recited
stories. Between narrator and hearer there is another link than that of
words; the tone of the voice talks, the expression of the face or the
gestures of the narrator. Joy and grief, love, anger, jealousy, hatred,
emotion, and all the other moods of his heroes, shared by the narrator,
were thus imparted to his hearers without the utterance of a word.

Modern exegesis is called to the task of reading between the lines the
spiritual life which the narrator did not expressly utter. This is not
always such a simple matter. We have in some cases got-ten out of touch
with the emotions of older times and the expressions for them. Why, for
instance, did Rebeccah veil herself when she caught sight of

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Isaac? (xxiv. 25.) Why did the daughters of Lot
go in unto him? Why did Tamar desire offspring of Judah? (xxxvii.) What
is the connexion of the awakening modesty of the first men and their
sin? In such cases exegesis has often gone far astray by taking modern
motives and points of view for granted.

A further medium of expression for the spiritual life of the personages
is articulate speech. Words are not, it is true, so vivid as actions,
but to make up for this they can the better reveal the inner life of the
personages. The early story-tellers were masters in the art of finding
words that suit the mood of the speakers: thus the malice of the cunning
serpent is expressed in words, as well as the guilelessness of the
childlike woman, Sarah's jealousy of her slave as well as the
conciliatoriness of Abraham (xvi. 6), the righteous wrath of Abimelech
(xx. 9), the caution of the shrewd Jacob (xxxii. 9), and the bitter
lament of Esau (xxvii. 36) and of Laban (xxxi. 43) when deceived by
Jacob. Notable masterpieces of the portrayal of character in words are
the temptation of the first couple and the conversation between Abraham
and Isaac on the way to the mount of sacrifice.

### LACONISM OF THE LEGEND WRITERS.

But even in this connexion we find many things to surprise us. First of
all, that the personages of Genesis often fail to speak where the modern
writer would surely have them do so, and where the very nature of the
case seems to require it. We may well imagine that Joseph complained
aloud when

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

he was cast into the pit and carried away to Egypt (cp. also xlii. 21),
that the murder of Abel was preceded by a dispute, that Hagar left
Abraham's house weeping and complaining that Abraham had put her away
(xxi. 14); but there is nothing of the kind. The first couple do not
utter a word of reply when God pronounces his curse upon their future:
they do not even indulge in self-accusations; not a word does Rebeccah
say in chapter xxvi., nor Noah during the Deluge, nor Abraham in chapter
xviii, when a son is promised him or when he is commanded to sacrifice
Isaac; neither does Hagar when she sees her child dying, nor later when
God heard the weeping of Ishmael. One who examined these references
might easily conclude that the personages of Genesis were intended to be
portrayed as taciturn and even secretive; he would find the only
talkative individual to be--God.

But if we go more deeply into these legends, we perceive that this
extraordinary laconism is part of the style of the narrator. The
narrators subordinated everything to the action. They introduced only
such speeches as really advanced the action. Hence especially they
avoided giving utterance to the feelings of the merely passive
personages. Whether Joseph complains or keeps silence, when his brethren
sell him, makes no difference with his destiny. What words were spoken
by Abraham and Noah when they received the commands of God makes no
difference; suffice it, they obeyed. The destiny of the first family is
fixed when God has cursed them; no self-reproaches will help the matter.
Or, what do we care about the dispute that preceded the murder of Abel,
since we know the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

reason which prompted Cain's deed! And it appears perfectly natural that
men should make no reply to the promises of God, as is usually the case;
for what can man add when God has spoken?

The other side of this strangely laconic method is that the remarks
which the narrator does introduce are an essential part of the
narrative. The conversation between the serpent and the woman is to show
how it came about that the forbidden fruit was eaten. Cain pours forth
his guilt-laden heart before God, and as a result modifies his sentence.
Abraham begs his wife to declare herself his sister; and thus it comes
about that she was taken into the harem of Pharaoh (xli. 11 ff.).
Abraham gave Lot the choice of going to the east or to the west; hence
Lot chose the plain of the Jordan. At Sarah's request Abraham takes
Hagar as concubine and at her request he gives her up again. In these
cases the words are not idle; on the contrary they are necessary to
suggest an inner motive for the action to follow. Especially necessary
are the words of cursing and of promise; they are the very climax of the
story, up to which all the rest leads. This explains why God is so often
represented as speaking in Genesis; for speech is really the chief
medium through which God influences the action in these legends.

In some places the narrators have introduced monologues, the most
unconcrete of all forms of speech, when the situation showed that there
was no one present to whom the person could have spoken. This is quite
commonly the case with God; for to whom should God reveal his most
hidden decrees? But in a few cases we can infer (i. 26; ii. 6 f.) an
elder

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

form of the account, in which God addressed himself to his celestial
associates.

But even in the laconic legends there are speeches which, while they are
not exactly necessary, either characterise a person or attempt to give
the opinion of the narrator, or which aim at some other point which the
narrator wants to make. Many of the speeches in Genesis are exceedingly
brief. Recall the lament of Hagar: "I am fleeing before the face of my
mistress" (xvi. 8), or the words of the daughters of Lot (xix. 31), of
Sarah (xxi. to), of Abraham (xxi. 24), "I will swear;" of Rebeccah
(xxiv. 18 ff.), of Jacob (xxv. 33), "Swear to me this day," of Isaac
(xxvi. 7), "She is my sister," of the shepherds of Gerar (xxvi. 20),
"The water is ours," of Isaac's slaves (xxvi. 32), "We have found
water," of Laban (xxix. 14), "Yea, thou art my flesh and blood," and so
on. Of course, the speeches are not always so brief; they are especially
apt to grow longer in the solemn and impressive formulae of cursing and
blessing. But in general we may see in brevity a characteristic mark of
a certain type in Genesis.

Even such utterances do not always reveal the ultimate purpose of the
actors, and reveal their spiritual life only in an indirect way. Hence
the expressions are not always entirely clear for us, and require an
especial gift for their interpretation. We are told that God forbade to
man the fruit of the tree of life, but his reason for this is not given.
What thought was in God's mind when threatening man with immediate
death, whereas this result did not actually follow? So, too, we learn
that the serpent desires to betray the woman, but not his

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

reason. And even such psychological masterpieces as the story of the
temptation are only indirect portrayals of soul-life.

### NO NATURE-LOVE IN GENESIS.

Very many of the legends are no less laconic in their descriptions of
incidental circumstances. In this respect also there is a great
difference between the primitive literary art and that of modern
story-tellers. Of course, the ancients have no touch of the intimate
feeling for the landscape; there is no trace of nature-love in Genesis.
The facts that the story of Eden is set among green trees, the story of
Hagar in the barren desolation of the wilderness, the story of Joseph in
the land of the Nile, affect the course of the story in certain
respects, indeed, since the first pair clothe themselves with leaves and
since the desert is a place where one can get lost, and where there is
no water. But these facts in no wise affect the mood or sentiment of the
action.

### ECONOMY OF DETAILS.

But aside from this intimate feeling for the life of nature, which was
foreign to the primitive man, how easy it would have been to give a
description of Paradise! What modern poet would have missed the
opportunity! But the early story-tellers were content to say that there
were beautiful trees there, and the source of mighty rivers. It is a
piece of the same method that the narrator does not tell us with what
weapon Cain slew Abel; he tells us merely that Noah planted vines and
then that he

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

drank of the wine, omitting the intervening steps of picking and
pressing the grapes; he no more tells us how the contempt of Hagar was
expressed (xvi. 4) than how Sarah took her revenge. We are wont to
admire the circumstantiality of the narratives, and justly, but this by
no means implies that the legends abound in striking and highly concrete
touches; on the contrary, they present on the whole not an abundance,
but a paucity, of concrete elements. But the little that we have is so
judiciously selected that we are warranted in seeking for a purpose in
almost every minute feature.

This economy of circumstantial details is the more striking because
alongside such lightly sketched features, and especially in the more
detailed narratives, there are often very minute descriptions. Thus, for
instance, the meal that Abraham serves to the three men is described in
detail, while the meal of Lot is but briefly sketched. For the purpose
of exegesis it is very suggestive to keep this question constantly in
mind, to observe the brief and detailed treatments, and to consider
everywhere the interest of the narrator. In general this will warrant
the conclusion that the narrator portrays the principal events
concretely, while merely hinting at or omitting those which are
incidental to the action: thus, for instance, in the story of the
sacrifice of Isaac the three days' journey is covered at a bound, while
the short passage to the place of sacrifice is described in all detail.
The narrator is quite arbitrary in the matter. Similarly the experiences
of Abraham's servant on the day when he sued for the hand of Rebeccah
are reported very minutely, while all the days consumed

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

in the journey to the city of Nahor are disposed of in a breath.

This emphasis laid upon the action is seen also in the manner of the
conclusion of the narrative. The legends stop promptly when they have
attained the desired object, not with a gradual cadence, but with a
sudden jolt. This observation also is important for exegesis. The point
just before the close is recognised as the climax by the narrator. Yet
there are here two varieties of conclusion: the customary sort follows
the climax with a short sentence (the type is the sacrifice of Isaac);
the less common, and plainly more impressive, closes with a pathetic
address (the curse of Noah is here the type).

### UNITY AND COHERENCE OF PARTS.

From the above observations we conclude that in the primitive legends
everything is subordinated to the action. In other literatures there are
narratives in which the action is merely a garb or a thread, while the
chief concern is the psychologic study, the brilliant conversation, or
the idea; but not so with the primitive Hebrew legend. The primitive man
demanded from his story-teller first of all action; he demands that
something shall happen in the story to please his eye. But the first
essential in such a story is to him its inner unity; the narrator must
furnish him a connected series of events each necessarily dependent on
the preceding.

One of the chief charms of the early legend is just this: to show how
one thing resulted from another. The more plausible and necessary this
connexion appears, the more attractive seems the whole story. A famine
forces Abraham to go to Egypt; but he is

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

afraid of being killed there on account of his beautiful wife.
*Therefore* he reports his wife to be his sister. Deceived *by this*
Pharaoh takes Sarah and makes presents to Abraham. *Therefore* God
punishes Pharaoh. *In consequence of this* Pharaoh releases Sarah but
permits Abraham to retain the presents.--Sarah has no children, but
desires them. *Therefore* she gives her maid to Abraham as concubine.
*Thus* Hagar conceives by Abraham. *Hence* Hagar despises her mistress.
*This* offends the proud Sarah most deeply. *Therefore* she causes
Abraham to restore Hagar to her, and mistreats her. *As a result* Hagar
flees into the desert. *Here* God has compassion on her and promises her
a son.

Observe how in such cases each successive member is linked to the
preceding one; how each preceding member appears as the natural cause or
at least the antecedent of the succeeding one. We are in the habit,
following a sort of tradition, of calling this kind of narrative
childish; but in so doing we are only partially right.

These narratives, then, are exceedingly tense in their connexion. The
narrators do not like digressions, but press with all their energy
toward the mark. Hence they avoid, if possible, the introduction of new
features in a given story, but seek an uninterrupted connexion. Rarely
indeed are new assumptions introduced, but good style demands the
announcement of all assumptions as near the beginning as possible. In
pursuit of this method it is considered permissible to skip over the
necessary consequences of what has been told, provided only that those
features stand forth which are essential to the continuation of the
action. There must be

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

nothing too much, and nothing too little. The narrator does not spring
aside; but the hearer also must not be allowed to spring aside: the
narrator holds fast to him so that he can think only what the narrator
wants to have him think.

### VARIATIONS ON A GIVEN THEME.

Many of the legends are fond of varying a given motive. Consider how the
story of Eden makes everything dependent on the nakedness and the
clothing of man, and how the relation of "field" and "field-tiller"
(this is the etymology of the Hebrew word here used for "man") pervades
this whole legend; how the story of Joseph's sale into Egypt treats the
coat-sleeve (coat of many colors) and the dreams; how the story of
Jacob's last testament (xlvii. 29 ff.) constantly connects his actions
with his bed: in praying he bows at the head of the bed, xlvii. 31; in
blessing he rises up in bed, xlviii. 2; in dying he stretches himself
out upon his bed, xlix. 33 (English version: "gathered up his feet in
his bed"), and so on. In this the rule is, quite in opposition to our
sense of style, to repeat the expression every time the thing is
referred to, so that one and the same word often runs through the story
like a red thread. Undoubtedly this custom originated in the poverty of
the language; but the narrators of our legends follow it in order to
produce an impression of unity and simplicity.

Precisely because of this inward connexion in the story it is possible
in many places where our received text shows gaps or distortions to
recognise the original form of the legend: the text-criticism is in this
point very much more positive than in the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

case of the prophets, the laws and the songs, which lacked this
connected condensation.

### PLAUSIBILITY DEMANDED.

Furthermore, the course of the action must be probable, highly credible,
even unavoidable. Nowhere must the hearer be able to make the objection
that what is being told is inconsistent with what has preceded or with
itself. Hagar, when elevated to too high station, could not fail to grow
haughty; and Sarah could not help feeling offended. True, the
probability aimed at by these old story-tellers was different from that
of which we speak. Their understanding of nature was different from
ours; for instance, they regarded it as entirely credible that all the
kinds of animals could get into the ark; furthermore, the way in which
they speak of God and his participation in the affairs of the world was
naïver than is possible for us of modern times; they regarded it as
quite plausible that the serpent should have spoken in primitive times;
that Joseph, the grand vizier, should look after the sale of the corn in
person.

Hence it would be quite unwarranted to speak of the "arbitrariness" and
"childish recklessness" of the legends simply because the assumptions of
the narrators are impossible to us in modern times. Only in a very few
places can the eye of the modern reader, even though trained for
criticism, detect improbabilities. In this line we may ask why Joseph,
who was so much attached to his father, failed to communicate with him
all the long years. Even after Hagar and her son were once rescued, were
not the dangers of the desert sure to recur

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

every day? But the auditor of ancient times doubtless did not ask such
questions; he was more willing to surrender to the narrator, and was
more easily charmed; he was also more credulous than we are; compare for
instance, xliii. 23.

### SUSTAINED INTEREST.

On the other hand, in a well-told legend the incidents are not so simple
that one can guess the whole course of events from the first few words;
if it were so, the legend would lose its interest. No one cares to hear
of things that are self-evident. On the contrary, our story-tellers are
dealing with what they regard as a complicated situation, whose final
outcome cannot be surveyed in advance by the hearer. This leads him to
listen the more intently. Jacob wrestles with a supernatural being;
which of the two will conquer? Jacob and Laban are equally gifted in
cunning; which will succeed in deceiving the other? The shrewd but
unwarlike Jacob has to meet the dull but physically superior Esau; how
will he manage him? Abraham has to go down into Egypt, and how will he
fare there? Thus all these stories are more or less exciting. The
child-like listener holds his breath, and rejoices when the hero finally
escapes all the threatening dangers.

The narrators are very fond of contrasts: the child cast out into the
desert becomes a mighty people; a poor slave, languishing in prison,
becomes the ruler of Egypt with all her abundance. They try if possible
to focus these contrasts into a single point: at the moment when Hagar
is in utter despair, God takes compassion on her; the very instant when
Abraham raises his arm to slay Isaac,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

he is checked by God. Lot lingers, and Jacob holds the divinity fast
until the dawn is at hand: the next moment will surely bring the
decision.

And where this intense interest is wholly lacking, where there is no
complication of interests, there we have no real legend. Thus the
account of creation in Genesis i. is scarcely to be called a story; and
yet, from v. 2 and 26, as well as from the poetic versions referred to
on pp. [10](log02.htm#page_10)-12 and [25](log03.htm#page_25)-26, we can
conjecture a form of the account in which more personages appear and in
which the world is created after a conflict of God with Chaos. In like
manner, the accounts of Abraham's migration and of his league with
Abimelech are not real legends, but only legendary traditions which have
originated probably from the decay of earlier and fuller legends.

### LEGENDS NOT PURE INVENTION.

As we have seen in the second division of this treatise, the legends are
not free inventions of the imagination. On the contrary, a legend adopts
and works over certain data which come from reflexion, tradition or
observation. These fundamental data have been treated in the preceding
pages; our present task is to consider the part taken by the imagination
in the development of the legends. With this subject we have reached the
very heart of our investigations.

As has been shown above, many of the legends seem intended to answer
definite questions. That is, these legends are not the thoughtless play
of an imagination acting without other purpose than the search for the
beautiful, but they have a specific

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

purpose, a point, which is to instruct. Accordingly, if these narratives
are to attain their object they must make this point very clear. They do
this in a decided way, so decidedly that even we late-born moderns can
see the point clearly, and can infer from it the question answered. The
sympathetic reader who has followed the unhappy-happy Hagar on her way
through the desert will find no word in the whole story more touching
that the one which puts an end to all her distress: God hears. But this
word contains at the same time the point aimed at, for upon this the
narrator wished to build the interpretation of the name Ishmael ("God
hears").--Or what word in the legend of the sacrifice of Isaac stamps
itself so deeply upon the memory as the affecting word with which
Abraham from the depths of his breaking heart quiets the questioning of
his unsuspecting child: God will provide! This word, which made God
himself a reality, is so emphasised because it answers the question
after the etymology of the place (Jeruel).

Other legends reflect historic events or situations, and in such cases
it was the duty of the narrator to bring out these references clearly
enough to satisfy his well-informed hearer. Thus in the legend of the
flight of Hagar the actors are at first mere individuals whose destinies
are interesting enough, to be sure, but at the climax, with the words of
God regarding Ishmael the narrator shows that in Ishmael he is treating
of a race and its destinies.

Hebrew taste is especially fond of playing about the names of leading
heroes and places, even when no etymology is involved Many of the
legends are quite filled with such references to names. Thus

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the legend of the Deluge plays with the name of Noah (cp. viii. 4, 9,
21), the story of the sacrifice of Isaac with Jeruel (xxii. 8, 12, 13),
the story of the meeting of Jacob and Esau with Mahanaim and Penuel (cp.
p. 321 in my Commentary), and so on.

Thus these legends are rich in points and allusions; they are so to
speak transparent: even the one who reads them naively and simply as
beautiful stories finds pleasure in them, but only the one who holds
them up against the light of the primitive understanding can catch all
their beautiful colors; to him they appear as small but flashing and
brilliant works of art. The characteristic feature of the Hebrew popular
legends as contrasted with other legends, if we understand the matter,
consists in the flashing of these points.

The art of the story-tellers consists in avoiding every suspicion of
deliberate purpose at the same time that they give great prominence to
their point. With marvellous elegance, with fascinating grace, they
manage to reach the goal they have set. They tell a little story so
charmingly and with such fidelity to nature that we listen to them all
unsuspecting; and all at once, before we expect it, they are at their
goal. For instance, the story of Hagar's flight (xvi.) wishes to explain
how Ishmael, although the child of our Abraham, was born in the
wilderness; to this end it draws a picture of Abraham's household: it
shows how, by an entirely credible series of events, Ishmael's mother
while with child was brought to desperation and fled into the
wilderness; thence it came that Ishmael is a child of the desert.

In many cases the task of the narrator was very

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

complex: he had to answer a whole series of different questions, or to
assimilate a quantity of antecedent presumptions. Thus, one variant of
the legend of Babel asks the origin of the difference of languages and
of the city of Babel, the other wants to know the source of the
distribution of races and also of a certain ancient structure. Or again,
the story of Abraham at Hebron undertakes to tell not only the origin of
the worship at Hebron, but also to explain the birth of Isaac and the
choice of his name. Here then the task was, to unite the differing
elements into unity. And it is just here that the story-tellers show
their art. The prime motive furnishes the leading thread of the story;
the subordinate motives they spin into a single scene which they
introduce into the body of the story with easy grace.

### ETYMOLOGIES SUBORDINATE FEATURES.

The etymologies usually constitute such subordinate motives. Thus in the
story of the worship at Jeruel a scene is interjected which is to
explain the name of the place, "God sees"; but this little scene, the
dialogue between Abraham and Isaac, xxii. 7 f., expresses so completely
the tone and sentiment of the whole story that we should not be willing
to dispense with it even if it had no particular point of its own. In
other cases the artists have joined together two leading motives; then
they invented a very simple and plausible transition from one to the
other: thus the first part of the legend of Hebron presents the
establishment of worship there under the guise of the story that

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Abraham entertained the three divine visitors
there; the second portion, which is to account for the birth of Isaac,
simply proceeds with the given situation, having the three guests enter
into a conversation at table and therein promise Isaac to Abraham. It is
the most charming portion of the task of the interpreter of Genesis to
search for these matters, and not only, so far as this is possible, to
discover what is for us the oldest meaning of the legends, but also to
observe the refinements of artistic composition in the stories.

### SUMMARY.

We have to do, then, even in the oldest legends of Genesis, not with
aimless, rude stories, tossed off without reflexion, but on the
contrary, there is revealed in them a mature, perfected, and very
forcible art. The narratives have a very decided style.

Finally, attention should be called to the fact that the narrators
scarcely ever express a distinct opinion about persons or facts. This
constitutes a clear distinction between them and the later legends and
histories worked over under the influence of the prophets. Of course,
the narrators of the early legends had their opinions; they are by no
means objective, but rather intensely subjective; and often the real
comprehension of the legend lies in our obtaining an impression of this
opinion of the narrator. But they almost never gave expression to this
opinion: they were not able to reflect clearly on psychological
processes. Wherever we do get a more distinct view of such an opinion it
is by

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

means of the speeches of the actors which throw some light on what has
happened; consider particularly the utterances of Abraham and Abimelech,
chapter xx., or the final scene of the story of Laban and Jacob, xxxi.
26 ff. At the same time this suppression of opinions shows most clearly
that the narrators, especially the earlier ones, did not care to
proclaim general truths.

It is true, there are at the basis of many of the legends and more or
less distinctly recognisable, certain general truths, as, in the case of
the story of the migration of Abraham, a thought of the value of faith,
and in the story of Hebron, the thought of the reward of hospitality.
But we must not imagine that these narratives aimed primarily at these
truths; they do not aim to teach moral truths. With myths, as has been
shown on pages [15](log03.htm#page_15)-17, this is different, for they
aim to answer questions of a general nature.

### AN EARLY ISRAELITISH ROMANCE

Out of the type of legend which has been sketched in essentials in the
preceding pages there was evolved, as we may discover even in Genesis
itself, another type relatively much nearer to modern fiction. While the
story of Hagar's flight is a classic instance of the former sort, the
most conspicuous example of the second is the story of Joseph. It is
necessary only to compare the two narratives in order to see the great
differences in the two kinds: there, everything characteristically brief
and condensed, here, just as characteristically, everything long spun
out.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

The first striking difference is the extent of the stories. Since the
earlier form was in vogue we see that men have learned to construct more
consider-able works of art and are fond of doing so. The second is, that
people are no longer satisfied to tell a single legend by itself, but
have the gift of combining several legends into a whole. Thus it is in
the story of Joseph, so also in the Jacob-Esau-Laban story and in the
legends of Abraham and Lot.

Let us inquire how these combinations came about. in the first place,
related legends attracted one another. For instance, it was to be
expected that legends treating the same individual would constitute
themselves into a small epic, as in the stories of Joseph and of Jacob;
or the similar, and yet characteristically different, legends of Abraham
at Hebron and Lot at Sodom have become united. Similarly in J, a story
of the creation and a story of Paradise are interwoven; both of them
treat the beginnings of the race. In P the primitive legends of the
creation and of the deluge originally constituted a connected whole. In
many cases that we can observe the nature of the union is identical: the
more important legend is split in two and the less important one put
into the gap. We call this device in composition, which is very common
in the history of literature--instance *The Arabian Nights*, the
*Decameron*, *Gil Blas*, and Hauff's *Tales*--"enframed stories." Thus,
the story of Esau and Jacob is the frame for the story of Jacob and
Laban; the experiences of Joseph in Egypt are fitted into the story of
Joseph and his brethren; similarly the story of Abraham at Hebron is
united with that of Lot at Sodom.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### DEVICES FOR UNITING SEVERAL STORIES.

In order to judge of the artistic quality of these compositions we must
first of all examine the joints or edges of the elder stories. Usually
the narrators make the transition by means of very simple devices from
one of the stories to the other. The transition par excellence is the
journey. When the first portion of the Jacob-Esau legend is finished
Jacob sets out for Aram; there he has his experiences with Laban, and
then returns to Esau. In the story of Joseph the carrying off of Joseph
to Egypt, and later the journey of his brethren thither, are the
connecting links of the separate stories. Similarly in the story of
Abraham and Lot, we are first told that the three men visited Abraham
and went afterwards to Sodom.

Now we must examine how these various journeys are motivated. The sale
of Joseph into Egypt is the goal at which everything that precedes has
aimed. The journey of his brethren to Egypt is prompted by the same
great famine which had already been the decisive factor in bringing
Joseph to honor in Egypt. And the experiences of the brethren in Egypt
are based upon Joseph's advancement. Thus we see that the story of
Joseph is very cunningly blended into a whole.

There is less of unity in the story of Jacob; but even here there is a
plausible motive why Jacob goes to Laban: he is fleeing from Esau. In
other respects we find here the original legends side by side unblended.
On the contrary, in the story of Abraham and Lot no reason is alleged
why the three men go directly from Abraham to Sodom; that is to

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

say, there is here no attempt at an inner harmonising of the different
legends, but the narrator has exerted himself all the more to devise
artificial links of connexion; this is why he tells that Abraham
accompanied the men to the gates of Sodom, and even returned to the same
place on the following morning. In this we receive most clearly the
impression of conscious art, which is trying to make from originally
disconnected elements a more plausible unity. In the Joseph legend we
have an instance of a much more intimate blending of parts than the
"frames" of these other stories, a whole series of different adventures
harmonised and interwoven.

### EPIC DISCURSIVENESS.

Another characteristic feature of the Joseph story is its
discursiveness, which stands in notable contrast with the brevity of the
older narratives. We find in it an abundance of long speeches, of
soliloquies, of detailed descriptions of situations, of expositions of
the thoughts of the personages. The narrator is fond of repeating in the
form of a speech what he has already told. What are we to think of this
"epic discursiveness"? Not as an especial characteristic of this
particular narrative alone, for we find the same qualities, though less
pronounced, in the stories of the wooing of Rebeccah, of Abraham at the
court of Abimelech (Genesis xx.), in some features of the story of Jacob
(notably the meeting of Jacob and Esau); and the stories of the
sacrifice of Isaac and various features of the story of Abraham and Lot
also furnish parallels.

Very evidently we have to do here with a distinct

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

art of story-telling, the development of a new taste. This new art is
not satisfied, like its predecessor, with telling the legend in the
briefest possible way and with suppressing so far as possible all
incidental details; but it aims to make the legend richer and to develop
its beauties even when they are quite incidental. It endeavors to keep
situations that are felt to be attractive and interesting before the eye
of the hearers as long as possible. Thus, for instance, the distress of
Joseph's brethren as they stand before their brother is portrayed at
length; there is evident intent to delay the narrative, so that the
hearer may have time to get the full flavor of the charm of the
situation. Thus Joseph is not permitted to discover himself at the very
first meeting, in order that this scene may be repeated; he is made to
demand that Benjamin be brought before him, because the aged Jacob
hesitates a long time to obey this demand, and thus the action is
retarded. Similarly in the story of the sacrifice of Isaac, the
narrative is spun out just before the appearance of God upon the scene,
in order to postpone the catastrophe and intensify the interest.

The means that is applied over and over again to prolong the account is
to report the same scene twice, though of course with variations. Joseph
interprets dreams for Egyptian officials twice; Joseph's brethren must
meet him in Egypt twice; twice he hides valuables in their grain sacks
in order to embarrass them (xlii. 25 ff., xliv. 2 ff.); twice they
bargain over Joseph's cup with the steward and with Joseph himself
(xliii. 13 ff., 25 ff.), and so on. Sometimes, though surely less
frequently, it is possible that the narrators have invented new

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

scenes on the basis of the earlier motives, as with the last scene
between Joseph and his brethren, chapter l.

Quite unique is the intercalated episode, the negotiations of Abraham
with God regarding Sodom, which may almost be called a didactic
composition. It is written to treat a religious problem which agitated
the time of the author, and which occurred to him in connexion with the
story of Sodom. These narrators have a quite remarkable fondness for
long speeches, so great as to lead them to subordinate the action to the
speeches. The most marked instance is the meeting of Abraham with
Abimelech, chapter xx. Here, quite in opposition to the regular rule of
ancient style, the events are not told in the order in which they
occurred, but a series of occurrences are suppressed at the beginning in
order to bring them in later in the succeeding speeches. Thus the
narrator has attempted to make the speeches more interesting even at the
expense of the incidents to be narrated.

It is also a favorite device to put substance into the speeches by
having what has already been reported repeated by one of the personages
of the story (xliii. 13, 21, 30 ff.; xliii. 3, 7, 20 f.; xliv. 19 ff).
The rule of style in such repetition of speech is, contrary to the
method of Homer, to vary them somewhat the second time. This preference
for longer speeches is, as we clearly perceive, a secondary phenomenon
in Hebrew style, the mark of a later period. We observe this in the fact
that the very pieces which we recognise from other considerations as the
latest developments of the legend or as intercalations (xiii. 14-17;
xvi. 9 f.; xviii.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 17-19, 23-33) are the ones which contain these
speeches.

We may find this delight in discursiveness in other species of Hebrew
literature also. The brief, condensed style of Amos is followed by the
discursive style of a Jeremiah, and the same relation exists between the
laconic sentences of the Book of the Covenant and the long-winded
expositions of Deuteronomy, between the brief apothegms which constitute
the heart of the Book of Proverbs and the extended speeches which were
afterwards added by way of introduction, between the oldest folk-songs,
which often contain but a single line each, and the long poems of art
poetry.

### INTEREST IN SOUL-LIFE.

We do not always agree with this taste of the later time; for instance,
the story of Joseph approaches the danger-line of becoming uninteresting
from excessive detail. On the other hand, this discursiveness is at the
same time the evidence of a newly acquired faculty. While the earlier
time can express its inner life only in brief and broken words, the new
generation has learned to observe itself more closely and to express
itself more completely. With this there has come an increase of interest
in the soul-life of the individual. Psycho-logical problems are now
treated with fondness and with skill. Thus in the story of the sacrifice
of Isaac there was created the perfection of the character study.

The narrator of the stories of Joseph shows himself a master of the art
of painting the portrait of a man by means of many small touches.
Especially successful

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

is the description of Joseph's inner vacillation at the sight of
Benjamin (xliii. 30), and the soul painting when Jacob hears that Joseph
is still alive (xlv. 26), and elsewhere. But while in these later
narratives the incidental features of the old legend are still developed
with greater detail, on the other hand this very fact has naturally
thrown the chief features somewhat into the background and made the
original point of the whole less obvious. This result has been further
favored by the circumstance that the original points had in many cases
ceased to be altogether clear to those of the later time. Thus in the
story of Joseph the historical and ætiological elements have lost
importance.

The difference between the two styles is so great that it seems
advisable to distinguish them by different names, and to limit the use
of "legend" to the first while we call the second "romance." Of course,
the transition between the two is fluctuant; we may call such transition
forms as the story of Laban and Jacob, or that of Rebeccah, "legends
touched with romance," or "romances based on legendary themes."

On the relative age of these styles, also, an opinion may be ventured,
though with great caution. The art of narrative which was acquired in
the writing of legends was applied later to the writing of history,
where, accordingly, we may make parallel observations. Now we see that
the oldest historical writing known to us has already adopted the
"detailed" style. Accordingly we may assume that this "detailed" style
was cultivated at least as early as the beginning of the time of the
kings. And

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

therefore the condensed style must have been cultivated for many
centuries before that time. However, it should be observed, this fixes
only the time of the styles of narrative, and not the age of the
narratives preserved to us in these styles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[43:1](log04.htm#fr_3) Reuss, AT III., p. 73:
"Originally the legends of the patriarchs arose individually without
connexion and independently of one another."--Wellhausen, Composition 2,
p. 9: "Tradition in the popular mouth knows only individual legends."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. History of the Development of the Legends of Genesis in Oral
Tradition](log05)
