[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kyb04)  [Next](kyb06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NHRC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kybalion*, by Three Initiates, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III

### MENTAL TRANSMUTATION

    "Mind (as well as metals and elements) may be transmuted,  
    from state to state; degree to degree; condition to condition;  
    pole to pole; vibration to vibration. True Hermetic Transmutation  
    is a Mental Art."--The Kybalion.

As we have stated, the Hermetists were the original alchemists,
astrologers, and psychologists, Hermes having been the founder of these
schools of thought. From astrology has grown modern astronomy; from
alchemy has grown modern chemistry; from the mystic psychology has grown
the modern psychology of the schools. But it must not be supposed that
the ancients were ignorant of that which the modern schools suppose to
be their exclusive and special property. The records engraved on the
stones of Ancient Egypt show conclusively that the ancients had a full
comprehensive knowledge of astronomy, the very building of the Pyramids
showing the connection between their design and the study of
astronomical science. Nor were they ignorant of Chemistry, for the
fragments of the ancient writings show that they were acquainted with
the chemical properties of things; in fact, the ancient theories
regarding physics are being slowly verified by the latest discoveries of
modern science, notably those relating to the constitution of matter.
Nor must it be supposed that they were ignorant of the so-called modern
discoveries in psychology--on the contrary, the Egyptians were
especially skilled in the science of Psychology, particularly in the
branches that the modern schools ignore, but which, nevertheless, are
being uncovered under the name of "psychic science" which is perplexing
the psychologists of to-day, and making them reluctantly admit that
"there may be something in it after all."

The truth is, that beneath the material chemistry, astronomy and
psychology (that is, the psychology in its phase of "brain-action") the
ancients possessed a knowledge of transcendental astronomy, called
astrology; of transcendental chemistry, called alchemy; of
transcendental psychology, called mystic psychology. They possessed the
Inner Knowledge as well as the Outer Knowledge, the latter alone being
possessed by modern scientists. Among the many secret branches of
knowledge possessed by the Hermetists, was that known as Mental
Transmutation, which forms the subject matter of this lesson.

"Transmutation" is a term usually employed to designate the ancient art
of the transmutation of metals--particularly of the base metals into
gold. The word "Transmute" means "to change from one nature, form, or
substance, into another; to transform" (Webster). And accordingly,
"Mental Transmutation" means the art of changing and transforming mental
states, forms, and conditions, into others. So you may see that Mental
Transmutation is the "Art of Mental Chemistry," if you like the term--a
form of practical Mystic Psychology.

But this means far more than appears on the surface. Transmutation,
Alchemy, or Chemistry on the Mental Plane is important enough in its
effects, to be sure, and if the art stopped there it would still be one
of the most important branches of study known to man. But this is only
the beginning. Let us see why!

The first of the Seven Hermetic Principles is the Principle of
Mentalism, the axiom of which is "THE ALL is Mind; the Universe is
Mental," which means that the Underlying Reality of the Universe is
Mind; and the Universe itself is Mental--that is, "existing in the Mind
of THE ALL." We shall consider this Principle in succeeding lessons, but
let us see the effect of the principle if it be assumed to be true.

If the Universe is Mental in its nature, then Mental Transmutation must
be the art of CHANGING THE CONDITIONS OF THE UNIVERSE, along the lines
of Matter, Force and mind. So you see, therefore, that Mental
Transmutation is really the "Magic" of which the ancient; writers had so
much to say in their mystical works, and about which they gave so few
practical instructions. If All be Mental, then the art which enables one
to transmute mental conditions must render the Master the controller of
material conditions as well as those ordinarily called "mental."

As a matter of fact, none but advanced Mental Alchemists have been able
to attain the degree of power necessary to control the grosser physical
conditions, such as the control of the elements of Nature; the
production or cessation of tempests; the production and cessation of
earthquakes and other great physical phenomena. But that such men have
existed, and do exist today, is a matter of earnest belief to all
advanced occultists of all schools. That the Masters exist, and have
these powers, the best teachers assure their students, having had
experiences which justify them in such belief and statements. These
Masters do not make public exhibitions of their powers, but seek
seclusion from the crowds of men, in order to better work their may
along the Path of Attainment. We mention their existence, at this point,
merely to call your attention to the fact that their power is entirely
Mental, and operates along the lines of the higher Mental Transmutation,
under the Hermetic Principle of Mentalism.

    "The Universe is Mental"--The Kybalion.

But students and Hermetists of lesser degree than Masters--the Initiates
and Teachers--are able to freely work along the Mental Plane, in Mental
Transmutation. In fact all that we call "psychic phenomena,"; "mental
influence"; "mental science"; "new-thought phenomena," etc., operates
along the same general lines, for there is but one principle involved,
no matter by what name the phenomena be called.

The student and practitioner of Mental Transmutation works among the
Mental Plane, transmuting mental conditions, states, etc., into others,
according to various formulas, more or less efficacious. The various
"treatments," "affirmations," "denials" etc., of the schools of mental
science are but formulas, often quite imperfect and unscientific, of The
Hermetic Art. The majority of modern practitioners are quite ignorant
compared to the ancient masters, for they lack the fundamental knowledge
upon which the work is based.

Not only may the mental states, etc., of one's self be changed or
transmuted by Hermetic Methods; but also the states of others may be,
and are, constantly transmuted in the same way, usually unconsciously,
but often consciously by some understanding the laws and principles, in
cases where the people affected are not informed of the principles of
self-protection. And more than this, as many students and practitioners
of modern mental science know, every material condition depending upon
the minds of other people may be changed or transmuted in accordance
with the earnest desire, will, and "treatments" of person desiring
changed conditions of life. The public are so generally informed
regarding these things at present, that we do not deem it necessary to
mention the same at length, our purpose at this point being merely to
show the Hermetic Principle and Art underlying all of these various
forms of practice, good and evil, for the force can be used in opposite
directions according to the Hermetic Principles of Polarity.

In this little book we shall state the basic principles of Mental
Transmutation, that all who read may grasp the Underlying Principles,
and thus possess the Master-Key that will unlock the many doors of the
Principle of Polarity.

We shall now proceed to a consideration of the first of the Hermetic
Seven Principles--the Principle of Mentalism, in which is explained the
truth that "THE ALL is Mind; the Universe is Mental," in the words of
The Kybalion. We ask the close attention, and careful study of this
great Principle, on the part of our students, for it is really the Basic
Principle of the whole Hermetic Philosophy, and of the Hermetic Art of
Mental Transmutation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The All](kyb06)
