[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kyb03)  [Next](kyb05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NHRC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kybalion*, by Three Initiates, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

### THE SEVEN HERMETIC PRINCIPLES

    "The Principles of Truth are Seven; he who knows these,  
    understandingly, possesses the Magic Key before whose  
    touch all the Doors of the Temple fly open."--The Kybalion.

The Seven Hermetic Principles, upon which the entire Hermetic Philosophy
is based, are as follows:

    1. The Principle of Mentalism.  
    2. The Principle of Correspondence.  
    3. The Principle of Vibration.  
    4. The Principle of Polarity.  
    5. The Principle of Rhythm.  
    6. The Principle of Cause and Effect.  
    7. The Principle of Gender.

These Seven Principles will be discussed and explained as we proceed
with these lessons. A short explanation of each, however, may as well be
given at this point.

1\. The Principle of Mentalism

    "THE ALL IS MIND; The Universe is Mental."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that "All is Mind." It explains that
THE ALL (which is the Substantial Reality underlying all the outward
manifestations and appearances which we know under the terms of "The
Material Universe"; the "Phenomena of Life"; "Matter"; "Energy"; and, in
short, all that is apparent to our material senses) is SPIRIT which in
itself is UNKNOWABLE and UNDEFINABLE, but which may be considered and
thought of as AN UNIVERSAL, INFINITE, LIVING MIND. It also explains that
all the phenomenal world or universe is simply a Mental Creation of THE
ALL, subject to the Laws of Created Things, and that the universe, as a
whole, and in its parts or units, has its existence in the Mind of THE
ALL, in which Mind we "live and move and have our being." This
Principle, by establishing the Mental Nature of the Universe, easily
explains all of the varied mental and psychic phenomena that occupy such
a large portion of the public attention, and which, without such
explanation, are non-understandable and defy scientific treatment. An
understanding of this great Hermetic Principle of Mentalism enables the
individual to readily grasp the laws of the Mental Universe, and to
apply the same to his well-being and advancement. The Hermetic Student
is enabled to apply intelligently the great Mental Laws, instead of
using them in a haphazard manner. With the Master-Key in his possession,
the student may unlock the many doors of the mental and psychic temple
of knowledge, and enter the same freely and intelligently. This
Principle explains the true nature of "Energy," "Power," and "Matter,"
and why and how all these are subordinate to the Mastery of Mind. One of
the old Hermetic Masters wrote, long ages ago: "He who grasps the truth
of the Mental Nature of the Universe is well advanced on The Path to
Mastery." And these words are as true today as at the time they were
first written. Without this Master-Key, Mastery is impossible, and the
student knocks in vain at the many doors of The Temple.

2\. The Principle of Correspondence

    "As above, so below; as below, so above."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that there is always a Correspondence
between the laws and phenomena of the various planes of Being and Life.
The old Hermetic axiom ran in these words: "As above, so below; as
below, so above." And the grasping of this Principle gives one the means
of solving many a dark paradox, and hidden secret of Nature. There are
planes beyond our knowing, but when we apply the Principle of
Correspondence to them we are able to understand much that would
otherwise be unknowable to us. This Principle is of universal
application and manifestation, on the various planes of the material,
mental, and spiritual universe--it is an Universal Law. The ancient
Hermetists considered this Principle as one of the most important mental
instruments by which man was able to pry aside the obstacles which hid
from view the Unknown. Its use even tore aside the Veil of Isis to the
extent that a glimpse of the face of the goddess might be caught. Just
as a knowledge of the Principles of Geometry enables man to measure
distant suns and their movements, while seated in his observatory, so a
knowledge of the Principle of Correspondence enables Man to reason
intelligently from the Known to the Unknown. Studying the monad, he
understands the archangel.

3\. The Principle of Vibration

    "Nothing rests; everything moves; everything vibrates."--The  
    Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that "everything is in motion";
"everything vibrates"; "nothing is at rest"; facts which Modern Science
endorses, and which each new scientific discovery tends to verify. And
yet this Hermetic Principle was enunciated thousands of years ago, by
the Masters of Ancient Egypt. This Principle explains that the
differences between different manifestations of Matter, Energy, Mind,
and even Spirit, result largely from varying rates of Vibration. From
THE ALL, which is Pure Spirit, down to the grossest form of Matter, all
is in vibration--the higher the vibration, the higher the position in
the scale. The vibration of Spirit is at such an infinite rate of
intensity and rapidity that it is practically at rest--just as a rapidly
moving wheel seems to be motionless. And at the other end of the scale,
there are gross forms of matter whose vibrations are so low as to seem
at rest. Between these poles, there are millions upon millions of
varying degrees of vibration. From corpuscle and electron, atom and
molecule, to worlds and universes, everything is in vibratory motion.
This is also true on the planes of energy and force (which are but
varying degrees of vibration); and also on the mental planes (whose
states depend upon vibrations); and even on to the spiritual planes. An
understanding of this Principle, with the appropriate formulas, enables
Hermetic students to control their own mental vibrations as well as
those of others. The Masters also apply this Principle to the conquering
of Natural phenomena, in various ways. "He who understands the Principle
of Vibration, has grasped the scepter of power," says one of the old
writers.

4\. The Principle of Polarity

    "Everything is Dual; everything has poles; everything has its  
    pair of opposites; like and unlike are the same; opposites are  
    identical in nature, but different in degree; extremes meet;  
    all truths are but half-truths; all paradoxes may be  
    reconciled."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that "everything is dual"; "everything
has two poles"; "everything has its pair of opposites," all of which
were old Hermetic axioms. It explains the old paradoxes, that have
perplexed so many, which have been stated as follows: "Thesis and
antithesis are identical in nature, but different in degree"; "opposites
are the same, differing only in degree"; "the pairs of opposites may be
reconciled"; "extremes meet"; "everything is and isn't, at the same
time"; "all truths are but half-truths"; "every truth is half-false";
"there are two sides to everything," etc., etc., etc. It explains that
in everything there are two poles, or opposite aspects, and that
"opposites" are really only the two extremes of the same thing, with
many varying degrees between them. To illustrate: Heat and Cold,
although "opposites," are really the same thing, the differences
consisting merely of degrees of the same thing. Look at your thermometer
and see if you can discover where "heat" terminates and "cold" begins!
There is no such thing as "absolute heat" or "absolute cold"--the two
terms "heat" and "cold" simply indicate varying degrees of the same
thing, and that "same thing" which manifests as "heat" and "cold" is
merely a form, variety, and rate of Vibration. So "heat" and "cold" are
simply the "two poles" of that which we call "Heat"--and the phenomena
attendant thereupon are manifestations of the Principle of Polarity. The
same Principle manifests in the case of "Light and Darkness," which are
the same thing, the difference consisting of varying degrees between the
two poles of the phenomena. Where does "darkness" leave off, and "light"
begin? What is the difference between "Large and Small"? Between "Hard
and Soft"? Between "Black and White"? Between "Sharp and Dull"? Between
"Noise and Quiet"? Between "High and Low"? Between "Positive and
Negative"? The Principle of Polarity explains these paradoxes, and no
other Principle can supersede it. The same Principle operates on the
Mental Plane. Let us take a radical and extreme example--that of "Love
and Hate," two mental states apparently totally different. And yet there
are degrees of Hate and degrees of Love, and a middle point in which we
use the terms "Like or Dislike," which shade into each other so
gradually that sometimes we are at a loss to know whether we "like" or
"dislike" or "neither." And all are simply degrees of the same thing, as
you will see if you will but think a moment. And, more than this (and
considered of more importance by the Hermetists), it is possible to
change the vibrations of Hate to the vibrations of Love, in one's own
mind, and in the minds of others. Many of you, who read these lines,
have had personal experiences of the involuntary rapid transition from
Love to Hate, and the reverse, in your own case and that of others. And
you will therefore realize the possibility of this being accomplished by
the use of the Will, by means of the Hermetic formulas. "Good and Evil"
are but the poles of the same thing, and the Hermetist understands the
art of transmuting Evil into Good, by means of an application of the
Principle of Polarity. In short, the "Art of Polarization" becomes a
phase of "Mental Alchemy" known and practiced by the ancient and modern
Hermetic Masters. An understanding of the Principle will enable one to
change his own Polarity, as well as that of others, if he will devote
the time and study necessary to master the art.

5\. The Principle of Rhythm

    "Everything flows, out and in; everything has its tides;  
    all things rise and fall; the pendulum-swing manifests in  
    everything; the measure of the swing to the right is the  
    measure of the swing to the left; rhythm compensates."--The  
    Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that in everything there is manifested
a measured motion, to and fro; a flow and inflow; a swing backward and
forward; a pendulum-like movement; a tide-like ebb and flow; a high-tide
and low-tide; between the two poles which exist in accordance with the
Principle of Polarity described a moment ago. There is always an action
and a reaction; an advance and a retreat; a rising and a sinking. This
is in the affairs of the Universe, suns, worlds, men, animals, mind,
energy, and matter. This law is manifest in the creation and destruction
of worlds; in the rise and fall of nations; in the life of all things;
and finally in the mental states of Man (and it is with this latter that
the Hermetists find the understanding of the Principle most important).
The Hermetists have grasped this Principle, finding its universal
application, and have also discovered certain means to overcome its
effects in themselves by the use of the appropriate formulas and
methods. They apply the Mental Law of Neutralization. They cannot annul
the Principle, or cause it to cease its operation, but they have learned
how to escape its effects upon themselves to a certain degree depending
upon the Mastery of the Principle. They have learned how to USE it,
instead of being USED BY it. In this and similar methods, consist the
Art of the Hermetists. The Master of Hermetics polarizes himself at the
point at which he desires to rest, and then neutralizes the Rhythmic
swing of the pendulum which would tend to carry him to the other pole.
All individuals who have attained any degree of Self-Mastery do this to
a certain degree, more or less unconsciously, but the Master does this
consciously, and by the use of his Will, and attains a degree of Poise
and Mental Firmness almost impossible of belief on the part of the
masses who are swung backward and forward like a pendulum. This
Principle and that of Polarity have been closely studied by the
Hermetists, and the methods of counteracting, neutralizing, and USING
them form an important part of the Hermetic Mental Alchemy.

6\. The Principle of Cause and Effect

    "Every Cause has its Effect; every Effect has its Cause;  
    everything happens according to Law; Chance is but a name  
    for Law not recognized; there are many planes of causation,  
    but nothing escapes the Law."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the fact that there is a Cause for every Effect;
an Effect from every Cause. It explains that: "Everything Happens
according to Law"; that nothing ever "merely happens"; that there is no
such thing as Chance; that while there are various planes of Cause and
Effect, the higher dominating the lower planes, still nothing ever
entirely escapes the Law. The Hermetists understand the art and methods
of rising above the ordinary plane of Cause and Effect, to a certain
degree, and by mentally rising to a higher plane they become Causers
instead of Effects. The masses of people are carried along, obedient to
environment; the wills and desires of others stronger than themselves;
heredity; suggestion; and other outward causes moving them about like
pawns on the Chessboard of Life. But the Masters, rising to the plane
above, dominate their moods, characters, qualities, and powers, as well
as the environment surrounding them, and become Movers instead of pawns.
They help to PLAY THE GAME OF LIFE, instead of being played and moved
about by other wills and environment. They USE the Principle instead of
being its tools. The Masters obey the Causation of the higher planes,
but they help to RULE on their own plane. In this statement there is
condensed a wealth of Hermetic knowledge--let him read who can.

7\. The Principle of Gender

    "Gender is in everything; everything has its Masculine  
    and Feminine Principles; Gender manifests on all  
    planes."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that there is GENDER manifested in
everything--the Masculine and Feminine Principles ever at work. This is
true not only of the Physical Plane, but of the Mental and even the
Spiritual Planes. On the Physical Plane, the Principle manifests as SEX,
on the higher planes it takes higher forms, but the Principle is ever
the same. No creation, physical, mental or spiritual, is possible
without this Principle. An understanding of its laws will throw light on
many a subject that has perplexed the minds of men. The Principle of
Gender works ever in the direction of generation, regeneration, and
creation. Everything, and every person, contains the two Elements or
Principles, or this great Principle, within it, him or her. Every Male
thing has the Female Element also; every Female contains also the Male
Principle. If you would understand the philosophy of Mental and
Spiritual Creation, Generation, and Re-generation, you must understand
and study this Hermetic Principle. It contains the solution of many
mysteries of Life. We caution you that this Principle has no reference
to the many base, pernicious and degrading lustful theories, teachings
and practices, which are taught under fanciful titles, and which are a
prostitution of the great natural principle of Gender. Such base
revivals of the ancient infamous forms of Phallicism tend to ruin mind,
body and soul, and the Hermetic Philosophy has ever sounded the warning
note against these degraded teachings which tend toward lust,
licentiousness, and perversion of Nature's principles. If you seek such
teachings, you must go elsewhere for them--Hermeticism contains nothing
for you along these lines. To the pure, all things are pure; to the
base, all things are base.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Mental Transmutation](kyb05.md)
