[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kyb10)  [Next](kyb12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NHRC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kybalion*, by Three Initiates, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX

### VIBRATION

    "Nothing rests; everything moves; everything  
    vibrates."--The Kybalion.

The great Third Hermetic Principle--the Principle of Vibration--embodies
the truth that Motion is manifest in everything in the Universe--that
nothing is at rest--that everything moves, vibrates, and circles. This
Hermetic Principle was recognized by some of the early Greek
philosophers who embodied it in their systems. But, then, for centuries
it was lost sight of by the thinkers outside of the Hermetic ranks. But
in the Nineteenth Century physical science re-discovered the truth and
the Twentieth Century scientific discoveries have added additional proof
of the correctness and truth of this centuries-old Hermetic doctrine.

The Hermetic Teachings are that not only is everything in constant
movement and vibration, but that the "differences" between the various
manifestations of the universal power are due entirely to the varying
rate and mode of vibrations. Not only this, but that even THE ALL, in
itself, manifests a constant vibration of such an infinite degree of
intensity and rapid motion that it may be practically considered as at
rest, the teachers directing the attention of the students to the fact
that even on the physical plane a rapidly moving object (such as a
revolving wheel) seems to be at rest. The Teachings are to the effect
that Spirit is at one end of the Pole of Vibration, the other Pole being
certain extremely gross forms of Matter. Between these two poles are
millions upon millions of different rates and modes of vibration.

Modern Science has proven that all that we call Matter and Energy are
but "modes of vibratory motion," and some of the more advanced
scientists are rapidly moving toward the positions of the occultists who
hold that the phenomena of Mind are likewise modes of vibration or
motion. Let us see what science has to say regarding the question of
vibrations in matter and energy.

In the first place, science teaches that all matter manifests, in some
degree, the vibrations arising from temperature or heat. Be an object
cold or hot--both being but degrees of the same things--it manifests
certain heat vibrations, and in that sense is in motion and vibration.
Then all particles of Matter are in circular movement, from corpuscle to
suns. The planets revolve around suns, and many of them turn on their
axes. The suns move around greater central points, and these are
believed to move around still greater, and so on, ad infinitum. The
molecules of which the particular kinds of Matter are composed are in a
state of constant vibration and movement around each other and against
each other. The molecules are composed of Atoms, which, likewise, are in
a state of constant movement and vibration. The atoms are composed of
Corpuscles, sometimes called "electrons," "ions," etc., which also are
in a state of rapid motion, revolving around each other, and which
manifest a very rapid state and mode of vibration. And, so we see that
all forms of Matter manifest Vibration, in accordance with the Hermetic
Principle of Vibration.

And so it is with the various forms of Energy. Science teaches that
Light, Heat, Magnetism and Electricity are but forms of vibratory motion
connected in some way with, and probably emanating from the Ether.
Science does not as yet attempt to explain the nature of the phenomena
known as Cohesion, which is the principle of Molecular Attraction; nor
Chemical Affinity, which is the principle of Atomic Attraction; nor
Gravitation (the greatest mystery of the three), which is the principle
of attraction by which every particle or mass of Matter is bound to
every other particle or mass. These three forms of Energy are not as yet
understood by science, yet the writers incline to the opinion that these
too are manifestations of some form of vibratory energy, a fact which
the Hermetists have held and taught for ages past.

The Universal Ether, which is postulated by science without its nature
being understood clearly, is held by the Hermetists to be but a higher
manifestation of that which is erroneously called matter--that is to
say, Matter at a higher degree of vibration--and is called by them "The
Ethereal Substance." The Hermetists teach that this Ethereal Substance
is of extreme tenuity and elasticity, and pervades universal space,
serving as a medium of transmission of waves of vibratory energy, such
as heat, light, electricity, magnetism, etc. The Teachings are that The
Ethereal Substance is a connecting link between the forms of vibratory
energy known as "Matter" on the one hand, and "Energy or Force" on the
other; and also that it manifests a degree of vibration, in rate and
mode, entirely its own.

Scientists have offered the illustration of a rapidly moving wheel, top,
or cylinder, to show the effects of increasing rates of vibration. The
illustration supposes a wheel, top, or revolving cylinder, running at a
low rate of speed--we will call this revolving thing "the object" in
following out the illustration. Let us suppose the object moving slowly.
It may be seen readily, but no sound of its movement reaches the ear.
The speed is gradually increased. In a few moments its movement becomes
so rapid that a deep growl or low note may be heard. Then as the rate is
increased the note rises one in the musical scale. Then, the motion
being still further increased, the next highest note is distinguished.
Then, one after another, all the notes of the musical scale appear,
rising higher and higher as the motion is increased. Finally when the
motions have reached a certain rate the final note perceptible to human
ears is reached and the shrill, piercing shriek dies away, and silence
follows. No sound is heard from the revolving object, the rate of motion
being so high that the human ear cannot register the vibrations. Then
comes the perception of rising degrees of Heat. Then after quite a time
the eye catches a glimpse of the object becoming a dull dark reddish
color. As the rate increases, the red becomes brighter. Then as the
speed is increased, the red melts into an orange. Then the orange melts
into a yellow. Then follow, successively, the shades of green, blue,
indigo, and finally violet, as the rate of sped increases. Then the
violet shades away, and all color disappears, the human eye not being
able to register them. But there are invisible rays emanating from the
revolving object, the rays that are used in photographing, and other
subtle rays of light. Then begin to manifest the peculiar rays known as
the "X Rays," etc., as the constitution of the object changes.
Electricity and Magnetism are emitted when the appropriate rate of
vibration is attained.

When the object reaches a certain rate of vibration its molecules
disintegrate, and resolve themselves into the original elements or
atoms. Then the atoms, following the Principle of Vibration, are
separated into the countless corpuscles of which they are composed. And
finally, even the corpuscles disappear and the object may be said to Be
composed of The Ethereal Substance. Science does not dare to follow the
illustration further, but the Hermetists teach that if the vibrations be
continually increased the object would mount up the successive states of
manifestation and would in turn manifest the various mental stages, and
then on Spiritward, until it would finally re-enter THE ALL, which is
Absolute Spirit. The "object," however, would have ceased to be an
"object" long before the stage of Ethereal Substance was reached, but
otherwise the illustration is correct inasmuch as it shows the effect of
constantly increased rates and modes of vibration. It must be
remembered, in the above illustration, that at the stages at which the
"object" throws off vibrations of light, heat, etc., it is not actually
"resolved" into those forms of energy (which are much higher in the
scale), but simply that it reaches a degree of vibration in which those
forms of energy are liberated, in a degree, from the confining
influences of its molecules, atoms and corpuscles, as the case may be.
These forms of energy, although much higher in the scale than matter,
are imprisoned and confined in the material combinations, by reason of
the energies manifesting through, and using material forms, but thus
becoming entangled and confined in their creations of material forms,
which, to an extent, is true of all creations, the creating force
becoming involved in its creation.

But the Hermetic Teachings go much further than do those of modern
science. They teach that all manifestation of thought, emotion, reason,
will or desire, or any mental state or condition, are accompanied by
vibrations, a portion of which are thrown off and which tend to affect
the minds of other persons by "induction." This is the principle which
produces the phenomena of "telepathy"; mental influence, and other forms
of the action and power of mind over mind, with which the general public
is rapidly becoming acquainted, owing to the wide dissemination of
occult knowledge by the various schools, cults and teachers along these
lines at this time.

Every thought, emotion or mental state has its corresponding rate and
mode of vibration. And by an effort of the will of the person, or of
other persons, these mental states may be reproduced, just as a musical
tone may be reproduced by causing an instrument to vibrate at a certain
rate--just as color may be reproduced in the same may. By a knowledge of
the Principle of Vibration, as applied to Mental Phenomena, one may
polarize his mind at any degree he wishes, thus gaining a perfect
control over his mental states, moods, etc. In the same way he may
affect the minds of others, producing the desired mental states in them.
In short, he may be able to produce on the Mental Plane that which
science produces on the Physical Plane--namely, "Vibrations at Will."
This power of course may be acquired only by the proper instruction,
exercises, practice, etc., the science being that of Mental
Transmutation, one of the branches of the Hermetic Art.

A little reflection on what we have said will show the student that the
Principle of Vibration underlies the wonderful phenomena of the power
manifested by the Masters and Adepts, who are able to apparently set
aside the Laws of Nature, but who, in reality, are simply using one law
against another; one principle against others; and who accomplish their
results by changing the vibrations of material objects, or forms of
energy, and thus perform what are commonly called "miracles."

As one of the old Hermetic writers has truly said: "He who understands
the Principle of Vibration, has grasped the scepter of Power."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Polarity](kyb12.md)
