[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2306)  [Next](sbe2308) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185898/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part II (SBE23)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### II. HAPTÂN YA*S*T.

The Ya*s*t of the seven Amshaspands is recited on the first seven days
of the week, that is to say, on the days consecrated to the
Amesha-Spe*n*tas. In fact it is nothing more than an extract from the
Sîrôzahs, being composed of the first seven formulas in their two forms:
§§ 1-5 = Sîrôzah I, 1-7; §§ 6-10 = Sîrôzah II, 1-7. Then come four
sections which are the original part of the Ya*s*t (§§ 11-15).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

0\. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_187)! .
. . .

Ashem Vohû: Holiness is the best of all good <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_187) . . . .

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathu*s*tra, one
who hates the Daêvas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto \[Hâvani\],
the holy and master of holiness <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_187) .
. . .

#### I.

1 <span id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_188). To Ahura Mazda, bright and
glorious, and to the Amesha-Spe*n*tas;

To Vohu-Manô; to Peace, whose breath is friendly, and who is more
powerful to destroy than all other creatures; to the heavenly Wisdom,
made by Mazda, and to the Wisdom acquired through the ear, made by
Mazda;

2 <span id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_189). To Asha-Vahi*s*ta, the fairest;
to the much-desired Airyaman; to the instrument made by Mazda; and to
the good Saoka, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy;

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

To Khshathra-Vairya; to the metals; to Mercy and Charity.

3 <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_190). To the good Spe*n*ta-Ârmaiti,
and to the good Râta, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy;

To Haurvatâ*t*, the master; to the prosperity of the seasons and to the
years, the masters of holiness;

And to Ameretâ*t*, the master; to fatness and flocks; to the plenty of
corn; and to the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda.

4 <span id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_191). (At the Gâh Hâvan): To Mithra,
the lord of wide pastures and to Râma *Hv*âstra.

(At the Gâh Rapithwin): To Asha-Vahi*s*ta and to Âtar, the son of Ahura
Mazda.

(At the Gâh Uzîren): To Apãm Napâ*t*, the tall lord, and to water, made
by Mazda.

5 <span id="fr_199"></span>[3](#fn_192). (At the Gâh Aiwisrûthrem): To
the Fravashis of the faithful and to the females that bring forth flocks
of males; to the prosperity of the seasons; to the well-shapen and
tall-formed Strength; to Verethraghna, made by Ahura, and to the
crushing Ascendant.

(At the Gâh U*s*ahin): To the holy, devout, fiend-smiting Sraosha, who
makes the world grow; to Rashnu-Razi*s*ta and to Ar*s*tâ*t*, who makes
the world grow, who makes the world increase <span
id="fr_200"></span>[3](#fn_192);

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and
glorification!

Yathâ ahû vairyô: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness . . . .

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### II.

6 <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_193) We sacrifice unto Ahura Mazda,
bright and glorious; we sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, the
all-ruling, the all-beneficent.

We sacrifice unto Vohu-Manô, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto
Peace, whose breath is friendly, and who is more powerful to destroy
than all other creatures; we sacrifice unto the heavenly Wisdom, made by
Mazda; we sacrifice unto the wisdom acquired through the ear, made by
Mazda.

7 <span id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_194). We sacrifice unto
Asha-Vahi*s*ta, the fairest, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto the
much-desired Airyaman; we sacrifice unto the instrument made by Mazda;
we sacrifice unto the good Saoka, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and
holy.

We sacrifice unto Khshathra-Vairya; we sacrifice unto the metals; we
sacrifice unto Mercy and Charity.

8 <span id="fr_203"></span>[3](#fn_195). We sacrifice unto the good
Spe*n*ta-Ârmaiti; we sacrifice unto the good Râta, with eyes of love,
made by Mazda and holy.

We sacrifice unto Haurvatâ*t*, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto
the prosperity of the seasons; we sacrifice unto the years, the holy and
masters of holiness.

We sacrifice unto Ameretâ*t*, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto
fatness and flocks; we sacrifice unto the plenty of corn; we sacrifice
unto the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda.

9 <span id="fr_204"></span>[4](#fn_196). (At the Gâh Hâvan): We
sacrifice unto

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mithra, the lord
of wide pastures; we sacrifice unto Râma *Hv*âstra.

(At the Gâh Rapithwin): We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahi*s*ta and Âtar, the
son of Ahura Mazda.

(At the Gâh Uzîren): We sacrifice unto Apãm Napâ*t*, the swift-horsed,
the tall and shining lord, the lord of the females; we sacrifice unto
the holy waters, made by Mazda.

10 <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_197). (At the Gâh Aiwisrûthrem): We
sacrifice unto the good, powerful, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful;
we sacrifice unto the females who bring forth flocks of males; we
sacrifice unto the prosperity of the seasons; we sacrifice unto the
well-shapen, tall-formed Strength; we sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made
by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the crushing Ascendant.

(At the Gâh U*s*ahin): We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed,
fiend-smiting Sraosha, who makes the world grow, the holy and master of
holiness; we sacrifice unto Rashnu-Razi*s*ta; we sacrifice unto
Ar*s*tâ*t*, who makes the world grow, who makes the world increase.

#### III.

11\. Let the Yâtus be crushed, O Zarathu*s*tra <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_198)! both Daêvas and men <span
id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_199).

Who is he in whose house, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! every Dru*g* is
destroyed, every Dru*g* perishes, when he pronounces these words <span
id="fr_208"></span>[4](#fn_200):

12 <span id="fr_209"></span>[5](#fn_201) . . . . . . . . . ?

13\. It is he who takes the seven Amesha-Spe*n*tas,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

the all-ruling, the all-beneficent, as a shield <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_202) against his enemies.

We worship the Law of the worshippers of Mazda; we worship the waters
coming in the shape of a horse <span id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_203),
made by Mazda.

14-15. He has renounced trespasses and faults, O Zarathu*s*tra! he has
renounced all trespasses and faults <span
id="fr_212"></span>[3](#fn_204), O Zarathu*s*tra! when he throws
down <span id="fr_213"></span>[4](#fn_205) the destroyer of Vohu-Manô
and his words <span id="fr_214"></span>[5](#fn_206), with a hundred
times hundredfold, with a many times manifold preaching and smiting, and
he takes away the Law of Mazda, that was carried away as a
prisoner <span id="fr_215"></span>[6](#fn_207), from the hands of the
\[ungodly\], who are destroyed by his strength.

Ashem Vohû: Holiness is the best of all good. . . .

 

16\. Yathâ ahû vairyô: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness . . .
.

I bless the sacrifice and the prayer, the strength and vigour

Of Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, and of the Amesha-Spe*n*tas;

Of Vohu-Manô; of Peace, whose breath is friendly <span
id="fr_216"></span>[7](#fn_208) . . . .

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Of Asha-Vahi*s*ta, the fairest; of the much-desired Airyaman <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_209) . . . .

Of Khshathra-Vairya, of the metals <span id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_209)
. .

Of the good Spe*n*ta-Ârmaiti and of the good Râta <span
id="fr_219"></span>[2](#fn_210). . . .

Of Haurvatâ*t*, the master <span id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_210) . . . .

Of Ameretâ*t*, the master <span id="fr_221"></span>[2](#fn_210) . . . .

(At the Gâh Hâvan): Of Mithra <span id="fr_222"></span>[3](#fn_211) . .
. .

(At the Gâh Rapithwin): Of Asha-Vahi*s*ta <span
id="fr_223"></span>[3](#fn_211) . . .

(At the Gâh Uzîren): Of the high lord Apãm Napâ*t* <span
id="fr_224"></span>[3](#fn_211) . . . .

(At the Gâh Aiwisrûthrem): Of the Fravashis of the faithful <span
id="fr_225"></span>[4](#fn_212) . . .

(At the Gâh U*s*ahin): Of the holy, devout, fiend-smiting Sraosha, who
makes the world grow; of Rashnu-Razi*s*ta and of Ar*s*tâ*t*, who makes
the world grow, who makes the world increase.

Ashem Vohû: Holiness is the best of all good . . .

Give unto that man <span id="fr_226"></span>[5](#fn_213) brightness and
glory, give him health of body, give him sturdiness of body, give him
victorious strength of body, give him full welfare of wealth, give him a
virtuous offspring, give him long, long life, give him the bright,
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[35:1](sbe2307.htm#fr_194) The rest as above,
Yt. I, 0.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[35:2](sbe2307.htm#fr_195) Sîrôzah I, 1-2.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[35:3](sbe2307.htm#fr_196) Sîrôzah I, 3-4.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[36:1](sbe2307.htm#fr_197) Sîrôzah I, 5-7.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[36:2](sbe2307.htm#fr_198) Sîrôzah I, 7.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[36:3](sbe2307.htm#fr_200) Sîrôzah I, 7.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[37:1](sbe2307.htm#fr_201) Sîrôzah II, 1-2.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[37:2](sbe2307.htm#fr_202) Sîrôzah II, 3-4.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[37:3](sbe2307.htm#fr_203) Sîrôzah II, 5-7.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[37:4](sbe2307.htm#fr_204) Sîrôzah II, 7.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[38:1](sbe2307.htm#fr_205) Sîrôzah II, 7.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[38:2](sbe2307.htm#fr_206) Or: Let
Zarathu*s*tra crush the Yâtus.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[38:3](sbe2307.htm#fr_207) The Yâtus are either
demons or men: the man-Yâtu is the sorcerer, the wizard. Cf. Yt. VIII,
44.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[38:4](sbe2307.htm#fr_208) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[38:5](sbe2307.htm#fr_209) I am unable to make
anything of this section.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[39:1](sbe2307.htm#fr_210) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[39:2](sbe2307.htm#fr_211) See Yt. VIII, 5, 42;
cf. § 20.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[39:3](sbe2307.htm#fr_212) Âtare-vîtaremaibyâ .
. . . vîmrao*t*; cf. âtarâish . . . . vî sarem mruyê (Yasna XII, 4
\[XIII, 16\]): âtareman seems to be a sin by commission, vîtareman a sin
by omission.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[39:4](sbe2307.htm#fr_213) Doubtful
(fraspâvare*s*: fraspâ is generally translated ramîtûntan).

<span id="fn_206"></span>[39:5](sbe2307.htm#fr_214) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[39:6](sbe2307.htm#fr_215) Cf. Yt. XIII, too;
XIX, 86; frava*s*nãm is the reverse of uzvazha*t* (1.1.).

<span id="fn_208"></span>[39:7](sbe2307.htm#fr_216) The rest as above, §
1.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[40:1](sbe2307.htm#fr_218) The rest as above, §
2.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[40:2](sbe2307.htm#fr_221) The rest as above, §
3.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[40:3](sbe2307.htm#fr_224) The rest as above,
§4.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[40:4](sbe2307.htm#fr_225) The rest as above, §
5.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[40:5](sbe2307.htm#fr_226) Who shall offer a
sacrifice to the Amshaspands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Ardibehi*s*t Ya*s*t](sbe2308)
