[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2304)  [Next](sbe2306.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185898/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part II (SBE23)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SÎRÔZAH II.

#### 1. Ormazd.

We sacrifice unto the bright and glorious Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice unto
the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, the all-ruling, the all-beneficent.

#### 2. Bahman.

We sacrifice unto Vohu-Manô, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto
Peace, whose breath is friendly, and who is more powerful to destroy
than all other creatures. We sacrifice unto the heavenly Wisdom, made by
Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Wisdom acquired through the ear, made by
Mazda.

#### 3. Ardibehe*s*t.

We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahi*s*ta, the fairest, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we
sacrifice unto the much-desired Airyaman; we sacrifice unto the
instrument made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the good Saoka, with eyes of
love, made by Mazda and holy.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

#### 4. Shahrêvar.

We sacrifice unto Khshathra-Vairya, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice
unto the metals; we sacrifice unto Mercy and Charity.

#### 5. Sapendârmad.

We sacrifice unto the good Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti; we sacrifice unto the good
Râta, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy.

#### 6. Khordâd.

We sacrifice unto Haurvatâ*t*, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto
the prosperity of the seasons. We sacrifice unto the years, the holy and
masters of holiness.

#### 7. Murdâd.

We sacrifice unto Ameretâ*t*, the Amesha-Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto
fatness and flocks; we sacrifice unto the plenty of corn; we sacrifice
unto the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda.

(At the gâh Hâvan): We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures;
we sacrifice unto Râma *Hv*âstra.

(At the gâh Rapithwin): We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahi*s*ta and unto Âtar,
the son of Ahura Mazda.

(At the gâh Uzîren): We sacrifice unto Apãm Napâ*t*, the swift-horsed,
the tall and shining lord, the lord of the females; we sacrifice unto
the water made by Mazda and holy.

(At the gâh Aiwisrûthrem): We sacrifice unto the good, powerful,
beneficent Fravashis of the holy ones; we sacrifice unto the females
that bring forth flocks of males; we sacrifice unto the thrift of the

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

seasons; we sacrifice unto the well-shapen and tall-formed Strength; we
sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the
crushing Ascendant.

(At the gâh Ushahin): We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed,
fiend-smiting Sraosha, who makes the world grow, the holy and master of
holiness; we sacrifice unto Rashnu Razi*s*ta; we sacrifice unto
Ar*s*tâ*t*, who makes the world grow, who makes the world increase.

#### 8. Dai pa Adar.

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the bright and glorious; we
sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, the all-ruling, the all-beneficent.

#### 9. Âdar.

We sacrifice unto Âtar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice unto the
Glory, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Weal, made by Mazda; we
sacrifice unto the Glory of the Aryas, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto
the awful Glory of the Kavis, made by Mazda.

We sacrifice unto Âtar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice unto king
Husravah; we sacrifice unto the lake of Husravah; we sacrifice unto
Mount Âsnava*nt*, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto Lake *K*aê*k*asta,
made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the awful Glory of the Kavis, made by
Mazda.

We sacrifice unto Âtar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice unto Mount
Raêva*nt*, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the awful Glory of the
Kavis, made by Mazda.

We sacrifice unto Âtar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice unto Âtar,
the beneficent, the warrior.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We sacrifice unto
that God, who is a full source of glory. We sacrifice. unto that God,
who is a full source of healing.

We sacrifice unto Âtar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice unto all
Fires; we sacrifice unto the God, Nairyô-Sangha, who dwells in the navel
of kings.

#### 10. Âbân.

We sacrifice unto the good Waters, made by Mazda and holy; we sacrifice
unto the holy water-spring Ardvi Anâhita; we sacrifice unto all waters,
made by Mazda and holy; we sacrifice unto all plants, made by Mazda and
holy.

#### 11. Khorshêd.

We sacrifice unto the bright, undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun.

#### 12. Mâh.

We sacrifice unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull. We
sacrifice unto the Soul and Fravashi of the only-created Bull; we
sacrifice unto the Soul and Fravashi of the Bull of many species.

#### 13. Tîr.

We sacrifice unto Ti*s*trya, the bright and glorious star; we sacrifice
unto the powerful Satavaêsa, made by Mazda, who pushes waters forward;
we sacrifice unto all the Stars that have in them the seed of the
waters; we sacrifice unto all the Stars that have in them the seed of
the earth; we sacrifice unto all the Stars that have in them the seeds
of the plants; we sacrifice unto the Star Vana*nt*, made by Mazda; we
sacrifice unto those stars that are seven in number, the Haptôiri*n*gas,
made by Mazda, glorious and healing; in order to oppose the Yâtus and
Pairikas.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

#### 14. Gô*s*.

We sacrifice unto the soul of the bounteous Cow; we sacrifice unto the
powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda and holy.

#### 15. Dai pa Mihir.

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the bright and glorious; we
sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, the all-ruling, the all-beneficent.

#### 16. Mihir.

We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who has a thousand
ears and ten thousand eyes, a God invoked by his own name; we sacrifice
unto Râma *Hv*âstra.

#### 17. Srôsh.

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting, world-increasing
Sraosha, holy and master of holiness.

#### 18. Rashn.

We sacrifice unto Rashnu Razi*s*ta; we sacrifice unto Ar*s*tâ*t*, who
makes the world grow, who makes the world increase; we sacrifice unto
the true-spoken speech that makes the world grow.

#### 19. Farvardîn.

We sacrifice unto the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the holy
ones.

#### 20. Bahrâm.

We sacrifice unto the well-shapen, tall-formed Strength; we sacrifice
unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura; we sacrifice unto the crushing
Ascendant.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

#### 21. Râm.

We sacrifice unto Râma *Hv*âstra; we sacrifice unto the holy Vayu; we
sacrifice unto Vayu, who works highly and is more powerful to destroy
than all other creatures. Unto that part of thee do we sacrifice, O
Vayu, that belongs to Spe*n*ta-Mainyu. We sacrifice unto the sovereign
Sky; we sacrifice unto the Boundless Time; we sacrifice unto the
sovereign Time of the long Period.

#### 22. Bâd.

We sacrifice unto the beneficent, bounteous Wind; we sacrifice unto the
wind that blows below; we sacrifice unto the wind that blows above; we
sacrifice unto the wind that blows before; we sacrifice unto the wind
that blows behind. We sacrifice unto the manly Courage.

#### 23. Dai pa Dîn.

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the bright and glorious; we
sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spe*n*tas.

#### 24. Dîn.

We sacrifice unto the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy; we
sacrifice unto the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda.

#### 25. Ard.

We sacrifice unto Ashi Vanguhi, the bright, high, strong, tall-formed,
and merciful; we sacrifice unto the Glory made by Mazda; we sacrifice
unto the Weal made by Mazda. We sacrifice unto Pâre*n*di, of the light
chariot; we sacrifice unto the Glory of the Aryas, made by Mazda; we
sacrifice

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto that awful
Glory, that cannot be forcibly seized, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto
the Glory of Zarathu*s*tra, made by Mazda.

#### 26. Â*s*tâd.

We sacrifice unto Ar*s*tâ*t*, who makes the world grow; we sacrifice
unto Mount Ushi-darena, made by Mazda, a God of holy happiness.

#### 27. Âsmân.

We sacrifice unto the shining Heavens; we sacrifice unto the bright,
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy ones.

#### 28. Zemyâd.

We sacrifice unto the Earth, a beneficent God; we sacrifice unto these
places, unto these fields; we sacrifice unto Mount Ushi-darena, made by
Mazda, a God of holy happiness; we sacrifice unto all the mountains,
that are seats of holy happiness, of full happiness, made by Mazda, the
holy and masters of holiness; we sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory,
made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the awful Glory that cannot be forcibly
seized, made by Mazda.

#### 29. Mahraspand.

We sacrifice unto the Mãthra Spe*n*ta, of high glory; we sacrifice unto
the Law opposed to the Daêvas; we sacrifice unto the Law of
Zarathu*s*tra; we sacrifice unto the long-traditional teaching; we
sacrifice unto the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda; we sacrifice
unto the Devotion to the Mãthra Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto the
understanding that keeps the Law of the worshippers of Mazda; we
sacrifice unto

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

the knowledge of the Mãthra Spe*n*ta; we sacrifice unto the heavenly
Wisdom, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Wisdom acquired through the
ear and made by Mazda.

#### 30. Anêrân.

We sacrifice unto the eternal and sovereign luminous space; we sacrifice
unto the bright Garô-nmâna; we sacrifice unto the sovereign place of
eternal Weal; we sacrifice unto the *K*inva*t*-bridge, made by Mazda; we
sacrifice unto Apãm Napâ*t*, the swift-horsed, the high and shining
lord, who has many wives; and we sacrifice unto the water, made by Mazda
and holy; we sacrifice unto the golden and tall Haoma; we sacrifice unto
the enlivening Haoma, who makes the world grow; we sacrifice unto Haoma,
who keeps death far away; we sacrifice unto the pious and good Blessing;
we sacrifice unto the awful, powerful, cursing thought of the wise, a
God; we sacrifice unto all the holy Gods of the heavenly world; we
sacrifice unto all the holy Gods of the material world.

I praise, I invoke, I meditate upon, and we sacrifice unto the good,
strong, beneficent Fravashis of the holy ones <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_97.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[20:1](sbe2305.htm#fr_102.md) Cf. Yasna XXVI, 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Ormazd Ya*s*t](sbe2306.md)
