[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc21010)  [Next](cc21012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** I *am* the man *that* hath seen
affliction by the rod of his wrath.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Ego vir videns afflictionem in
virga Indignationis ejus.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.i-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p6"></span>The word, <span
id="iii.iv.i-p6.1"></span>עברה *obere*, properly means assault, passing
over limits; but what is peculiar to man is often in Scripture ascribed
to God. Here also he changes the person, for he spoke before of the
people under the person of a woman, as it is often done; but now the
Prophet himself comes before us. At the same time there is no doubt but
that by his own example he exhorted all others to lamentation, which was
to be connected with true repentance. And this chapter, as we shall see,
is full of rich instruction, for it contains remarkable sentiments which
we shall consider in their proper places.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p7"></span>Some think that this Lamentation was
written by Jeremiah when he was cast into prison; but this opinion seems
not probable to me; and the contents of the chapter sufficiently shew
that this ode was composed to set forth the common calamity of the whole
people. Jeremiah, then, does not here plead his own private cause, but
shews to his own nation what remedy there was for them in such a state
of despair, even to have an immediate recourse to God, and on the one
hand to consider their sins, and on the other to look to the mercy of
God, so that they might entertain hope, and exercise themselves in
prayer. All these things we shall see in their due order.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p8"></span>The Prophet then says that he was an
*afflicted man*, or a man who saw affliction. This mode of speaking, we
know, is common in Scripture — to see affliction — to see good and evil
— to see life and death. He then says that he had *experienced* many
afflictions, and not only so, but that he had been given up as it were
to miseries, — how? *by the rod of his fury*. He does not mention the
name of God, but Jeremiah speaks of him as of one well known, using only
a pronoun. Now, then, at the very beginning, he acknowledges that
whatever he suffered had been inflicted by God’s hand. And as all the
godly ought to be convinced of this, that God is never angry without
just reasons, there is included in the word *wrath* a brief confession,
especially when it is added, *by the rod*, or *staff*. In short, the
Prophet says that he was very miserable, and he also expresses the
cause, for he had been severely chastised by an angry God.

<span id="iii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p2"></span>**2.** He hath led me, and brought *me
into* darkness, but not *into* light.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Me deduxit et proficisci fecit in
tenebras, et non in lucem.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p6"></span>The letters of the alphabet are tripled
in this chapter, which I had omitted to mention. In the first two
chapters each verse begins with the successive letters of the alphabet,
except that in the last chapter there is one instance of inversion, for
Jeremiah has put <span id="iii.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>פ, *phi*, before <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p6.2"></span>ע, *oin;* or it may be that the order has
been changed by the scribes; but this is uncertain. Here then, as I have
said, each letter is thrice repeated. Then the first, the second, and
the third verse begins with <span id="iii.iv.ii-p6.3"></span>א *aleph;*
and the fourth begins with <span id="iii.iv.ii-p6.4"></span>ב, *beth*,
and so he goes on to the end.  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p10"></span>He confirms here the last verse, for lie
shews the cause or the manner of his afflictions, for he had been led
into darkness and not into light. This kind of contrast has not the same
force in other languages as it has in Hebrew. But when the Hebrews said
that they were in darkness and not in the light, they amplified that
obscurity, as though they had said that there was not even a spark of
light in that darkness, it being so thick and obscure. This is what the
Prophet now means. And we know what is everywhere understood in
Scripture by darkness, even every kind of Lamentation: for the
appearance of light exhilarates us, yea, the serenity of heaven cheers
and revives the minds of men. Then darkness signifies all sorts of
adversities and the sorrow which proceeds from them. He afterwards adds,
—

<span id="iii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Surely against me is he turned;
he turneth his hand *against me* all the day.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Utique contra me vertetur,
eonvertet marrum suam quotidie (vel, toro die, qtuanquam in duobus
verbis videtur futurtum tempus debere resolvi in all prceteritutn, vel
saltem Propheta actum continuum, designat, ut soepe fieri solet.)

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p6"></span>Now he says that *God was an adversary
to him;* for this is what the verb <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>ישב, *isheb,* means, he is turned against
me. As an enemy, when intending to fight, comes to meet one from the
opposite side, so the Prophet says of God, who had become an enemy to
him; and he teaches the same thing in another way when he says that he
perceived that the hand of God was against him*: He turns,* he says,
*against me his hand daily,* or all the day, <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p6.2"></span>כל-היום, *cal-eium*. But the Prophet simply
means constancy, as though he had said that there was no truce, no
cessation, because God manifested the rigor of his vengeance without
limit or end. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>**4.** My flesh and my skin hath he made
old; he hath broken my bones.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Senio confecit earnera meam
(senescere fecit, *ad verbum*) et pelletn meam (*vel*, cutem;) confregit
ossa mea.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p6"></span>These, as it evidently appears, are
metaphorical words. Illness often makes people to look old, for from
pain proceeds leanness: thus the skin is contracted, and the wrinkles of
old age appear even in youths. As, then, sorrows exhaust moisture and
strength, hence he is said to grow old who pines away in mourning. This
is what the Prophet now means. *God,* he says*, has made my flesh and my
skin, to grow old,* that is, he hath worn me out, within and without, so
that I am almost wasted away.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7"></span>He then adds, *He hath broken my bones*
This seems to be hyperbolical; but we have said elsewhere that this
simile does not in every instance express the greatness of the sorrow
which the faithful feel under a sense of God’s wrath. Both David and
Hezekiah spoke in this way; nay, Hezekiah compares God to a lion,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p8"></span>“As a lion,” he says, “has he broken my
bones.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.iv-p8.2"></span>[Isa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p9"></span>And David says at one time that his bones
wasted away, at another that they were broken, and at another that they
were reduced to ashes; for there is nothing more dreadful than to feel
that God is angry with us. The Prophet, then, did not only regard
outward calamities, but the evidence of God’s vengeance; for the people
could see nothing else in their distresses except that God was their
enemy — and this was true; for God had often exhorted them to
repentance; but upon those whom he had found incurable, he at length, as
it was just, poured forth his vengeance to the uttermost. This, then,
was the reason why the Prophet said, that God had broken his bones. He
then adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p2"></span>**5.** He hath builded against me, and
encompassed *me* with gall and travail.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p3"></span>**5.** Ædificavit contra me, et
circumdedit felle et molestia.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p6"></span>The words, as translated, may seem harsh,
yet they have no common beauty in Hebrew. The Prophet says he was
blocked up and straitened as it were by walls; and as we shall see, he
repeats this comparison three times; in other words, indeed, but for the
same purpose.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p7"></span>God, he says, *hath built against me, as,*
when we wish to besiege any one, we build mounds, so that there may be
no escape. This, then, is the sort of building of which the Prophet now
speaks: God, he says, holds me confined all around, so that there is no
way of escape open to me.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p8"></span>He then gives a clearer explanation, that
he was surrounded by gall  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) or
poison and trouble. He mentions poison first, and then, without a
figure, he shews what that poison was, even that he was afflicted with
many troubles. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p2"></span>**6.** He hath set me in dark places, as
*they that be* dead of old.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p3"></span>**6.** In tenebris jacere me fecit
tanquam mortuos seculi.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p6"></span>Here he amplifies what he had before said
of poison and trouble; he says that he was placed in darkness, not that
he might be there for a little while, but remain there for a long time;
he hath made me, he says, to dwell in darkness. But the comparison which
follows more clearly explains the Prophet’s meaning, as the dead of
ages. The word <span id="iii.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>עולם, *oulam*, may refer
to future or past time. Some say, as *the dead for ever,* who are
perpetually dead. But the Scripture elsewhere calls those *the dead of
ages* who have been long buried, and have decayed, and whose memory has
become nearly extinct. For as long as the dead body retains its form, it
seems more like a living being; but when it is reduced to ashes, when no
bone appears, when the whole skin and nerves and blood have perished,
and no likeness to man remains, there can then be no hope of life. The
Scripture then calls those the dead of ages, who have wholly decayed. So
also in this place the Prophet says, that he dwelt in darkness, into
which he had been cast by God’s hand, and that he dwelt there as though
he had been long dead, and his body had become now putrid.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p7"></span>This way of speaking appears indeed
hyperbolical; but we must always remember what I have reminded you of,
that it is not possible sufficiently to set forth the greatness of that
sorrow which the faithful feel when terrified by the wrath of God. He
then adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p2"></span>**7.** He hath hedged me about, that I
cannot get out: he hath made my chain heavy.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p3"></span>**7** Sepsit me, ut non egrediar;
aggravavit compedem meum.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p6"></span>Here he says, first, that he was held
*shut up;* for <span id="iii.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>גדר, *gidar,* is to
enclose, and <span id="iii.iv.vii-p6.2"></span>גדרה, *gidare,* means a
fence or a mound, or an enclosure of any kind. He then says, that he was
shut up as it were by a fence, so that he could not go forth; literally,
it is, and *I shall not go forth;* but the conjunction here is to be
taken as denoting the end. He has *shut me up,* he says, or he has
enclosed me, that I might not get out.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p7"></span>It then follows, *He hath made heavy my
fetter.* His meaning is, that he was not only bound with fetters, but so
bound that he could not raise up his feet, as though he had said, that
he not only had fetters, but that they were so heavy that he could not
even move his feet.

<span id="iii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p2"></span>**8.** Also when I cry and shout, he
shutteth out my prayer.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Etiam si clamem et vociferer,
clausit precationem meam (*vel* precatioi meae.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet describes here the
extremity of all evils, that it availed him nothing to cry and to pray.
And yet we know that we are called to do this in all our miseries.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p7"></span>“The strongest tower is the name of the
Lord, to it will the righteous flee and shall be safe.” (<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>[Pr
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p8"></span>Again,

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p9"></span>“Whosoever shall call on the name of
the Lord shall be saved.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.viii-p9.2"></span>[Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p10"></span>And Scripture is full of testimonies
of this kind; that is, that God graciously invites all the faithful to
himself:

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p11"></span>“He shall call upon me, and I will
hear him.” (<span id="iii.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>[Ps
91:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p12"></span>“In the day when I call, answer me
speedily.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.viii-p12.2"></span>[Ps
102:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p13"></span>“Before they call, I will answer.”
(<span id="iii.iv.viii-p13.1"></span>[Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p14"></span>In short, there is no need to collect
all the passages; but we may be content with this one thing, that when
God claims to himself this prerogative, that he answers prayers, he
intimates that it is what cannot be separated from his eternal essence
and godhead; that is, that he is ready to hear prayer. And hence the
Psalmist concludes,

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p15"></span>“To thee shall all flesh come.” (<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p15.1"></span>[Ps
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p16"></span>When, therefore, Jeremiah complains
that his prayers were in vain, and without any fruit or effect., it
seems strange and inconsistent. But we know that God holds the faithful
in suspense, and so hears as to prove and try their patience, sometimes
for a long time. This is the reason why he defers and delays his aid.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p17"></span>It is no wonder, then, that God did
not hear the prayers of his servant, that is, according to the judgment
of the flesh. For God never rejects his own, nor is he deaf to their
prayers and their sighs; but the faithful often speak according to what
the flesh judges. As, then, the Prophet found that he obtained nothing
by prayer, he says that his prayer was shut out, or that the door was
closed against him, so that his prayer did not come to God.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p18"></span>Now, this passage is worthy of special
notice; for except God immediately meets us, we become languid, and not
only our ardor in prayer is cooled but almost extinguished. Let us,
then, bear in mind, theft though God may not help us soon, yet our
prayers are never repudiated by him; and since we see that the holy
fathers experienced the same thing, let us not wonder, if the Lord at
this day were to try our faith in the same manner. Let us, therefore,
persevere hi calling on Him; and should there be a longer delay, and our
complaint be that we are not heard, yet let us proceed in the same
course, as we shall see the Prophet did. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p2"></span>**9.** He hath inclosed my ways with hewn
stone, he hath made my paths crooked.

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p3"></span>**9.** Sepivit (*idem est verbum quod
ante vidimus*) vias meas lapide quadrato, semitas meas pervertit.

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p6"></span>Other metaphors are used. Some think that
the Prophet refers to the siege of Jerusalem, but such a view is not
suitable. The metaphors correspond with one another, though they are
somewhat different. He had said before, that he was enclosed by God, or
surrounded as with a mound; and now he transfers this idea to his ways.
When the life of man is spoken of, it is, we know, compared to a way.
Then the Prophet includes under this word all the doings of his life, as
though he had said, that all his plans were brought into straits, as
though his way was shut up, so that he could not proceed: “Were I to
proceed ill any direction, an obstacle is set before me; I am compelled
to remain as it were fixed.” So the Prophet now says, his *ways were
enclosed,* because God allowed none of His counsels or His purposes to
be carried into effect.

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p7"></span>And to the same purpose he adds, that.
God had perverted his ways, that is, that he had confounded all his
doings, and all his counsels.

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p8"></span>But these words are added, *with a
squared stone* The verb <span id="iii.iv.ix-p8.1"></span>גזז *gizaz*,
means to cut; hence the word <span id="iii.iv.ix-p8.2"></span>גזית,
*gizit*, signifies a polished stone, or one trimmed by the hammer. And
we know that such stones are more durable and firmer than other stones.
For when unpolished stones are used, the building is not so strong as
when the stones are squared, as they fit together better. Then the
Prophet intimates that the enclosures were such that he could by no
means break through them, as they could not be broken. He, in short,
means that he was so oppressed by God’s hand, that whatever he purposed
God immediately reversed it. We now, then, perceive what he means by
saying, that all his ways were subverted or overturned by God.  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) This is not to be understood
generally, for it is God who directs our ways. But he is said to pervert
our ways, when he disconcerts our counsels, when all our purposes and
efforts are rendered void; in a word, when God as it were meets us as an
adversary, and impedes our course; it is then that he is said to pervert
our ways. But this ought not to be understood as though God blinded men
unjustly, or as though he led them astray. The Prophet only means that
he could find no success in all his counsels, in all his efforts and
doings, because he had God opposed to him. here I stop.

<span id="iii.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iv.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou didst in
former times so severely chastise thy people, we may in the present day
patiently submit to all thy scourges, and in a humble and meek spirit
suffer ourselves to be chastised as we deserve; and that we may not, in
the meantime, cease to call on thee, and that however slowly thou mayest
seem to hear our prayers, we may yet persevere continually to the end,
until at length we shall really find that salvation is not in vain
promised to all those who in sincerity of heart call on thee, through
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Ninth

<span id="iii.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p2"></span>**10.** He *was* unto me *as* a bear
lying in wait, *and as* a lion in secret places.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Urus insidians fuit mihi (ipse
mihi,) leo in latebris.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p6"></span>Harsh is the complaint when Jeremiah
compares God to a. bear and a lion. But we have said that the
apprehension of God’s wrath so terrified the faithful, that they could
not sufficiently express the atrocity of their calamity; and then borne
in mind must also be what we have stated, that they spoke according to
the judgment of the flesh; for they did not always so moderate their
feelings, but that something fell from them worthy of blame. We ought
not, then, to make as a rule in religion all the complaints of holy men,
when they were pressed down by the hand of God; for when their minds
were in a state of confusion, they uttered much that was intemperate.
But we ought, on the other hand, to acknowledge how great must be our
weakness, since we see that even the strongest; have thus fallen, when
God exercised severity towards them.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p7"></span>Though, then, it does not seem that it
was said in due honor, that God did *lie in wait* as *bears* for
travelers, or as lions in their dens; yet, if we consider how much the
faithful dreaded the tokens of God’s wrath, we shall not wonder at this
excess. It is then certain that rite Prophet brings before us here not
only evidences of the fear of God, of religion and humility, but also of
the corrupt feelings of the flesh; for it cannot be, but that the
infirmity of men will betray itself ill extreme evils. He adds, what is
of the same import, —

<span id="iii.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** He hath turned aside my ways,
and pulled me in pieces: he hath made me desolate.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Vias meas pervertit et scidit
me (*vel,* dissipavit, *vel*, laceravit,) posuit me vastatam (*vel*,
quasi vastitatem.)

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p6"></span>In this verse also the Prophet shews
how grievously the faithful are disturbed when they feel that God is
adverse to them. But he uses the same figure as yesterday, though the
word <span id="iii.iv.xiii-p6.1"></span>סורר, *surer,* is different:
what he used yesterday was <span id="iii.iv.xiii-p6.2"></span>עוה,
*oue*, but in the same sense.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p7"></span>He then says that his ways had been
perverted;  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) and for this reason,
because he had been disappointed in his purpose; whatever he did was
made void, because God by force prevented him. When we undertake to do
anything, a way is open to us; but when there is no success, our way is
said to be perverted. And this is done by God, who has all events,
prosperous as well as adverse, in his own hand. As, then, God directs
our ways when he blesses our counsels and our actions; so, on the other
hand, he perverts them, when all things turn out unsuccessfully, when
our purpose is not done and events do not answer our expectations.

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *He hath torn me*
or broken me. The verb <span id="iii.iv.xiii-p9.1"></span>פשח,
*peshech,* means properly to cut, but here to tear or scatter. It
follows lastly, *he hath made me a waste* In this expression he includes
the other two things; for he who is reduced to desolation, does not hold
on his way, nor find any exit; he is also drawn here and there, as
though he was torn into several parts. We hence see that the Prophet
here complains of extreme evils, for there was no hope of deliverance
left. He adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** He hath bent his bow, and set me
as a mark for the arrow.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Extendit (*vel,* intendit) arcum
suum, et statuit me quasi signum sagittae.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet introduces another
metaphor, that God had shot him with arrows, as he was made a mark to
them. Jeremiah has elsewhere often used the word <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>מתרא, *methera*, for a prison; but here it
means a mark at which arrows are leveled, and such is its meaning in
<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p6.2"></span>[Job
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p6.2"></span>, where there is a similar complaint made.
The meaning is, that the people, in whose name Jeremiah speaks, had been
like marks, because God had directed against them all his arrows. It is,
indeed, a fearful thing when God aims at us, that he may discharge his
darts and arrows in order to hit and wound us. But as God had so
grievously afflicted his people, that he seemed to have poured forth all
his vengeance, the Prophet justly complains that the people had been
like marks for arrows.

<span id="iii.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p2"></span>**13.** He hath caused the arrows of his
quiver to enter into my reins.

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p3"></span>**13.** Induxit in renes meos filion
pharetrae sum (*id est*, sagittas.)

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xv-p6"></span>He goes on with the same metaphor; he
said in the last verse that God had leveled his bow; he now adds, that
his arrows had penetrated into his reins, that is, into his inward
parts. But we must bear in mind what the Prophet meant, that God had
dealt so severely with the people, that no part, even the innermost, was
sound or untouched, for his arrows had perforated their very reins. He
afterwards adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p2"></span>**14.** I was a derision to all my
people; *and* their song all the day.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p3"></span>**14.** Fui risus (*vel*, ludibrium)
toti populo meo, pulsatio (*vel*, canticum, *quod pulsatur* *ab organo
et instrumento musico*) quotidie (*vel*, toto die.)

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet again complains of the
reproaches to which God had exposed the Jews. We have said that of all
evils the most grievous is reproach, and experience teaches us that
sorrow is greatly embittered when scoffs and taunts are added to it; for
he who silently bears the most grievous sorrows, becomes broken in heart
when he finds himself contumeliously treated. This, then, is the reason
why the Prophet again amplifies the miseries of the people, because they
were exposed to the scoffs of all men. But it may seem a strange thing
that the Jews were derided by their own people. This is the reason why
some think that the Prophet complains of his own private evils, and that
he does not represent the whole people or the public condition of the
Church. But it may also be said in reply, that the Prophet does not mean
that the people were derided by themselves, which could not be; but it
is the same as though he had said, that their state was so disgraceful,
that while they looked on one another, they had a reason for taunting,
if this their condition was allowed to continue.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p7"></span>In short, the Prophet does not mean what
was actually done, but he simply complains that their calamity was
liable to all kinds of reproaches, so that any one looking on Jerusalem
might justly deride such a disgraceful spectacle. And it was, as we have
said, a most equitable reward, for they had not ceased to reproach God.
Then rendered to them was what they had deserved, when God loaded them
in turn with dishonor.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, that he was *their
song,* that is, of derision; for it is a confirmation of the former
clause, and the same complaint is also formal in Job. He says that he
was their song *daily* or all the day. This constancy, as it has been
said, proved more clearly the grievousness of the evil.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p2"></span>**15.** He hath filled me with
bitterness, he hath made me drunken with wormwood.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p3"></span>**15.** Satiavit me amaritudinibus,
saturavit me felle.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p6"></span>Some render the last word “wormwood,”
but this word seems not to me to suit the passage, for though wormwood
is bitter, yet it is a wholesome herb. I therefore take it in this and
like places for poison or gall; and <span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p6.1"></span>ראש, *rash,* as we shall see, is joined
with it. To satiate, is also a metaphor very common. Then the Prophet
means that lie was full of bitterness and gall; and lie thus had regard
to those calamities from which so much sorrow had proceeded.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p7"></span>We hence also gather that the faithful
were not free from sorrow in their evils, for bitterness and gall
sufficiently shew that their minds were so disturbed that they did not
bear their troubles with sufficient patience. But they struggled with
their own infirmity, and the example is set before us that we may not
despond when bitterness and gall lay hold on our minds; for since the
same thing happened to the best servants of God, let us bear in mind our
own infirmity, and at the same time flee to God. The unbelieving nourish
their bitterness, for they do not unburden their souls into the bosom of
God. But the best way of comfort is, when we do not flatter ourselves in
our bitterness and grief, but seek the purifying of our souls, and in a
manner lay them open, so that whatever bitter thing may be there, God
may take it away and so feed us, as it is said elsewhere, with the
sweetness of his goodness. He adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p2"></span>**16.** He hath also broken my teeth
with gravel stones, he hath covered me with ashes.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p3"></span>**16.** Confregit (*vel*, contrivit)
lapillo dentes meos, involvit me (foedavit me, *alii autem*, versavit)
hi pulvere.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p6"></span>Many renderings are given of these
words’ there is, however, no over-statement here; for, as it has been
often said, the grief of the people under such a mass of evils could not
be sufficiently expressed. The Prophet, no doubt, extended here his hand
to the weak, who would have otherwise lain down as dead; for under such
evils the ruin of the whole nation, the fall of the city, and the
destruction of the temple, it could not be but such thoughts as these
must have occurred. Now, as to any one unacquainted with such a trial,
he would soon succumb, had no remedy been presented to him. The Prophet
then dictates for all the godly such complaints as they might, so to
speak, pour forth confidently and freely into the bosom of God.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p7"></span>We hence see that here is even
expressed whatever might occur to the minds of God’s children, so that
they might not hesitate in their straits to direct their prayers to God,
and freely confess whatever they suffered in their souls. For shame
closes up the door of access; and thus it happens; that we make a clamor
as though God were far away from us; hence impatience breaks out almost
to a rage. But when an access to God is opened to us, and we dare to
confess what burdens our minds, this, as I have said, is the best way
for obtaining relief and comfort. We must then understand the design of
the Prophet, that he suggests words to the faithful, that they might
freely cast their cares and sorrows on God, and thus find some
alleviation.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p8"></span>For this reason, he says that his
teeth had been broken by a little stone or pebble.  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) The same expression, if I mistake not,
is found in Job. It is a metaphor taken from those who press stones
instead of bread under their teeth; for when grit lies hid in bread, it
hurts the teeth. Then inward and hidden griefs are said to be like small
stones, which break or shatter the teeth. For the Prophet does not speak
here of large stones, but on the contrary he speaks of pebbles or small
stones, which deceive men, for they lie hid either in bread or in meat,
or in any other kind of food. As, then, the teeth are hurt by pressing
them, so the Prophet says that his sorrows were most bitter, as that
part, as it is well known, is very tender; and when any injury is done
to the teeth, the pain spreads instantly almost through the whole body.
This is the reason why he says that his teeth were broken.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p12"></span>Then he adds, that he was *covered
with dust,* or that he was lying down or dragged along in the dust. The
expression is taken from those who are drawn by way of reproach along
the ground, as a carcass is, or some filthy thing which we abhor.  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) Thus the Prophet complains that there
was nothing short of extreme evils. He adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p2"></span>**17.** And thou hast removed my soul
far off from peace: I forgat prosperity.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p3"></span>**17.** Et remota fuit a pace anima mea,
oblitus sum boni.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p6"></span>By saying that his *soul was remote from
peace,* he means that no good remained; for by peace, as it is well
known, the Hebrews understood every kind of prosperity. And he explains
himself by another clause, that, he had *forgotten every good;* and this
forgetfulness ought to be understood, so to speak, as real or entire;
for if there had been any reason for rejoicing, it would not have been
forgotten; for all are naturally pleased with what is pleasant, nay,
they with avidity seek what delights them. It would then be contrary to
nature to forget things good and pleasant, to us. But the Prophet means
here a privation. Hence the forgetfulness of which he speaks is nothing
else but alienation from everything good, as though he had said (as the
previous clause shews) that he was removed from every hope of peace.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p7"></span>But the expression is much more
emphatical, when he says, that his soul was far removed from peace. By
soul he does not mean himself only, (for that would be frigid,) but he
understands by it all things connected with him, as though he had said,
“Wherever I look around me, I find no peace, and no hope appears to me.”
Hence it was, that all the faculties of his soul were far removed from
all experience of good things. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p2"></span>**18.** And I said, My strength and my
hope is perished from the LORD:

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p3"></span>**18.** Et dixi, Periit fortitudo mea, et
spes mea a Jehova.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p6"></span>This verse shews what I have before
reminded you of, that the Prophet does not here speak as though he was
divested of every sin, and prescribed a perfect rule for prayer. But, on
the contrary, in order to animate the faithful to seek God, he sets
before them here an instance of infirmity which every one finds true as
to himself. It was yet a most grievous trial, because the Prophet almost
despaired; for since faith is the mother of hope, it follows, that when
any one is overwhelmed with despair, faith is extinct. Nevertheless the
Prophet. makes this declaration, *Perished,* he says, *has my strength
and my hope from God*  <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179)

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p10"></span>He does not speak through some
inconsiderate impulse, as though he was suddenly carried away, as many
things happen to us which we have had no thought of; but he speaks what
was, as it were, fixed in his mind. As he said, “Perished has my hope
and strength from Jehovah,” it is evident that his faith was not
slightly shaken, but had wholly failed’ but the expression, *I said,*
renders the thing still stronger; for it means, as it is well known, a
settled conviction. The Prophet was then fully persuaded that he was
forsaken by God; but what does this mean? We ought indeed to maintain
this, that faith sometimes is so stifled, that even the children of God
think that they are lost, and that it is all over with their salvation.
Even David confesses the same thing; for it was an evidence of despair,
when he declared,

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p11"></span>“I said in my haste, Vanity is every
man.” (<span id="iii.iv.xx-p11.1"></span>[Ps
116:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p12"></span>He had almost failed, and he was not
master of himself when he was thus agitated. There is no doubt but that
the Prophet also expressly reminded the faithful that they ought not to
despair, though despair laid hold on their minds, or though the devil
tempted them to despair, but that they ought then especially to struggle
against it. This is indeed, I allow, a hard and perilous contest, but
the faithful ought not to faint, even when such a thing happens to them,
that is, when it seems to be all over with them and no hope remains;
but, on the contrary, they ought nevertheless to go on hoping, and that,
indeed, as the Scripture says elsewhere, against hope, or above hope.
(<span id="iii.iv.xx-p12.1"></span>[Ro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p13"></span>Let us then learn from this passage,
that the faithful are not free from despair, for it enters into their
souls; but that there is yet no reason why they should indulge despair;
on the contrary, they ought courageously and firmly to resist it; for
when the Prophet said this, he did not mean that. he succumbed to this
trial, as though he had embraced what had come to his mind; but lie
meant, that lie was as it were overwhelmed for a short time. Were any
one to ask, How can it be that hope and despair should reside in the
same man? the answer is, that when faith is weak, that part of the soul
is empty, which admits despair. Now, faith is sometimes not only
enfeebled, but is also nearly stifled. This, indeed, does not happen
daily, but there is no one whom God deeply exercises with temptations,
who does not feel that his faith is almost extinguished. It is often no
wonder, that despair then prevails; but it is for a moment. In the
meantime, the remedy is, immediately to flee to God and to complain of
this misery, so that he may succor and raise up those who are thus
fallen. He then adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p2"></span>**19.** Remembering mine affliction and
my misery, the wormwood and the gall.

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p3"></span>**19.** Recordari (*vel*, recordando,
*alii*, recordare) afflictionis meae et aerumnae maere (*alii vertunt*,
humiliationem, *alii*, peccatum; *sed nomen afflictionis vel aerumnoe
melius convenit*) veneni et fellis (*iterum ponitur* <span
id="iii.iv.xxi-p3.1"></span>לענה *quod vertunt quidam*, absynthium, *sed
potius est* *amaritudo vel venenum*, veneni *ergo* et fellis.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p6"></span>The verb may be considered as an
imperative; it is an infinitive mood, but it is often taken in Hebrew as
an imperative. Thus, many deem it a prayer, *Remember my affliction and
my trouble, the gall and the poison* This might be admitted; but what
others teach I prefer: that this verse depends on the last. For the
Prophet seems here to express how he had almost fallen away from hope,
so that he no longer found strength from God, even because he was
overwhelmed with evils; for it is very unreasonable to think, that those
who have once experienced the mercy of God should cast away hope, so as
not to believe that they are to flee to God any more. What seems then by
no means congruous the Prophet here in a manner excuses, and shews that
it was not strange that he succumbed under extreme evils, for he had
been so pressed down by afflictions and troubles, that his soul became
as it were filled with poison and gall.  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180)

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p8"></span>But in the meantime, he shews by the
word *remember,* how such a trial as this, when it comes, lays hold on
our minds, that is, when we think too much of our evils. For the
faithful ought to hold a middle course in their afflictions, lest they
contract a torpor; for as hence indifference and stupidity arise, they
ought to rouse themselves to a due consideration of their evils; but
moderation ought to be observed, lest sorrow should swallow us up, as
Paul also warns us (<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p8.1"></span>[2Co
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.xxi-p8.1"></span>.) They then who fix their minds too much on
the remembrance of their evils, by degrees open the door to Satan, who
may fill their hearts and all their thoughts with despair. The Prophet
then describes here the fountain of evils, when he says, that he
remembered his affliction and trouble; and suitable to this is what
immediately follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p2"></span>**20.** My soul hath *them* still in
remembrance, and is humbled in me.

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p3"></span>**20.** Recordando recordabitur, et
humiliabitur in me (*vel*, super me) anima mea.

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p6"></span>The Prophet seems in other words to
confirm what he had said, even that the memory of afflictions
overwhelmed his soul. For the soul is said to be humbled in or upon man,
when he lies down under the burden of despair. It is the soul that
raises man up, and as it were revives him; but when the soul is cast as
it were on man, it is a most grievous thing; for it is better to lie
down a dead body than to have this additional burden, which makes the
case still worse. A dead body might indeed lie on the ground without
strength and motion, but it may still retain its own place; but when the
soul is thus cast down, it is said to press down man, though lifeless,
more and more. This then is what the Prophet means. And yet he says that
he was so occupied with this remembrance, that he could not thence
withdraw his mind.

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p7"></span>There is no doubt but that he also
intended here to confess his own infirmity, and that of all the
faithful; and the reason of this we have already explained. Then relying
on this doctrine, even when all our thoughts press us down, and not only
lead us to despair, but also hurry us on and cast us headlong into it,
let us learn to flee even then to God and to lay before him all our
complaints, and let us not be ashamed, because we see that this mode of
proceeding is suggested to us by the Holy Spirit. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p2"></span>**21.** This I recall to my mind,
therefore have I hope.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>**21.** Hoc revocabo ad cor meum,
propterea sperabo.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p6"></span>We see here what I have already
stated, that if we struggle against temptations, it will be a sure
remedy to us, because our faith will at length emerge again, and gather
strength, yea, it will in a manner be raised up from the lowest depths.
This is what the Prophet now shews. *I will recall this,* he says, *to
my heart, and therefore will I hope* How can despair produce hope from
itself? This would be contrary to nature. What then does the Prophet
mean here, and what does he understand by the pronoun *this,* <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p6.1"></span>זאת, *zat?* Even that being oppressed with
evils, he was almost lost, and was also nearly persuaded that no hope of
good anymore remained. As then he would recall this to mind, he says
that he would then have new ground of hope, that is, when he had
recourse to God; for all who devour their own sorrows, and do not look
to God, kindle more and more the hidden fire, which at length suddenly
turns to fury. Hence it comes that they clamor against God, as though
they were doubly insane. But he who is conscious of his own infirmity,
and directs his prayer to God, will at length find a ground of hope.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p7"></span>When therefore we recall to mind our
evils, and also consider how ready we are to despair, and how apt we are
to succumb under it, some hope will then arise and aid us, as the
Prophet here says.  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p14"></span>It must still be observed, that we
ought to take heed lest we grow torpid in our evils; for hence it
happens that our minds become wholly overwhelmed. Whosoever then would
profit by his evils, should consider what the Prophet says here came to
his mind, for he at length came to himself, and surmounted all
obstacles. We see then that God brings light out of darkness, when he
restores his faithful people from despair to a good hope; yea, he makes
infirmity itself to be the cause of hope. For whence is it that the
unbelieving east away hope? even because security draws them away from
God; but a sense of our own infirmity draws us even close to him; thus
hope, contrary to nature, and through the incomprehensible and wonderful
kindness of God, arises from despair. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p2"></span>**22.** *It is of* the LORD’S mercies
that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>**22.** Clementite Jehovae, quod non
sumus consumpti (vel, certe non sunt consumptae,) certe non defecerunt
miscrationes ejus.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6"></span>The first clause may be explained in
two ways: The view commonly taken is, that it ought to be ascribed to
God’s mercy that the faithful have not been often consumed. Hence a very
useful doctrine is elicited — that God succors his own people, lest they
should wholly perish. But if we attend to the context, we shall see that
another sense is more suitable, even that the *mercies of God were not
consumed, and that his compassion’s had not failed* The particle <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6.1"></span>כי, *ki,* is inserted, but ought to be
taken as an affirmative only, *surely the mercies of God are not
consumed;*  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) and then, — surely
his compassion’s have not failed. And he afterwards adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p2"></span>**23.** *They are* new every morning:
great *is* thy faithfulness.

<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p3"></span>**23.** Novae ad singula mane; magna
veritas tua.

<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxv-p6"></span>This verse confirms what I have said,
that the same truth is here repeated by the Prophet, that God’s mercies
were not consumed, nor had his compassion’s failed. How so? Because they
were new, or renewed, every day; but he puts *morning*, and that in the
plural number. I am surprised at the hour striking so soon; I hardly
think that I have lectured a whole hour.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as there are
none of us who have not continually to contend with many temptations,
and as such is our infirmity, that we are ready to succumb under them,
except thou helpest us, — O grant, that we may be sustained by thine
invincible power, and that also, when thou wouldest humble us, we may
loathe ourselves on account of our sins, and thus perseveringly contend,
until, having gained the victory, we shall give thee the glory for thy
perpetual aid in Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxvii-p1"></span>Lecture Tenth

<span id="iii.iv.xxvii-p2"></span>In the last lecture the Prophet said
that the *mercies* of God are renewed daily. This must indeed be viewed
according to the apprehension of men, for to God belongs no charge. But
the mercies of God seem to be renewed when he for a time hides his face,
and again becomes reconciled to us. The Prophet mentions *morning;* and
he alludes, as I think, to this passage in the Psalms —

<span id="iii.iv.xxvii-p3"></span>“If weeping dwells with us in the
evening,  
yet joy will return in the morning.” (<span
id="iii.iv.xxvii-p3.2"></span>[Ps
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.xxvii-p3.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxvii-p4"></span>He then means that God hastens to
succor men in misery.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvii-p5"></span>He subjoins the word *truth,* because
a sense of God’s mercy can never come to us except he offers it to us.
Were then God to take away the promise, all the miserable would
inevitably perish; for they can never lay hold on his mercy except
through his word. This, then, is the reason why Scripture so often
connects these two things together, even God’s mercy and his
faithfulness in fulfilling his promises. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p2"></span>**24.** The LORD *is* my portion,
saith my soul; therefore will I hope in him.

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p3"></span>**24.** Pertie inca Jehova, dixit my
soul; anima mea; ideo sperabo in eo.

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p6"></span>The Prophet intimates in this verse
that we cannot stand firm in adversities, except we be content with God
alone and his favor; for as soon as we depart from him, any adversity
that may happen to us will cause our faith to fail. It is then the only
true foundation of patience and hope to trust in God alone; and this is
the case when we are persuaded that his favor is sufficient for our
perfect safety. In this sense it is that David calls God his portion.
(<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.xxviii-p6.1"></span>.) But there is in the words an implied
contrast, for most men seek their happiness apart from God. All desire
to be happy, but as the thoughts of men wander here and there, there is
nothing more difficult than so to fix all our hopes in God so as to
disregard all other things.

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p7"></span>This then is the doctrine which the
Prophet now handles, when he says, that those alone could hope, that is,
persevere in hope and patience, who have so received God as their
portion as to be satisfied with him alone, and to seek nothing else
besides him. But he speaks emphatically, that his *soul* had thus
*said.* Even the unbelieving are ashamed to deny what we have stated,
that the whole of our salvation and happiness is found in God alone.
Then the unbelieving also confess that God is the fountain of all
blessings, and that they ought to acquiesce in him; but with the mouth
only they confess this, while they believe nothing less. This then is
the reason why the Prophet ascribes what he says to his soul, as though
he had said, that lie did not boast, like hypocrites, that God was his
portion, but that of this lie had a thorough conviction. *My soul* has
said, that is, I am fully convinced that God is *my portion;* therefore
will I hope in him. We now understand the meaning of this passage.

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p8"></span>It remains for us to make an
application of this doctrine. That we may not then fail in adversities,
let us bear in mind this truth, that all our thoughts will ever wander
and go astray, until we are fully persuaded that God alone is sufficient
for us, so that lie may become alone our heritage. For all who are not
satisfied with God alone, are immediately seized with impatience,
whenever famine oppresses them, or sword threatens them, or any other
grievous calamity. And for this reason Paul also says,

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p9"></span>“If God be for us, who can be against
us? I am persuaded that neither famine, nor nakedness, nor sword, nor
death, nor life, can separate me from the love of God, which is in
Christ.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p9.2"></span>[Rom.
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.xxviii-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxviii-p10"></span>Then Paul lays hold of the paternal
favor of God as a ground of solid confidence; for the words in Christ
sufficiently show that those are mistaken interpreters who take this
love passively, as though he had said, that the faithful would never
cease to love God, though he exercised them with many afflictions. But
Paul meant that the faithful ought so to fix their minds on God alone,
that whatever might happen, they would not yet cease to glory in him.
Why? because God is their life in death, their light in darkness, their
rest in war and tumult, their abundance in penury and want. It is in the
same sense our Prophet now says, when lie intimates that none hope in
God but those who build on his paternal favor alone, so that they seek
nothing else but to have him propitious to them. It afterwards follows,
—

<span id="iii.iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p2"></span>**25.** The LORD *is* good unto them
that wait for him, to the soul *that* seeketh him.

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p3"></span>**25.** Bonus Jehova expectanti ipsum,
(*vel*, speranti in eum,) animae quaerenti ipsum.

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p6"></span>He continues the same subject: he
however adds now something to it, even that God always deals mercifully
with his servants, who recumb on him, mid who seek him. We hence see
that the last verse is confirmed, where he said that he was content with
God alone, while suffering all kinds of adversity: How so? for God, he
says, is *good to those who wait for him.*  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) It might have been objected and said,
that adversities produce sorrow, weariness, sadness, and anguish, so
that it cannot be that they retain hope who only look to God alone; and
it is no doubt true that, when all confess that they hope in God, they
afterwards run here and there; and the consequence is, that they fail in
their adversities. As, then, this might have been objected to the
Prophet, he gives indirectly this answer, that God is good to those who
wait for him, as though he had said, that the confidence which recumbs
on God alone cannot disappoint us, for God will at length shew his
kindness to all those who hope in him. In short, the Prophet teaches us
here, that the blessings of God, by which he exhilarates his own
children, cannot be separated from his mercy or his paternal favor. Such
a sentence as this, “Whatever can be expected is found in God,” would be
deemed frigid by many; for they might object and say, as before stated,
that they were at the same time miserable. Hence the Prophet reminds us
here that God’s blessings flow to us from his favor as from a fountain,
as though he had said, “As a perennial fountain sends forth water, so
also God’s goodness manifests and extends itself.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p8"></span>We now, then, understand the Prophet’s
meaning. He had indeed said, that we ought to acquiesce in God alone;
but now he adds, by way of favor, regarding the infirmity of men, that
God is kind and bountiful to all those who hope in him. The sum of what
he states is, as I have said, that God’s goodness brings forth its own
fruits, and that the faithful find by experience, that nothing is better
than to have all their thoughts fixed on God alone. God’s goodness,
then, ought to be understood, so to speak, as actual, even what is
really enjoyed. As, then, God deals bountifully with all who hope in
him, it follows that they cannot be disappointed, while they are
satisfied with him alone, and thus patiently submit to all adversities.
In short, the Prophet teaches here what the Scripture often declares,
that hope maketh not ashamed. (<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p8.1"></span>[Ro
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.xxix-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p9"></span>But the second clause must be noticed:
for the Prophet defines what it is to hope in God, when he says that he
is good to *the soul that seeks him.* Many indeed imagine hope to be I
know not what — a dead speculation; and hypocrites, when God spares
them, go on securely and exult, but their confidence is mere ebriety,
very different from hope. We must then remember what the Prophet says
here, that they alone hope hi God who from the heart seek him, that is,
who acknowledge how greatly they need the mercy of God, who go directly
to him whenever any temptation harasses them, and who, when any danger
threatens them, flee to his aid, and thus prove that they really hope in
God. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#026)<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p2"></span>**26.** *It is* good that *a man* should
both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p3"></span>**26.** Bonum et expectabit et silebit
ad salutem Jehovae *(ad verbum*; *vertunt tamen* *quidam*, bonus
sperabit et silebit ad Jehovae; *sed potius it neutro genere accipio
vocem*, <span id="iii.iv.xxx-p3.1"></span>טוב, *sicut in proximo versu
qui sequetur*, Bonum viro, *et coetera*.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p6"></span>It is, indeed, an abrupt phrase when he
says, Good and he will wait; for these words are without a subject; but
as it is a general statement, there is no ambiguity. The Prophet means
that it is *good to hope and to be silent as to the salvation, of God.*
Then the verbs in the future tense ought to be rendered its
subjunctives, as though it was said, “It is good when any one hopes in
the salvation of Jehovah, and is silent, that is, bears patiently all
his troubles until God succors him.”  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p15"></span>But; the Prophet here reminds us, that
we are by no means to require that God should always appear to us, and
that his paternal favor should always shine forth on our life. This is,
indeed, a condition sought for by all; for the flesh inclines us to
this, and hence we shun adversities. We, then, naturally desire God’s
favor to be manifested to us; how? In reality, so that all things may go
on prosperously, that no trouble may touch us, that we may be tormented
by no anxiety, that no danger may be suspended over us, that no calamity
may threaten us: these things, as I have said, we all naturally seek and
desire. But in such a case faith would be extinguished, as Paul tells us
in his Epistle to the Romans,

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p16"></span>“For we hope not,” he says, “for what
appears, but we hope for what, is hidden.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p16.2"></span>[Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.xxx-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p17"></span>It is necessary in this world that the
faithful should, as to outward things, be miserable, at one time exposed
to want, at another subject to various dangers — at; one time exposed to
reproaches and calumnies, at another harassed by losses: why so? because
there would be no occasion for exercising hope, were our salvation
complete. This is the very thing which the Prophet now teaches us, when
he declares that it is good for us to learn in silence to wait for the
salvation of God.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p18"></span>But to express more clearly his mind,
he first says, He will wait, or hope. He teaches the need of patience,
as also the Apostle does, in <span id="iii.iv.xxx-p18.1"></span>Hebrew
10:36; for otherwise there can be no faith. It hence appears, that where
there is no patience, there is not even a spark of faith in the heart of
man; how so? because this is our happiness, to wait or to hope; and we
hope for what is hidden. But in the second clause he explains himself
still more clearly by saying, and *will be silent* To be silent means
often in Scripture to rest, to be still; and here it signifies no other
thing than to bear the troubles allotted to us, with a calm and resigned
mind. He is then said to be silent to God, who remains quiet even when
afflictions supply occasion for clamoring; and hence this quietness is
opposed to violent feelings; for when some trouble presses on us, we
become turbulent, and are carried away by our fury, at one time we
quarrel with God, at another we pour forth various complaints. The same
thing also happens, when we see some danger, for we tremble, and then we
seek remedies here and there, and that with great eagerness. But he who
patiently bears his troubles, or who recumbs on God when dangers
surround him, is said to be silent or to rest quietly; and hence the
words of Isaiah, “In hope and silence;” for he there exhorts the
faithful to patience, and shews where strength is, even when we trust in
God, so as willingly to submit to His will, and to be ready to bear his
chastisements, and then when we doubt not but that he will be ready to
bring us help when we are in danger. (<span
id="iii.iv.xxx-p18.2"></span>[Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.xxx-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p19"></span>We now perceive what the Prophet means
when he says, that it. is *good if we wait and be silent as to the
salvation of God;* even because our happiness is hid, and we are also
like the dead, as Paul says, and our life is hid in Christ. (<span
id="iii.iv.xxx-p19.1"></span>[Col
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xxx-p19.1"></span>.) As then it is so, we must necessarily be
silent as to God’s salvation, and cherish hope within, though surrounded
with many miseries. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p2"></span>**27.** *It is* good for a man that he
bear the yoke in his youth.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p3"></span>**27.** Bonum viro, si tulerit jugum in
pueritia sua.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p6"></span>This verse admits of two meanings; for
the word yoke may be explained as signifying teaching, or the scourges
of God. We, indeed, undertake or bear in two ways the yoke of God, even
when we are taught to receive his doctrine, or when we are resigned when
he chastises us, when we are not obstreperous, but willingly submit to
his corrections. As then some take the word <span
id="iii.iv.xxxi-p6.1"></span>עול, for the yoke of instruction, and
others for the yoke of chastisement, two explanations, as I have said,
are given; and both are admissible. It is indeed truly said, that it is
good for man to be accustomed from his youth to God’s corrections; but
Jeremiah seems rather to speak of that obedience generally, which the
faithful render to God when they submit to his will. It is then our true
happiness when we acknowledge that we are not our own, and allow God, by
his sovereign power, to rule us as he pleases. But we ought to begin
with the law of God. Hence, then, it is, that we are said to bear the
yoke of God, when we relinquish our own judgment, and become wise
through God’s word, when, with our affections surrendered and subdued,
we hear what God commands us, and receive what he commands. This, then,
is what Jeremiah means by bearing the yoke.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p7"></span>And he says, in youth. For they who
have lived unrestrained throughout their life, can hardly bear to be
brought into any order. We indeed know, that, the aged are less
tractable than the young; nay, whether we refer to the arts or to the
liberal sciences, the youthful age is the most flexible. The aged are
also much slower; and added to this is another evil, they are very
obstinate, and will hardly bear to be taught the first rudiments, being
imbued with a false notion, as though they must have lived long in vain.
As, then, the disposition in the old is not easily changed, the Prophet
says that it is good for us to be formed from childhood to bear the
yoke. And this is also seen in brute animals; when a horse is allowed
full liberty in the fields, and not in due time tamed, he will hardly
ever bear the curb, he will be always refractory. The oxen, also, will
never be brought to bear the yoke, if they be put under it in the sixth
or eighth year. The same is found to be the case with men. Jeremiah,
then, does not say, without reason, that it is good for every one to be
trained from his youth in the service of God; and thus he exhorts
children and youth not to wait for old age, as it is usually the case.
For it has been a common evil, in all ages, for children and youth to
leave the study of wisdom to the old. “Oh! it will be time enough for me
to be wise, when I arrive at a middle age; but some liberty must be
given to childhood and youthful days.” And for this reason, Solomon
exhorts all not to wait for old age, but duly to learn to fear God in
childhood. So also our Prophet declares that it is good for one to bear
the yoke in his childhood. It then follows. —

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p2"></span>**28.** He sitteth alone and keepeth
silence, because he hath borne *it* upon him.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p3"></span>**28.** Sedebit seorsum (*vel*, solus)
et silebit, quia tulit super se.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p6"></span>Here he shews the fruit of
teachableness; for when God deals severely with his children, they yet
do not rebel, but even then they willingly submit to his authority. For
whence comes it that so much impatience rages in men, except that they
know not what it is to obey God, to prepare themselves to bear the yoke?
so, then, men become furious like wild beasts, never tamed, therefore
the Prophet now says, “Whosoever is thus habituated to the yoke of God,
will also be silent in extreme evils, and remain quiet.” We now perceive
what I have just said, that the fruit of docility and obedience is set
forth in this verse.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p7"></span>But when he says that those who are
thus trained to obey God *will sit apart,* he expresses most fitly the
strength and character of patience. For they for the most part who wish
to appear magnanimous make a great display, and think that their valor
is nothing except they appear as on a theater; they allow themselves at
the same time an unbridled liberty when they are alone; for they who
seem the most valorous, except God’s fear and true religion prevail in
their souls, rage against God and champ the bridle in adversities,
though they may not make a clamor before men, for, as I have already
said, they regard display. But here a very different account is given of
patience, even that we are to sit alone and be silent, that is, even
were no one present as a witness, whose presence might make us ashamed;
were we even then to sit, and to submit with calm minds to God, and to
take his yoke, we should thus prove our patience. This verse then
distiguishes between the simplicity of the godly and that will display
in which they delight who seek to obtain the praise of courage,
patience, and perseverance, from the world; for these also sit and speak
words as from heaven, and as though they had put off the flesh. He who
has lost a son will say, that he had begotten a mortal: he who is
stripped of all his goods will say, “All my things I carry with me.”
Thus magnanimously do ungodly men speak, so that they seem to surpass in
fortitude and firmness all the children of God. But when they give
utterance to these swelling words, what they regard is the opinion which
men may form of them. But the faithful, what do they do? They sit apart,
that is, though they might shamelessly clamor against God, yet they are
quiet and submit to his will. We now understand what is meant by
*sitting apart.*

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p8"></span>Then he says, *because he will carry
it on himself* Some take <span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p8.1"></span>נטל
*nuthel,* in a transitive sense, “he will cast it upon him.” But this is
a forced rendering. It would be a simpler meaning, were we to say,
because he will carry or raise it on himself. The verb <span
id="iii.iv.xxxii-p8.2"></span>נטל, *nuthel,* means not only to carry,
but also elevate or raise up. When, therefore, the Prophet says, that it
is an example of real patience when we carry it on ourselves, he means
that we succumb not under our adversities, nor are overwhelmed by them;
for it is patience when it is not grievous to us to undergo any burdens
which God may lay on us; and on this account we are said to regard his
yoke as not grievous — how so? because it is pleasant to us. As, then,
meekness thus extenuates the heaviness of the burden, which would
otherwise overwhelm us, the Prophet says that those who raise up on
themselves all their troubles *sit apart.*

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p9"></span>I do not, however, know whether this
passage has been corrupted; for the expression seems not to me natural.
Were we to read <span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p9.1"></span>עלו, *olu*, his
yoke, it would be more appropriate, and a reason would be given for what
goes before, that the faithful sit apart and are silent before God,
because they bear his yoke; for the pronoun may be referred to God as
well as to man. But this is only a conjecture.  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span>**29.** He putteth his mouth in the
dust; if so be there may be hope.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p3"></span>**29.** Ponet in pulvere os suum, si
forte sit spes.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p6"></span>He continues the same subject; for he
describes to us men so subdued to obedience that they are ready to bear
whatever God may lay on them. He then says that the sitting and the
silence of which he spoke, so far prevailed, that the children of God,
though in extreme evils, did not yet cease to persevere in their
obedience. For it sometimes happens that those who have made some
progress in the fear of God, give proof of their obedience and patience
in some small trial; but when they are greatly tried, then breaks forth
the impatience which they had previously checked. Then the Prophet
teaches us here, that the children of God do not sufficiently prove
their patience, when they bear with a calm mind a moderate correction,
except they proceed to a higher degree of perseverance, so as to remain
quiet and resigned even when the state of things appears hopeless.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p7"></span>By saying that the faithful *put
their mouth in the dust,* he means that they lie down humbly before God
and confess themselves to be as dead. The import of what is said is
this: In time of extreme affliction the wise will put his mouth in the
dust, while seeing things in such confusion that all his thoughts vanish
away on account of the atrocity of evils; and thus he intimates that the
wise would have nothing to say. To put the mouth, then, in the dust is
to become mute, as though he had said, that the faithful shut their
mouth, when they do not murmur against God nor abandon themselves to
complaints, when they do not expostulate that injury is done them, nor
allege what the unbelieving usually do when God deals severely with
them. In short, to put the mouth in the dust, means to bring no
complaints, and so to check ourselves that no clamorous words proceed
from our mouth. Thus another phrase is used to set forth the silence
mentioned before.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p8"></span>And that the Prophet here speaks of
extreme trials, may be easily gathered from the next clause, *If so be
that there is hope;* not that the faithful doubt whether God would give
them hope, for they have no doubt but that God, who shines in darkness
itself by his word, would at length by, the effect prove that he is not
unfaithful. But the particle <span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>אולי
*auli,* as it is well known, expresses what is difficult; for when
anything appears to be incredible, the Hebrews say, *If it may be.* But
here, as I have said, it does not intimate a doubt; for when the mind of
a godly man fluctuates or doubts, how is it that he puts his mouth in
the dust? but the Prophet shews that those who are taught to obey God,
persevere even in extreme trials, so that while nothing but despair
appears, they yet lie down humbly before God, and patiently wait until
some hope shines forth. And here hope is to be taken for the ground or
occasion of hope.  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) It afterwards
follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>**30.** He giveth *his* cheek to him
that smiteth him: he is filled full with reproach.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p3"></span>**30.** Dabit percutienti maxillam,
saturbitur opprobriis.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p6"></span>Here he mentions another fruit of
patience, that the faithful, even when injuries are done to them by the
wicked, would yet be calm and resigned. For there are many who submit to
God when they perceive his hand; as, for instance, when any one is
afflicted with a disease, he knows that it is a chastisement that
proceeds from God; when pestilence happens, or famine, from the
inclemency of the weather, the hand of God appears to them; and many
then conduct themselves in a suitable manner: but when an enemy meets
one, and when injured, he instantly says, “I have now nothing to do with
God, but that wicked enemy treats me disgracefully.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p7"></span>It is then for this reason that the
Prophet shews that the patience of the godly ought to extend to injuries
of this kind; and hence he says, *He will give the cheek to the smiter,
and will be filled with reproaches*  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) There are two kinds of injuries; for
the wicked either treat us with violence, or assail us with reproaches;
and reproach is the bitterest of all things, and inflicts a most
grievous wound on all ingenuous minds. The Prophet, then, here declares
that the children of God ought meekly to suffer when they are violently
assailed, and not only so, but when they are dealt with reproachfully by
the wicked. This, then, he says of patience. Now follows another
confirmation, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p2"></span>**31.** For the Lord will not cast off
for ever:

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p3"></span>**31.** Quia non respuet (*vel*,
rejiciet) in perpetuum Dominus.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p6"></span>It is certain that there will be no
patience, except there be hope, as it has already appeared. As, then,
patience cherishes hope, so hope is the foundation of patience; and
hence consolation is, according to Paul, connected with patience. (<span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p6.1"></span>[Ro
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p6.1"></span>.) And this is the doctrine which the
Prophet now handles, — that the faithful bear the yoke with meek and
calm minds, because they believe that God will at length be propitious
to them: hence also arises patience; for the faithful are persuaded that
all adversities are temporary, and that there will be a happy end,
because God will at length be reconciled to them, though he gives them
new evidences of his wrath.  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) The
rest to-morrow.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as it is
expedient for us to be daily chastised by thy hand, we may willingly
submit to thee, and not doubt but that thou wilt be faithful, and not
prove us with too much rigor, but that thou wilt consider our weakness,
so that we may thus calmly bear all thy chastisements, until we shall at
length enjoy that perfect blessedness, which is now hid to us under
hope, and as it were sealed, until Christ thy Son shall reveal it at his
coming. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvii-p1"></span>Lecture Eleventh

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p2"></span>**32.** But though he cause grief,
yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p3"></span>**32.** Quia si dolore affecerit,
etiam miserebitur secundum multitudinem clementiarum suarum.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p5"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p6"></span>We saw in the last Lecture that the
best and the only true remedy for sorrows is, when the faithful are
convinced that they are chastised only by the paternal hand of God, and
that, the end of all their evils will be blessed. Now this they cannot
of themselves assume; but God comes to their aid, and declares that he
will not be angry for ever with his children. For this promise extends
generally to the whole Church,

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p7"></span>“For a moment I afflicted thee, in
the time of mine indignation, but with perpetual mercies will I follow
thee,” (<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>[Isa.
54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p8"></span>and again,

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p9"></span>“I will visit their iniquities with
a rod, yet my mercy I will not take away from them”  
(<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p9.2"></span>[Psalm
89](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p9.2"></span> 33, 84.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p10"></span>When therefore the faithful feel
assured that their punishment is only for a time, then they lay hold on
hope, and thus receive invaluable comfort in all their evils.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p11"></span>Jeremiah now pursues the same
subject, even that God will *shew compassion according to the multitude
of his mercies, though he causes sorrow to men.* This may indeed be
generally explained as to all mankind; but, as we have said, God has
promised this to his own Church. All miseries, regarded in themselves,
are tokens of the wrath and curse of God; but as all things turn out for
good and for salvation to the children of God, when they embrace this
truth, that God, as the Prophet Habakkuk says, remembers mercy in wrath,
(<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>[Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>,) so they restrain themselves and do
not despond, nor are they overwhelmed with despair. We now then
understand the Prophet’s object in saying, that though God afflicts he
yet remembers mercy.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p12"></span>But we must at the same time bear
in mind what I have before shewed, that the faithful are exposed to
various evils, because it is profitable for them to be chastised by
God’s hand. Hence appears the necessity of this doctrine, for were we
exempt frown all adversities, this admonition would be superfluous. But
as it cannot be but that God will smite us with his rods, not only
because we deserve to be smitten, but also because it is expedient, it
is necessary to flee to this consolation which is offered to us, even
that God having afflicted us with grief will again shew us compassion,
even *according to the multitude of his mercies* He confirms the truth
of what he alleges by a reference to the very nature of God himself.
Hence, that the faithful might not debate with themselves whether God
would be propitious to them, after having inflicted on them a temporary
punishment, the Prophet comes to their aid, and sets before them the
mercy of God, or rather mercies, in the plural number; as though he had
said, that it could not be that God should deny himself, and that
therefore he would be always merciful to his people; for otherwise his
mercy would be obliterated, yea, that mercy which is inseparable from
his eternal essence and divinity.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxviii-p13"></span>And hence, when God is pleased
briefly to shew what he is, he sets forth his mercy and patience; for
except his goodness and mercy meet us, when we come to him, dread would
immediately absorb all our thoughts; but when God comes forth as if
clothed and adorned with mercy, we may then entertain hope of salvation;
and though conscious of evil, yet while we recumb on God’s mercy, we
shall never lose the hope of salvation. We not: apprehend the Prophet’s
meaning. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#033)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p2"></span>**33.** For he doth not afflict
willingly nor grieve the children of men.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p3"></span>**33.** Quia non affligit ex corde
suo, et delore afficit filios viri.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p6"></span>This is another confirmation of the
same truth, that God takes no delight in the evils or miseries of men.
It is indeed a strong mode of speaking which the Prophet adopts, but
very suitable. God, we know, puts on, as it were, our form or manner,
for he cannot be comprehended in his inconceivable glory by human minds.
Hence it is that he transfers to himself what properly can only apply to
men. God surely never acts unwillingly nor feignedly: how then is that
suitable which Jeremiah declares, — that God does *not afflict from his
heart?* But God, as already said, does here assume the character of man;
for though he afflicts us with sorrow as he pleases, yet true it is that
he delights not in the miseries of men; for if a father desires to
benefit his own children, and deals kindly with them, what ought we to
think of our heavenly Father?

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p7"></span>“Ye,” says Christ, “who are evil,  
know how to do good to your children,” (<span
id="iii.iv.xxxix-p7.2"></span>[Mt
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxix-p7.2"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p8"></span>what then are we to expect from the
very fountain of goodness? As, then, parents are not willingly angry
with their children, nor handle them roughly, there is no doubt but that
God never punishes men except when he is constrained. There is, as I
have said, an impropriety in the expression, but it is enough to know,
that God derives no pleasure from the miseries of men, as profane men
say, who utter such blasphemies as these, that we are like balls with
which God plays, and that we are exposed to many evils, because God
wishes to have as it were, a pleasant and delectable spectacle in
looking on the innumerable afflict, ions, and at length on the death of
men.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p9"></span>That such thoughts, then, might not
tempt us to unbelief, the Prophet here puts a check on us, and declares
that God does *not afflict from his heart,* that is, willingly, as
though he delighted in the evils of men, as a judge, who, when he
ascends his throne and condemns the guilty to death, does not do this
from his heart, because he wishes all to be innocent, and thus to have a
reason for acquitting them; but. yet he willingly condemns the guilty,
because this is his duty. So also God, when he adopts severity towards
men, he indeed does so willingly, because he is the judge of the world;
but he does not do so from the heart, because he wishes all to be
innocent — for far away from him is all fierceness and cruelty; and as
he regards men with paternal love, so also he would have them to be
saved, were they not as it were by force to drive him to rigor. And this
feeling he also expresses in Isaiah,

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p10"></span>“Ah! I will take consolation from
mine adversaries.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p10.2"></span>[Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxix-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p11"></span>He calls them adversaries who so
often provoked him by their obstinacy; yet he was led unwillingly to
punish their sins, and hence he employed a particle expressive of grief,
and exclaimed Ah! as a father who wishes his son to be innocent, and yet
is compelled to be severe with him.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxix-p12"></span>But however true this doctrine may
be, taken generally, there is yet no doubt but that the Prophet here
addresses only the faithful; and doubtless this privilege peculiarly
belongs to God’s children, as it has been shown before. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xl"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xl-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034)<span
id="iii.iv.xl-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p2"></span>**34.** To crush under his feet all the
prisoners of the earth,

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p3"></span>**34.** Ad conterendum sub pedibus suis
omnes vinetos terrae,

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p4"></span>**35.** To turn aside the right of a man
before the face of the most High,

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p5"></span>**35.** Ad pervertendum (ad declinandum)
judisium viri coram conspectu excelsi,

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p6"></span>**36.** To subvert a man in his cause,
the Lord approveth not.

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p7"></span>**36.** Ad pervertendumm hominem in lite
sua, Dominus non videt (*vel*, non vidit)

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p9"></span><span id="iii.iv.xl-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p10"></span>Many interpreters think that these three
verses are connected with the previous doctrine, and show the connection
thus, — that God does not see, that is, does not know what it is to
pervert the good cause of a man, and to oppress the innocent; and,
doubtless, God is said not to know what iniquity is, because he abhors
all evil; for what is the nature of God but the perfection of justice?
It may then be truly said, that. God knows not what it is to turn man
aside in judgment. Others take not to see, as meaning, not to approve.

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p11"></span>If we subscribe to the opinion of those
who say that injustice is contrary to the nature of God, there is here
an exhortation to patience; as though the Prophet had said that
afflictions ought to be borne with resignation, because the Jews had
fully deserved them. For the liberty taken to complain arises from this,
that men imagine that they are without fault; but he who is convicted
dares not thus to rise up against God; for the chief thing in humility
is the acknowledgment of sin. This, then, is one meaning. But they who
give this explanation, that God does not approve of those who pervert
judgment, think that there is here a ground of consolation, because God
would at length succor the miserable who were unjustly oppressed. And
doubtless it avails not a little to encourage patience when we are
persuaded that God will be an avenger, so that he will at length help
us, after having for a time suffered us to be severely treated.

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p12"></span>But these expositions seem to me to be
too remote; we may give a correcter explanation by supposing a
concession to be made, as though the Prophet had said, “It is indeed
true that the wicked take much license, for they imagine that God is
blind to all evil deeds.” For this madness is often ascribed to the
ungodly, that they think that they can sin with impunity, because God,
as they suppose, cares not for the affairs of men. They then imagine
that God is asleep, and in a manner dead, and hence they break out into
all kinds of wickedness. And for this reason it was that David so
vehemently rebuked them:

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p13"></span>“He who has formed the ear, will he not
hear? He who has created the heaven, will he not see?” (<span
id="iii.iv.xl-p13.1"></span>[Ps
94:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.xl-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p14"></span>This explanation also I cannot approve
of, it being forced and not obvious.

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p15"></span>I therefore think that the reference is
to the impious words of those who complain that God is not moved by any
compassion. For this thought almost lays hold on us wheel pressed down
by adversities, — that God has forgotten us, that he is either asleep or
lies down inactive. In short, there is nothing more difficult to be
assured of than this truth, that God governs the world by his counsel,
and that nothing happens without a design. This is indeed what almost
all confess; but when a trial comes, this doctrine vanishes, and every
one is carried away by some perverted and erroneous thoughts, even that
all things roll round fortuitously through blind fate, that men are not
the objects of God’s care. Nor is there a doubt but that in Jeremiah’s
time words of this kind were flying about; and it appears evident from
the context that those Jews were reproved who thought that their
miseries were disregarded by God, and hence they clamored; for men are
necessarily carried away into a furious state of mind, when they do not
believe that they have to do with God. The Prophet, then, refers to such
impious words, or if they dared not to express in language what they
thought, he refers to what was believed almost by all, — that the wicked
*perverted the judgment of man,* that they *turned aside a man in his
cause,* that *they tore under their feet all the bound of the earth;*
 <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) that is, that all those things
were done by the connivance of God. The plain meaning, then, is, that
judgment is perverted before the face of the Most High, — that the bound
of the earth such as are helpless, are despised, trodden under foot by
the wicked, — that a man in his cause is unjustly dealt with, and that
all this is done because *God does not see*  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) We now, then, perceive what the
Prophet means.

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p23"></span>But whence came such madness? even
because the Jews, as I have said, would not humble themselves under the
mighty hand of God; for hypocrisy had so blinded them, that they proudly
clamored against God, thinking that they were chastised with unjust
severity,. As then, they thus flattered themselves in their sins, this
expostulation arose which the Prophet mentions, that man’s judgment was
perverted, that the innocent failed in a good cause, that the miserable
were trodden under foot; and whence all this? because God did not see,
or did not regard these things. Now follows the reproof of this
delirious impiety, —

<span id="iii.iv.xli"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xli-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037)<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p2"></span>**37.** Who *is* he *that* saith, and it
cometh to pass, *when* the Lord commandeth *it* not?

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p3"></span>**37.** Quis iste, dixit; fuit, Deus non
praecepit?

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p4"></span>**38.** Out of the mouth of the most
High proceedeth not evil and good?

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p5"></span>**38.** Ex ore Excelsi non egredietur
malum et bonum (*vel*, quasi non egrediatur malum et bonum ex ore
Excelsi?)

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p7"></span><span id="iii.iv.xli-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p8"></span>The Prophet, after having mentioned the
blasphemy which prevailed everywhere at that time, strongly condemns so
gross a stupidity. *Who is this?* he says. He checks such madness by a
sharp rebuke — for the question implies an astonishment, as though the
Prophet had said, that it was like a prodigy to find men who imagined
that God was content with his own leisure, and exercised no care over
the world; for this was to annihilate him altogether. God is not a dead
being, he is not a spectre; what then? God is the judge of the world. We
hence see that it was a monstrous thing, when men entertained the notion
that God is idle or forgetful, that he gives up the world to chance.
This is the reason why the Prophet asks as of a thing absurd and
extremely disgraceful. *Who is this?* he says; Could it be that men
should give themselves up to such a degree of madness? for when they
said, that anything could happen without God’s command, it was the same
as if they denied his power; for what is God without his judgment?

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p9"></span>The other verse may be explained in two
ways; but as to the meaning, there is but little difference. It may,
then, be read as a question, “Cannot good and evil proceed from the
mouth of the most High?” or it may be rendered thus, “As though good and
evil should not proceed from the mouth of God.” As to the substance of
what is said, we see that there is no need of disputing, for the Prophet
confirms what he had said, that men are to be abhorred who imagine God
to be as it were dead, and thus rob him of his power and of his office
as a judge. And, doubtless, except we hold this truth, no true religion
can exist in us; for except all the sayings and doings of men come to an
account before the tribunal of God, and also their motives and thoughts,
there will be first. no faith and, secondly, there will be no integrity,
and all prayer to God will be extinguished. For if we believe that God
does not regard what is done in the world, who will trust in him? and
who will seek help from him? besides, who will hesitate to abandon
himself to cruelty, or frauds, or plunder? Extinguished, then, is every
sense of religion by this impious opinion, that God spends his time
leisurely in heaven, and attends not to human affairs. This is the
reason why the Prophet is so indignant against those who said, that
anything could be done without the command of God.

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p10"></span>Let us now see how God commands what is
wrongly and foolishly done by men. Surely he does not command the
ungodly to do what is wicked, for he would thus render them excusable;
for where God’s authority interposes, there no blame can be. But God is
said to command whatever he has decreed, according to his hidden
counsel. There are, then, two kinds of commands; one belongs to
doctrine, and the other to the hidden judgments of God. The command of
doctrine, so to speak, is an evident approbation which acquits men; for
when one obeys God, it is enough that he has God as his authority,
though he were condemned by a hundred worlds. Let us, then, learn to be
attentive to the commands of doctrine, by which we ought to regulate our
life, for they make up the only true rule, from which it is not right to
depart. But God is said to command according to his secret decrees what
he does not approve, as far as men are concerned. So Shimei had a
command to curse, and yet he was not exempt from blame; for it was not
his purpose to obey God; nay, he thought that he had offended God no
less than David. (<span id="iii.iv.xli-p10.1"></span>[2 Sam.
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p10.1"></span>.) Then this distinction ought to be
understood, that some things are commanded by God, not that men may have
it as a rule of action, but when God executes his secret judgments by
ways unknown to us. Thus, then, ought this passage to be understood,
even that nothing is carried on without God’s command, that is, without
his decree, and, as they say, without his ordination.

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p11"></span>It hence appears, that those things
which seem contingent, are yet ruled by the certain providence of God,
so that nothing is done at random. And what philosophers call accident,
or contingent, (<span id="iii.iv.xli-p11.1"></span>ἐνδεχόμενον) is
necessary as to God; for God decreed before the world was made whatever
he was to do; so that there is nothing now done in the world which is
not directed by his counsel. And true is that saying in the Psalms, that
our God is in heaven, and doeth whatsoever he pleaseth, (<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p11.2"></span>[Ps
116:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p11.2"></span>;) but this would not be true, were not all
things dependent on God’s counsel. We hence see that nothing is
contingent, for everything that takes place flows from the eternal and
immutable counsel of God. It. is indeed true, that those things which
take place in this or that manner, are properly and naturally called
contingencies, but what is naturally contingent, is necessary, as far as
it is directed by God; nay, what is carried on by the counsel and will
of men is necessary. Philosophers think that all things are contingent
(<span id="iii.iv.xli-p11.3"></span>ἐνδεχόμενα) and why? because the
will of man may turn either way. They then, conclude, that whatever men
do is contingent, because he who wills may change his will. These things
are true, when we consider the will of man in itself, and the exercise
of it; but when we raise our eyes to the secret providence of God, who
turns and directs the counsels of men according to his own will, it is
certain that how much soever men may change in their purposes, yet God
never changes.

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p12"></span>Let us then hold this doctrine, that
nothing is done except by God’s command and ordination, and, with the
Holy Spirit, regard with abhorrence those profane men who imagine that
God sits idly as it were on his watch-tower and takes no notice of what
is done in the world, and that human affairs change at random, and that
men turn and change independently on any higher power. Nothing is more
diabolical than this delirious impiety; for as I have said, it
extinguishes all the acts and duties of religion; for there will be no
faith, no prayer, no patience, in short;, no religion, except we believe
and know that God exercises such care over the world, of which he is the
Creator, that nothing happens except through his certain and
unchangeable decree.

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p13"></span>Now they who object, and say that God
is thus made the author of evils, may be easily refuted; for nothing is
more preposterous than to measure the incomprehensible judgment of God
by our contracted minds. The Scripture cries aloud that the judgments of
God are a great deep; it exhorts us to reverence and sobriety, and Paul
does not in vain exclaim that the ways of God are unsearchable. (<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p13.1"></span>[Ro
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p13.1"></span>.) As, then, God’s judgments in their
height far surpass all our thoughts, we ought to beware of audacious
presumption and curiosity; for the more audacious a man becomes, the
farther God withdraws from him. This, then, is our wisdom, to embrace
only what the Scripture teaches. Now, when it teaches us that nothing is
done except through the will of God, it does not speak indiscriminately,
as though God approved of murders, and thefts, and sorceries, and
adulteries; what then? even that God by his just and righteous counsel
so orders all things, that he still wills not iniquity and abhors all
injustice. When, therefore, adulteries, and murders, and plunders are
committed, God applies, as it were, a bridle to all those things, and
how much soever the most; wicked may indulge themselves in their vices,
he still rules them; this they themselves acknowledge; but for what end
does he rule them? even that he may punish sins with sins, as Paul
teaches us, for he says that; God gives up to a reprobate mind those who
deserve such a punishment, that he gives them up to disgraceful lusts,
that he blinds more and more the despisers of his word. (<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p13.2"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p13.2"></span>; <span id="iii.iv.xli-p13.3"></span>[2Th
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p13.3"></span>.) And then God has various ways, and those
innumerable and unknown to us.

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p14"></span>Let us then learn not to subject; God
to our judgment, but adore his judgments, though they surpass our
comprehension; and since the cause of them is hid from us, our highest
wisdom is modesty and sobriety.

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p15"></span>Thus we see that God is not the author
of evils, though nothing happens but by his nod and through his will, —
for far different is his design from that of wicked men. Then absurd
would it be to implicate him as all associate ill the same crime, when a
murderer, or a thief, or an adulterer is condemned, — and why? because
God has no participation in thefts and adulteries; but the vices of men
are in a way wonderful and incomprehensible as his judgments. In a word,
as far as the heavens are from the earth, so great is the difference
between the works of God and the deeds of men, for the ends, as I have
said, are altogether different.  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191)

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p23"></span><span id="iii.iv.xli-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p24"></span>The Prophet says that *from the mouth
of the most High proceed good and evil* By “mouth” he means his decree.
God indeed does not always declare that he is a judge; he has often
executed punishment on the wicked, as it were, in silence; for there
were no prophets among the heathens to proclaim the judgments he brought
on them. But though God does not always speak when he punishes the
wickedness of men, it is yet said that good and evil proceed from his
mouth; because he allots to men their punishment as it seems good to
him; and then he spares others or bears with them for a time. It
follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039)<span
id="iii.iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p2"></span>**39.** Wherefore doth a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p3"></span>**39.** Cur molestia se afficit homo
vivens? Vir super peccato suo?

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p6"></span>Some explain the verb <span
id="iii.iv.xlii-p6.1"></span>יתאונן, *itaunen,* by giving it the sense
of lying, “Why should man lie?” others, “Why should man murmur?” But I
see not what sense there can be in rendering it lying or murmuring.
Others translate thus, “Why should man harden himself?” but it is a mere
conjecture. Now, this verb sometimes means to weary one’s self, in
*Hithpael*. So in the eleventh chapter of Numbers, “The people
murmured,” as some render the words; but I think differently; nor is
there a doubt but that Moses meant that the people were wearied, so that
they in a manner pined away; and this meaning is the most suitable here.
For the Prophet had before rebuked those who imagined that God, having
relinquished the care of the world, led an inactive and easy life in
heaven; but now, in order to rouse the minds of all, he points out the
remedy for this madness, even that men should not willingly weary
themselves in their sins, but acknowledge that their wickedness is shewn
to them whenever any adversity comes upon them. And surely men would not
be so infatuated as to exclude God from the government of the world,
were they to know themselves and seriously to call to mind their own
deeds and words; for God would soon exhibit to them sure and notorious
examples of his judgment. Whence then comes it, that we are so dull and
stupid in considering the works of God? nay, that we think that God is
like a spectre or an idol? even because we rot in our sins and contract
a voluntary dullness; for we champ the bit, according to the old
proverb.

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p7"></span>We now, then, perceive why the Prophet
joins this sentence, *Why does a living man weary himself?*  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) *and a man in his sins?* for as long
as men thus remain in their own dregs, they will never acknowledge God
as the judge of the world, and thus they always go astray through their
own perverse imaginations. If, then, we wish to dissipate all the mists
which prevent us from seeing God’s providence, (that is, by the eyes of
faith,) let every one be his own witness and the judge of his own life,
and carefully examine himself; it will then immediately occur to us,
that God is not without reason angry with us, and that we are afflicted
with so many adversities, because our sins will come forth before us. We
here see the cause of that madness which makes men to exclude God’s
providence from human affairs, even because they look not on themselves,
but torment themselves without any benefit and become wearied in their
sins, and do not raise up their eyes to God. The rest, connected with
our subject, I must defer till to-morrow.

<span id="iii.iv.xliii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xliii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iv.xliii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are at
this day tossed here and there by so many troubles, and almost all
things in the world are in confusion, so that wherever we turn our eyes,
nothing but thick darkness meets us, — O grant that we may learn to
surmount all obstacles, and to raise our eyes by faith above the world,
so that we may acknowledge that governed by thy wonderful counsel is
everything that seems to us to happen by chance, in order that we may
seek thee, and know that help will be ready for us through thy mercy
whenever we humbly seek the pardon of our sins, through Christ Jesus our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iv.xliv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xliv-p1"></span>Lecture Twelfth

<span id="iii.iv.xlv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xlv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:40](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040)<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p2"></span>**40.** Let us search and try our ways,
and turn again to the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p3"></span>**40.** Percontemur (scrutemur) vias
nostras, et inquiramus, et convertamur ad Jehovam.

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p6"></span>The Prophet now shews more clearly what
the reproof meant which we shortly explained yesterday: he said that men
act absurdly while they weary themselves in their sins; he now adds that
they would do rightly if they inquired into their own life, and
faithfully examined themselves.

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p7"></span>For hence is trouble and weariness, when
men feel and deplore their outward evils, but consider not the cause,
that is, when they consider not that they are justly chastised by God’s
hand. Then the examination now mentioned is set in opposition to the
torpor and weariness with which men in vain torment themselves, and in
which they pine away, because they reflect not on their vices. Hence it
is that they attain nothing but weariness — and that is a sorrow to
death, as Paul says; but sorrow to life proceeds from the
self-examination to which the Prophet now invites and exhorts us.

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p8"></span>He then says that the only true remedy
in adversities is when men carefully examine themselves, and consider
what they deserve.  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) He also
mentions conversion; for they who are really touched with the fear of
God do not stop at this examination, but rise higher; for as God calls
them back to the right way, when they acknowledge that they have
departed from him, they flee to his mercy, loathe themselves on account
of their vices, and seek after newness of life. Thus our Prophet
prescribes to us a certain order, — that we are to examine our whole
life, and that, being influenced by the fear of God, we are to return to
him; for while he treats us with severity, he still kindly invites us by
ever offering to sinners a free pardon. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xlvi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041)<span
id="iii.iv.xlvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p2"></span>**41.** Let us lift our heart with
*our* hands unto God in the heavens.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p3"></span>**41.** Tollamus corda nostra cum
manibus ad Deum in coelis.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p6"></span>To conversion he joins prayer; for we
cannot be reconciled to God except he buries our sins; nor can
repentance and faith be separated. Moreover, to taste of God’s mercy
opens to us the door of prayer. And this ought to be carefully noticed,
because the unbelieving seem at times to be very busy in seeking to
return to God’s favor, but they only attend to the outward change of
life; and at the same time they are not anxious about pardon, but go
boldly before God, as though they were not exposed to his judgment.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p7"></span>And we see under the Papacy that while
they make long sermons on repentance, they hardly ever make any account
of faith, as though repentance without faith were a restoration from
death to life.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p8"></span>Hence I said that we ought to notice
the mode of teaching which our Prophet adopts: he begins with
self-examination, then he requires conversion; but he does not separate
it from faith. For when he exhorts us to pray, it is the same thing as
though he had set before us the judgment of God, and had also taught us
that we cannot escape death except God be propitious to us. How then is
pardon to be obtained? by prayer: and prayer, as it is well known, must
be always founded on faith.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p9"></span>By telling us to *raise up our hearts
to God together with our hands,* he bids us to banish all hypocrisy from
our prayers. For all without a difference raise up their hands to God;
and nature itself, when we are pressed down with evils, leads us to seek
God. But the greater part stifle this feeling of nature. When affliction
comes, it is a common thing with all to raise up their hands to heaven,
though no one should bid them to do so; but still their hearts remain
fixed on the earth, and they come not to God. And the greater part of
men are included in that class mentioned by Isaiah,

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p10"></span>“This people come to me with their
tongue,  
but their heart is far away.” (<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p10.2"></span>[Isa
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xlvi-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p11"></span>As, then, men deal thus formally with
God, and present a naked ceremony, as though God had changed and
suffered his eyes to be covered, the Prophet bids all dissimulation to
cease from prayer; *Let us raise up hands,* he says, *to God,* and also
*hearts.* Joel speaks somewhat differently, when he says,

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p12"></span>“Rend your hearts and not your
garments,” (<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p12.1"></span>[Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xlvi-p12.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p13"></span>for he seems to exclude the outward
rite, because men, wishing to shew that they were guilty before God,
rent their garments. Joel says that this was superfluous and useless;
and doubtless the rite itself was not so very necessary. But as prayers,
when they are earnest, move the hands, our Prophet refers to that
practice as useful. At the same time he teaches us that the chief thing
ought not to be omitted, even to raise up the hearts to God: *Let us,*
then, he says, *raise up our hearts together with our hands to God;* and
he adds, *to God who is in heaven:* for it is necessary that men should
rise up above the world, and to go out of themselves, so to speak, in
order to come to God.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvi-p14"></span>We now then understand the meaning of
the Prophet, — that those who repent from the heart ought not to go
before God, as though they were not guilty before his tribunal, but that
on the contrary they ought to be penitent and humble, so that they may
obtain pardon. He afterwards shews that the right way of praying is,
when we not only perform the outward ceremonies, but when we open our
hearts and raise them up as it were to heaven itself. It is, then, the
right way of praying, when the inward feeling corresponds with the
external posture. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xlvii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042)<span
id="iii.iv.xlvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p2"></span>**42.** We have trangressed and we
have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p3"></span>**42.** Nos peccavimus et rebelles
fuimus; tu non pepercisti.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p6"></span>The faithful do not here expostulate
with God, but on the contrary acknowledge that God’s severity was just.
That God then had dealt with them severely, they ascribe to their own
sins, This is the substance of what is said.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p7"></span>We hence learn that an ingenuous
confession ever accompanies repentance, as also Paul teaches us, (<span
id="iii.iv.xlvii-p7.1"></span>[2Co
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xlvii-p7.1"></span>.) For when a sinner is either secure or
tries to cover his wickedness, and flatters himself, as we see but a few
who willingly humble themselves before God, he contracts the hardness of
obstinacy. For this reason the Prophet requires confession; nay, he
suggests here the words suitable to be used, when we desire to obtain
pardon from God. *We have done wickedly,* he says, *and have been
rebellious* The pronoun, we, is here emphatical, as though the faithful
had taken on themselves the blame of all the evils, which the greater
part ever sought to disown.  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p11"></span>Here then the Prophet shews that
there is no other way of being reconciled to God, than by confessing
ourselves to be the authors of all our evils; and he also teaches us,
that it is an evidence of true repentance, when we do not allege vain
pretences as it is commonly done, nor flatter ourselves, but confess
that we are guilty. He now shows that guilt ought by no means to be
extenuated, so that our confession may be real and complete: but in this
respect the world trifle with God. The most wicked are, indeed, ashamed
to deny that they are sinners; but as they are forced to make some kind
of confession, this they do lightly; and it seems an extorted
confession, and is therefore jejune, or at least not complete. But the
Prophet here shews that they who seek to be reconciled to God, ought not
only in words to acknowledge and confess their guilt, but also
ingenuously to open their hearts. Hence he connects perverseness with
sin: as though he had said, “We have not sinned simply or in one way,
but we have exasperated God himself; and by sinning in many ways and
constantly, we have provoked him against us.” He says, in short, that
there is then an access open to us to obtain favor, when we do not
murmur against God nor contend with him as though he had dealt severely
with us, but when we confess that he has been hard and rigid with us,
because he had a reason to be so on account of our sins and wickedness.
He adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xlviii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:43](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#043)<span
id="iii.iv.xlviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p2"></span>**43.** Thou hast covered with anger,
and persecuted us: thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied.

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p3"></span>**43.** Obtexisti in ira et
persequutus es nos; occidisti et non pepercisti.

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p6"></span>At the first view, this complaint may
seem to proceed from a bitter heart; for here the faithful complain that
they had been slain, and then that God had executed his judgment as it
were in darkness, without any indulgence; and the next verse confirms
the same thing. But it is a simple acknowledgment of God’s righteous
vengeance for in their extreme calamities the faithful could not declare
that God dealt mercifully with them, for they had been subjected to
extreme rigor, as we have before seen. Had they said that they had been
leniently chastised, it would have been very strange, for the temple had
been burnt, the city had been demolished, the kingdom had been
overthrown, the people for the most part had been driven into exile, the
remainder had been scattered, the covenant of God had been in a manner
abolished; for it could not have been thought otherwise according to the
judgment of the flesh. Had, then, the exiles in Chaldea said that God
had smitten them leniently, would not such an extenuation have appeared
very strange? and had also the Prophet spoken in the same strain? For
the causes of sorrow were almost innumerable: every one had been robbed
of his goods; then there were many widows, many orphans; but the chief
causes of sorrow were the burning of the temple and the ruin of the
kingdom. No wonder, then, that the faithful set forth here their
aggravated evils: but yet they seek out no other cause than their own
sins.

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p7"></span>Hence they say now, that God had
*covered them over in wrath* It is a most suitable metaphor; as though
he had said, that God had executed his vengeance in thick darkness. For
an object presented to the eye produces sympathy, and we are easily
inclined to mercy when a sad spectacle is presented to us. Hence it is,
that even the most savage enemies are sometimes softened, for they are
led by their eyes to acts of humanity. The Prophet, then, in order to
set forth the horrible vengeance of God, says that there had been a
covering introduced, so that God had punished the wicked people in an
implacable manner. But as I have said, he does not charge God with
cruelty, though he says that he had covered them over in wrath.  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195)

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p13"></span>He then says, *Thou hast pursued us
and killed us, and hast not spared* They intimate, in short, that God
had been a severe judge; but they at the same time turned to themselves
and sought there the cause, even that they might not, by their own
hardness, provoke God against themselves, as hypocrites are wont to do.
And the consciousness of evil leads us also to repentance; for whence is
it that men grow torpid in their sins, except that they flatter
themselves? When, therefore, God suspends his judgments, or when he
moderates them, and does not punish men as they deserve, then, if there
be any repentance, it is yet frigid, and soon vanishes. This, then, is
the reason why God inflicts deadly strokes, because we feel not his hand
except the stroke be as it were deadly. As, then, simple chastisement is
not sufficient to lead us to repentance, the Prophet introduces the
faithful as speaking thus, “Behold, thou hast in wrath covered us over,
so as not to look on us,” so that there might be no opportunity for
mercy, that is, that they might be the judges of themselves, and
conclude from the atrocity of their punishment how grievously they must
have provoked the wrath of God. It follows in the same sense, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xlix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044)<span
id="iii.iv.xlix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p2"></span>**44.** Thou hast covered thyself with
a cloud, that *our* prayer should not pass through.

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p3"></span>**44.** Obtexisti in nube tibi, ne
transiret precatio.

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.xlix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms the same thing,
but the words are different. He again repeats the word to cover; but,
that the metaphor might be clearer and more fully explained, he says,
*with a cloud.* He simply intimates, that a cloud interposed, that God
might more unrestrainedly punish the Jews, as they had deserved. Isaiah
speaks somewhat otherwise, but for the same purpose:

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p7"></span>“The hand of God,” he says, “is not
shortened, nor are his ears more deaf; but your sins have interposed a
distance between you and God.” (<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p7.1"></span>[Isa.
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.xlix-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p8"></span>There is no doubt but that Isaiah meant
the same thing as our Prophet, even that God’s nature never changes;
and, therefore, that when he seems to rage against his people, the cause
ought to be ascribed to their sins, because God ever remains like
himself. We know what is said in the Psalms,

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p9"></span>“Thou art God who hearest prayer.”
(<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p9.1"></span>[Ps
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xlix-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p10"></span>God, then, is always ready to hear his
people, and he also possesses power sufficient to help them; but the
distance arises from our sins. And so the Prophet now says that a cloud
interposed.

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p11"></span>Nearly the same sentence is found in
the third chapter, as we have seen; for there the Prophet said, in the
name of the whole people, that they had become separated from God, but
that it was a separation, not because God had changed his purpose, but
because the people had, in a manner, rejected his favor. *Thou hast,*
then, he says, covered *thyself with a cloud,* that is, thou hast made
for thyself a covering, that prayer may not pass through. This seems,
indeed, very strange, because God advances to meet all the miserable,
and promises to hear their prayers: what, then, can this mean, that a
cloud interposed that prayer might not go through to him? even that the
Jews did not pray aright, and that they had closed up against themselves
every access by which God could admit them. In short, the faithful do
not here contend with God, as though they had been deceived by his
promises, but confess that they were unworthy to pray to God, and they
also acknowledge that they did not pray aright.  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) And according to this sense they say,
that they were hindered, as though a cloud interposed, so that their
prayer could not ascend to God. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.l"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.l-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.l-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:45](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#045)<span id="iii.iv.l-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.l-p2"></span>**45.** Thou hast made us *as* the
offscouring and refuse in the midst of the people.

<span id="iii.iv.l-p3"></span>**45.** Quisquilias et rejectionem posuiti
nos in medio populorum.

<span id="iii.iv.l-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.l-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.l-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.l-p6"></span>They say here that they were exposed to
reproach, so as to become, as it were, the sweepings of the world. Some
render <span id="iii.iv.l-p6.1"></span>סחי, *sachi*, “refuse;” some by
other words; and some “filth:” But the word properly means sweepings or
scraping’s, called by the Greeks <span
id="iii.iv.l-p6.2"></span>περιψήματα. Paul says, that he and his
associates were the offscouring (<span
id="iii.iv.l-p6.3"></span>περιψήματα) of the world. (<span
id="iii.iv.l-p6.4"></span>[1Co
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv.l-p6.4"></span>.)
He means that they were despised as offscourings or scrapings. The word
is derived from sweeping. Whatever, then, is cleaned off by sweeping or
scouring, that is, the filth of the house or the floor, is called <span
id="iii.iv.l-p6.5"></span>סחי, *sachi.* What the Prophet had in view is
not obscure; for he means that the degradation of the people was not
hidden, but open Go all nations, as though God had erected a theater in
Judea, and there exhibited a remarkable and an unusual example of his
vengeance. To the same purpose is what he adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.li"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.li-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.li-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:46](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046)<span id="iii.iv.li-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.li-p2"></span>**46.** All our enemies have opened their
mouths against us.

<span id="iii.iv.li-p3"></span>**46.** Aperuerunt super nos os suum
omnes inimici nostri.

<span id="iii.iv.li-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.li-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.li-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.li-p6"></span>He repeats what he had said, that the
people were an offscouring, or scrapings, or sweepings, and also a
refuse. The last word is, indeed, in the infinitive mood, <span
id="iii.iv.li-p6.1"></span>מאוס, *maus,* but it is to be taken as a
noun. They had become all this, because they had as many enemies as
neighbors; for we know that the Jews were hated by all the neighboring
nations. They had become, then, a refuse and filth among all people, for
with an open mouth they spoke furiously against them. For the open mouth
means that they spoke insolently, and took the liberty of cursing them
all, as it has been stated elsewhere. Now it was the bitterest thing to
the miserable people, when they found that the reproaches and taunts of
enemies were added to their calamities: for we know how grievously does
reproach wound those who are already afflicted.

<span id="iii.iv.lii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:47](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#047)<span id="iii.iv.lii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lii-p2"></span>**47.** Fear and a snare is come upon
us, desolation and destruction.

<span id="iii.iv.lii-p3"></span>**47.** Pavor et fovea fuit nobis,
destructio (*alii* vertunt, deceptio,) et contritio.

<span id="iii.iv.lii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lii-p6"></span>The Prophet largely dwells on the
grievousness of the calamity which had happened. He compares here the
anxieties into which the people had been brought, to a *pitfall* and
*dread.* There is a striking alliteration in the words <span
id="iii.iv.lii-p6.1"></span>פחד and <span
id="iii.iv.lii-p6.2"></span>פחת, *pechet* and *peched.* But the meaning
is, that the people had been reduced to such straits, that there was no
outlet for them; as the case is with us, when we are filled with dread,
and look here and there, and see nothing but pitfalls on every side;
then we are at our wits’ end. Such then was the state of the people, as
Jeremiah shews: filled with dread, they sought refuge, but saw pitfalls
on every side.

<span id="iii.iv.lii-p7"></span>He afterwards mentions *desolation* or
destruction, and sorrow. It is probably a mistake in Jerome’s version,
where the first; word is rendered “prophesying.” Some think that he was
led astray by the letter <span id="iii.iv.lii-p7.1"></span>ש, *shin*,
which he seems to have read with a point on the left side; and he took
the word as coming from <span id="iii.iv.lii-p7.2"></span>נשא *nusha.*
But another conjecture seems more correct, that the transcribers have
committed a mistake; for what I have said is most appropriate to the
passage, even that the people were overwhelmed with all kinds of evils,
because there was nothing to be seen but desolation and sorrow, or
bruising, or breach, <span id="iii.iv.lii-p7.3"></span>שבר, *shaber.* It
now follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.liii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.liii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:48](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#048)<span
id="iii.iv.liii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p2"></span>**48.** Mine eye runneth down with
rivers of water for the destruction of the daughter of my people.

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p3"></span>**48.** Rivi (*hoc est*, tanquam rivi)
aquarum descendit oculus meus super contrione (*vel*, afflictione, *est
idem nomen* <span id="iii.iv.liii-p3.1"></span>שבר) filii populi mei.

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.liii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p6"></span>Interpreters give different
explanations of the beginning of this verse: some render it thus, “My
eye comes down unto rivers of waters;” others, “My eye flows down unto
rivers of waters,” or, “rivers of waters flow down.” But as I have
explained elsewhere, the Prophet rather means, that his eye came down
like rivers; and to come down, or to descend, is a metaphor for flowing
down; for water, as it is well known, descends when it flows. And there
is a change of number when he says, “My eye descends;” there is also
raider-stood the particle of comparison, <span
id="iii.iv.liii-p6.1"></span>כ, *caph*  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) The meaning is, that his eyes
descended or flowed down as rivers. The last: word properly signifies
divisions, but; he means that many streams flowed down, as though they
were so many rivers.

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p10"></span>*For the bruising,* or the breach, *of
my people:* the Prophet speaks here in his own person, though there is
no doubt but that he exhorts all others to join him in his sorrow. For
the faithful would not have prayed to God with sufficient ardor, had
they not been dreadfully broken and confounded; had not the calamity
deeply affected them, as it ought to have done, there would have been no
serious attention to prayer. This is the reason why the Prophet here
mentions his own weepings, and groanings, and tears, even that he might
rouse himself to prayer, and lead others also. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.liv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.liv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.liv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:49](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#049)<span id="iii.iv.liv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.liv-p2"></span>**49.** Mine eye trickleth down, and
ceaseth not, without any intermission.

<span id="iii.iv.liv-p3"></span>**49.** Oculus meus defluxit, et non
quievit a non intermissionibus (*hoc est*, ut non sint intermissiones,
*vel* ut nulla sit requies.)

<span id="iii.iv.liv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.liv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.liv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.liv-p6"></span>He repeats the same in other words, —
that his eyes flowed down with tears. He still retains the singular
number, but this is common in Hebrew. He then says, that *his eye
without end flowed down, so that there was no rest* But it afterwards
follows —

<span id="iii.iv.lv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:50](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#050)<span id="iii.iv.lv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p2"></span>**50.** Till the LORD look down, and
behold from heaven.

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p3"></span>**50.** Donec aspiciat et videat Jehova e
coelis.

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p6"></span>The Prophet here makes a distinction
between his weeping and that blind sorrow by which the unbelieving are
affected and violently agitated: they have no regard to God. Then the
Prophet says here that he not only wept, but that he also prayed and
waited for God to put an end to evils. As I have already said, the
unbelieving grieve abundantly in adversities, nay, they abandon
themselves to sorrow; but they turn away wholly from God, and are like
wild beasts. Then the Prophet points out the right way to mourn: our
eyes must flow down to weariness and without rest, but at the same time
we must wait until God be propitious to us. Therefore this verse
connects well with the former,  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)
*until Jehovah look down and see from heaven;* for otherwise tears would
draw us to despair, and despair would become the cause of fury; for we
see that the ungodly murmur against God.

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p12"></span>Thus, then, ought we to weep, in order
that we may at the same time cherish hope while we wait for God to look
down on us and to see our miseries from heaven. The word *heaven*, is
not added uselessly, because men in their evils, when they seek God, are
filled with terror, for they do not think that they can ascend to him:
hence, then, it is, that they despond, for they imagine that God is too
remote from them. The Prophet therefore anticipates here this false
notion, and says that we ought nevertheless to wait until God looks down
from heaven; which corresponds with what is said in the Psalms: that God
is high and yet has respect to low things. (<span
id="iii.iv.lv-p12.1"></span>[Ps
113:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.lv-p12.1"></span>.) Though, then, the majesty of God is
elevated above all the heavens, yet this does not prevent him familiarly
to regard what is low and despised in the world. At length it follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lvi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#051)<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p2"></span>**51.** Mine eye affecteth mine heart
because of all the daughters of my city.

<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p3"></span>**51.** Oculus meus dolore afficit
animam meam propter omes filias urbis meae (*vel* pro omnibus filiabus
urbis meae.)

<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p6"></span>He had said, that his eye flowed down,
and then, that it was like a fountain, from which many streams or rivers
flowed: he now adopts another mode of speaking, that his *eyes grieved
his soul;* and it is a sign of the greatest sorrow when he who weeps
seeks some relief, and is at the same time overpowered by that external
feeling. For many indulge in grief and inflame themselves; then the soul
of man is like a fan to rouse the burning. But when we weep and our eyes
shed tears, and when the mind in a manner exhausts itself, it is a proof
of the greatest grief. And this great. grief Jeremiah wished to express
by saying, that *his eye troubled* or grieved *his soul*

<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p7"></span>The latter part is explained in two
ways: sonic render thus, “Because of all the daughters of my city.” But
though this meaning is generally taken, I yet prefer the opinion of
those who render the words thus, “More than all the daughters of my
city,” for <span id="iii.iv.lvi-p7.1"></span>מן, men, denotes a
comparison, as it is also a causative. He says, then, that he was given
to grief more than all the young women. As the female sex, as it is well
known, are more tender and softer than men, the Prophet amplifies his
lamentation by this comparison, that in weeping he exceeded all the
young women of the city, so that he had almost forgotten his manhood.
Had he said, the daughters of the people, it might be explained as
before, as referring either to the cities, or to the whole people, that
is, the whole community. But when he mentions *all the daughters of his
city,* I cannot otherwise take the passage but as setting forth a
comparison, that is, that he could not moderate his grief, but was so
seized with it as women are, and also young girls, whose hearts, as it
has been already said, are still more tender.  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) The rest to-morrow.

<span id="iii.iv.lvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lvii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iv.lvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
hitherto spared us, we may not grow torpid in our vices, and that since
thou hast already begun to deal more severely with thy Church, we may be
awakened by thy chastisements, and so humble ourselves under thy mighty
hand, as yet not to doubt but that thou wilt be propitions to us, and
that we may so loathe ourselves on account of our sins, as still to be
fully persuaded that, provided we wait for thee, thou wilt at length be
merciful to us, so as to afford us new reasons for joy and gratitude,
through Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iv.lviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lviii-p1"></span>Lecture thirteenth

<span id="iii.iv.lix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:52](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#052)<span id="iii.iv.lix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p2"></span>**52.** Mine enemies chased me sore,
like a bird, without cause.

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p3"></span>**52.** Venando venati sunt tanquam
passerem (*vel*, avem) inimici mei sine causa.

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p6"></span>We shall see to the end of the chapter
the various complaints, by which the Prophet deplored the miseries of
his own nation, that he might at length obtain the mercy of God. He
takes here the comparison of a bird or a sparrow. He says that the
Chaldeans had been like fowlers, and the Jews like sparrows: and we know
that there is neither prudence nor courage in birds. He, then, means
that the Jews had been destitute of all help, having been exposed as a
prey to their enemies, who were like fowlers.

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p7"></span>And he seems to allude to the words of
Solomon, when he says, that without a cause is the net spread for birds
(<span id="iii.iv.lix-p7.1"></span>[Pr
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.lix-p7.1"></span>;) and he means that innocent men are
circumvented by the wicked, when they spread for them their snares as it
were on every side, while they are like the birds, who have no prudence
to avoid them.

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p8"></span>We now, then, understand the drift of
what the Prophet says: he amplifies the indignity of their calamity by
this comparison, — that the Chaldeans at their pleasure plundered the
miserable people, who were not able to resist them, who were indeed
without any power to defend themselves.  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lx-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:53](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#053)<span id="iii.iv.lx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lx-p2"></span>**53.** They have cut off my life in the
dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.

<span id="iii.iv.lx-p3"></span>**53.** Succiderunt (*vel potius*,
constrinxerunt) in puteo vitam meam, et projecerunt lapidem super me.

<span id="iii.iv.lx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lx-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lx-p6"></span>He now employs other comparisons. Some
improperly confine this to Jeremiah himself, as though he explained here
before God the wrongs done to himself: but there is no doubt but that he
undertakes the cause of the whole people; and his object was to
encourage by his own example the faithful to lament their state so that
they might obtain pardon from God.

<span id="iii.iv.lx-p7"></span>He then compares himself to a man
half-dead, cast into a pit, and there left for lost. Then some
improperly interpret the words, “they cast stones;” for stoning was not
in the mind of the Prophet; but having said that he was fast bound in a
pit or dungeon, he adds that a stone was laid over him, that lie might
not come forth, as we know was the case with Daniel. (<span
id="iii.iv.lx-p7.1"></span>[Dan. 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv.lx-p7.1"></span>.)
Daniel was cast into the den of lions, and then a stone was put on the
mouth of the den. So also the Prophet says, that he was bound fast in
the pit, and not only that, but that a stone was laid over him, that
there might be no hope of coming out; and thus the pit was like a grave.
Here, then, he means that lie was reduced to the last extremity, because
he had not only been taken by his enemies, but had also been cast into a
pit. And, as it is well known, it is a metaphorical expression or a
similitude. He adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:54](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#054)<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p2"></span>**54.** Waters flowed over mine head;
*then* I said, I am cut off.

<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p3"></span>**54.** Inundaverunt (*ad verbum*,
*alii,* ascenderunt) aquae super caput meum; dixi, succisus sum.

<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p6"></span>He now adds a third comparison, — that
he had been overwhelmed, as it were, with a flood of evils. This
similitude occurs often in Scripture, especially in the Psalms; for when
David wished to set forth his despair, lie said that he was sunk in deep
waters. (<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p6.1"></span>[Ps.
69:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.lxi-p6.1"></span>.) So also in this place the Prophet
complains, that waters had flowed over his head, so that he thought
himself lost. Though, indeed, this was the saying of a man in a hopeless
state, it is yet evident from the context that the Prophet was firm in
the hope of God’s mercy. But he speaks according to the judgment of the
flesh; and we know that the faithful are as it were divided; for as they
have not put off the flesh, they must necessarily be acquainted with
adversities, be stormed by fear and feel anxieties; in short, when death
hangs over them, they must in a manner be exposed to fear. In the
meantime, faith in their hearts obtains the victory, so that they do not
succumb under terrors, or cares, or anxieties.

<span id="iii.iv.lxi-p7"></span>When, therefore, the Prophet says that
in his own judgment he was lost, he does not mean that his faith was so
extinguished that he ceased to pray to God; for in the next verse he
shews that he persevered in prayer. How, then, did he say or believe
that he was lost? even, as I have already said, according to human
judgment. And we often see that the faithful complain that they are
forsaken, that God is asleep in heaven, that he has turned away from
them. All these things are to be referred to the perception of the
flesh. While, then, the faithful cast their eyes on dangers, when death
comes, they not only tremble, but fear greatly and faint also. In the
meantime, as I have said, they struggle by faith against all these
temptations. So, then, is this passage to be understood, — that the
Prophet believed that he was lost, that is, as far as he could judge by
the aspect of things at that time, for no hope appeared then to the
Church. But we yet see that the Prophet did not indulge himself in this
despair; for he immediately adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:55](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055)<span
id="iii.iv.lxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p2"></span>**55.** I called upon thy name, O LORD,
out of the low dungeon.

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p3"></span>**55.** Invocavi nomen tuum, Jehova, e
puteo profunditatum.

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p6"></span>We certainly see that the Prophet had
an inward conflict, which also all the faithful experience, for the
spirit fights against the flesh, as Paul teaches us. (<span
id="iii.iv.lxii-p6.1"></span>[Ga
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.lxii-p6.1"></span>.) Though, then, he on the one hand
apprehended death, he yet ceased not to flee to God; for faith
strengthened his mind so that he did not succumb, but on the contrary he
firmly rejected the temptation presented to him. Though, then, he was,
according to the flesh, persuaded as to his own ruin, he on the other
hand, called on the name of God; for the faithful do not measure the
power and grace of God by their own thoughts, but give glory to God by
recumbing on him even in the greatest extremities.

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p7"></span>And this passage ought to be carefully
noticed; for when Satan cannot in any other way turn us aside from
prayer, he alleges our weakness; “What meanest thou, miserable being?
will God hear thee? for what canst thou do? thou tremblest, thou art
anxious, nay, thou despairest; and yet thou thinkest that God will be
propitious to thee.” Whenever, therefore, Satan tries to shut the door
against us so as to prevent us to pray, let this example of the Prophet
come to our minds; for he, though he thought himself lost, did not yet
cast aside the confidence he entertained as to God’s help and aid. For
whence arose his perseverance, except that he in a manner rebuked
himself when he found himself so overwhelmed, and as it were dead. These
two states of mind are seen in this short prayer of David,

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p8"></span>“My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?”  
(<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p8.2"></span>[Ps
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.lxii-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p9"></span>For when he addressed God, and called
him his God, we see his rare and extraordinary faith; and when he
complains that he was forsaken, we see how, through the infirmity of the
flesh, he thought that it was all over with him as to his salvation.
Such a conflict, then, is described here; but faith overcame and gained
the victory, for the Prophet ceased not to cry to God, even from *the
pit of depths* — from the pit, that is, from death itself.

<span id="iii.iv.lxii-p10"></span>And this also ought to be carefully
observed; for when God bears us on his wings, or when he carries us in
his bosom, it is easy to pray; but when we seem to be cast into the
deepest gulfs, if we thence cry to him, it is a real and certain proof
of faith and hope. As such passages often occur in the Psalms, they may
be compared together; but I touch but slightly on the subject, for it is
not my object to heap together all the quotations which are appropriate;
it is enough to present the real meaning of the Prophet. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxiii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:56](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#056)<span
id="iii.iv.lxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p2"></span>**56.** Thou hast heard my voice: hide
not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry.

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p3"></span>**56.** Vocem meam audisti; ne
occultes (*vel*, occludas) aurem tuam ad respirationem meam (*vertunt*,
ad clamorem meum) et ad precationem meam (*sed prius nomen accipio
potius pro gemitu, vel clamore*.)

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p6"></span>When the Prophet says that God
*heard,* it is the same as though he said, that he had so prayed that
God became a witness of his earnestness and solicitude; for many boast
in high terms of their earnestness and fervor and constancy in prayer,
but their boastings are all empty and vain. But the Prophet summons God
as a witness of his crying, as though he had said that he was not so
overwhelmed by his adversity, but that he always fled to God.

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p7"></span>He then says, *Close not,* etc.; it is
properly, “hide not;” but as this is not quite suitable to ears, I am
disposed to give this version, Close not thine ear to my cry. The verb
<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p7.1"></span>רוח *ruch*, means to dilate, to
respire; hence almost all render the noun here, “breathing;” but what
follows cannot admit of this sense, *to my prayer* or cry. I have no
doubt but that these two words mean crying; for in groaning the spirit
of man dilates itself, and the soul, compressed by grief, expands. But
when we cast our cares and troubles into the bosom of God, then the
spirit forcibly emerges. This, then, is what the Prophet means, when he
asks God *not to close his ear to his dilation or groaning, and to his
cry.*  <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxiv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:57](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#057)<span
id="iii.iv.lxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxiv-p2"></span>**57.** Thou drewest near in the day
*that* I called upon thee: thou saidst, Fear not.

<span id="iii.iv.lxiv-p3"></span>**57.** Appropinquasti in die in quo
clamavi ad te (*vel*, invocavi te,) dixisti, Ne timeas.

<span id="iii.iv.lxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxiv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet tells us that he had
experienced the goodness of God, because he had not suffered a repulse
when he prayed. And this doctrine is especially useful to us, that is,
to call to mind that we had not in time past prayed in vain. For we may
hence feel assured, that as God ever continues like himself, he will be
ever ready to help us when- ever we implore his protection. This, then,
is the reason why the Prophet declares here that he had experienced the
readiness of God to hear prayer: *Thou didst come nigh,* he says, *in
the day when I called on thee; thou didst say, Fear not* And this
approach or coming nigh refers to what was real or actually done, that
God had stretched forth his hand and helped his servants. Since, then,
they had been confirmed by such evidences, they had the privilege of
ever fleeing to God. God, indeed, supplies us with reasons for hope,
when he once and again aids us; and it is the same as though he
testified that he will ever be the same as we have once and again found
him to be.

<span id="iii.iv.lxiv-p7"></span>He then adds an explanation, *Thou
didst say, Fear not* He does not mean that God had spoken; but, as I
have said, he thus sets forth the fact, that he had not sought God in
vain, for he had relieved him. Though God may not speak, yet when we
find that our prayers are heard by him, it is the same as though he
raised us up and removed from us every fear. The sum of what is said is,
that God had been propitious to his servants whenever they cried to him.
It now follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:58](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#058)<span id="iii.iv.lxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxv-p2"></span>**58.** O Lord, thou hast pleaded the
causes of my soul; thou hast redeemed my life.

<span id="iii.iv.lxv-p3"></span>**58.** Disceptasti, Domine,
disceptationes animae meae, redemisti vitam meam.

<span id="iii.iv.lxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxv-p6"></span>For the same purpose he now says, that
God had been his judge to undertake his cause, and not only once, for he
had contended for him as though he had been his perpetual advocate. The
meaning is, that the Prophet (who yet speaks in the name of all the
faithful) had found God a defender and a helper, not only in one
instance, but whenever he had been in trouble; for he uses the plural
number, and says, *Thou hast pleaded the pleadings of my soul*

<span id="iii.iv.lxv-p7"></span>He adds, Thou hast redeemed my life. It
is the way of God’s pleading when he delivers us as it were from death.
Friends do, indeed, sometimes anxiously exert themselves, interposing
for our defense, but they do not always succeed. But God is such a
pleader of our cause, that he is also a deliverer, for our safety is in
his hand. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxvi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059)<span
id="iii.iv.lxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxvi-p2"></span>**59.** O LORD, thou hast seen my
wrong: judge thou my cause.

<span id="iii.iv.lxvi-p3"></span>**59.** Vidisti, Jehova, oppressionem
(subversionem, *alii vertunt*, iniquitatem) meam; judica judicium meum.

<span id="iii.iv.lxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxvi-p6"></span>The word <span
id="iii.iv.lxvi-p6.1"></span>עותתי, *outti*, is rendered by some
“iniquity,” but in an ironical sense, as though the Prophet had said,
“Thou, God, knowest whether I have offended.” But the word is to be
taken passively; the verb <span id="iii.iv.lxvi-p6.2"></span>עות, *out,*
means, to subvert, as we have elsewhere seen, even in this chapter.
Then, by *his subversion,* he means oppression, even when his
adversaries unworthily trod him under their feet. And hence he asks God
at the same time to *judge his judgment,* that is, to undertake his
cause, and to appear as his defender, as he had formerly done; for he
saw his subversion, that is, he saw that he was unjustly cast down and
laid prostrate by the wicked. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxvii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:60](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#060)<span
id="iii.iv.lxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p2"></span>**60.** Thou hast seen all their
vengeance *and* all their imaginations against me.

<span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p3"></span>**60.** Vidisti omnes ultiones
ipsorum, omnes cogitationes contra me.

<span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p6"></span>This mode of speaking was often used
by the saints, because God, when it pleased him to look on their
miseries, was ever ready to bring them help. Nor were they words without
meaning, when the faithful said, *O Lord, thou hast seen;* for they said
this for their own sake, that they might shake off all unbelief. For as
soon as any trial assails us, we imagine that God is turned away from
us; and thus our flesh tempts us to despair. It is hence necessary that
the faithful should in this respect struggle with themselves and feel
assured that God has seen them. Though, then, human reason may say, that
God does not see, but neglect and disregard his people, yet on the other
hand, this doctrine ought to sustain them, it being certain that God
does see them. This is the reason why David so often uses this mode of
expression.

<span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p7"></span>*Thou, Jehovah,* he says, *hast seen
all their vengeances* By vengeances here he means acts of violence,
according to what we find in <span id="iii.iv.lxvii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.lxvii-p7.1"></span>, where God is said “to put to flight the
enemy and the avenger.” By the avenger there he simply means, not such
as retaliate wrongs, but cruel and violent men. So also, in this place,
by vengeances, he means all kinds of cruelty, as also by thoughts he
means wicked counsels, by which the ungodly sought to oppress the
miserable and the innocent. He again repeats the same thing, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxviii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:61](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#061)<span
id="iii.iv.lxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p2"></span>**61.** Thou hast heard their
reproach, O LORD, *and* all their imaginations against me;

<span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p3"></span>**61.** Audivisti probra ipsorum,
Jehova, omnes cogitationes eorum contra me.

<span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p6"></span>We see that this is a repetition, but
for vengeances he now mentions *reproaches* And in this way he sought
again to turn God to mercy; for when he brings no aid, he seems to close
his eyes and to render his ears deaf; but when he attends to our evils,
he then soon brings help. The Prophet, then, having said that God saw,
now refers to hearing: he had heard their reproaches. Adopting a
language not strictly proper, he adds, that he had heard their thoughts;
though he speaks not only of their secret counsels, but also of all the
wicked conspiracies by which his enemies had contrived to ruin him.
 <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) He adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:62](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#062)<span
id="iii.iv.lxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p2"></span>**62.** The lips of those that rose up
against me, and their device against me all the day.

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p3"></span>**62.** Labia (*vel* sermones, *aut*,
linguas) insurgebtium contra me, et sermones eorum contra me tota die
(*vel*, quotidie.)

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p6"></span>Instead of thoughts, he now mentions
*lips,* or words. The verb <span id="iii.iv.lxix-p6.1"></span>הגה, *ege*
means to meditate, when no voice is uttered; but as the noun is
connected here with lips, there is no doubt but that the Prophet refers
to words, rather than to hidden meditations.  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) He then says, that such were the
conspiracies, that they did not conceal what they had in their hearts,
but publicly avowed their wicked purposes. Now this insolence must have
moved God to aid his people, so unjustly oppressed.

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p10"></span>He adds, *every day,* or daily. This
circumstance also must have availed to obtain favor, so that God might
the sooner aid his people. For had the ungodly made violent assaults,
and soon given over, it would have been easy to persevere in so short a
trial, as when a storm soon passes by; but when they went on
perseveringly in their machinations, it was very hard to bear the trial.
And hence we derive a ground of hope, supplied to us by what the Holy
Spirit suggests to us here, that God will be merciful to us on seeing
the pertinacity of our enemies. He then adds, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxx-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:63](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#063)<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p2"></span>**63.** Behold their sitting down, and
their rising up; I *am* their musick.

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p3"></span>**63.** Sessionem eorum et surrectionem
eorum aspice; ego canticum eorum (*vel*, pulsatio, *ut alii vertunt*

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p6"></span>The Prophet repeats still the same
thing, only in other words. He had spoken of the lyings in wait, and the
conspiracies and the speeches of his enemies; he now adds, that nothing
was hid from God. By *sitting* and *rising,* he means all the actions of
life, as when David says,

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p7"></span>“Thou knowest my sitting and my rising,”
(<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p7.1"></span>[Ps
139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.lxx-p7.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p8"></span>that is, whether I rest or walk, all my
actions are known to thee. By rising, then, the Prophet denotes here, as
David did, all the movements or doings of men; and by sitting, he means
their quiet counsels; for men either deliberate and prepare for work
while they sit, or rise, and thus move and act.

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p9"></span>He means, in short, that whether his
enemies consulted silently and quietly, or attempted to do this or that,
nothing was unknown to God. Now, as God takes such notice of the
counsels and all the actions of men, it cannot be but that he restrains
and checks the wicked; for God’s knowledge is always connected with his
office as a judge. We hence see how the Prophet strengthens himself, as
we have lately stated, and thus gathers a reason for confidence; for the
wicked counsels of his enemies and their works were not hid from God.

<span id="iii.iv.lxx-p10"></span>He adds, *I am become a song* He again
sets before God his reproach, east upon him by the ungodly. For that
indignity also availed much to lead God not to suffer his people to be
unworthily treated. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxxi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:64](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#064)<span
id="iii.iv.lxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p2"></span>**64.** Render unto them a recompence,
O LORD, according to the work of their hands.

<span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p3"></span>**64.** Repende illis mercedem, Jehova,
secundum opus manuum suarum

<span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p6"></span>He adds here a conclusion; for he has
hitherto been relating, as I have said, the evils which he suffered, and
also the reproaches and unjust oppressions, in order that; he might have
God propitious to him; for this is the way of conciliating favor when we
are wrongfully dealt with; for it cannot be but that God will sustain
our cause. He indeed testifies that he is ready to help the miserable;
it is his own peculiar work to deliver captives from prison, to
illuminate the blind, to succor the miserable and the oppressed. This is
the reason, then, why the Prophet now confidently asks God to render to
his enemies *their reward, according to the work of their hands*

<span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p7"></span>Were any one to object, and say, that
another rule is prescribed to us, even to pray for our enemies, even
when they oppress us; the answer is this, that the faithful, when they
prayed thus, did not bring any violent feelings of their own, but pure
zeal, and rightly formed; for the Prophet here did not pray for evil
indiscriminately on all, but on the reprobate, who were perpetually the
enemies of God and of his Church. He might then with sincerity of heart
have asked God to render to them their just reward. And whenever the
saints broke forth thus against their enemies, and asked God to become
an avenger, this principle must be ever borne in mind, that they did not
indulge their own wishes, but were so guided by the Holy Spirit — that
moderation was connected with that fervid zeal to which I have referred.
The Prophet, then, as he speaks here of the Chaldeans, confidently asked
God to destroy them, as we shall again presently see. We find also in
the Psalms the same imprecations, especially on Babylon, — “Happy he who
shall render to thee what thou hast brought on us, who shall dash thy
children against a stone.” (<span id="iii.iv.lxxi-p7.1"></span>[Ps.
137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.lxxi-p7.1"></span>.) It follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxxii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:65](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#065)<span
id="iii.iv.lxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p2"></span>**65.** Give them sorrow of heart, thy
curse unto them.

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p3"></span>**65.** Des illis impedimentum cordis
(*alii*, obstinationem,) maledictionem tuam illis (*vel* maledictio tua
illis.)

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p6"></span>He expresses what the vengeance was to
be, even that God would give them up to a reprobate mind; for by <span
id="iii.iv.lxxii-p6.1"></span>מגנת-לב, *meganet-leb,* he no doubt meant
the blindness of the heart, and at the same time included stupidity, as
though he had said, “O Lord, so oppress them with evils, that they may
become stupified.” For it is an extremity of evil, when we are so
overpowered as not to be as it were ourselves, and when our evils do not
drive us to prayer.  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204)

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p10"></span>We now then perceive what the Prophet
meant by asking God to *give* to his enemies the *impediment of heart,*
even that he might take away a sound mind, and smite them with blindness
and madness, as it is said elsewhere. — I run on quickly, that I may
finish, lest the hour should prevent us. The last verse of this triple
alphabet follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
3:66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#066)<span
id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p2"></span>**66.** Persecute and destroy them in
anger from under the heavens of the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p3"></span>**66.** Persequere in ira et perde
eos e sub coelis Jehovae (*quidam in vocativo casu legunt*, Jehova; *sed
quia non ponitur* <span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p3.1"></span>שמים, *sed in
constructione* <span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p3.2"></span>שמי, *ideo retineo
proprietatem*.)

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p6"></span>He first asks God to *persecute them
in wrath,* that is, to be implacable to them; for persecution is, when
God not only chastises the wicked for a short time, but when he adds
evils to evils, and accumulates them until they perish. He then adds,
and prays God to *destroy them from under the heavens of Jehovah* This
phrase is emphatical; and they extenuate the weightiness of the
sentence, who thus render it, “that God himself would destroy the
ungodly from the earth.” For the Prophet does not without a design
mention the heavens of Jehovah, as though he had said, that though God
is hidden from us while we sojourn in the world, he yet dwells in
heaven, for heaven is often called the throne of God, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p7"></span>“The heaven is my throne.” (<span
id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p7.1"></span>[Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p8"></span>“O God, who dwellest in the
sanctuary.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p8.2"></span>[Ps
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p8.2"></span>; <span
id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p8.3"></span>[Ps
77:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p8.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiii-p9"></span>By God’s sanctuary is often meant
heaven. For this reason, then, the Prophet asked here that the ungodly
should be destroyed from under the *heaven of Jehovah,* that is, that
their destruction might testify that he sits in heaven, and is the judge
of the world, and that things are not in such a confusion, but that the
ungodly must at length render an account before the celestial judge,
whom they have yet long neglected. This is the end of the chapter.

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iv.lxxiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as at this
day ungodly men and wholly reprobate so arrogantly rise up against thy
Church, we may learn to flee to thee, and to hide ourselves under the
shadow of thy wings, and fully to hope for thy salvation; and that
however disturbed the state of things may be, we may yet never doubt but
that thou wilt be propitious to us, since we have so often found thee to
be our deliverer; and that we may thus persevere in confidence of thy
grace and mercy, and be also roused by this incentive to pray to thee,
until having gone through all our miseries, we shall at length enjoy
that blessed rest which thou hast promised to us through Christ Jesus
our Lord. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc21011.htm#fr_173) <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p6.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p7"></span> The verses in this chapter are
needlessly multiplied. It would have been better had each verse
contained a letter, for the length of this chapter is the same with the
two foregoing; the only difference is, that the lines, or alternate
lines, begin with the same letter three times, as follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p8"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>א I am
the man who hath seen affliction,  
Through the rod of his indignation;  
<span id="iii.iv.ii-p8.4"></span>א Me hath he led and caused to walk  
In darkness, and not in light;  
<span id="iii.iv.ii-p8.7"></span>א Surely against me he turns,  
Upset me does his hand all the day.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p9"></span>The three next lines, or alternate lines,
begin with <span id="iii.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>ב, and so on to the end of
the alphabet — *Ed*

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc21011.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p9"></span> The *Sept*., the *Targ*., and the *Arab*.
render this “my head;” but the *Vulg*. and the *Syr*., “gall.” It occurs
again in <span id="iii.iv.v-p9.1"></span>[La
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv.v-p9.1"></span>,
and is rendered “gall” by the *Targ*. and all the versions. He was
“surrounded with gall,” with what was bitter to him, and “with
faintness,” with what made him to faint. Hence, in the next verse, he
represents himself as being like the dead. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc21011.htm#fr_175) <span
id="iii.iv.ix-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ix-p9"></span> “Subverted” is the *Vulg*., “obstructed”
the *Sept*., and “rendered oblique” the *Syr*. The meaning is, “turned
aside.” he had built as it were a wall of hewn stones across his way,
and thus he turned aside his goings or his paths, so that he was
constrained to take some other course. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc21011.htm#fr_176) <span
id="iii.iv.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiii-p8"></span> The word, having the last letter
doubled, means to turn aside again and again, “He has often turned aside
my ways.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc21011.htm#fr_177) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p9"></span> The word means grit or gravel,
rendered “pebble” by the Sept., and “stones” by the Syr. and the Targ.
It is rendered “gravel” in <span id="iii.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Pr
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>. The verb only occurs here and in <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p9.2"></span>[Psalm
119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p9.2"></span>; and to wear out, is its most suitable
meaning, —

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p10"></span>And he hath worn out with grit my
teeth.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p11"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc21011.htm#fr_178) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p13"></span> The verb rendered “covered,” is
found only here, and is translated “fed” by the *Sept*. and *Vulg*.;
“tumbled” or laid low, by the Targ.; and “besprinkled,” by the *Syr*. As
he had said, that his food had been as it were grit, he could not have
said that he was fed with ashes. Therefore the *arg*. or the *Syr*. is
the most suitable, that God had laid him low in ashes, *Tr* that he had
besprinkled or covered him with ashes. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc21011.htm#fr_179) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p7"></span> The word “strength” is rendered
“victory” by the Sept., “end” by the *Vulg*, “splendor by the Syr., and
valor by the Targ. means superiority, excellency, rather than strength,
—

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p8"></span>And I said, Perished hath my
excellency,  
And my expectation from Jehovah.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p9"></span>Whatever he had that was excellent had
perished; and perished also had every good he expected from Jehovah. The
meaning is not, that these things perished from Jehovah, but that his
excellency and his expectation from Jehovah had perished. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc21011.htm#fr_180) <span
id="iii.iv.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxi-p7"></span> The verb “remember” is rendered as an
imperative by the *Targ*., the *Vulg.,* and the *Syr.;* and it is so
rendered by *Henderson*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc21011.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p8"></span> The pronoun “this” is by most
referred to what the next verse contains; but as a clause intervenes,
this can hardly be the meaning. The Lamentations <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>[Lam.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>, I render thus,

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p10"></span>**19.** Remember my affliction and my
abasement,  
The wormwood and the gall.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p11"></span>**20.** Remembering thou wilt
remember them,  
For bowed down within me is my soul:

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p12"></span>**21.** This I recall to my mind;  
Therefore will I hope.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p13"></span>He prays, then he expresses his
confidence that God would hear his prayer; and “this” refers to the
assurance he felt that God would remember his afflicted state, and on
this ground he entertained hope. In the next verse he states what
confirmed this hope: — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc21011.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p7"></span> So the Targ. and all the versions,
except the Vulg; they read <span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p7.1"></span>תמו. “The
mercies of Jehovah” is the nominative case absolute, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p9"></span>**22.** The mercies of Jehovah, verily
they have no end,  
For his compassion’s never fail.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p10"></span>**23.** Renewed (are they) in the
morning;  
Great is thy faithfulness.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p11"></span>“Renewed” refers to “mercies,” i.e.,
blessings, the fruit of mercy; and God’s mercies have no end, because
his compassion’s ever continue. “In the morning,” that is, after a night
of affliction. If the rendering be made literal, “in the mornings,” the
meaning is the same; they follow the previous nights of trouble.
Blessings, being as it were suspended or withheld during the night, are
again renewed in the morning. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc21011.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iii.iv.xxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p7"></span> There is more authority for the word
for “wait” being in the singular than in the plural, as it is given in
the *Syr.* — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc21011.htm#fr_184) <span
id="iii.iv.xxx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p7"></span> It may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p8"></span>Good *it is* when he hopes and waits
quietly  
For the salvation of Jehovah.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p9"></span>The <span id="iii.iv.xxx-p9.1"></span>ו
may often be rendered when. This verse, the preceding, and following,
begin with “good,” which renders the passage very striking, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p11"></span>**25.** Good is Jehovah to him who
waits for him,  
To the soul who seeks him:

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p12"></span>**26.** Good it is when he hopes and
waits quietly  
For the salvation of Jehovah:

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p13"></span>**27.** Good it is for man  
That he bears the yoke in his youth.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p14"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc21011.htm#fr_185) <span
id="iii.iv.xxxii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p10"></span> It is so found in the *Syr*.; but it
comes to the same thing, if the verb be taken passively. in *Niphal*, —
“Because it (the yoke mentioned before) has been laid on him.”
*Blayney’s* version is, “When it is laid on him.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc21011.htm#fr_186) <span
id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p9"></span> To lay the mouth in the dust, is a
token of entire submission. Agreeably with this, the following words may
be considered as spoken by the individual, —

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p10"></span>He will lay in the dust his mouth
(and say) —  
“It may be there is hope.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p11"></span>It is better to render the verbs
here as they are, in the future tense, as all the versions do; for he
describes what is usually the character of the godly under severe
trials. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc21011.htm#fr_187) <span
id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiv-p8"></span> That is, he will suffer himself to be
filled with reproaches; he will submit to all reproaches. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc21011.htm#fr_188) <span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p7"></span> This verse is connected with <span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p7.1"></span>[La
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p7.1"></span>: “Good is Jehovah to him who waits for
him;” and the reason is given here, “For not reject perpetually (or, for
ever) will the Lord.” “For,” as assigning a reason, is here repeated
three times, in this verse and in the two following verses; and they
seem all to be reasons given for the truth contained in <span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p7.2"></span>[La
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p7.2"></span>,

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p9"></span>**31.** For not reject perpetually  
Will the Lord:

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p10"></span>**32.** For though he afflicts, yet he
will shew compassion  
According to the multitude of his mercies:

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p11"></span>**33.** For he does not depress from
his heart,  
Nor afflict the children of men.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p12"></span>All these particulars explain and
elucidate the truth, that God is good. “From his heart,” does not mean
“willingly,” but at his will, that is, arbitrarily, without reason, but
when constrained by man’s wickedness. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc21011.htm#fr_189) <span
id="iii.iv.xl-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p16"></span> The order is here reverted. It is a
common thing in Scripture to state first the chief thing, the chief good
or evil. Here the greatest evil is mentioned first, the tearing under
foot of such as were already bound, or imprisoned; then the sparing of
the guilty; and thirdly, the withholding of justice to the righteous. To
turn aside or divert judgment, is not to punish the guilty; and to wrong
a person in his cause, is to deny his right. By “the bound,” or
“prisoners of the earth,” or land, *Blayney* understands persons
imprisoned for debt, who were obliged to work as slaves until they
satisfied their creditors. See <span id="iii.iv.xl-p16.1"></span>[Mt
18:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iv.xl-p16.1"></span>. Cruelty to such is referred to in <span
id="iii.iv.xl-p16.2"></span>[Isa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xl-p16.2"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc21011.htm#fr_190) <span
id="iii.iv.xl-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p17"></span> The *Targ*. and the versions differ as
to the import of this clause. The verb *to see*, has been taken to mean
three things, — to know, to approve, and to regard or to notice. The
*Vulgate* takes the first, our version the second, and *Calvin* the
third. The context seems to favor the last meaning especially the
following verses.

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p18"></span>There is a difficulty as to the
antecedent to the pronoun “his, before “feet.” It seems to refer to
“man” in the last verse; for the words are, “the sons (or children) of
man,” not of “men.” The verb <span id="iii.iv.xl-p18.1"></span>ראה, when
followed by <span id="iii.iv.xl-p18.2"></span>ל, means to look on, at,
or simply to see. <span id="iii.iv.xl-p18.3"></span>[Ps
64:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.xl-p18.3"></span>. Then the literal rendering of the passage
would be as follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p19"></span>On the tearing under his feet  
Of all the bound of the land,  
On the diverting of a man’s judgment,  
In the presence of the most High,  
On the wronging of a person in his cause  
The Lord doth not look.

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p20"></span>Or if the “on” be dropped, the last line
may be,

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p21"></span>The Lord doth not see.

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p22"></span>This is manifestly the saying of
unbelieving men, or of those weak in faith, as proved by the next verse,
when rightly rendered. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc21011.htm#fr_191) <span
id="iii.iv.xli-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p16"></span> ‘The construction of these two verses
is variously given. The verb rendered, “It was, or, “It came to pass,”
if in the third person, is feminine, while it is usually and probably
always masculine, when it has this meaning. It may be taken to be here
in the second person. The literal rendering of the verse then would be,
—

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p17"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p18"></span>Who-he-saying (i.e., Who is he who
says,) That thou art Lord, ordering not, (i.e., who dost not order, or
command.)

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p19"></span>Then the following verse contains a
continuation of what the objector said, —

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p20"></span>From the mouth of the Highest  
Cometh not the evil and the good.

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p21"></span>The answer of the Prophet is in <span
id="iii.iv.xli-p21.1"></span>[La
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039)<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p21.1"></span>, in which he intimates that God orders
evil as a punishment for sin.

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p22"></span>The objector’s declaration, that God as
a Lord or Sovereign does not command or order events, and for this
reason, because both evil and good cannot come from him, is a proof that
*not to see* in <span id="iii.iv.xli-p22.1"></span>[La
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#036)<span
id="iii.iv.xli-p22.1"></span>, is not to regard or notice the affairs of
men. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc21011.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iii.iv.xlii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p8"></span> “Murmur” is the Sept. and the Vulg.
The word only occurs here and in <span id="iii.iv.xlii-p8.1"></span>[Nu
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.xlii-p8.1"></span>; and “complain” is the most suitable
rendering in both places, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p10"></span>**39.** Why complain should man,  
Any man alive, for his sin?

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p11"></span>That is, on account of suffering for
his sin. Thus God is justified in ordaining or commanding evil as well
as good, that is, the evil of punishment. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc21011.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iii.iv.xlv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p9"></span> The words literally rendered are very
expressive, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p10"></span>Let us uncover our ways, and search.

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p11"></span>The cover was first to be stripped off,
and then was a search to be made as to the character of their ways. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc21011.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iii.iv.xlvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p8"></span> To give the proper emphasis to the
pronoun, the version ought to be as follows, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p9"></span>We, transgressed have we rebelled.

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p10"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc21011.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iii.iv.xlviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p8"></span> To “cover” is the idea given to the
verb by the *Sept*., the *Vulg*, the *Syr*., and the *Targ*.; but
*Blayney* and some others take it in the sense of fencing in, enclosing,
in allusion to the practice of hunters; and the next verb, which means
to pursue, to chase, favors this meaning, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p9"></span>Thou hast in wrath enclosed and
chased us,  
Thou hast slain and not spared.

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p10"></span>Then the same verb begins the next
verse, —

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p11"></span>Thou hast enclosed thyself in a
cloud,  
That prayer might not pass through.

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p12"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc21011.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iii.iv.xlix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlix-p12"></span> There are circumstances, no doubt,
according to God’s word, under which God does not hear prayer: and this
seems to have been an instance of this kind. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc21011.htm#fr_197) <span
id="iii.iv.liii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p7"></span> Let the verb have a causative sense,
to cause to descend, to bring down, and there will be no difficulty in
the clause; so the Sept. and the *Vulg*., —

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p8"></span>Streams of water does mine eyes bring
down  
For the breach of the daughter of my people,

<span id="iii.iv.liii-p9"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc21011.htm#fr_198) <span
id="iii.iv.lv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p7"></span> The connection of this verse with the
preceding will be more evident from the following version, —

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p9"></span>**49.** Mine eye hath poured down, and it
will not cease,  
With any intermissions,

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p10"></span>**50.** Until Jehovah look down  
And see from heaven.

<span id="iii.iv.lv-p11"></span>To “see” here, as in <span
id="iii.iv.lv-p11.1"></span>[La
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#036)<span
id="iii.iv.lv-p11.1"></span>, means to regard, so as to interfere in the
affairs of men. “with any,” etc., literally, “With no,” etc. But the
English language not admit of the two negatives, though the Welsh will.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc21011.htm#fr_199) <span
id="iii.iv.lvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lvi-p8"></span> The versions and the *Targ*. give the
first meaning, “because of the daughters of my city;” and the last
words, “of my city,” seem to favor it; for had women as a sex been
intended, they would not have been thus designated. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc21011.htm#fr_200) <span
id="iii.iv.lix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p9"></span> The words literally are, —

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p10"></span>Hunting hunted me like a bird  
have mine enemies without a cause.

<span id="iii.iv.lix-p11"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc21011.htm#fr_201) <span
id="iii.iv.lxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p8"></span> Materially correct, no doubt, is this
explanation. We may give this version, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p9"></span>My voice hast thou heard, deafen not
thy ear  
To my sighing, to my cry.

<span id="iii.iv.lxiii-p10"></span>The verb <span
id="iii.iv.lxiii-p10.1"></span>עלם means to veil, and hence to hide. To
veil the eye is, not to look at what is set before it; and to veil the
ear is, to render it deaf to what is said. The Prophet says that God had
heard his voice, for he had prayed; but he further asks God not to turn
a deaf ear to his sighing, or sobbing, as given by the *Vulg*, and to
his cry. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc21011.htm#fr_202) <span
id="iii.iv.lxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p7"></span> There is no necessity, as some have
supposed, of making <span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p7.1"></span>לי in the
former verse, and <span id="iii.iv.lxviii-p7.2"></span>עלי in this
verse, the same. The difference is occasioned by the verbs “thou hast
seen,” and, “thou hast heard.” God had seen the thoughts or purposes
effected “against” him; and he had heard the purposes formed
“concerning” him. He refers first to the purposes carried into effect,
and then, as it is common in the prophets, he refers to the purposes
previously formed respecting him. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc21011.htm#fr_203) <span
id="iii.iv.lxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p7"></span> The best word is muttering, —

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p8"></span>The lips of my adversaries,  
And their muttering concerning me all the day.

<span id="iii.iv.lxix-p9"></span>It isn’t here, as in the previous
verse, “concerning me,” not “against me.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc21011.htm#fr_204) <span
id="iii.iv.lxxii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p7"></span> The word meant “covering, as rendered
by the *Sept*.; the Syr. Has “sorrow,” and the Vulg. “shield,” which has
no meaning. What is no doubt meant is hardness or blindness —

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p8"></span>Give them blindness of heart:  
Thy curse be to them.

<span id="iii.iv.lxxii-p9"></span> — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc21012)
