[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc21014)  [Next](cc21016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>JEREMIAH

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>CHAPTERS 48—52

<span id="iv.i.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 48

<span id="iv.i.i-p3"></span>**1** Concerning Moab: Thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel, — Woe upon Nebo! for it is laid waste,
Ashamed, taken is Kiriathaim; Ashamed is Misgab and dismayed.

<span id="iv.i.i-p4"></span>**2** No more shall be the boasting of Moab
over Heshbon; They have consulted an evil against her, — “Come and let
us cut her off from being a nation.” Also Madmen, thou shalt be cut off,
After thee shall go the sword.

<span id="iv.i.i-p5"></span>**3** The sound of a cry from Horonaim! A
waste and great destruction!

<span id="iv.i.i-p6"></span>**4** Distressed is Moab; A cry have her
little ones made to be heard.

<span id="iv.i.i-p7"></span>**5** For in the ascent to Luhith, With
weeping shall ascend weeping; For in the descent to Horonaim, The
enemies a cry of distress shall hear:

<span id="iv.i.i-p8"></span>**6** Flee ye, save your lives; And ye shall
be as the juniper in the desert,

<span id="iv.i.i-p9"></span>**7** Therefore, because thy confidence Was
in thy works and in thy treasures, Even thou shalt be taken: And go
forth shall Chemosh into captivity, His priests and his princes
together.

<span id="iv.i.i-p10"></span>**8** And come shall a waster to every
city, Nor shall a city escape; Perish also shall the valley, And
destroyed shall be the plain, As Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="iv.i.i-p11"></span>**9** Give wings to Moab, For flying she
shall fly, And her cities shall be a waste, That there will be none to
inhabit them.

<span id="iv.i.i-p12"></span>**10** Cursed is he who doeth the work of
Jehovah deceitfully, And cursed is he who restrains his sword from
blood.

<span id="iv.i.i-p13"></span>**11** Quiet has been Moab from his
childhood, And hath settled on his dregs, And hath not been changed from
vessel to vessel, And to captivity he hath not gone: Therefore remained
has his flavor in him, And his odor was not changed.

<span id="iv.i.i-p14"></span>**12** Therefore, behold, the days are
coming, saith Jehovah, That I will send to him drivers, Who will drive
him out; And his vessels will they empty, And his bottles will they
scatter:

<span id="iv.i.i-p15"></span>**13** And ashamed will be Moab of Chemosh,
As ashamed was the house of Israel of Bethel, The object of their
confidence.

<span id="iv.i.i-p16"></span>**14** How say ye, “We are valiant, and men
strong for war:”

<span id="iv.i.i-p17"></span>**15** Wasted is Moab, and from his cities
they have vanished, And his young men have descended to the slaughter,
Saith the King, Jehovah of hosts is his name.

<span id="iv.i.i-p18"></span>**16** Nigh is the destruction of Moab to
come, And her calamity greatly hastens. Be ye moved for him all who are
around him, And all ye who know his name, say, — “How has the strong
staff been broken, the beautiful rod!”

<span id="iv.i.i-p19"></span>**17** Come down from glory, and dwell in
thirst, Thou inhabitant, the daughter of Dibon!

<span id="iv.i.i-p20"></span>**18** For the waster of Moab comes up
against thee, The destroyer of thy fortresses.

<span id="iv.i.i-p21"></span>**19** On the way stand and look, Thou
inhabitant of Aroer. Ask the fugitive, and her who has escaped, “Say,
what hath happened?”

<span id="iv.i.i-p22"></span>**20** Ashamed is Moab, for he is broken.
Howl ye, and cry out, And proclaim in Arnon that Moab is laid waste.

<span id="iv.i.i-p23"></span>**21** Judgment also shall come on the
plain country, On Holon, and on Jahazah, and on Mephaath,

<span id="iv.i.i-p24"></span>**22** And on Dibon, and on Nebo, and on
Beth-diblathaim,

<span id="iv.i.i-p25"></span>**23** And on Kiriathaim, and on
Beth-gamul, and on Beth-meon,

<span id="iv.i.i-p26"></span>**24** And on Kerioth, and on Bozrah, And
on all the cities of the land of Moab, far and near

<span id="iv.i.i-p27"></span>**25** Cut, off is the horn of Moab, And
his strength is broken, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.i-p28"></span>**26** Make him drunk, for against Jehovah
hath he magnified him- self; And roll himself shall Moab in his own
vomit; And he also shall be a derision;

<span id="iv.i.i-p29"></span>**27** For has not Israel been a derision
to thee? Has he been found among thieves? For since thou hast spoken of
him, thou hast been excited.

<span id="iv.i.i-p30"></span>**28** Leave the cities, and dwell in the
rock, Ye inhabitants of Moab: And they shall be as a dove, Which makes a
nest in the passages, Beyond the mouth of the cleft.

<span id="iv.i.i-p31"></span>**29** Heard have we of the pride of Moab;
Very proud is his haughtiness, And his pride, and the loftiness of his
heart.

<span id="iv.i.i-p32"></span>**30** I know, saith Jehovah, his
insolence, And his lies are not stable they shall not do so

<span id="iv.i.i-p33"></span>**31** Therefore for Moab will I howl, And
to all Moab will I cry aloud; I will mutter to the men of the city of
potsherd.

<span id="iv.i.i-p34"></span>**32** With the weeping of Jazer Will I
weep for thee, vine of Sibmah: Thy shoots have passed over the sea, Even
to the sea came Jazer: On thy summer-fruits and on thy vintages Has
fallen a waster.

<span id="iv.i.i-p35"></span>**33** And taken away shall be joy and
exultation, From the fruitful field, from the land of Moab; And the wine
from the presses will I make to cease: He will not tread with shouting,
shouting, There will not be shouting.

<span id="iv.i.i-p36"></span>**34** At the cry of Heshbon, to Elealeh,
to Jahaz, Will they send forth their voice, From Zoar to Horonaim; An
heifer three years old *is Moab;* Verily even the waters of Nimrim shall
be dried up.

<span id="iv.i.i-p37"></span>**35** And I will cause to cease from Moab,
saith Jehovah, Him who offers on the high place, And who burns incense
to his gods

<span id="iv.i.i-p38"></span>**36** Therefore my heart for Moab Shall
make a sound like pipes, And my heart for the men of the city of
potsherd Like pipes shall make a sound; For the treasures he had made
have perished.

<span id="iv.i.i-p39"></span>**37** For on every head *shall be*
baldness, And to every beard, a shaving, And on all hands, incisions,
and on loins, sackcloth.

<span id="iv.i.i-p40"></span>**38** On all the roofs of Moab, And in all
her streets, shall be mourning altogether; For I will break Moab like a
vessel In which there is no pleasure, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.i-p41"></span>**39** How Moab is broken! they will howl;
How has he turned his back! he is ashamed: Yea, Moab is become a
derision, And a terror to all around.

<span id="iv.i.i-p42"></span>**40** For thus saith Jehovah, — Behold, as
an eagle will he fly, And extend his wings over Moab:

<span id="iv.i.i-p43"></span>**41** Taken are the cities, the
strongholds are seized, And the heart of the men of Moab shall be in
that day As the heart of a woman in distress.

<span id="iv.i.i-p44"></span>**42** And broken shall Moab be, so as not
to be a people, Because against Jehovah hath he exalted himself.

<span id="iv.i.i-p45"></span>**43** Terror, and the pit, and the snare,
*shall be* on thee, Inhabitant of Moab, saith Jehovah:

<span id="iv.i.i-p46"></span>**44** He who flies from terror shall fall
into the pit, And he who ascends from the pit shall be taken in the
snare; For I will bring upon her, upon Moab, The year of their
visitation, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.i-p47"></span>**45** Under the shadow of Heshbon shall
they stand, Who from violence shall flee: But fire shall go forth from
Heshbon, And a flame from the midst of Sihon; And it shall consume the
corner of Moab, And the extremities of the sons of tumult.

<span id="iv.i.i-p48"></span>**46** Woe to thee, Moab! Perished have the
people of Chemosh! For driven have been thy sons into captivity, And thy
daughters into exile.

<span id="iv.i.i-p49"></span>**47** But I will restore the captivity of
Moab In the latter days, saith Jehovah. Thus far the judgment of Moab.

<span id="iv.i.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 49

<span id="iv.i.ii-p3"></span>**1** Concerning the children of Ammon:
Thus saith Jehovah, — Hath Israel no children? hath he no heir? Why doth
their king inherit Gad, And his people dwell in its cities?

<span id="iv.i.ii-p4"></span>**2** Therefore, behold, the days are
coming, saith Jehovah, That I will cause to be heard the trumpet of war
At Rabbah, of the children of Ammon; And she shall be a heap of
desolation, And her daughters shall be burned with fire, And possess his
possessors shall Israel, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p5"></span>**3** Howl thou, Heshbon, for laid waste is
Ai; Cry aloud, ye daughters of Rabbah. Gird on sackcloth, lament, Run
here and there by the fences; For their king, into captivity is he gone,
And his priests and his princes with him.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p6"></span>**4** Why gloriest thou in thy deep
valleys? Flown down has thy valley, rebellious daughter! Who trusted in
her hidden places, Saying, Who can come to me?

<span id="iv.i.ii-p7"></span>**5** Behold, I will bring on thee terror,
saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, from all around thee; And ye shall be
driven out, each one before him, And there will be none to gather the
dispersed.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p8"></span>**6** But I will afterwards restore The
captivity of the children of Ammon, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p9"></span>**7** Concerning Edom: Thus saith Jehovah
of hosts, — Is there not wisdom any more in Teman? Has counsel perished
from the intelligent? Overflowing has been their wisdom!

<span id="iv.i.ii-p10"></span>**8** Flee, ye inhabitants of Dedan, Who
have turned *and* made deep *your* dwelling; For the ruin of Esau will I
bring on him, At the time of his visitation.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p11"></span>**9** If vintagers had come to thee, Would
they not have left some grapes? If thieves in the night, would they not
have destroyed What would suffice them?

<span id="iv.i.ii-p12"></span>**10** But I will uncover Esau, I will
disclose his hidden things, So that he cannot be concealed: Plundered
shall be his seed, And his brethren and his neighbors; And he shall be
no more.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p13"></span>**11** Leave thy orphans, I will nourish
them; And thy widows, let them trust in me.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p14"></span>**12** For thus saith Jehovah, — Behold,
those to whom it was not their judgment To drink the cup, shall surely
drink, And shalt thou be exempted? Thou shalt not be exempted, For
drinking thou shalt drink it.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p15"></span>**13** For I have by myself sworn, saith
Jehovah, That a waste, a reproach, a desert, And a curse, shall Bozrah
become; And all her cities shall be perpetual wastes.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p16"></span>**14** A hearing have we heard from
Jehovah, And a messenger to the nations has been sent, — “Be ye gathered
and come against her, And rise ye up to the battle.”

<span id="iv.i.ii-p17"></span>**15** For behold, small made I thee among
the nations, Contemptible among men:

<span id="iv.i.ii-p18"></span>**16** Deceived thee has thy terror, the
pride of thine heart; Thou who dwellest in the fissures of rocks, Who
occupiest the heights of mountains: Though thou raisest high, as an
eagle, thy nest, Thence will I draw thee down, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p19"></span>**17** And Edom shall become a waste;
Every one passing by her shall be astonished, And shall hiss on account
of all her strokes.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p20"></span>**18** As in the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah And of their neighboring cities, saith Jehovah, Dwell there
shall no man, Nor shall a son of man abide there.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p21"></span>**19** Behold, as a lion from the swelling
of Jordan, Will he ascend to the habitation of strength: After having
made him to rest, I will make him flee from her; And who is the chosen
one whom I shall set over her? For who is as I am? And who will protest
against me? And who is the shepherd that before me will stand?

<span id="iv.i.ii-p22"></span>**20** Therefore, hear ye the counsel of
Jehovah, Which he hath counseled against Edom, And his thoughts which he
hath thought Against the inhabitants of Teman; Surely draw them forth
shall the least of the flock, Surely destroyed over them shall be their
dwellings.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p23"></span>**21** At the sound of their fall, tremble
shall the earth, The cry of their voice shall at the Red Sea be heard.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p24"></span>**22** Behold, as an eagle will he ascend
and fly, And will spread his wings over Bozrah; And the heart of the
valiant men of Edom in that day Shall be like the heart of a sorrowful
woman.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p25"></span>**23** Concerning Damascus: Ashamed is
Hamath and Arpad; Because they heard a bad report, they melt away, Like
a turbulent sea which cannot rest.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p26"></span>**24** Weakened is Damascus, she turns to
flight, Terror hath laid hold on her, Anguish and pangs have seized her,
As a woman in travail.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p27"></span>**25** How is not forsaken the city of
praise — The city of my joy?

<span id="iv.i.ii-p28"></span>**26** Yet fall shall her young men in her
streets, And all the men of war shall be cut off In that day, saith
Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p29"></span>**27** For I will kindle a fire in the
wall of Damascus, And it shall consume the palaces of Ben-hadad.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p30"></span>**28** Concerning Kedar, and the kingdoms
of Hazor, which Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, had smitten: Thus
saith Jehovah, — Arise ye, ascend against Kedar, And destroy the
children of the east.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p31"></span>**29** Their tents and their flocks shall
they take away, And their curtains and all their vessels; Their camels
also shall they take to themselves, And they shall cry to them, “Terror
*is* on every side.”

<span id="iv.i.ii-p32"></span>**30** Flee ye, depart far away, (Though
deep have they made to dwell The inhabitants of Hazor, saith Jehovah;)
For consulted against you hath Nebuchadnezzar, The king of Babylon, a
counsel, And he hath purposed against you a purpose.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p33"></span>**31** Arise ye, ascend against a secure
nation, That dwelleth in confidence, saith Jehovah; It hath neither
gates nor bars, it dwelleth alone.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p34"></span>**32** And their camels shall became a
prey, And the abundance of their cattle a plunder; And I will scatter
them to every wind, *Even* the utmost corners; And from all the sides
thereof Will I bring their destruction, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p35"></span>**33** And Hazor shall be the habitation
of dragons, A perpetual desolation; Dwell there shall no man, Nor shall
a son of man abide in her.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p36"></span>**34** The word which came to Jeremiah,
the prophet, against Elam, at the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah,
the king of Judah, saying:

<span id="iv.i.ii-p37"></span>**35** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, The chief part of their strength;

<span id="iv.i.ii-p38"></span>**36** And I will bring against Elam four
winds From the four quarters of the heavens; And I will scatter them to
these four winds, And there shall not be a nation To which some
fugitives from Elam shall not come.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p39"></span>**37** For I will terrify Elam before
their enemies, And before those who seek their life; And I will bring on
them the evil Of the indignation of my wrath, saith Jehovah; And I will
send after them the sword Until I shall have consumed them;

<span id="iv.i.ii-p40"></span>**38** And I will erect my throne in Elam,
And destroy thence the king and the princes, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p41"></span>**39** But it shall be in the latter days
That I will restore the captivity of Elam, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 50

<span id="iv.i.iii-p3"></span>**1** The word which Jehovah spoke
concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, by Jeremiah
the prophet:

<span id="iv.i.iii-p4"></span>**2** Tell ye among the nations, proclaim,
Raise up also a banner, proclaim, conceal not; Say ye, “Taken is
Babylon, Confounded is Bel, broken is Merodach, Confounded are her
images, broken are her idols.”

<span id="iv.i.iii-p5"></span>**3** For ascend against her shall a
nation from the north, Which will turn her land to a waste, So that
there will be no dweller in it, man or beast; They have fled, they have
departed.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p6"></span>**4** In those days and at that time,
saith Jehovah, Come shall the children of Israel And the children of
Judah together; Going and weeping they shall come, And Jehovah their God
will they seek.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p7"></span>**5** To Sion will they ask the way,
hither their faces, — “Come ye and let us join ourselves to Jehovah, By
a perpetual covenant, not to be forgotten.”

<span id="iv.i.iii-p8"></span>**6** A lost sheep have been my people;
Their pastors have made them to wander; On the mountains they strayed,
From mountain to hill they went, They forgot the place of their lying
down.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p9"></span>**7** All who found them devoured them,
And their adversaries said, “We sin not, Because they have sinned
against Jehovah, The habitation of justice, And the hope of their
fathers, *even* Jehovah.”

<span id="iv.i.iii-p10"></span>**8** Flee ye from the midst of Babylon,
And from Chaldea go forth, And be as he-goats before the flock.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p11"></span>**9** For, behold, I will rouse and bring
against Babylon, An assembly of great nations from the land of the
north, And they shall set in order against her; Thence taken will she
be; Their arrows, like those of a skillful valiant man, They shall not
return in vain.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p12"></span>**10** And Chaldea shall be a prey, And
all who plunder her shall be satiated, saith Jehovah,

<span id="iv.i.iii-p13"></span>**11** Surely ye rejoiced and exulted
When ye plundered mine heritage; Ye became fat as a heifer well fed, And
neighed like strong horses.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p14"></span>**12** Ashamed greatly shall be your
mother, Blush shall she who bare you; Behold, the last of nations *shall
she be,* A desert, a waste, a solitude!

<span id="iv.i.iii-p15"></span>**13** Because of the indignation of
Jehovah She shall not be inhabited, And shall be an entire waste; All
who pass by Babylon shall be astonished, And shall hiss for all her
strokes.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p16"></span>**14** Set in order against Babylon
around; All ye who bend the bow, Shoot at her, spare not the arrows, For
against Jehovah hath she sinned.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p17"></span>**15** Cry ye aloud against her around;
She hath given her hand, Fallen have her foundations, Demolished have
been her walls, Because it is the vengeance of Jehovah; Vengeance take
ye on her; as she has done, do to her.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p18"></span>**16** Cut off the sower from Babylon,
And him who handles the sickle in the time of harvest: From the face of
the wasting sword Every one shall look to his own people, Every one to
his own land shall flee.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p19"></span>**17** A scattered flock hath Israel
been, Lions have driven him out; The first who devoured him was the king
of Assyria, And this last hath broken his bones, *Even* Nebuchadnezzar,
the king of Babylon.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p20"></span>**18** Therefore thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel — Behold, I will visit the king of Babylon and
his land, As I visited the king of Assyria:

<span id="iv.i.iii-p21"></span>**19** And I will restore Israel to his
folds, And he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, And on mount Ephraim and
Gilead; And satisfied shall be his soul.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p22"></span>**20** In those days and at that time,
saith Jehovah, Sought will be the iniquity of Israel, and there will be
none; And the sin of Judah, and it shall not be found: For I will pardon
those whom I shall reserve.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p23"></span>**21** On the land of the exasperating
ascend, And against the inhabitants of visitation, Slay and destroy
after them, saith Jehovah; And do all that I have commanded thee.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p24"></span>**22** A sound of battle in the land and
a great ruin!

<span id="iv.i.iii-p25"></span>**23** Now has the hammer of the whole
earth Been cut off and broken in pieces! How has Babylon become a waste
among the nations!

<span id="iv.i.iii-p26"></span>**24** I set a snare for thee, therefore
taken wert thou, Babylon, though thou knewest not: Thou wept found, and
hence taken, Because against Jehovah thou didst contend.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p27"></span>**25** Opened hath Jehovah his treasure,
And brought forth the instruments of his wrath; For this is the work of
the Lord, the Jehovah of hosts, In the land of the Chaldeans.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p28"></span>**26** Come ye against her from the
extremity, Open her repositories, tread her as heaps, Destroy her
wholly, that there may be to her no remnant.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p29"></span>**27** Slay all her bullocks, Let them
descend to the slaughter Woe to them, for their day is come, The time of
their visitation.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p30"></span>**28** The voice of these who flee and
escape From the land of Babylon! To announce in Sion the vengeance of
Jehovah our God, The vengeance of his temple.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p31"></span>**29** Summon against Babylon the mighty,
All who bend the bow; Besiege her around, that there may be no escape;
Render to her according to her work, According to all she has done, do
ye to her; For against Jehovah has she acted proudly, Against the Holy
One of Israel.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p32"></span>**30** Therefore fall shall her young men
in her streets, And all her men of war shall be destroyed In that day,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p33"></span>**31** Behold, I am against thee, the
proud one, Saith the Lord, the Jehovah of hosts; For come is thy day,
the time of thy visitation.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p34"></span>**32** And stumble shall the proud and
fall, And there will be no one to raise him up; And I will kindle a fire
in his cities, And it shall consume all round him.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p35"></span>**33** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
Oppressed have been the children of Israel And the children of Judah
together; And all who led them captives have prevailed against them,
They have refused to let them go.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p36"></span>**34** Their Redeemer is strong, Jehovah
of hosts is his name, Their cause pleading he will plead, So as to
destroy the land, And to make to tremble the inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p37"></span>**35** A sword on the Chaldeans, saith
Jehovah! And on all the inhabitants of Babylon! And on all her princes
and on her wise men!

<span id="iv.i.iii-p38"></span>**36** A sword on her diviners! and they
shall become foolish; A sword on her valiant men! and they shall be
terrified;

<span id="iv.i.iii-p39"></span>**37** A sword on her horses! and on her
chariots! And on her multitude, in the midst of her! They shall be as
women; A sword on her treasures! and they shall be plundered;

<span id="iv.i.iii-p40"></span>**38** A drought on her waters! and they
shall be dried up: For it is the land of carved images, And in idols
they glory.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p41"></span>**39** Therefore dwell there shall wild
birds with wild beasts, And dwell there shall the daughters of
ostriches; And it shall not be inhabited any more for ever; It shall not
be an habitation to all generations.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p42"></span>**40** As in God’s overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah, And of their neighboring cities, saith Jehovah, Dwell there
shall no man, For shall a son of man abide there.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p43"></span>**41** Behold, a people cometh from the
north, Even a great nation and many kings Shall be roused from the sides
of the earth.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p44"></span>**42** On the bow and the shield shall
they lay hold, Cruel shall they be, and will shew no mercy; Their voice
like the sea shall roar, And on horses shall they ride, Prepared as a
man for battle Against thee, daughter of Babylon.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p45"></span>**43** Heard has the king of Babylon a
report of them, And feeble became his hands; Anxiety laid hold on him,
*And* anguish, like a woman in travail.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p46"></span>**44** Behold, as a lion from the
swelling of Jordan Will he ascend to the strong habitation: After having
made him to rest, I will make him flee from her; And who is the chosen
one whom I shall set over her? For who is as I am? And who will protest
against me? And who is the shepherd that before me will stand?

<span id="iv.i.iii-p47"></span>**45** Therefore hear ye the counsel of
Jehovah, Which he hath counseled against Babylon; And his thoughts which
he has thought Against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely draw them forth
shall the least of the flock, Surely destroyed over them shall be their
dwellings.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p48"></span>**46** At the sound of Babylon being
taken, tremble shall the earth, And a cry among the nations shall be
heard.

<span id="iv.i.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 51

<span id="iv.i.iv-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah, — Behold, I will
raise a destroying wind against Babylon, And against boasters of wisdom,
my adversaries;

<span id="iv.i.iv-p4"></span>**2** And I will send against Babylon
winnowers, And they shall winnow her and empty her land; For they shall
be against her around in the day of evil.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p5"></span>**3** As to him who bends the bow, And him
who raises himself up in his coat of mail, — Spare ye not her young men,
Destroy all her army

<span id="iv.i.iv-p6"></span>**4** And fall shall they wounded, in her
land, And pierced through in her streets.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p7"></span>**5** For not widowed is Israel, nor Judah
By his God, by Jehovah of hosts: But rather their land is filled with
sin On account of the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p8"></span>**6** Flee ye from the midst of Babylon,
And save ye, every one his life, Lest ye perish in her iniquity; For it
is the time of Jehovah’s vengeance, A reward will he render to her

<span id="iv.i.iv-p9"></span>**7** A golden cup has Babylon been In
Jehovah’s hand, inebriating the whole earth; From her wine have the
nations drunk, Therefore have the nations become mad.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p10"></span>**8** Suddenly has Babylon fallen, and is
broken; Howl ye for her, take rosin for her wound, It may be that she
can be healed!

<span id="iv.i.iv-p11"></span>**9** We have tried to heal Babylon, But
she was not healed; Leave her, and let us depart, Every one to his own
land; For to the heavens has reached her judgment And has risen up to
the clouds.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p12"></span>**10** Brought forth has Jehovah our
righteousness; Come ye and let us declare in Sion The work of Jehovah
our God.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p13"></span>**11** Polish the arrows, prepare the
shields, Rouse will Jehovah the spirit of the kings of Media; For as to
Babylon his thought is to destroy her. For it is Jehovah’s vengeance,
the vengeance of his temple.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p14"></span>**12** On the wails of Babylon raise the
standard, Increase the watch, set the watchmen, Set in order the
ambushes: For as Jehovah has thought, so will he do What he hath spoken
concerning the inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p15"></span>**13** Thou that dwellest among great
waters, Who aboundest in treasures, Come is thine end, the measure of
thy cupidity.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p16"></span>**14** Sworn hath Jehovah by himself, —
Surely I will fill thee with men as with locusts, Who will shout over
thee with the vintage-shouting, —

<span id="iv.i.iv-p17"></span>**15** *(Even)* he who made the earth by
his power, Who hath constituted the world by his wisdom, And by his
knowledge extended the heavens,

<span id="iv.i.iv-p18"></span>**16** At whose voice there is abundance
of waters in the heavens, Who raises vapors from the extremity of the
earth, Who makes the lightnings and the rain, And brings out the wind
from his treasures.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p19"></span>**17** Infatuated is every man become by
his knowledge, Put to shame shall be every founder by the graven image,
For a lie is the molten image, And there is no breath in them:

<span id="iv.i.iv-p20"></span>**18** Vanity are they, the work of
illusions; At the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p21"></span>**19** Not like these is the portion of
Jacob; For the former of all things is He, And the rod of his
inheritance is Israel; Jehovah of hosts is his name.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p22"></span>**20** A hammer hast thou been to me,
weapons of war; And by thee have I broken nations in pieces, And by thee
destroyed kingdoms:

<span id="iv.i.iv-p23"></span>**21** Yea, by thee have I broken in
pieces The horses and their riders, And by thee have I broken in pieces
The chariots and their riders2

<span id="iv.i.iv-p24"></span>**22** And by thee have I broken in pieces
Men and women, And by thee have I broken in pieces Old men and children,
And by thee have I broken in pieces Young men and maidens,

<span id="iv.i.iv-p25"></span>**23** And by thee have I broken in pieces
The shepherds and their flocks, And by thee have I broken in pieces The
husbandmen and their yokes of oxen, And by thee have I broken in pieces
The captains and the rulers.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p26"></span>**24** But I will render to Babylon And to
all the inhabitants of Chaldea, All the evils which they have done in
Sion, Before your eyes, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p27"></span>**25** Behold, I am against thee, O
destroying mountain, saith Jehovah, Which destroyest all the earth; And
I will extend my hand over thee, And will roll thee down from the rocks,
And will make thee a burnt mountain:

<span id="iv.i.iv-p28"></span>**26** And they shall not take of thee a
stone for a corner, Nor a stone for foundations; For perpetual wastes
shalt thou be, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p29"></span>**27** Raise a banner in the land, Sound a
trumpet among the nations, Prepare the nations against her, Assemble
against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Of Minni and of Ashkenaz; Set up
against her a leader, Bring forth the horse as the horrible locust;

<span id="iv.i.iv-p30"></span>**28** Prepare against her the nations,
The kings of Media, her captains and her princes, And all the land of
its dominion.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p31"></span>**29** And tremble shall the land and be
in pain, For confirmed as to Babylon shall be the thoughts of Jehovah:
To set the land of Babylon a waste, So as to have no inhabitant.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p32"></span>**30** Ceased have the valiant men of
Babylon to fight, They sat down in their fortresses; Fail did their
valor, they became women, Burnt were her dwellings, broken her bars.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p33"></span>**31** A runner to meet a runner ran, And
a messenger to meet a messenger, To announce to the king of Babylon That
taken was the city at its extremity;

<span id="iv.i.iv-p34"></span>**32** And the fords were taken, And the
pools were burnt with fire, And the men of war were broken in pieces.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p35"></span>**33** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel, — The daughter of Babylon *shall be* like a
threshing-floor, *(Come will)* the time of treading her; Yet a little
while and come will her harvest.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p36"></span>**34** Devoured me, broken me in pieces,
Hath Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon; He hath set me an empty
vessel, He hath swallowed me like a dragon, He hath filled his belly
with my delicacies, He hath cast me off.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p37"></span>**35** My plunder and my flesh be on
Babylon, Shall the inhabitant of Sion say; My blood be on the
inhabitants of Chaldea, Shall Jerusalem say.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p38"></span>**36** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, —
Behold, I will plead thy cause, And avenge thy vengeance, For I will
make dry her sea, And will dry up her fountain:

<span id="iv.i.iv-p39"></span>**37** And Babylon shall become heaps An
habitation of dragons, A wonder and a hissing, without an inhabitant.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p40"></span>**38** They will roar as lions, They will
roar as whelps of lions.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p41"></span>**39** In their heat will I make their
feasts, And make them drunk, that they may exult And sleep a perpetual
sleep, And not awake, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p42"></span>**40** I will bring them as lambs to the
slaughter, As rams and he-goats.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p43"></span>**41** How has Sheshach been taken! And
captured, the praise of the whole land! How has Babylon become a waste
among nations!

<span id="iv.i.iv-p44"></span>**42** Come up over Babylon has the sea,
With the multitude of its waves is she covered.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p45"></span>**43** Her cities shall be a waste, And a
land of desert, and a land of drought, Pass through it shall no man, And
dwell in it shall no son of man.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p46"></span>**44** And I will visit Bel in Babylon;
And I will draw what he hath swallowed out of his month: And flow to him
together shall nations no more: Even the wall of Babylon hath fallen.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p47"></span>**45** Go out from the midst of her, my
people, And save ye, every one his life, From the indignation of
Jehovah’s wrath.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p48"></span>**46** And let not faint be your heart,
And fear ye not the rumor heard in the land; Come in one year shall a
rumor, And afterwards in another year, a rumor; — And violence *shall
be* in the land, And a ruler after a ruler.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p49"></span>**47** Therefore, behold, the days are
coming, That I will visit the images of Babylon; And her whole land
shall be ashamed, And all her slain, they shall fall in the midst of
her.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p50"></span>**48** And rejoice over Babylon shall
heaven and earth, And all the things that are in them; When from the
north shall come to her Destroyers, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p51"></span>**49** As Babylon made to fall the slain
of Israel, So for Babylon they shall fall, the slain of all the land.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p52"></span>**50** Ye who have escaped from the sword,
Depart, stand not still; From afar remember Jehovah, And let Jerusalem
come to your minds.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p53"></span>**51** We are ashamed, because we have
heard reproach; Shame hath covered our faces, because strangers came
Into the sanctuaries of the house of Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p54"></span>**52** Therefore, behold, the days are
coming, saith Jehovah, That I will visit her graven images, And in the
whole land groan shall the wounded.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p55"></span>**53** Though Babylon ascended into
heaven, And though in the height she fortified her strength, From me
would come to her wasters, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p56"></span>**54** The voice of a cry from Babylon!
And a great crashing from the land of the Chaldeans!

<span id="iv.i.iv-p57"></span>**55** For Jehovah will lay waste Babylon,
And will destroy from her the voice of boasting: And sound shall their
waves like great waters, Sent forth shall be the sound of their voice.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p58"></span>**56** For come to her, to Babylon, is a
waster, And taken are her valiant men, Broken is their bow; For the God
of retributions is Jehovah, Recompensing he will recompense.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p59"></span>**57** And I will inebriate her princes
and her wise men, And her captains, and her rulers, and her valiant men:
And they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, And shall not awake, saith the
King, Whose name is Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p60"></span>**58** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — The
wall of Babylon, *though* wide, Shall *yet* surely be demolished; And
her gates, *though* high, Shall *yet* be consumed with fire: Thus
labored have the people for nothing, And the nations for the fire, and
wearied themselves.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p61"></span>**59** The word which Jeremiah the prophet
commanded Seraiah, the son of Neraiah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went
for Zedekiah, the king of Judah, to Babylon, in the fourth year of

<span id="iv.i.iv-p62"></span>**60** his reign; and Seraiah was a quiet
prince: and Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come on
Babylon, even all

<span id="iv.i.iv-p63"></span>**61** These words which had been written
against Babylon; and Jeremiah said to Seraiah, — “When thou comest to
Babylon and hast seen it, then read

<span id="iv.i.iv-p64"></span>**62** All these words, and say, — ‘O
Jehovah, thou hast spoken against this place, to destroy it, so that
there should be no inhabitant in it, neither man nor beast, but that it
shall become perpetual desolations.’

<span id="iv.i.iv-p65"></span>**63** And it shall be, when thou hast
made an end of reading this book, that thou shalt tie a stone

<span id="iv.i.iv-p66"></span>**64** To it, and cast it into the midst
of the Euphrates, and shalt say, — ‘Thus sink shall Babylon, and shall
not rise from the evil which I shall bring on her, though they may weary
themselves.’ Thus far the words of Jeremiah.

<span id="iv.i.v"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 52

<span id="iv.i.v-p3"></span>**1** Twenty-one years old was Zedekiah when
he began to reign, and eleven years reigned he in Jerusalem; and the
name of his mother was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

<span id="iv.i.v-p4"></span>**2** And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, according to all the things which Jehoiakim had done:

<span id="iv.i.v-p5"></span>**3** And on account of the indignation of
Jehovah against Jerusalem and Judah, until he cast them away from his
presence, Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

<span id="iv.i.v-p6"></span>**4** And it was in the ninth year of his
reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth of the month, that
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, came, he and all his army, against
Jerusalem, and encamped against it, and built against it a fortress on
every side.

<span id="iv.i.v-p7"></span>**5** And the city was besieged till the
eleventh year of Zedekiah.

<span id="iv.i.v-p8"></span>**6** In the fourth month, on the ninth of
the month, the famine prevailed in the city, so that there was no bread
for the people of the land:

<span id="iv.i.v-p9"></span>**7** And the city was broken in upon, and
all the men of war fled, and went out of the city by night, by the way
of the gate, between two walls, which were near the king’s garden; (and
the Chaldeans were near the city around:) and they went out by the way
of the desert.

<span id="iv.i.v-p10"></span>**8** And the army of the Chaldeans pursued
the king, and they took Zedekiah in the deserts of Jericho; for all his
army were scattered from him.

<span id="iv.i.v-p11"></span>**9** They then took the king, and brought
him to the king of Babylon in Riblah, to the land of Hamath; who
pronounced judgment upon him.

<span id="iv.i.v-p12"></span>**10** And the king of Babylon slew the
sons of Zedekiah before his eyes; and all the princes of Judah he also
slew in Riblah:

<span id="iv.i.v-p13"></span>**11** But he blinded the eyes of Zedekiah,
and bound him with chains; And the king of Babylon brought him to
Babylon, and put him in prison till the day in which he died.

<span id="iv.i.v-p14"></span>**12** Now, in the fifth month, in the
tenth day of the month, (that year was the nineteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon,) Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the
soldiers, who stood before the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem,

<span id="iv.i.v-p15"></span>**13** And burnt the house of Jehovah and
the house of the king, and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great
house he burnt with fire:

<span id="iv.i.v-p16"></span>**14** And all the walls of Jerusalem
around they destroyed, even the whole army of the Chaldeans, which was
with the prince of the soldiers.

<span id="iv.i.v-p17"></span>**15** And some of the poor of the people
and the rest of the people who had remained in the city, and the
fugitives who had fled over to the king of Babylon, and the remainder of
the multitude, Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the soldiers, led away
captive.

<span id="iv.i.v-p18"></span>**16** But some of the poor of the land,
Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the soldiers, left to be vinedressers and
husbandmen.

<span id="iv.i.v-p19"></span>**17** And the brass pillars which were in
the house of Jehovah, and the bases, and the brazen sea which was in the
house of Jehovah, the Chaldeans broke in pieces, and carried away all
their brass to Babylon.

<span id="iv.i.v-p20"></span>**18** The pots also, and the shovels and
the snuffers and the basons and the spoons, and all the vessels of
brass, with which they ministered, they took away.

<span id="iv.i.v-p21"></span>**19** And the dishes and the pans and the
basons and the pots and the candlesticks and the spoons and the bowls,
some of which were all of gold and some were all of silver, the prince
of the soldiers took away.

<span id="iv.i.v-p22"></span>**20** The two pillars, the one sea, and
the twelve oxen of brass, which were under the bases which Solomon had
made in the house of Jehovah, there was no weight as to the brass of all
these vessels.

<span id="iv.i.v-p23"></span>**21** As to the pillars, the height of
each pillar was eighteen cubits, and a thread of twelve cubits
surrounded it, and its thickness was four fingers; it was hollow.

<span id="iv.i.v-p24"></span>**22** And the chapiter which was over it
was brass, and the height of one chapiter was five cubits, and net-work
and pomegranates were on the chapiter around; all these were of brass;
and like these were the second pillar and the pomegranates.

<span id="iv.i.v-p25"></span>**23** And there were pomegranates,
ninety-six on one side; all the pomegranates on the net-work around were
one hundred.

<span id="iv.i.v-p26"></span>**24** The prince of the soldiers took away
also Seraiah, the chief priest, and Zephaniah, the second priest, and
the three keepers of the door:

<span id="iv.i.v-p27"></span>**25** And from the city he took away one
eunuch, who had been set over the men of war: and seven men of those who
attended the king, who were found in the city, and a scribe, the chief
of the army, who gathered to the army the people of the land, and sixty
men of the people of the land, who were found in the midst of the city.

<span id="iv.i.v-p28"></span>**26** And Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the
soldiers, took them away and brought them to the king of Babylon in
Riblah:

<span id="iv.i.v-p29"></span>**27** And the king of Babylon smote them
and slew them in Riblah, in the land of Hamath; and he removed Judah
from his own land.

<span id="iv.i.v-p30"></span>**28** These are the people whom
Nebuchadnezzar carried away captive: in the seventh year, three thousand
and twenty-three Jews;

<span id="iv.i.v-p31"></span>**29** In the eighteenth of Nebuchadnezzar,
he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred and thirty-two
souls;

<span id="iv.i.v-p32"></span>**30** In the three-and-twentieth year of
Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the soldiers, carried away
Jews, seven hundred and forty-five souls; — all the souls were four
thousand and six hundred.

<span id="iv.i.v-p33"></span>**31** And it came to pass in the
thirty-seventh year of Jehoiachin, the king of Judah, in the twelfth
month, on the twenty-fifth of the month, that Evil-merodach, the king of
Babylon, in the first year of his reign, lifted up the head of
Jehoiachin, the king of Judah, and brought him forth from prison;

<span id="iv.i.v-p34"></span>**32** And he spake kindly to him, and set
his throne above the thrones of the kings, who were with him in Babylon;

<span id="iv.i.v-p35"></span>**33** And he changed his prison garments,
and ate bread before him always, all the days of his life.

<span id="iv.i.v-p36"></span>**34** And his portion, a perpetual portion
was given him by the king of Babylon every day, until the day he died,
all the days of his life.

<span id="iv.i.v-p37"></span>PRAISE TO GOD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations 1-5](cc21016)
