[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc21004)  [Next](cc21006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 51

<span id="ii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will
raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst of
them that rise up against me, a destroying wind;

<span id="ii.iv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Sic dicit Jehova, Ecce, ego excitans
contra Babylonem, et contra habitatores cordis qui insurgunt contra me,
venturn corrumpentem *(vel,* dissipantem.)

<span id="ii.iv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.i-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p6"></span>He proceeds with the same subject. Jeremiah
seems, indeed, to have used more words than necessary; but we have
stated the reason why he dwelt at large on a matter so clear: His object
was not only to teach, for this he might have done in a few words, and
have thus included all that we have hitherto seen and shall find in the
whole of this chapter; but as it was an event hardly credible, it was
necessary to illustrate the prophecy respecting it with many figures,
and to inculcate with many repetitions what had been already said, and
also to confirm by many reasons what no one hardly admitted.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p7"></span>He then says, *Behold, I will,* etc. God is
made the speaker, that the word might have more force and power.
*Behold,* he says, *I will raise up a destroying wind* against the
Chaldeans. The similitude of wind is very appropriate, for God thus
briefly reminded them how easy it was for him to destroy the whole world
even by a single blast. The wind is, indeed, indirectly set in
opposition to instruments of war; for when any one seeks to overcome an
enemy, he collects many and strong forces, and procures auxiliaries on
every side; in short, he will not dare to attempt anything without
making every possible preparation. As, then, men dare not attack their
enemies without making strenuous efforts, God here extols his own power,
because it is enough for him to raise up a *wind.* We now, then,
perceive the design of the similitude, when he says, that he would raise
up a wind that would destroy or scatter the Chaldeans.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p8"></span>In the following words there is an
obscurity; literally, they are, *the inhabitants of the heart;* for as
the word <span id="ii.iv.i-p8.1"></span>ישבי**,** *ishebi,* is in
construction, another word necessarily follows it, as for instance, the
country of the Chaldeans. But the relative, <span
id="ii.iv.i-p8.2"></span>ה, *He,* referring to Babylon, ought to have
been put down. Yet as the words occur, we are compelled to read, *and
against the inhabitants of the heart* Some will have the relative, <span
id="ii.iv.i-p8.3"></span>אשר, *asher,* to be understood, but that is
harsh, for it is an unnatural mode of speaking. They, however, give this
rendering of <span id="ii.iv.i-p8.4"></span>אשר לב*, asher leb,* “those
who in heart rose up against me.” But what if we read the words
*inhabitants of the heart* metaphorically, as meaning those who gloried
in their own wisdom? for the Babylonians, as it is well known, thought
other men dull and foolish, and were so pleased with their own
astuteness, as though they were fortified by inclosures on every side.
They dwelt then in their own heart, that is, they thought themselves
well fortified around through their own wisdom. In this sense the
Prophet seems to call the Babylonians *the inhabitants of the heart*
 <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)

<span id="ii.iv.i-p12"></span>He adds, at the same time, that they
*rose, up against God,* even because they had cruelly treated his
people, and nearly destroyed them. And we know that God undertook the
cause of his Church, and therefore complained that war was made on him
by the ungodly, whenever they molested the faithful. It is also at the
same time generally true, that all who arrogate to themselves wisdom
rise up against God, because they rob God of the honor due to him. But
it ought properly to be referred to the union which exists between God
and his Church, when he charges the Chaldeans, that they *rose up*
against him. It follows,—

<span id="ii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p2"></span>**2**. And will send unto Babylon fanners,
that shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble
they shall be against her round about.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p3"></span>**2**. Et mittam contra Babylonem
ventilatores, qui ventilent ipsam *(ad verbum,* et ventilabunt ipsam,)
et exinanient terram ejus *(vel,* spoliabunt; <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>בקק *enim significat proprie exinanire,
evacuare, ut vulgo dicunt; et significat etiam spoliare et proedari;*
qui *ergo* exinanient terram;) quia erunt contra eam in circuitu in die
mali *(hoc est,* in die adversa.)

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p6"></span>Here he explains himself more clearly,
without the metaphor he had used. He no longer uses the similitude of
wind when he declares that he would send *fanners* At the same time some
take <span id="ii.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>זארים, *zarim,* in the sense of
aliens, who would banish her; but this would be harsh. I then doubt not
but that the Prophet alludes to the wind before mentioned. He does not
indeed continue that metaphor; but yet what he says corresponds with it.
Instead of wind he now mentions fanners, or winnowers; but this cannot
be understood except of enemies. A clearer explanation is still found in
the word *empty,* after having said that the Persians and the Medes
would *fan* or winnow Babylon. He compares her, no doubt, to chaff. As
then the chaff, when ventilated, falls on the ground, so he says a
similar thing would happen to the Babylonians.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p7"></span>But he adds, *And shall make empty her
land,* that is, the land of Babylon. He says that the whole country
would be so plundered, that nothing would be left remaining. And he
confirms this declaration, *because they shall be,* he says, *around
her.* By this expression he intimates that there would be no escape for
the Chaldeans.

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p8"></span>It often happens that men stealthily
escape, when pressed by their enemies; for though enemies may watch all
passages, yet they often do not find out all hiding-places. But the
Prophet says, that their enemies would so surround them, that the
Chaldeans would not be able to take with them anything which they might
save from their enemies’ hands. He adds, *in the day of evil.* By this
phrase he intimates again, that the Chaldeans were already devoted by
God to destruction. It is, then, the same thing as though he had said,
that as soon as her enemies came, it would be all over with Babylon and
the whole nation, — how so? for it would be the day of her utter ruin.
It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p2"></span>**3**. Against *him that* bendeth let the
archer bend his bow, and against *him that* lifteth himself up in his
brigandine: and spare ye not her young men; destroy ye utterly all her
host.

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p3"></span>**3**. Ad tendentem qui tendit arcum suum
<span id="ii.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>ידרך *est hic vox* *supervacua,* qui
tendit *igitur* arcum suum,) et (*copula hic abundat*;) ne parcatis
electis ejus, interficite omnem exercitum ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p6"></span>Interpreters give various expositions of
this verse. Some understand a soldier of light armor by *him who bends
the bow;* and by him who *elevates himself in his coat of mail,* they
understand a heavy-armed, soldier, There is also another difference;
some take <span id="ii.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>אל, *al,* for <span
id="ii.iv.iii-p6.2"></span>לא, *la,* when it is said <span
id="ii.iv.iii-p6.3"></span>ואל יתעל*, veal itol,* because a copulative
follows; and the words seem not to be well connected, if we read thus,
“As to him who raises himself up in his coat of mail, and spare ye not,”
etc.; and hence they take negatively the particle <span
id="ii.iv.iii-p6.4"></span>אל, *al,* instead of <span
id="ii.iv.iii-p6.5"></span>לא *la*, “and he may not raise up himself in
his coat of mail.” But it is probable that the copulative in the second
place is redundant The simple meaning would therefore be, *As to him who
bends the bow, and who raises himself up in his coat of mall*  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80)

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p10"></span>I do not, indeed, give such a refined
interpretation as some do, respecting the light and heavy armed
soldiers. I doubt not, then, but that he points out the archers, and
those clad in mail. If, however, any one prefers the other explanation,
let him enjoy his own opinion. As to the main point, it is evident that
the Prophet exhorts the Persians and the Medes not to spare the young
men among the Chaldeans, but to destroy their whole army, so that no
part of it should be left remaining.

<span id="ii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.iv-p2"></span>Grant Almighty God, that since thou wert
formerly so solicitous respecting the salvation of thy people as to
undertake war, for their sake, against a most powerful nation, — O
grant, that we also, at this day, may know, that we shall be safe and
secure under the protection of thy hand, and that we may so experience
thy power, that there may be to us a just reason for glorying in thee,
and that our enemies may be confounded, in order that thy glory may
shine forth more and more, and that the kingdom of thine only-begotten
Son may also be thus promoted. — Amen.

<span id="ii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.v-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY SIXTH

<span id="ii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p2"></span>**4**. Thus the slain shall fall in the
land of the Chaldeans, and *they that are* thrust through in her
streets.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p3"></span>**4**. Et cadent vulnerati in terra ejus
(in terra Casdin) et transfixi *(vel,* confossi) in compitis ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p6"></span>HE proceeds with what we began yesterday
to explain, — that the time was nigh when God would take vengeance on
the Babylonians. As, then, this could not be without great destruction
in a city so very populous, and as it could not be overthrown except
calamity extended itself through the whole country, hence, he says, that
though Babylon should prepare great and powerful armies, it would yet be
in vain, because *they shall fall,* he says, *wounded everywhere in the
land;* and then he adds, *and pierced through in her streets* By these
words he means, that the Chaldeans would be slain not only in the open
fields, but also in the midst of the city. he afterwards adds, —

<span id="ii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p2"></span>**5**. For Israel *hath* not *been*
forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the LORD of hosts; though their land
was filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p3"></span>**5**. Quoniam non viduatus est Israel,
et Jehudah a Deo suo, a Jehova exercituum; quin potius *(eadem est
particula* <span id="ii.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>כי *causalis, quae tamen*
hic *phes aliquid exprimit, ergo* quin potius) terra ipsorum plena est
peccato propter sanctum Israel.

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet shows here the cause why God
had resolved to treat the Babylonians with so much severity, even
because he would be the avenger of his own people. He also obviates a
doubt which might have disturbed weak minds, for he seemed to have
forsaken his people when he suffered them to be driven into exile. As
this was a kind of repudiation, as we have seen elsewhere, the Prophet
says now, that *Israel had* not been *wholly widowed, nor Judah, by his
God;* as though he had said, that the Jews and the Israelites were
indeed, for a time, like widows, but this was not to be perpetual. For,
as we have said, the divorce was temporary, when God so forsook his
Temple and the city, that the miserable people was exposed to plunder.
As long, then, as the will of their enemies prevailed, God seemed to
have forsaken his people. It is of this widowhood that the Prophet now
speaks; but he yet testifies that Israel would not be wholly widowed by
Jehovah his God.

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p7"></span>He indeed alludes to that spiritual
marriage, of which frequent mention is made; for God had, from the
beginning, united the Church to himself, as it were, by a marriage-bond;
and the people, as it is well known, had been so received into covenant,
that there was contracted, as it were, a spiritual marriage. Then the
Prophet now says, that they were not widowed; in which he refers to the
hope of deliverance; for it could not have been denied but that God had
repudiated his people. But he shows that their chastisement would not be
perpetual, because God would at length reconcile to himself the people
from whom he had been alienated, and would restore them to the ancient
condition and honor of a wife. He speaks of both kingdoms.

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p8"></span>Then he adds, *by Jehovah of hosts* By
this title he sets forth the power of God, as though he had said, that
as God is faithful in his promises, and constantly keeps his covenant,
so he is not destitute of power, so as not to be able to save his people
and to rescue them, when it pleases him, from death itself. He confirms
this truth, when he says, for *the land* of the Chaldeans *is filled
with sin on account of the Holy One of Israel,* as though he had said,
that the land was abominable, because it carried on war against God.:
For when he speaks of the *Holy One of Israel,* he shows that God had
such a care for his people that he was prepared, when the suitable time
came, to show himself as their avenger. We now perceive what the Prophet
means when he says, that Chaldea was *filled with sin,* even because it
provoked God when it thought that the wrong was done only to men.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p2"></span>**6**. Flee out of the midst of Babylon,
and deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this
*is* the time of the LORD’S vengeance; he will render unto her a
recompence.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p3"></span>**6**. Fugite e medio Babylonis, et
servate quisque animam suam, (vel, eripite,) ne excidamini (vel,
pereatis) in iniquitate ejus; quia tempus hoc ultionis Jehova, mercedem
ipse rependet ei.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject, but
illustrates it by various figures; for otherwise he would not have
penetrated into the hearts of the godly. Were any at this day to predict
the destruction of Rome, it could hardly be believed; and yet we know
that it has in our life been stormed, and now it hangs as it were by a
thread, though hitherto it has been supported and fortified by the
greatest forces. But the dignity of the city so confounded the minds of
men, that it was hardly credible that it could have been so soon
subverted. How, then, was it possible for such a thing to have happened
at that time? for Babylon was the mistress of the East. The Assyrians
had previously possessed the empire; but they had been subdued, and had,
as it were, been brought under the yoke. As, then, Babylon now
flourished in power so great and invincible, Jeremiah seemed to be
labeling when he spoke of its approaching destruction. It was hence
necessary that what he said should be confirmed, as it is now done. And
so he now turns to foreigners and guests, and exhorts them to flee lest
they should perish in the accursed city.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p7"></span>*Flee,* he says, *from the midst of
Babylon* But there was then no safer place in the land; for had all the
regions of the world been shaken, yet Babylon would have been deemed
beyond any danger. But he says that all guests were to flee from the
midst of it, if they wished to save their lives. Then he adds, *lest ye
perish in her iniquity* He assigns a reason why those who then dwelt in
Babylon could not be safe except they fled, even because God was about
to punish the city for its iniquities. He then sets the iniquity of
Babylon in opposition to the multitude of its men, as well as to its
wealth and defenses, and other means of strength. Babylon was populous;
it might also be aided by many auxiliaries; and there were ready at hand
those who might hire their services. As, then, there was nothing wanting
to that city, the Prophet here shows that wealth and abundance of
people, and all other helps would be of no moment, because it was God’s
will to punish her iniquity. This is the reason why Jeremiah now says,
*lest ye perish in her iniquity;* that is, “do not mingle with those
ungodly men whom God has given up to destruction.”

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p8"></span>And for the same purpose he adds, *For
it is the time of the vengeance of Jehovah* Here, again, he obviates an
objection; for as God had suspended his judgment, no one thought it
possible that a fire could so soon, and, as it were, in a moment be
kindled to destroy Babylon. Then the Prophet says, that it was *the
time;* by which he intimates, that though God does not immediately
execute his judgments, yet he does not he down as it were idly, so as to
forget what he has to do, but that he has his own times. And this
doctrine deserves to be noticed, because through our intemperate zeal we
make much ado, except God brings us help as soon as we are injured; but
if he delays even a short time, we complain and think that he has
forgotten our welfare. And even saints, in depositing familiarly their
cares and anxieties in his bosom, speak thus,

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p9"></span>“Arise, O Lord, why sleepest thou”
(<span id="ii.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p10"></span>As, then, we are by nature inclined to
impatience, we ought to observe what Scripture so often inculcates, even
this — that God has his certain and fixed times for punishing the
wicked. Hence Jeremiah now teaches us, that the *time of God’s
vengeance* was come.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p11"></span>He then adds, *A reward will he render
to her*; as though he had said, that though Babylon would not have to
suffer punishment immediately, yet she would not escape from God’s hand,
for the reward which God would render her was already prepared. And this
doctrine arises from a general principle, that God will ever render to
every one his just reward. We now, then, perceive the design of the
Prophet.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p12"></span>We have said that the words were
addressed to the strangers and the guests who were in Chaldea, or in the
city Babylon. They then pervert this passage, who think that the
faithful are here exhorted immediately to depart from Babylon, That is,
to withdraw themselves from superstitions and the defilements of the
world; for the Prophet means no such thing. A passage might, however, be
made from one truth to another. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p2"></span>**7**. Babylon *hath been* a golden cup in
the LORD’S hand, that made all the earth drunken: the nations have
drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are mad.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p3"></span>**7**. Calix aureus Babylon in manu
Jehovae, inebrians totam terram; e vino ejus biberunt gentes, propterea
insanierunt gentes.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p6"></span>Here again he anticipates an objection
which might have been made; for we know that the kingdoms of the world
neither rise nor stand, except through the will of God; as, then, the
Prophet threatens destruction to Babylon, this objection was ready at
hand. “How comes it, then, that this city, which thou sayest is
accursed, has hitherto so greatly flourished? for who hath honored
Babylon with so great dignity, with so much wealth, and with so many
victories? for it has not by chance happened that this monarchy has been
elevated so high; for not only all Assyria has been brought, under its
yoke, but also the kingdom of Israel, and the kingdom of Judah is not
far from its final ruin.” To this the Prophet answers, and says, that
*Babylon was a cup in God’s hand to inebriate the earth;* as though he
had said, that God was by no means inconsistent with himself when he
employed the Babylonians as his scourges, and when he now chastises them
in their turn. And he shows also, that when things thus revolve in the
world, they do not happen through the blind force of chance, but through
the secret judgments of God, who so governs the world, that he often
exalts even the ungodly to the highest power, when his purpose is to
execute through them his judgments.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p7"></span>We now, then, understand the design of
this passage; for otherwise what the Prophet says might seem abrupt.
Having said that the *time of God’s vengeance* had already come, he now
adds, *A golden cup is in God’s hand;* — to what purpose was this added?
By what has been stated, it appears evident how aptly the words run, how
sentences which seem to be wide asunder fitly unite together; for a
doubt might have crept in as to this, how could it be that God should
thus bestow his benefits on this city, and then in a short time destroy
it. As, then, it seems unreasonable that God should vary in his doings,
as though he was not consistent with himself, the Prophet on the other
hand reminds us, that when such changes happen, God does in no degree
change his purposes; for he so regulates the government of the world,
that those whom he favors with remarkable benefits, he afterwards
destroys, they being worthy of punishment on account of their
ingratitude, and that he does not without reason or cause use them for a
time as scourges to chastise the wickedness of others. And it is for
this reason, as I think, that he calls it *a golden cup;* for God seemed
to pour forth his benefits on the Babylonians as with a full hand. When,
therefore, the splendor of that city and of the monarchy was so great,
all things were there as it were golden.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p8"></span>Then he says, that it was *a golden cup,*
but *in the hand of God* By saying that it was in God’s hand, he
intimates that the Babylonians were not under the government of chance,
but were ruled by God as he pleased, and also that their power, though
very great, was yet under the restraint of God, so that they did nothing
but by his permission, and even by his command.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p9"></span>He afterwards adds how God purposed to
carry this cup in his hand, a cup so splendid as it were of gold; his
will was that it should *inebriate the whole earth* These are
metaphorical words; for the Prophet speaks here, no doubt, of
punishments which produce a kind of fury or madness. When God then
designed to take vengeance on all these nations, he inebriated them with
evils, and this he did by the Babylonians. For this reason, therefore,
Babylon is said to have been the golden cup which God extended with his
own hand, and gave it to be drunk by all nations. This similitude has
also been used elsewhere, when Jeremiah spoke of the Idumeans,

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p10"></span>“All drank of the cup, yea, drank of it
to the dregs, so that they were inebriated,”  
(<span id="ii.iv.ix-p10.2"></span>[Jer
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p10.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p11"></span>He there also called the terrible
punishment that was coming on the Idumeans the cup of fury. Thus, then,
were many nations inebriated by the Babylonians, because they were so
oppressed, that their minds were infatuated, as it were, with troubles;
for we know that men are stupefied with adversities, as though they were
not in a right mind. In this way Babylon inebriated many nations,
because it so oppressed them that they were reduced to a state of rage
or madness; for they were not in a composed state of mind when they were
miserably distressed.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82)

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p15"></span>To the same purpose is what is added:
*The nations who drank of her cup became mad.* Here he shows that the
punishments were not ordinary, by which divers nations were chastised by
the Babylonians, but such as deprived them of mind and judgment, as it
is usually the case, as I have just said, in extreme evils.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p16"></span>Moreover, this passage teaches us, that
when the wicked exercise their power with great display, yet God
overrules all their violence, though not apparently; nay, that all the
wicked, while they seem to assume to themselves the greatest license,
are yet guided, as it were, by the hand of God, and that when they
oppress their neighbors, it is done through the secret providence of
God, who thus inebriates all who deserve to be punished. At the same
time, the Prophet implies, that the Babylonians oppressed so many
nations neither by their own contrivance, nor by their own strength; but
because it was the Lord’s will that they should be inebriated: otherwise
it would have greatly perplexed the faithful to think that no one could
be found stronger than the Babylonians. Hence the Prophet in effect
gives this answer, that all the nations could not have been overcome,
had not the Lord given them to drink the wine of fury and madness. It
follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.x"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p2"></span>**8**. Babylon is suddenly fallen and
destroyed: howl for her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be
healed.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p3"></span>**8**. Subito cecidit Babylon et confracta
est; ululate super eam; tollite resinam *(alii,* balsamum) ad dolorem
ejus, si forte sanetur.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.x-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p6"></span>The Prophet now declares that the fall of
Babylon would be sudden, that the faithful might understand that God
could accomplish in one moment what he had decreed. For when the
prophets spoke of God’s judgments, the people questioned among
themselves, how could that be which surpassed the common ideas of men.
That men, therefore, might not estimate God’s power according to their
own thoughts, he introduces this word, *suddenly;* as though he had
said, that God had no need of warlike forces; for though he makes no
preparations, yet he can subvert every power that exists in the world.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p7"></span>He then adds, *Howl for her;* and this is
said, because it could not be but that many nations would either bewail
the ruin of so great a monarch, or be astonished at her, and thus many
things would be said. He then says, that though the whole world were to
howl for Babylon, it would yet fall and be suddenly broken, whenever it
pleased God. And he says, by way of irony, *Take balm, if peradventure
it can be healed* The word <span id="ii.iv.x-p7.1"></span>צרי, *tsari,*
is, by some, rendered *balsam,* but it means rosin, for we know that it
was deemed precious in Judea; and the Prophet no doubt accommodated what
he said to what was commonly known. As then that medicament was in
common use among the Jews, he now says, *Take rosin* As there is hardly
any country which has not its peculiar remedies; so we see that Jeremiah
refers not to what was usually done at Babylon, or to medicaments used
by the Chaldeans, but to what was commonly used in his own country, as
it appears from other places. Now rosin was a juice which flowed from
trees, and it was a thick juice. The best rosin which we now use is from
the terebinth; but in these parts they have what proceeds from the fir,
for here the terebinth is not found. But Judea had a most valuable
rosin, as we learn from many parts of Scripture. And under this one
thing is included everything, *Take rosin;* as though he had said, “Let
physicians come together (otherwise she will perish) from every place,
if *peradventure she can be healed.*” This is said ironically, that the
faithful might know that the diseases of Babylon would be incurable.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p8"></span>We have said elsewhere, that Babylon was
not wholly demolished when taken by Cyrus, and that the people were not
then driven away. They dwelt there as usual, though made tributary, as
they were afterwards, under the dominion of the Persians. Babylon was
also grievously oppressed, when punished for its revolt, until what
Jeremiah and others prophesied was fulfilled. Then the time of which he
speaks ought not to be confined to one calamity only, which was only a
prelude to others still greater. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="ii.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#009)<span id="ii.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p2"></span>**9**. We would have healed Babylon, but
she is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own
country: for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up *even*
to the skies.

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p3"></span>**9**. Curavimus Babylonem *(idem est
quidera verbum,* אפר, quod significat sanare et mederi, quia non semper
est in medico relevetur ut oeger, nec semper foeliciter succedit, ideo
dicit Propheta, medicati sumus, vel, remedia attulimus ad curandum
Babylonem,) et non sanata fuit; derelinquite eam, et proficiseamur
quisque in terram suam; quia pertigit ad coelos judicium ejus, et
elevatum est usque ad nubes.

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet assumes different characters;
he speaks here in the person of those who of themselves brought help to
the Babylonians. And many, no doubt, would have been ready to assist
them, had King Belshazzar wished to accept aid; and we know also, that
the city had a large army. He compares, then, the nations subject to the
Babylonians, and also the hired and foreign soldiers, to physicians, as
though he had said, “Babylon has been, with great care, healed.” As when
a great prince is taken ill, he sends here and there for the best and
most skillful physicians; but when the disease is incurable, they all
strive in vain to save his life: so now the Prophet speaks, using a
metaphor; but he speaks in the person of those who either had set to
hire their services, or had come from a sense of duty to heal Babylon.
“See,” they said, “the fault is not with us, for we have faithfully and
carefully done our best to heal her, but she has not been healed.”

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p7"></span>He then adds, *Leave her, and let us
depart, every one to his own land.* This was the language of foreign
soldiers and mercenaries. When they saw that the safety of the city was
hopeless, they began to counsel one another, “What do we? Ought we not
rather to consult our own safety? for our efforts are wholly useless. It
is then time for every one to return to his own country, for the end of
Babylon is come.” But the change of person has much more force than if
the Prophet had spoken thus, “The time shall come when the auxiliaries
shall flee away, for they will see that it would be all in vain to
defend her.” But when he compares them to physicians, this similitude
more fully illustrates the case; and then when he speaks in their
person, this renders what is said still more emphatieal.

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p8"></span>He at length adds, *For her judgment has
reached to the heavens, and has been elevated to the clouds.* Jeremiah
could not have properly addressed what he said to the unbelieving, if
you explain this of God being adverse and hostile to the Babylonians;
for it never occurred to the hired soldiers,

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p9"></span>that Babylon perished through the just
judgment of God. But the Prophet, according to a usual mode of speaking,
says, *Her judgment* (that is, her destruction) *reached to the heavens,
and has been elevated to the clouds;* that is, no aid shall be found
under heaven, which can deliver Babylon, — how so? because it will be
the same as though destruction came from heaven itself, and from the
clouds. For when danger is nigh either from behind or from before us, we
can turn aside either to the right hand or to the left, so that we may
escape the evils which men may bring on us: but when heaven itself seems
to threaten our heads, then an escape is attempted in vain. This then is
the reason why the Prophet says that the judgment of Babylon had reached
to the heavens and had been elevated to the clouds.  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p2"></span>**10**. The LORD hath brought forth our
righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the LORD our
God.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p3"></span>**10**. Eduxit *(vel,* protulit; egredi
fecit, *ad verbum)* Jehova justitias nostras: venite et narremus in Sion
opus Jehovae, Dei nostri.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet here addresses the faithful,
and especially shows, that the ruin of Babylon would be a sure evidence
of God’s paternal favor towards his Church. And it was no common
consolation to the faithful, in their extreme miseries, to know, that so
dear and precious to God was their salvation, that he would by no means
spare the Babylonians, whom the whole world regarded as half gods; for,
as I have said, the power of that monarchy filled the minds of men with
astonishment. When the faithful, then, knew that the Babylonians were to
perish, because they had oppressed and cruelly treated them, an
invaluable consolation, as I have said, must hence have been conveyed to
them. The Prophet then reminds us here, that it would be a singular
testimony as to God’s favor to his Church, when he subverted Babylon,
and he also exhorts the faithful to gratitude: for it is the design of
all God’s benefits, that his name may be celebrated by us, according to
what David says:

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p7"></span>“What shall I render to the Lord for all
the benefits which he has bestowed on me? The cup of salvation will I
take and call on the name of the Lord.” (<span
id="ii.iv.xii-p7.1"></span>[Ps.
116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv.xii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p8"></span>He then says, first, *Brought forth hath
Jehovah our righteousness* Here, some anxiously toil to untie a knot,
where there is none; for fearing lest the word, righteousness, should be
laid hold on for the purpose of setting up merits, they say that
righteousness is the remission of sins. Then they thus explain the words
of the Prophet,” God has at length unfolded his mercy towards us, and it
is our righteousness when all our iniquities are buried.” But this is
forced. When the Prophet speaks here of righteousnesses, he does not
mean the merits by which the Jews were to obtain what had been promised
to them; but righteousnesses he calls their good cause with regard to
the Babylonians. For righteousness has various meanings; and when a
comparison is made between men, God is said to bring forth our
righteousness, when he vindicates our integrity from the calumnies of
the wicked. So Jacob said,

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p9"></span>“The Lord will bring forth my
righteousness as the dawn.”  
(<span id="ii.iv.xii-p9.2"></span>[Ge
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#033)<span
id="ii.iv.xii-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p10"></span>But in this sense our righteousness has
a reference to our adversaries. So whenever David asked of God to regard
his righteousness, he no doubt compared himself with his enemies. And
righteousness here is to be taken simply with reference to the
Babylonians. For though God had punished the Jews as they deserved, yet
as to the Babylonians they were cruel tyrants and wicked robbers. The
cause, then, of the chosen people was just, with regard to them. This is
the reason why he *says,* that God *brought forth* their
*righteousnesses* The rest to-morrow.

<span id="ii.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xiii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
didst formerly put forth thy wonderful power, to help thy miserably
afflicted people, — O grant, that at this day the same power may be put
forth in our behalf, and that the same evidence of thy grace and
paternal favor may be shown to us, by raising up thy terrible hand to
destroy all the ungodly who cruelly oppress thine innocent people, that
being delivered by thine hand, we may learn ever to give thanks to thee,
in the name of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="ii.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY SEVENTH

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p2"></span>WE began yesterday to explain the words
of the Prophet, when he says, that the *righteousnesses* of the people
had been brought to light; and we said, that the word righteousnesses
does not refer to God, as though the Jews had deserved a reward, but is,
on the contrary, to be understood of a just cause as to the Chaldeans,
who, being impelled by avarice and pride alone, had made war against the
Church, and without any right, had tyrannically oppressed the people. As
far, then, as it was God’s will to defend his people, it was a just
cause. Nor is there any need of having here, a long dispute respecting
this, — how could the people be just, who had, by so many iniquities,
provoked the wrath of God; for, as we have already said, he does not
treat now of their merits, but. of a right which depended on the
faithfulness and protection of God.

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p3"></span>The Prophet now exhorts the faithful to
gratitude; he would have them at the same time to rise up to the hope of
deliverance, and to cherish the promises which he had given them, when
he says, *Come,* as though he would set before their eyes the gift of
redemption. He also shows the end, even that the people were to
celebrate the grace of God, as though he had said, that the people,
after having obtained mercy, ought to have this in view, to worship God
again in his Temple; as though he had said, that when God restored his
Church, his pure and true worship should, at the same time, be restored;
for the design of his grace is religion, and not the honor or dignity of
the people. This is the reason why he says, *Come and let us declare in
Sion the work of Jehovah our God.* Now, when Peter treats of a better
redemption, he says, that those who are delivered from the kingdom of
darkness ought to set forth the unspeakable praises of God. (<span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>.)
We must then understand, that God has appeared to us as a Redeemer, in
the person of his only-begotten Son, in order that we may celebrate his
mercy, which we have experienced, according also to what is said in the
song of Zacharias,

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p4"></span>“He delivered us from the hand of our
enemies, that we may all our life worship him in holiness.” (<span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>[Luke 1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074),
[75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p5"></span>It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p2"></span>**11**. Make bright the arrows; gather
together the shields: the LORD hath raised up the spirit of the kings of
the Medes: for his device *is* against Babylon, to destroy it; because
it *is* the vengeance of the LORD, the vengeance of his temple.

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p3"></span>**11**. Polite sagittas (parate, *ad*
*verbum,)* implete *(vel,* perficite) clypeos; suscitat Jehova spiritum
regum Mediae, quia super Babylonem cogitatio ejus ad perdendum eam, quia
ultio Jehovae haec, ultio Templi ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p6"></span>These words might have been addressed to
the Medes as well as to the Babylonians. If the latter meaning be
approved, that is, that the Prophet addresses the Babylonians, the words
are a taunt, as though he had said, that they were to no purpose
spending their labors in preparing their armies, because God would be
stronger than they, and that the Medes would carry on war under his
banner and authority. Nor would what I have also stated, be unsuitable,
that is, that the Prophet bids the Medes to prepare themselves and to
put on their arms, that they might fight courageously against the
Babylonians.  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84)

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p8"></span>He now adds the main thing, — that the
*kings of the Medes would come against Babylon,* because they had been
called from above; and he mentions the word *spirit,* that he might more
fully express that men’s minds are ruled and turned by the secret power
of God, and also that whatever power or boldness is found in them,
proceeds altogether from God; as though he had said, that God would so
prepare the Medes and the Persians, that he would not only strengthen
their arms, hands, and feet, for the war, but would also lead them, and
overrule their passions — that he would, in short, turn their spirit
here and there, according to his will. He does not now speak of the
wind, as before; nor does he point out the enemies generally, but
expressly names the Medes. For though Cyaxares, or Darius, as he is
called by Daniel, was not a very prudent man, nor skillful in war, yet,
as he was higher in dignity, the Prophet here mentions the Medes rather
than the Persians. Cyrus excelled in celerity, and was also a man of
singular wariness, activity, and boldness: but as he was by no means
wealthy, and ruled over a rustic nation, and the limits of his kingdom
were confined, the Prophet rightly speaks here of the Medes only, whose
power far exceeded that of the Persians.

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p9"></span>But we hence learn, that Jeremiah did not
speak as a man, but was the instrument of the Spirit; for it was an
indubitable seal to his prophecy, that he predicted an event a long time
before the war took place. Cyrus was not yet born, who was the leader in
this war: nor was Darius as yet born; for seventy years elapsed from the
time the Prophet spoke to the taking of Babylon. We then see that this
passage is a sure proof of his faithfulness and authority.

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, that God’s *thought
respecting Babylon* was *to destroy her* He still speaks after the
manner of men, and at the same time obviates an objection which might
have disturbed weak minds, because Babylon not only remained safe and
secure for a long time, but also received an increase of power and
dignity. The minds then of the godly might have desponded, when there
seemed to be no accomplishment of this prophecy. Hence the Prophet calls
attention to the *thought* of God, as though he had said, that though
God did not immediately put forth his hand, if, was yet enough for the
faithful to know what he had decreed. in short, the Prophet reminded,
them, that they ought to acquiesce in God’s decree, though his work was
yet hid.

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p11"></span>And he again confirms the Jews, by
adding, that it would be his *vengeance,* even that of God, because he
disregarded not his *Temple.* By these words he intimates that the
worship, according to the law, was pleasing to God, because the Jews
became a distinct people from heathen nations, when the rule as to
religion was prescribed to them. Then the Prophet intimates, that though
any sort of religion pleased men, there is yet but one which is approved
by God, even that which he himself has commanded. The case being so, we
may conclude, that God cannot long endure his worship to be scoffed at.
For we know how scornfully and proudly the Chaldeans spoke of the
Temple, so that they not only uttered blasphemies, but also heaped every
reproach they could think of on the Temple. Since that religion was
founded on God’s word, it follows that it could not be but that he must
have at length risen and vindicated the wrongs done to him by the
Chaldeans. We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet, when he says,
that it would be the *vengeance of God;* and he adds, *because God will
avenge his temple.* He confirms the Jews, when he declares that God
would be the vindicator of his own worship; and he, at the same time,
shows, that the worship according to the law, which had been taught by
Moses, was the only worship in the world which God approved. It
afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p2"></span>**12**. Set up the standard upon the
walls of Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the watchmen, prepare
the ambushes: for the LORD hath both devised and done that which he
spake against the inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p3"></span>**12**. Super muros Babylonis tollite
vexilium, roborate custodiam *(vel,* augete,) parate *(vel,* statuite,
*potius) custodes,* disponite insidias; quia etiam cogitavit Jehova,
etiam fecit quod loquutus est super habitatores Babylonis.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p6"></span>These words seem to have been addressed
to the Chaldeans rather than to the Medes or the Persians, as some
expound them; for this is favored by the context; for as he bids them
first to raise a standard on the walls, so he adds, *Increase the
watch,* which refers to the citizens of Babylon, and then he says, *set
the watchmen* All this cannot apply to the Persians and the Medes, but
must be referred to the besieged, as being most suitable to them. I do
not then doubt but that the Prophet here treats, with a taunt, all the
efforts the Chaldeans would make for the defense of their city. For not
only they who attack a city raise a standard, but also they who are
besieged, and this as a sign of confidence, in order to show that they
possess sufficient courage to check their enemies, and to sustain all
their attacks. It was then the design of the Prophet to show, that
however strenuously the Chaldeans might defend themselves, yet all their
exertions would be in vain, because God would, without labor, destroy
the city.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p7"></span>*Raise,* he says, *the banner on the
walls of Babylon, and strengthen,* or increase *the watch;* and
afterwards, *set watchmen,* so that every one might watch with more care
than usual. He says at last, *set in order the ambushes* “When all
things have been tried by you, your labor will be without any advantage,
for *the Lord hath spoken* ” When the particle <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p7.1"></span>גם, *gam,* is *repeated,* it ought to be
rendered *as* and *so* — *for as the Lord hath thought, so will he do
what he hath said, etc*. He says again that God had *thought,* lest the
faithful should imagine that he heedlessly casts forth threatenings; for
this thought often occurs to the mind, that God terrifies without
effecting anything, Hence the Prophet, that he might more fully confirm
his prophecy*,* says, that the thing had been meditated upon by God; and
we said yesterday that God does not deliberate with himself like men;
but as we cannot otherwise understand the certainty and unchangeableness
of his secret counsel, nor form an idea of the validity of his
decrees*,* the word *thought* is mentioned. The Prophet, in short,
means, that he brought forth nothing but what God had decreed. For words
are often heedlessly uttered, and the reality and the words are not
always connected; but Jeremiah testifies that he had taken what he
announced from the hidden and immutable counsel of God. Then he adds,
*what he hath spoken* or said; and this refers to his doctrine or his
prediction. It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p2"></span>**13**. O thou that dwellest upon many
waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, *and* the measure of
thy covetousness.

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p3"></span>**13**. Quae habitas super aquas multas
*(vel,* magnas,) quae multa es in thesauris, *(id est,* dives, *vel,*
locuples) venit finis tuus, mensura cupiditatis tuae.

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p6"></span>The word <span
id="ii.iv.xvii-p6.1"></span>שכנתי, *shekenti,* is to be taken here for
<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p6.2"></span>שכנת, *shekenet,* a dweller; and the
passage is more clear when we take it as the title of Babylon. And he
says that she was *a dweller among waters,* because the Euphrates not
only flowed by the city, (and we know that it was a very large river,)
but it surrounded it; and it, was indeed divided above Babylon into many
streams, so that it made as it were many islands, and thus access to the
city was more difficult. This circumstance served not only for a defense
to it, but also for other advantages.: For these streams or channels
were navigable; and the land also was made more fertile by the
irrigation they supplied. Thus these streams contributed to its wealth
as well as to its defense in time of war. And though Babylon was deemed
on this account impregnable, and was also a very fertile land, yet the
Prophet says here that its *end was come*

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p7"></span>Now, except he had made this preface,
that Babylon was situated among the rivers or many waters, and that it
was also a city full of wealth, all this might have seemed a hindrance
to prevent God from executing on it his vengeance; for this objection
was ready at hand, “How can Babylon be taken, which is seated between
many waters? for without great force and number of soldiers it cannot
but remain in safety, since it is protected by so many rivers.” Then
another objection might have been brought forward, that Babylon was an
opulent city, so that it could hire auxiliaries on every side, and that
having such abundance of money, it would never be unprotected. Hence the
Prophet here mentions these two things; but what he says ought to be
taken adversatively, as if he said, “Though thou dwellest among many
waters, and art great in treasures, that is, hast large treasures, yet
*thine end is come.”*

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p8"></span>He adds, *the measure of thy cupidity*.
Some render <span id="ii.iv.xvii-p8.1"></span>אמת, *amet,* “*end*,” but
improperly; and the Prophet has not without reason introduced the word
<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p8.2"></span>אמת, *amet,* which properly means a
cubit, but is to be taken here for measure. *Jerome* renders it “a
foot,” a word in use in his age. But the meaning is sufficiently clear,
that though Babylon had exhausted all the wealth of the world as an
insatiable gulf, yet *the measure of her cupidity* would come. For the
cupidity of that nation was unlimited, but God at length brought it to
an end — not that they were amended, but that God checked their
coveting. And according to this sense the Prophet says, that though they
had been hitherto devouring the wealth of many countries, yet the
*measure of her cupidity was come,* even because the Lord would take
away, together with the monarchy, the power and opportunity of doing
wrong. For the Chaldeans were able to act licentiously, when they had so
many nations subject to them; but the *measure* of their cupidity was
come, when God in a manner cut off their strength, not that they then
desisted, or that their rapacious disposition was amended — for they
changed not their nature; but cupidity is to be referred here to its
exercise, even because their power was then taken from them, so that
they could not carry on their plunders as they had used to do. He
afterwards adds, —

<span id="ii.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p2"></span>**14**. The LORD of hosts hath sworn by
himself, *saying,* Surely I will fill thee with men, as with
caterpillers; and they shall lift up a shout against thee.

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p3"></span>**14**. Juravit Jehova exercituum per
animam suam, Nisi implevero to homine sicut locusta *(hoc est,*
hominibus sicut locustis, *aut* bruchis,) qui canunt super to דדיה*, (id
est,* canticum vindemiale, *cujus ante facta fuit mentio.)*

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet more fully confirms what he
had said by introducing God as making an oath; and it is the most solemn
manner of confirmation when God swears by his own name. But he speaks of
God in the language of men when he says that he *swears by his own
soul;* for it is a kind of protestation when men swear by their own
souls, as though they laid down or pledged their own life. Whoever then
swears by his own soul, means that as his own life is dear to him, he
thus lays it down as a pledge, that were he to deceive by perjury, God
would be an avenger and take it away. This is suitable to men, not to
God; but what does not properly belong to God is transferred to him; nor
is this uncommon, as we have seen it in other places. And the more
familiar is the manner of speaking adopted by God, the more it ought to
touch men when he makes himself like them, and in a manner assumes their
person as though he lived in the midst of them.

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p7"></span>But we must still remember why the
Prophet introduces God as making an oath, even that all doubtfulness
might be removed, and that more credit might be given to his *prophecy*;
for it not only proceeded from God, but was also sealed by an oath. *If
I shall not fill Babylon,* he says, *with men as with locusts*

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p8"></span>The multitude of enemies is here
opposed to the multitude of the citizens, which was very large. For we
have said elsewhere that Babylon surpassed all other cities, nor was it
less populous than if it were all extensive country. As then it was full
of so many defenders, it might have been objected and said, “Whence can
come such a number of enemies as can be sufficient to put to flight the
inhabitants? for were a large army to enter, it would yet be in great
danger in contending with so vast a multitude.” But the Prophet compares
here the Persians and the Medes to locusts; and we know that Cyrus
collected from various nations a very large army, nay, many armies.
Fulfilled then was what had been predicted by the Prophet, for Cyrus
made up his forces not only from one people, but he brought with him
almost all the Medes, and also led many troops from other barbarous
nations. Hence then it happened, that what had been said by Jeremiah was
proved by the event.

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p9"></span>He also adds, that they would be
victorious; for by the *vintage song,* or shout, he no doubt means a
song or shout of triumph. But this song, <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>הידד, *eidad,* was then in use among the
Jews. Then as they did after vintage sing in token of joy, so also
conquerors, exulting after victory over their enemies, had a triumphant
song. And the Greek translators have rendered it <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p9.2"></span>κέλευσμα*,* or <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p9.3"></span>κελευμα*,* which is properly the song of
sailors; when they see the harbor they exult with joy and sing, because
they have been delivered from the dangers of the Sea, and also have
completed their sailing, which is always perilous, and have come to the
harbor where they more fully enjoy life, where they have pleasant air,
wholesome water, and other advantages. But the simple meaning of the
Prophet is, that when the Persians and the Medes entered Babylon, they
would become immediately victorious, so that they would exult without a
contest and without any toil, and sing a song of triumph. The Prophet
now confirms his prophecy in another way, even by extolling the power of
God, —

<span id="ii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#015)<span
id="ii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p2"></span>**15**. He hath made the earth by his
power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched
out the heaven by his understanding.

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p3"></span>**15**. Qui fecit terram in virtute sua,
qui statuit *(alii vertunt,* paravit) orbem in sapientia sua, et in sua
intelligentia; extendit coelos;

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p4"></span>**16**. When he uttereth *his* voice,
*there is* a multitude of waters in the heavens; and he causeth the
vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth: he maketh lightnings with
rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p5"></span>**16**. Ad vocem dando copiam aquarum in
coelis, qui attollit (et attollit, *ad verbum)* elevationes a fine
*(vel,* extremitate) terrae; fulgura in pluviam facit, educit ventum de
thesauris suis.

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p7"></span><span id="ii.iv.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p8"></span>The Prophet commends here, as I have
already said, in high terms, the power of God; but we must bear in mind
his purpose, for abrupt sentences would be otherwise uninteresting. His
object was to encourage the Jews to entertain hope; for they were not to
judge of Babylon according to its splendor, which dazzled the eyes of
all; nor were they to measure by their own notions what God had
testified, he bids the faithful to raise all their thoughts above the
world, and to behold with admiration the incomprehensible power of God,
that they might not doubt but that Babylon would at length be trodden
under foot; for had they fixed their eyes on that monarchy, they could
have hardly believed the words of prophecy; for the Prophet spoke of
things which could not be comprehended by the human mind.

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p9"></span>We now then understand why the Prophet
set forth the power of God, even that. the faithful might learn to think
of something sublimer than the whole world, while contemplating the
destruction of Babylon, for that would not be effected in a way usual or
natural, but through the incredible power of God. The same words are
also found in the tenth chapter; and the five verses we meet with here
were there explained. But Jeremiah had then a different object in view,
for he addressed the Jewish exiles, and bade them firmly to persevere in
the worship of God: though religion was oppressed, and though the
victorious Chaldeans proudly derided God, he yet bade them to stand firm
in their religion, and then said,

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p10"></span>“When ye come to Babylon, say, Cursed
are all the gods who made not the heaven and the earth.” (<span
id="ii.iv.xix-p10.1"></span>[Jer
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.xix-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p11"></span>And there, indeed, he used a foreign
language, and taught them to speak in the Chaldee, that they might more
plainly profess that they would persevere in the worship of the only
true God. He afterwards added what he now repeats, even that the power
of God was not diminished, though he had chastised for a time his own
people. But now, as we have said, he speaks in sublime terms of the
power of God, in order that the faithful might know that what the
judgment of the flesh held as impossible, could easily be done by that
God who can do all things.

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p12"></span>He says first, *He who made the earth*
He does not mention God’s name; but the expression is more emphatical,
when he says, *the Maker of the earth;* as though he had said, “Who can
be found to be the creator of the heaven and the earth except the only
true God?” We hence see more force in the sentence than if God’s name
had been expressed; for he thus excluded all the fictitious gods, who
had been devised by the heathens; as though he had said, “The only true
God is He who made the earth.” Then he says, *by his power* He speaks of
God’s power in connection with the earth, as it is probable, on account
of its stability.

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *Who hath
constituted the world by his wisdom, and by his knowledge extended the
heavens* The wisdom of God is visible through the whole world, but
especially in the heavens. The Prophet indeed speaks briefly, but he
leads us to contemplate God’s wonderful work in its manifold variety,
which appears above and below. For though it may seem a light matter,
when he says, that the world was constituted by the wisdom of God, yet
were any one to apply his mind to the meditation of God’s wisdom in the
abundance of all fruits, in the wealth of the whole world, in the sea,
(which is included in the world,) it could not, doubtless, be, but that
he must be a thousand times filled with wonder and admiration: for the
more carefully we attend to the consideration of God’s works, we
ourselves in a manner vanish into nothing; the miracles which present
themselves on every side, before our eyes, overwhelm us. As to the
heavens, what do we see there? an innumerable multitude of stars so
arranged, as though an army were so in order throughout, all its ranks;
and then the wandering planets, not fixed, having each its own course,
and yet appearing among the stars. Then the course of the sun, how much
admiration ought it to produce in us! — I say, not in those only who
understand the whole system of astronomy, but also in those who see it
only with their own eyes; for when the sun, in its daily course,
completes so great and so immense a distance, they who are not amazed at
such a miracle must be more than stupid; and then the sun, as it is well
known, has its own course, which is performed every year, and never
passes in the least beyond its own boundaries; and the bulk of that body
is immense (for, as it is well known, it far exceeds the earth,) and yet
it rolls with great celerity and at the same time in such order as
though it advanced by degrees quietly. Surely it is a wonderful specimen
of God’s wisdom. The Prophet, then, though he speaks in an ordinary way,
yet suppress the godly with materials of thought, so that they might
apply their minds to the consideration of God’s works. Some explain the
words, that God expands the heavens whenever they are covered with
clouds; but this is wholly foreign to the meaning of the Prophet; for
there is no doubt but that he points out in this verse the perpetual
order of nature, as in the next verse he speaks of those changes which
sometimes happen.

<span id="ii.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
deigned once to receive us under thy protection, we may learn to recumb
on the power of thy hand, and that as so many terrors on every side meet
us through the assaults and cruelty of our enemies, we may yet continue
firm, and persevere in calling on thy name, until thou appearest as our
Redeemer, not only once, but whenever we may need thy help, until thou
gatherest us at length into that blessed rest, which has been prepared
for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxi-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH

<span id="ii.iv.xxi-p2"></span>IN our last Lecture, we stopped where the
Prophet commends the power of God, as manifested in his ordinary works.
Having previously spoken of creation, and briefly shown, that both in
heaven and on earth there are many clear evidences of God’s wonderful
wisdom as well as of his power, he now comes to the rains and winds. We
have further said, that there is a difference between a fixed order of
nature and those changes which are daily observed; for were the
appearance of the heavens and the earth always the same, God’s power and
wisdom could not appear so wonderful; but when the heavens are covered
with clouds, when the air is now tranquil, and then disturbed by winds,
when storms suddenly arise, and then rains follow, God thus vividly sets
forth his manifold wisdom and power.

<span id="ii.iv.xxi-p3"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxi-p4"></span>This, then, is the reason why the
Prophet, after having briefly touched on what we have seen, adds, as
evidences of God’s power and wisdom, those things which appear to us in
their various changes. He then says, that by *his voice alone he gives
abundance of waters in the heavens,* and then that *he raises vapors
from the extremity of the earth,* that he *creates lightnings and the
rain,* which yet seem to be contrary things. At last he says, that he
*brings the winds out of his treasures* Philosophers indeed mention the
causes of these things, but we ought to come to the fountain itself, and
the original cause, even this, that things are so arranged in the world,
that though there are intermediate and subordinate causes, yet the
primary cause ever appears eminently, even the wisdom and power of God.
Winds arise from the earth, even because exhalations proceed from it;
but exhalations, by whom are they created? not by themselves: it hence
follows, that God is their sole author. And he calls hidden places
*treasures:* as when one draws out this or that from his storehouse, so
he says that winds come forth from hidden places, not of themselves, but
through God, who holds them as though they were shut up. I pass by these
things by only touching on them, because I have already reminded you
that we have before explained, in the tenth chapter (<span
id="ii.iv.xxi-p4.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.xxi-p4.1"></span>),
what is here literally repeated. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#017)<span
id="ii.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p2"></span>**17**. Every man is brutish by *his*
knowledge; every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his
molten image *is* falsehood, and *there is* no breath in them.

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p3"></span>**17**. Infatuatus est omnis homo a
scientia, pudefactus omnis conflator a sculptili; quia mendacium est
fusile, et non est spiritus in ipsis.

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p6"></span>This verse is usually explained, as
though the Prophet pointed out how men glide into errors and fancies,
even because they seek to be wise according to their own notions; and
Paul, in the first chapter to the Romans, assigns it as the cause of
idolatry, that men become vain in their own wisdom, because they follow
whatever their own brains suggest to them. This doctrine is in itself
true and useful; for men have devised idols for themselves, because they
would not reverently receive the knowledge of God offered to them, but
rather believed their own inventions: and as mere vanity is whatever man
imagines according to his own thoughts, it is no wonder that those who
presumptuously form their own ideas of God, become wholly foolish and
infatuated. But it is evident from the context, that the Prophet means
here another thing, even that the artificers who cast or forge idols, or
form them in any other way, are wholly delirious in thinking that they
can, by their own art and skill, make gods. A log of wood lies on the
ground, is trodden under foot without any honor; now when the artificer
adds form to it, the log begins to be worshipped as a god; what madness
can be imagined greater than this? The same thing may be said of stones,
of silver, and of gold; for though it may be a precious metal, yet no
divinity is ascribed to it, until it begins to put on a certain form.
Now when a melter casts an idol, how can a lump of gold or silver become
a god? The Prophet then upbraids this monstrous madness, when he says,
that men are in their knowledge like brute beasts, that is, when they
apply their skill to things so vain and foolish. But he mentions the
same thing twice, according to the common usage of the Hebrew style; for
we know that the same thing is often said twice for confirmation by the
prophets.

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p7"></span>After then having said that *men are
infatuated by knowledge,* he adds, that they were *made ashamed by the
graven image* There seems to be an impropriety in the words; for <span
id="ii.iv.xxii-p7.1"></span>פסל, *pesal,* “graven,” does not well agree
with <span id="ii.iv.xxii-p7.2"></span>צרף, *tsareph,* “the caster,” or
founder; but the Prophet, stating a part for the whole, simply means,
that all artificers are foolish and delirious in thinking that they can
by their own hand and skill cast or forge, or in any way form gods. And
to prove this he says, that there is *no spirit* or breath *in them;*
and this was a sufficient proof; for we know that God is the fountain of
life, and hence he is called by Moses

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p8"></span>“the God of the spirits of all flesh.”
(<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>[Nu
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022)<span
id="ii.iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xxii-p9"></span>Whatever life, then, is diffused through
all creatures, flows from God alone as the only true fountain. What,
then, is less like divinity, or has less affinity to it, than a lump of
gold or of silver, or a log of wood, or a stone? for they have no life
nor rigor. Nothing is more fading than man, yet while he has life in
him, he possesses something divine; but a dead body, what has it that is
like God? But yet the form of a human body comes nearer to God’s glory
than a log of wood or a stone formed in the shape of man. It is not,
then, without reason that the Prophet condemns this madness of all the
heathens, that they worshipped fictitious gods, in whom yet there was no
spirit. It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#018)<span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p2"></span>**18**. They *are* vanity, the work of
errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>**18**. Vanitas ipsi, opus illusionum,
tempore visitationis ipsorum peribunt.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p6"></span>As he had called idols a lie, so now in
the same sense he declares that they were *vanity,* even because they
were nothing real, but vain pomps, or phantoms, or masks; and he
afterwards expresses himself more clearly by saying that they were *the
work of illusions* But he does not seem to take the word <span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p6.1"></span>תעתעים*, toroim,* in a passive but in an
active sense. He then means that it was a deceptive work, which was a
snare to men; as though he had said, that they were the work of
imposture, or impostures.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p7"></span>This passage, and such as are like it,
ought to be carefully noticed; because the Papists seem to themselves to
find a way to escape when they confess their images are not to be
worshipped, but that they are books for the unlearned. They who are
moderate in their views have recourse to this evasion. This was once
suggested by Gregory, but very foolishly; and they who wish to appear
more enlightened than others under the papacy repeat the same saying,
that images ought to be tolerated, because they are the books of the
ignorant. But what does the Holy Spirit, on the other hand, declare
here, and also by the Prophet Habakkuk? that they are *the work of
impostures,* even mere snares or traps. (<span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>[Hab
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)<span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>.) All, then, who seek instruction from
statues or pictures gain nothing, but become entangled in the snares of
Satan, and find nothing but impostures. And doubtless, whatever draws us
away from the contemplation of the only true God, ought justly to be
deemed an imposture or a deception; for who by the sight of a picture or
a statue can form a right idea of the true God? Is not the truth
respecting him thus turned into falsehood? and is not his glory thus
debased? For we have then only the true knowledge of God, when we regard
him to be God alone, when we ascribe to him an infinite essence which
fills heaven and earth, when we acknowledge him to be a spirit, when, in
short, we know that he alone, properly speaking, exists, and that heaven
and earth, and everything they contain, exist through his power. Can a
stone or wood teach us these things? No; but on the contrary, I am led
by the stone to imagine that God is fixed and confined to a certain
place. And then the life of God, does it appear in the stone or in the
wood? Besides, what likeness has a body, and that lifeless, to an
infinite spirit? It. is, then, not without reason that he complains, as
it is recorded by Isaiah, that he is thus wholly degraded:

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p8"></span>“To whom have ye made me like? for I
contain the earth in my fist, and ye confine me to wood or stone.”
(<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>[Isa.
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)<span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p9"></span>If, in a word, the minds of men
received no other error from idols than the thought that God is
corporeal, what can be more preposterous?

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p10"></span>We hence see that the Prophet does not
here say without cause, that all idols are vanity, and the work of
imposture or deception.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p11"></span>He lastly adds, that all fictitious
gods would perish *at the time of visitation* In this clause he exhorts
the faithful to patience, and in a manner sustains their minds, that
they might not despond; for it was not a small trial to see the monarchy
of Babylon flourishing, when yet it had no other protection than that of
idols. As, then, the Babylonians thought flint fictitious gods were the
guardians and defenders of their safety, and that through them they had
subdued all their neighbors, they became thus more and more addicted to
their superstitions, the reward of which they regarded all their wealth
and power. Inasmuch as the minds of the godly could not have been
otherwise than shaken by such a trial, the Prophet here supports them,
and reminds them to wait for the time of visitation when the idols were
to perish. However, a reference may be intended to the Babylonians as
well as to the idols, when he says, *They shall perish at the time of
their visitation,* that is, when the Chaldeans shall be visited. But it
is probable that the time of visitation refers here especially to idols,
because the Prophet had spoken before of all the wicked and reprobate.
However this may be, we understand that his object was to show that
however prosperous idolaters might be for a time, yet the hand of God
was to be patiently borne until the suitable time came, which is here
called the time of visitation. And the metaphor refers to the notions of
men, for we think that God dwells idly in heaven and turns away his
*eyes* from us, while he spares the ungodly. Hence the Prophet calls the
judgment of God a *visitation,* because he then shows really, by evident
proofs, that he does not disregard the affairs of men. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#019)<span
id="ii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p2"></span>**19**. The portion of Jacob *is* not
like them; for he *is* the former of all things: and *Israel is* the rod
of his inheritance: the LORD of hosts *is* his name.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>**19**. Non sicut ipsi *(vel,* sicut
ipsa, *si ad idola referimus)* portio Jacob; quia fictor omnium ipse, et
virga haereditatis ejus, Jehova exercituum nomen ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p6"></span>Had the Prophet only said that idols
were mere impostures and mockeries, it would have been indeed something;
but this part of his teaching would have been cold and uninteresting,
had he not, on the other hand, proclaimed the glory of the one and only
true God. We ought, indeed, to know that idols are nothing, that men are
most foolishly deceived, and are wholly infatuated, when they imagine
that there is in them some divinity. But the main thing is, that the
true God himself is brought before us, and that we are taught to direct
all our thoughts to him. This, then, is what is now done by the Prophet;
for after having exposed the folly of the heathens in worshipping idols,
and having shown that the whole is nothing but deception and falsehood,
he now says, *Not as they,* the fictitious gods, *is the portion of
Jacob;* that is, the God who had revealed himself to the chosen people
is very far different from all idols.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p7"></span>And, doubtless, the vanity which the
Prophet before mentioned cannot be adequately understood, except the
true God be known. For though some of the ancient philosophers ridiculed
the grossest errors of the common people, yet they had nothing fixed or
certain on which they could rest, like him, who, when asked, “What was
God?” requested time to consider, and who after several delays confessed
that the more he inquired into the nature of God, the more absorbed were
all his thoughts. And this must necessarily be the case with men until
they are taught what God is, which can never be done until he himself
represents himself and his glory as it were in a mirror.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p8"></span>This is then the reason why the Prophet,
while setting the only true God in opposition to idols and all the
inventions of mortals, calls him *the portion of Jacob,* because the law
was as it were the representation of the glory of God. As then he had
plainly shown himself there, as far as it was needful for the salvation
of the chosen people, the Prophet, in order to invite men to the true
knowledge of the true God, calls him *the portion of Jacob,* as though
he had set the law as a mirror before their eyes. *The portion of Jacob*
then *is God,* who is not like fictitious gods; how so? because he is
the framer of all things. It is indeed by a few words that he makes the
distinction between the only true God and the fictitious gods; but in
this brief sentence he includes what I have before explained, even that
God is the fountain of life, and the life of all, and then that his
essence is spiritual and also infinite; for as he has created the heaven
and the earth, so of necessity he sustains both by his power.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p9"></span>We then see that the Prophet speaks
briefly but not frigidly; and from this passage we learn a useful
doctrine, even that God cannot be comprehended by us except in his
works. As then vain men weary themselves with speculations, which have
not in them, so to speak, any practical knowledge, it is no wonder that
they run headlong into many delirious things. Let us then be sober in
this respect, so that we may not inquire into the essence of God more
than it becomes us. When therefore we seek to comprehend what God is, or
how to attain the knowledge of him, let us direct all our thoughts, and
eyes, and minds to his works.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p10"></span>So also by this passage, when the
Prophet calls God the worker or framer of all things, is exposed the
vanity of all superstitions; and how? because we hence learn that the
power which made not the heaven and the earth, is vain and worthless;
but the only maker of heaven and earth is God, then he is God alone.
Since he is the only true God, it follows that the inventions or
figments of men are altogether delirious, and are therefore the
artifices and impostures of the devil to deceive mankind. We hence see
that the doctrine of the Prophet is exclusive, when he says that God is
*the maker of all things;* for where the maker of all things is not
found, there certainly no divinity can be.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p11"></span>He adds, *the rod of his inheritance*
This seems to refer to God, but in the tenth chapter the word *Israel*
is introduced; otherwise these five verses literally agree, but in that
passage the Prophet says that Israel was the *rod of God’s inheritance*
Here the rod means a measuring pole; for the similitude is taken from
lands being measured; for the ancients used poles of certain length for
measuring. Hence the Hebrews called an inheritance the rod of
inheritance, because it was what had been measured and had certain
limits: as when one possesses a field, he knows how many acres it
contains, it having been measured. But both things may be fitly and
truly said, even that Israel is the rod of God’s inheritance, and also
that God himself is a rod of inheritance; for there is a mutual union.
For as God favors us with this honor, to make us his inheritance, and is
pleased to have us as his own, so also he offers himself to us as an
inheritance. David says often, “The Lord is my portion,” and “The Lord
is the portion of mine inheritance,” that is, my hereditary portion. So
in this place the meaning would not be unsuitable were we to apply the
words to God. As, however, the word *Israel* is found in the former
place, it may be deemed as understood here.  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p13"></span>He says at last, *Jehovah of hosts is
his name* There is implied a contrast here; for he does not honor God
with this character, as though it was a common or ordinary name; but he
claims for him his own right, and thus distinguishes him from all idols.
By saying, then, that this name belongs only to the true God, even the
God of Israel, he intimates that by this distinction he differs from all
idols, and that men are sacrilegious when they transfer any power to
idols, and expect safety from them, and flee to them. As then this name
belongs only to God, it follows that in Him dwells a fullness of all
power and might. Since it is so, then wholly worthless is everything
that the world has ever imagined respecting the number and multitude of
gods. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p2"></span>**20**. Thou *art* my battle axe *and*
weapons of war: for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and
with thee will I destroy kingdoms;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p3"></span>**20**. Malleus tu mihi, vasa (vel,
instrumenta) proelii, (aut, bellica,) et conteram (vel, contrivi) per to
gentes, et perdam (vel, perdidi, malo in proeterito tempore accipere
utrunque verbum, rationem postea dicam) per to regna;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p4"></span>**21**. And with thee will I break in
pieces the horse and his rider; and with thee will I break in pieces the
chariot and his rider;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p5"></span>**21**. Et contrivi per to equum et
ascensorem ejus, et contrivi per to currum et ascensorem ejus;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p6"></span>**22**. With thee also will I break in
pieces man and woman; and with thee will I break in pieces old and
young; and with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p7"></span>**22**. Et contrivi per to virum et
mulierem, et contrivi per to senem et puerum, et contrivi per to
adolescentem et virginem;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p8"></span>**23**. I will also break in pieces with
thee the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in pieces
the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break in
pieces captains and rulers.

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p9"></span>**23**. Et contrivi per to pastorem et
gregem ejus, et contrivi per to agricolam et jugum ejus, et contrivi per
to duces et principes.

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p11"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p12"></span>The Prophet here obviates the doubts of
many; for as he had spoken of the destruction of Babylon, it might have
been readily objected, that the monarchy which was fortified by so many
defenses, and which had subjugated all the neighboring nations, was
impregnable. Hence the Prophet here shows that the power and wealth of
Babylon were no hindrances that God should not destroy it whenever he
pleased; for it is an argument derived from what is contrary. We have
before seen that God roots up what he has planted, (<span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p12.1"></span>[Jer
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p12.1"></span>;) and then we have seen the metaphor of the
potter and his vessels. When the Prophet went down to the potter, he saw
a vessel formed and then broken at the will and pleasure of the potter
(<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p12.2"></span>[Jer
18:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#002)<span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p12.2"></span>.) So also now God shows that the
destruction was as it were in his hand, because the Chaldeans had not
raised themselves to eminence through their own power, but he had raised
them, and employed them for his own purpose. In short, he compares the
Babylonians in this passage to a formed vessel, and he makes himself the
potter:

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p13"></span>“I am he who has raised Babylon to so
great a height; it therefore belongs to me to pull it down whensoever it
pleases me.”

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p14"></span>We now understand the design of this
passage, though the Prophet employs different words.

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p15"></span>He says that Babylon was a *hammer and
weapons of war to break in pieces* the nations. The verb <span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p15.1"></span>נפף, *nuphets,* means to break in pieces,
and carelessly to scatter here and there, and also violently to scatter.
He says then, “I have by thee scattered the nations, and by thee have
destroyed kingdoms.” But as the Chaldeans had enjoyed so many victories
and had subjugated so many nations, he adds, *I have by thee broken in
pieces the horse and his ride,; the chariot and its rider;* and then, *I
have broken in pieces men and women, old men and children, the young men
and the maidens, the shepherds and also their flocks* He enumerates here
almost all kinds of men. He then mentions *husbandmen* and *yokes of
oxen,* or of horses; and lastly, he mentions *captains and rulers*
 <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) All these things are said by way
of concession; but yet the Prophet reminds us that no difficulty would
prevent God to destroy Babylon, because Babylon in itself was nothing.
According to this sense, then, it is called a hammer. In short, the
Prophet takes away the false opinion which might have otherwise
disturbed weak minds, as though Babylon was wholly invincible. He shows
at the same time that God executed his judgments on all nations by means
of Babylon. Thus the faithful might have been confirmed; for otherwise
they must have necessarily been cast down when they regarded the
formidable power of Babylon; but when they heard that it was only a
hammer, and that they would not have been broken in pieces by the
Babylonians had they not been armed from above, or rather had they not
been driven on by a celestial power, it then appeared that the calamity
which the Jews had suffered was nothing more than a punishment inflicted
by God’s hand. When, therefore, they heard this, it was no small
consolation; it kept them from succumbing under their miseries, and from
being swallowed up with sorrow and despair. But it now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#024)<span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p2"></span>**24**. And I will render unto Babylon
and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done
in Zion in your sight, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p3"></span>**24** Et rependam Babyloni et omnibus
habitatoribus Chaldaeae to omnia mala ipsorum quae intulerunt in Sion
(contra Sion, quae fecerunt in Sion, ad verbum,) in oculis vestris,
(vel, eoram oculis vestris,) dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p6"></span>The Prophet, after having reminded the
Jews that all that they had suffered from the Babylonians had been
justly inflicted on account of their sins, and that God had been the
author of all their calamities, now subjoins, *I will render to Babylon
and to the Chaldeans* what they have deserved. It may, however, appear
strange at the first view, that God should here threaten the
Babylonians; for if their services depended on his command, they seemed
doubtless to have deserved praise rather than punishment; nay, we know
what the Holy Spirit declares elsewhere,

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p7"></span>“I gave Egypt as a reward to my servant
Nebuchadnezzar, because he has faithfully performed my work,” (<span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p7.1"></span>[Eze
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p8"></span>for Nebuchadnezzar had afflicted the
Jews, therefore he obtained this, says Ezekiel, as his reward. It seems
then an inconsistent thing when God declares that the Chaldeans deserved
punishment because they had afflicted the Jews. But both declarations
agree well together; for when God declared by Ezekiel that he gave Egypt
as a reward to his servant Nebuchadnezzar, he had a regard to the Jews
and to their perverseness, because they had not as yet been sufficiently
humbled; nay, they thought that it was by chance that they had been
subdued by the Babylonians. God then declares that he had executed his
judgment on them by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar. It was afterwards
necessary that the faithful should be raised up in their extreme
distress; and this was regarded by our Prophet when he *said* — *Behold,
I will render to Babylon and to the Chaldeans all their evils* They then
obtained Egypt for a short time, but afterwards all the evils they had
brought on other nations recoiled on their own heads.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p9"></span>But this promise was in a peculiar
manner given to the Church; for though the vengeance executed on the
Chaldeans was just, because they exercised extreme cruelty towards all
nations; yet God, having a care for his own Church, thus undertook its
cause; therefore he speaks not here generally of the punishment
inflicted on the Chaldeans for their cruelty; but God, as I have said,
had a regard to his own Church. Hence, he says, I will render to the
Babylonians and to all the Chaldeans, all the evil *which they had done
in Sion* We now see that this punishment had a special reference to the
chosen people, in order that the faithful might know that they had been
so chastised by God, that yet the memory of his covenant had never
failed, and that thus in the midst of death they might have some hope of
salvation, and that they might feel assured that God would at length be
merciful; not that God would ever restore the whole body of the people;
but this promise, as it has been elsewhere stated, is addressed only to
the remnant. Yet fixed remains the truth, that God, after having broken
in pieces the Jews and other nations by means of one nation, would yet
be the avenger of his Church, because he could never forget his
covenant. He adds, *before your eyes,* that the faithful might with
calmer minds wait for the vengeance of which they themselves would be
eye-witnesses.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
hast favored us with the light of thy Gospel, in which we see thy glory,
and into which we may be also transformed, except prevented by our
unbelief, — O grant, that with fixed eyes we may ever study that
knowledge which once for all has been made known to us, until at length,
having followed the way there set before us, we shall come to the
fullness of that celestial glory which has been obtained for us by the
blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="ii.iv.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxviii-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY NINTH

<span id="ii.iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025)<span
id="ii.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p2"></span>**25**. Behold, I *am* against thee, O
destroying mountain, saith the LORD, which destroyest all the earth: and
I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the
rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain.

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p3"></span>**25**. Ecce ego ad to, mons
perditionis, dicit Jehova, perdens omnem terram; et extendam manum meam
super to, et devolvam to e rupibus, et ponam to in montem combustionis.

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p6"></span>There is no doubt but that the Prophet
speaks of Babylon. But it may seem strange to call it a mountain, when
that city was situated in a plain, as it is well known; nay, it has no
mountains near it. It was a plain, so that streams might be drawn here
and there in any direction. Hence they think that the city was called a
mountain on account of the height of its walls and also its great
buildings. And this is probable, as though the Prophet called it a great
mass; for historians tell us that its walls were very high, about two
hundred feet, and a foot commonly exceeded three fingers. Then the
towers were very high. In short, Babylon was a prodigy for the quantity
of its bricks, for the walls were not built with squared stones, but
formed of bricks. Their breadth also was incredible; for chariots drawn
by four horses could go along without touching one another. Their
breadth, according to Strabo and also Pliny, was fifty feet. Then this
metaphor was not used without reason, when the Prophet, regarding in one
respect the state of the city, called Babylon a *mountain,* as though
Ninus, or Semiramis, or others, had contended with nature itself. The
beginning of Babylon was that memorable tower mentioned by Moses, but
then the work was left off. (<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p6.1"></span>[Ge
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p6.1"></span>)
Afterwards, either because such a beginning inflamed the desire of men,
or because the place was very pleasant and fertile, it happened that a
city of great size was built there. In short, it was more like a country
than a city; for, as Aristotle says, it was not so much a city as a
country or a province. This much as to the word *mountain.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p7"></span>Now God himself declares war against
Babylon, in order that more credit might be given to this prophecy; for
the Prophet had no regard to the Chaldeans, but to his own nation, and
especially to the remnant of the godly. The greater part derided his
prophecy, but a few remained who received the Prophet’s doctrine with
becoming reverence. It was then his object to consult their good and
benefit; and, as we shall see at the end of this chapter, he wished to
lay up this treasure with them, that they might cherish the hope of
restoration while they were as it were lost in exile. God then does here
encourage them, and declares that he would be an enemy to the
Babylonians.

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p8"></span>*Behold,* he says, *I am against thee, O
mountain of perdition* The mountain of perdition is to be taken in an
active sense, for destroying mountain, as also a clearer explanation
follows, when he says that it had *destroyed all the earth* For the
Babylonians, as it is well known, had afflicted all their neighbors, and
had transferred the imperial power of the Medes to their own city. When
they subdued the Assyrians they extended their power far and wide, and
at length advanced to Syria, Judea, and Egypt. Thus it happened that the
Babylonians enjoyed the empire of the east till the time of Cyrus; and
then the monarchy was possessed by the Persians. But our Prophet had
respect to the former state of things; for he said that the Chaldeans
had been like a hammer, which God had employed to break in pieces all
the nations; and, according to the same meaning, he now says that all
the earth had been destroyed by the Babylonians.

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p9"></span>But God here declares that he would be
their judge, because he would *extend his hand over Babylon,* and *roll
it down from the rocks,* he proceeds still with the same metaphor; for
as he called Babylon a mountain on account of its great buildings, and
especially on account of its high walls and lofty towers, so now he
adopts the same kind of language, *I will cast thee down,* or rather
roll thee, *from the rocks,* and *make thee a mountain of burning.* He
thus intimates that Babylon would become a heap of ashes, though this
was not immediately fulfilled; for as we have said, it was so taken as
not to be entirely laid waste. For in the time of Alexander the Great,
many years after, Babylon was standing, and there Alexander died. It
then follows that it was not reduced to solitude and ashes by Darius and
Cyrus. But we have already untied this knot, that is, that the Prophet
does not only speak of one vengeance of God, but includes others which
followed. For Babylon soon after revolted and suffered a grievous
punishment for its perfidy, and was then treated with great contempt.
Afterwards, Seleucus tried in various ways to destroy it, and for this
end Seleucia was built, and then Ctesiphon was set up in opposition to
Babylon. Babylon then was by degrees reduced to that solitude of which
the Prophet here speaks. Pliny says that in his time the temple of Bel
was there, whom they thought to have been the founder of the city; but
he afterwards adds that the other parts of the city were deserted. If
Jerome, as he says, visited it, we ought; to believe what he had seen;
and he says that Babylon was a small ignoble town, and ruins only were
seen there. There is, then, nothing unreasonable in this prophecy, for
it ought not to be restricted to one calamity only; for God ceased not
in various ways to afflict Babylon until it was wholly laid waste,
according to what our Prophet testifies. According to this view, then,
he says that Babylon would become a *mountain of burning,* or a burnt
mountain,  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) for ruins only would
remain; and in the same sense he immediately adds, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p2"></span>**26**. And they shall not take of thee a
stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations; but thou shalt be
desolate for ever, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p3"></span>**26**. Et non tollent ex to lapidem ad
angulum, et lapidem ad fundamenta; quia solitudines perpetuae eris,
dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p6"></span>He confirms the former verse, that when
Babylon was destroyed, there would be no hope of restoration. It often
happens, that those cities which have been wholly destroyed are
afterwards built up again; but God says that this would not be the case
with Babylon, for it was given over to perpetual destruction. By
*corner* and *foundations* he understands the strength of the buildings,
he then says, that there was no hope that the stones would be again
fitted together, for the building of the city, for Babylon would become
a perpetual waste or desolation.

<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p7"></span>We have, indeed, said, that the walls of
Babylon were not made of stones but of bricks: but the Prophet simply
speaks according to the common manner, in order to show that its ruin
would be for ever.  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) We have also
said elsewhere that a difference is commonly made by the prophets
between the people of God and the reprobate, that God promises to his
Church a new state as a resurrection from death, but that he denounces
on the unbelieving perpetual desolation. This course is now followed by
our Prophet when he says, that the desolations there would *be for
ever,* because there is no hope of pardon or of mercy to the
unbelieving. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p2"></span>**27**. Set ye up a standard in the
land, blow the trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against
her, call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and
Ashchenaz; appoint a captain against her; cause the horses to come up as
the rough caterpillers.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p3"></span>**27**. Tollite signum in terra,
clangite tuba in gentibus, sanctificate *(vel,* praeparate) super eam
gentes, congregate contra eam regna Ararath, Minni, et Aschenaz,
praeficite super eam ducem *(alii putant esse nomen proprium, et
relinquunt* <span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p3.1"></span>טפסר *sed accipitur haud
dubie pro duce,)* educite equum tanquam locustam *(vel,* bruchum)
horribilem *(vertit Hieronymus,* aculeatum; *alii vertunt,*
horripilantem; *sed vox illa asperior est, et tamen proprie signatur
horror ille, dum pili exurgunt ob metum, vel, ob iracundiam.)*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p6"></span>The Prophet here confirms what he had
before taught, even that Babylon, however proud on account of its
strongholds, would not yet escape God’s hand. Had he used a simple mode
of speaking, hardly any one would have ventured to look for what the
Prophet said. It was then necessary to introduce figurative expressions,
of which we have before spoken. Here, then, with the highest authority,
he commands the nations to raise up war against Babylon.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p7"></span>We must observe, as I have before
reminded you, that by such modes of speaking, the effect of prophetic
doctrine is set forth. For the unbelieving deride whatever *they* hear,
because the voice of God is the same to them as though it were a sound
flowing through the air. Hence the Prophet shows that he was endued with
the power of God, and that the hand of God was connected with his mouth,
so that he fulfills whatever he predicts. *Raise,* he says, *a
standard.* This might have appeared ludicrous, for we know that the
Prophet was despised, not only at Jerusalem, but also in his own town
where he had been born: by what right, then, or on what ground does he
now boldly command all nations, and bid the banners to be raised? But as
I have said, he shows that a false judgment would be formed of what he
said, except the people thought that God himself spoke.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p8"></span>*Sound with the trumpet,* he says,
*among all nations,* and then, *sanctify* *against her the nations;* and
further, *assemble,* literally, “make to hear,” but it means, in *Piel,*
to collect, to assemble. As to the word *Ararat,* it may be taken for
Armenia. I know not why some have taken Minni to be the lower Armenia,
for there is no creditable author for such an opinion. Nor is it certain
what country the Prophet designates by *Ashchenaz.* But it is evident
from histories, that the great army which Darius, or Cyrus under the
authority of Darius, led with him, had been collected from various and
even remote nations. For he brought with him the Hyrcanians and the
Armenians, and some from many unknown places. As, then, heathen authors
declare that this army was collected indiscriminately from many nations
and almost unknown, it is nothing strange that the Hebrew names are at
this day unknown. And there is no doubt but that the Prophet here
indirectly intimates some great shaking of the world, as though he had
said, that even barbarous nations, The name of whom hath not hitherto
been heard of, would come like all overwhelming flood to destroy
Babylon. He will hereafter speak of the Medes; but here he treats the
subject in a different way, as though he had said, that so great would
be the multitude of enemies, that Babylon, notwithstanding its
largeness, would be easily overthrown. We now perceive the Prophet’s
design as to these obscure words.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p9"></span>He says afterwards, *Set up a leader
against her* This is to be understood of Cyrus, whose vigor was
especially apparent in that war. Nor is there a doubt but that he led
his uncle and father-in-law to undertake the war. For those historians
fable, who say that Cyrus was cast away by his grandfather, and that he
was brought up privately by Astyages, and that he afterwards made war
with his grandfather. All these things have been invented. For it is
quite evident that Darius, the king of the Medes, was the chief in that
war, and Daniel is our best witness on this point. Heathen writers
imagine that there was no king of the Medes except under the authority
of Cyrus. But Cyrus did not rule until after the death of his
father-in-law, or his uncle, whose daughter he had married. It then
follows, that he was the general, so that he carried on the war under
the authority of Darius. Cyrus then was, as it were, the hired soldier
of his uncle and father-in-law, but at length he obtained the kingdom of
the Medes and the whole empire of the East. Of this leader, then, I
understand this passage, when the Prophet says, *Set up* or appoint *a
leader against* Babylon:  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) he adds,
*Bring forth,* or make to ascend, *the horse as the locust* This refers
to their number; as though he had said, Bring forth against Babylon
horses without number, who shall be as locusts. He compares them to
locusts, not for strength or skill in war, but only with regard to their
number. But as the locusts are frightful, he applies to them the word
<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.5"></span>סמר, *samer,* “dreadful,” as though
he had said, They are, indeed, locusts as to their abundance, but they
are at the same time dreadful, as though they had on them frightful
hairs. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#028)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p2"></span>**28**. Prepare against her the nations
with the kings of the Medes, the captains thereof, and all the rulers
thereof, and all the land of his dominion.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p3"></span>**28**. Praeparate contra eam gentes*,*
regna Medorum, duces ejus, et principes ejus, et totam terram ditionis
ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p6"></span>He now repeats what he had said of
preparing the nations; but he mentions them first generally, and then he
comes to specify them particularly. He then bids the *nations* to be
sent for, and then he shows who they were, even the *kingdoms of the
Medes*  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) There was, indeed, but one
kingdom, but many kings were subject to it. Then, on account of the many
provinces over which satraps ruled, and also on account of many
tributary countries, the Prophet was not satisfied to use the singular
number, but calls them in the plural number, the *kingdoms of the
Medes;* for that monarchy had extended itself far and wide, so that many
kings were subject to Darius.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p8"></span>And it tended, in no small degree, to
show the certainty of this prophecy, that Jeremiah declared, before
Cyrus or even Darius was born, that the Medes would come. But we have
stated, that though Cyrus, being singularly active and a good warrior,
carried on the war, yet Darius was the first in authority. Then Babylon
obeyed the Medes for a time; but as Darius was now old, Cyrus succeeded
him; and then the monarchy was transferred to Persia; and laws issued
thence until the time of Alexander the Great, who, together with his
catamite, burnt the tower. Nor is there a doubt but that many memorable
transactions were deposited there. But Alexander being drunk, seized a
torch and burnt the tower; for he thought that the memory of the
Oriental monarchy could thus be abolished.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p9"></span>We now then perceive why the Prophet
expressly mentions here the Medes; and he adds, *the captains and
princes* He includes, no doubt, under these names, all the satraps and
kings. At length he adds, *the whole land of its dominion,* or
jurisdiction; and by this word he designates the kingdoms already
mentioned. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#029)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span>**29**. And the land shall tremble and
sorrow: for every purpose of the LORD shall be performed against
Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p3"></span>**29**. Et contremuit terra, et doluit
*(similitudo sumpta est a parturientibus,)* quia stabilita fuit super
Babylon cogitationes (*in plurali numero ponit cum tamen verbum sit
singulare, hoc est,* stabilitae sunt cogitationes) Jehovae ad ponendum
terram Babylonis in solitudinem, ita ut non sit habitator *(vel,* qui
illic habitet.)

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p6"></span>The Prophet no doubt endeavored to
remove all doubts from the minds of the godly, which would have
otherwise weakened confidence in his doctrine. It might have occurred to
the minds of all, that the whole world would sooner come to nothing than
that Babylon should fall. Though it were so, says the Prophet, that the
whole earth trembled, yet Babylon will be destroyed. Hence, he says,
*Tremble shall the land and be in pain,* even *because confirmed,* etc.
There is here a striking contrast between the moving of the earth and
the stability of God’s purpose. The verb means properly to rise, but it
is taken in many places in the sense of confirming or establishing, and
necessarily so in this passage. he then says, *Tremble shall the land,*
 <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) even *because confirmed shall be
the thoughts of God respecting Babylon*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p10"></span>But he mentions thoughts in the
plural number, as though he had said, that whatever God had appointed
and decreed would be unchangeable, and that the whole earth would sooner
be shaken than that the truth of God should lose its effect. Then this
verse contains nothing else but a confirmation of the whole prophecy.
But the Prophet shows, that if even all the hindrances of the world were
in favor of the perpetuity of Babylon, yet what God had decreed
respecting its destruction, would be fixed and unchangeable. It
afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#030)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>**30**. The mighty men of Babylon have
forborn to fight, they have remained in *their* holds: their might hath
failed; they became as women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her
bars are broken.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p3"></span>**30**. Cessarunt fortes Babylonis ad
*pugnandum (hoc est,* destiterunt pugnare fortes Babylonis,) sederunt in
munitionibus, deficit *(vel,* elanguit) virtus ipsorum, fuerunt in
mulieres, accenderunt habitacula ejus, confracti sunt vectes ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p6"></span>The Prophet shows here, as by the
finger, the manner of the destruction of Babylon, such as it is
described by heathen authors. He then says, that the *valiant* men *of
Babylon,* even those who had been chosen to defend the city, *ceased to
fight* For the city was taken rather by craft than by open force; for
after a long siege, Cyrus was laughed to scorn by the Babylonians; then
they securely held a feast. In the meantime two eunuchs of Belshazzar
passed over to Cyrus; for; as Xenophon relates, the tyrant had slain the
son of one, and by way of disgrace castrated the other. Hence, then, it
was that they revolted from him; and Cyrus was instructed by them how he
could take the city. The fords were dried-up, when Belshazzar suspected
no such thing, and in the night he heard that the city was taken. Daniel
gives a clearer description; for he says that there was held a stated
feast, and that the hand of a writer appeared on the wall, and that the
king, being frightened, had heard from Daniel that the end of his
kingdom was near at hand, and that the city was taken that very night.
(<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>[Da
5:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>.) hence the Prophet says now that the
valiant men desisted, so that they did not fight. He indeed speaks of
what was future, but, we know what was the manner of the prophets, for
they related what was to come as though it had already taken place.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, that they *sat down
in their fortresses,* for the city was not taken by storm — there was no
fighting; but the forces passed silently through the fords, and the
soldiers entered into the middle of the city; the king was slain
together with all his satraps, and then all parts of the city were taken
possession of. We now, then, see that the Spirit of God spoke by the
mouth of Jeremiah, as of a thing that had already taken place.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p8"></span>He then adds, that *their valor had
failed* or languished, even because terror stupefied them when they
heard that the city was taken. So also true became what is added, that
they *became women,* that they were like women as to courage, for no one
dared to oppose the conquerors. Fighting might have still been carried
on by so large a multitude, yea, they might have engaged with their
enemies in hundred or in thousand of the streets of the city, for it
would have been easy in the night to distress them: but the Prophet
says, that they all became women as to courage. At last, he adds, that
that *burnt by enemies were the palaces,* and that *the bars of the
gates were broken;* for no one dared to summon to arms after it was
heard that the city was taken. It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#031)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p2"></span>**31**. One post shall run to meet
another, and one messenger to meet another, to shew the king of Babylon
that his city is taken at *one* end,

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p3"></span>**31**. Cursor in occursum cursoris
cucurrit *(vel,* curret, *ad verbum)* et nuntius in occmsum nuntii ad
nuntiandum regi Babylonis, quod capta sit urbs ejus ab extremitate.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p6"></span>This also was fulfilled according to the
testimony of heathen authors, as well as of Daniel. They do not indeed
repeat these words, but according to the whole tenor of history we may
easily conclude that messengers ran here and there, for the Babylonians
never thought that the enemy could so suddenly penetrate into the city,
for there was no entrance. We have seen how high the walls were, for
there were no muskets then, and the walls could not have been beaten
down. There were indeed battering-rams; but what was the breadth of the
walls? even fifty feet, as already stated, so that four horses abreast
could pass without coming into contact. There was then no battering-ram
that could throw down walls so thick. As to the fords, the thing seemed
incredible; so that they kept a feast in perfect security. In such an
irruption, what our Prophet testifies here must have necessarily
happened. But it is quite evident that he was the instrument of the Holy
Spirit; for Cyrus was not as yet born when this prophecy was announced.
We hence then know, that the holy man was guided from above, and that
what he said was not produced in his own head, but was really celestial;
for he could not have divined any such thing, nor was it through
probable conjecture that he was able thus to speak and lead the Jews, as
it were, into the very scene itself.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p7"></span>Nor is there a doubt but that this
authority was afterwards confirmed when the fathers told their children,
“So have we heard from the mouth of the Prophet what we now see with our
eyes; and yet no man could have conjectured any such thing, nor have
discovered it by reason or clearsightedness: hence Jeremiah must have
necessarily been taught by the Spirit of God.” This, then, is the reason
why God designed that the destruction of Babylon should be, as we see,
so graphically described.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p8"></span>He then says, *A runner ran to meet a
runner,* and then, *a messenger to meet a messenger, to tell the king of
Babylon that his city was taken at its extremity*?  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) Had this been said of a small city, it
might have appeared ridiculous: why are these runners? one might say.
But it has been sufficiently shown, that so extensive was that city,
that runners, passing through many fields, might have come to the king,
and convey the news that the city was *taken* at one of its extremities.
And heathen writers cannot sufficiently eulogize the contrivance and
skill of Cyrus, that, he thus took possession of so great a city; for he
might have only secured one half of it, and Belshazzar might have
retained the other half, and might have bravely contested with Cyrus and
all his forces; and he would have no doubt overcome him, had it not been
for the wonderful and unusual expedition of Cyrus. This haste, then, or
expedition of Cyrus, is what the Prophet now sets forth, when he says
that *messengers ran to the king to tell him that the city was taken* He
now adds, respecting other things, what no one could have divined, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#032)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>**32**. And that the passages are
stopped, and the reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war
are affrighted.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>**32**. Et vada capta sunt, e stagna
exusta sunt igni, et viri proelii *(hoc est,* bellicosi) conterriti
sunt.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p6"></span>This verse most clearly proves that
Jeremiah was God’s herald, and that his language was under the guidance
of the celestial Spirit; for he sets forth the manner in which Babylon
was taken, as though he had witnessed it with his own eyes.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p7"></span>He says that *the fords were taken,*
and that the *pools were burnt with fire.* We do not read that Cyrus had
made use of fire; and some render pools, reeds, but there is no reason
to constrain us so to render the word; for the Prophet speaks
metaphorically. Their object was to give a literal rendering, by saying
that reeds were burnt; but the Prophet shows, speaking hyperbolically,
that the fords of the Euphrates were dried up, as though one burned wood
by applying fire to it. This, indeed, is not suitable to water; but he,
by a hyperbole, expresses more fully the miracle which might have
otherwise exceeded human comprehension. He then says, that the fords
were dried up, and then adds, that the pools were burnt. The same thing
is expressed twice, but in a different way; and as I have already said,
he states hyperbolically, that such was the skill of Cyrus and his army,
that he made dry the fords and the pools, as though one collected a
large heap of wood and consumed it with fire.  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) We now perceive the design of the
Prophet.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, that the *men of
war were broken in pieces* For though the fords were made dry, that is,
the streams which were drawn from the Euphrates, vet. the guards of the
city might have still kept possession of a part of it, and have manfully
resisted, so as to prevent the soldiers of Cyrus from advancing farther;
but the city was so craftily taken, that the Babylonians were so
terrified as not to dare to raise up a finger, when yet they might have
defended a part of the city, though one part of it was taken.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
didst formerly testify thy favor towards thy Church by not sparing the
greatest of monarchies, — O grant that we may know thee at this day to
be the same towards all thy faithful people who call upon thee; and as
the power and cruelty of our enemies are so great, raise thou up thine
hand against them, and show that thou art the perpetual defender of thy
Church, so that we may have reason to magnify thy goodness in Christ
Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxviii-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETIETH

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p2"></span>**33**. For thus saith the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel; The daughter of Babylon *is* like a
threshingfloor, *it is* time to thresh her: yet a little while, and the
time of her harvest shall come.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p3"></span>**33**. Quoniam sic dicit Jehova
exercituum, Deus Israel, filia Babylonis tanquam area, tempus calcandae
ejus; adhuc paulisper, et veniet messis ei.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p6"></span>BY this similitude the Prophet confirms
what he had before said, even that God would be the avenger of his
Church, and would justly punish the Babylonians, but at the suitable
time, which is usually called in Scripture the time of visitation, He
then compares Babylon to a *threshing-floor,* not indeed in the sense
which interpreters have imagined, but because the threshing-floor only
serves for the time of harvest, and is afterwards closed up and not
used. Babylon, then, had been for a long time like a threshing-floor,
because there had been no treading there, that is, no noise or shouting.
But God declares that *the time of harvest would come,* when the
threshing-floor would be used. Oxen did then tread the corn; for the
corn was not beaten out with flails, as with us and in most places in
France, though the inhabitants of Provence still use the treading. In
Judea they tread out the corn on floors, and oxen were used for the
purpose. Now, the reason for the similitude seems evident; for the time
would come when God would smite Babylon, as oxen after harvest tread out
with their feet the corn on the threshing-floor, which for the rest of
the year is not wanted, but remains closed up and quiet. Hence I have
said that what we have before seen as to the time of visitation is
confirmed; for it was strange at the first view to promise deliverance
to the Jews, while yet Babylon was increasing more and more and
extending the limits of its monarchy. (<span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p6.1"></span>[Isa
28:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#024)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p6.1"></span>.) God shows in that passage that it was no
matter of wonder if he did not daily exercise his judgments in an equal
degree; and he bids us to consider how husbandmen act, for they do not
sow at the same time wheat and barley and other kinds of grain; nor do
they always plough, or always reap, but wait for seasonable times.
“Since*,* then, husbandmen are endowed with so much care and foresight
as I have taught them, why may not I also have my times rightly
distributed, so that there may be now the harvest, and then the treading
or threshing? and should I not at one time sow wheat, and at another
cumin?” for the Prophet adds these several sorts. The same is the mode
of reasoning in this place, though the Prophet speaks more briefly.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p7"></span>He then says that Babylon would be like
a threshing-foor, and how? because it had been as a place closed up and
wholly quiet; for God had spared the Chaldeans, and, as we shall
hereafter see, they had been so inebriated with pleasures that they
feared no danger.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p8"></span>And then immediately he explains
himself, — it is *time to tread* or thresh *her.* Then Babylon became
like a threshing-fioor, for she had not been trodden or threshed for a
long time, as the threshing-floor is not used for nine or ten months
through the whole year. But he adds, *yet a little while, and come will
her harvest*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p9"></span>We learn from this and other passages
that treading or threshing was in use among the Jews and other eastern
nations only during harvest. In other places, corn is often kept in the
ears for five and six years. Some thresh the corn after six, or eight,
or nine months, as it suits their convenience. But there are many
countries where the corn is immediately threshed; it is not stored up,
but is immediately conveyed to the threshing-floor, and there it is
trodden by oxen or threshed with flails. As then it was usual
immediately to tread the corn, hence God declares that the time of
harvest would come when Babylon would be trodden, as the threshing-floor
is trodden after harvest.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p13"></span>We must observe that a *little while*
is not to be understood according to the notions of men; for though God
suspends his judgments, he yet never delays beyond the time; on the
contrary, he performs his work with all due celerity The Prophet Haggai
says,

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p14"></span>“Yet a little while, and I will shake
the heaven and the earth.”  
(<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p14.2"></span>[Hag
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p14.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p15"></span>But this was not fulfilled till many
years after. But we must remember what is in Habakkuk, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p16"></span>“If the vision delays, wait for it,
for it will come *  
*and will not be slow.” (<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p16.2"></span>[Hab
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p16.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p17"></span>He says that prophecies delay, that
is, according to the judgment of men, who make too much haste, and are
even carried away headlong by their own desires. But God performs his
work with sufficient celerity, provided we allow him to arrange the
times according to his own will, as it is just and right for us to do.
Whenever, then, the ungodly enjoy ease and securely indulge themselves,
let this fact come to our own minds, that the threshing-floor is not
always trodden, but that the time of harvest will come whenever it
pleases God. This is the use we ought to make of what is here said. It
follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xl"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.xl-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#034)<span id="ii.iv.xl-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p2"></span>**34**. Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon
hath devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel,
he hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my
delicates, he hath cast me out.

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p3"></span>**34**. Comedit me, contrivit me
Nabuchadnezer rex Babylonis; posuit me (locavit, *ad verbum*) vas inane;
diglutivit me tanquam draco, implevit ventrem suum deliciis meis, ejecit
me.

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xl-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p6"></span>Here is mentioned the complaint of the
chosen people, and this was done designedly by Jeremiah, in order that
the Jews might feel assured that their miseries were not overlooked by
God; for nothing can distress us so much as to think that God forgets us
and disregards the wrongs done to us by the ungodly, hence the Prophet
here sets the Israelites in God’s presence, that they might be convinced
in their own minds that they were not disregarded by God, and that he
was not indifferent to the unjust and cruel treatment they received from
their enemies. For this complaint is made, as though they expostulated
with God in his presence.

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p7"></span>He then says, *Devoured me and broken me
in pieces has Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon*  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) The word, *to eat,* or devour, was
enough; but Jeremiah wished to express something more atrocious by
adding the word, *to break in pieces;*  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) for he intimates that Babylon had not
been like a man who devours meat set before him, but that she had been a
cruel wild beast, who breaks in pieces the very bones. We now, then,
understand the design of the Prophet; he amplifies the savageness of the
king of Babylon, by saying that God’s people had not only been devoured
by him as men swallow down their food, but that they had also been torn
in pieces by his teeth, as though he had been a lion, or a bear, or some
other wild animal; for these not only devour their prey, but also with
their teeth break in pieces whatever is harder than flesh, such as
bones.

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p10"></span>For the same purpose he adds, *He has set
me an empty vessel,* that is, he has wholly exhausted me, as when one
empties a flagon or a cask. Then he says, he has *swallowed me like a
dragon*  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) It is a comparison
different from the former, but yet very suitable; for dragons are those
who devour a whole animal; and this is what the Prophet means. Though
these comparisons do not in everything agree, yet as to the main thing
they are most appropriate, even to show that God suffered his people to
be devoured, as though they had been exposed to the teeth of a lion or a
bear, or as though they had been a prey to a dragon.

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p12"></span>He adds, *Filled has he his belly with my
delicacies,* that is, whatever delicate thing I had, he has consumed it.
He then says, *he has cast off the remnants,* like wolves and lions and
other wild beasts, who, when they have more prey than what suffices
them, choose what is most savory; for they choose the head of man that
they may eat the brain; they suck the blood, but leave the intestines
and whatever they do not like. So also the Prophet says here of the
miserable Jews, that they had been so devoured that the enemy, having
been satiated, had cast. off the remainder.  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p14"></span>We hence learn that God’s people had been
so exposed to plunder, that the conqueror was not only satisfied, but
cast away here and there what remained; for satiety, as it is well
known, produces loathsomeness. But the Prophet refers to the condition
of the miserable people; for their wealth had been swallowed up by the
Chaldeans, but their household furniture was plundered by the
neighboring nations; and the men themselves had been driven into exile,
so that there came a disgraceful scattering. They were then scattered
into various countries, and some were left through contempt in the land;
thus was fulfilled what is said here, “He has cast me out,” even because
these wild beasts, the Chaldeans, became satiated; meat was rejected by
them, because they could not consume all that was presented to them.

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p15"></span>By these figurative terms, as it has been
stated, is set forth the extreme calamity of the people; and the Prophet
no doubt intended to meet such thoughts as might otherwise have proved
very harassing to the Jews. For as they found no end to their evils,
they might have thought that they had been so cast away by God as to
become the most miserable of men. This is the reason why our Prophet
anticipates what might have imbittered the minds of the godly, and even
driven them to despair, he then says, that notwithstanding all the
things which had happened, yet God had not forgotten his people; for all
these things were done as in his sight.

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p16"></span>With regard to us, were God not only to
double the calamities of his Church, but also to afflict it in an
extreme degree, yet what the Prophet says here ought to afford us aid,
even that God’s chosen people were formerly so consumed, that the
remainder was cast away in contempt; for the conqueror, though
insatiable, could not yet consume all that he got as a prey, because his
cupidity could not contain it. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p17"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xli"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xli-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035)<span
id="ii.iv.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p2"></span>**35**. The violence done to me and to my
flesh *be* upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and, my blood
upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p3"></span>**35**. Violentia mea *(sed passive
accipitur, alii vertunt,* rapinam, *quod idem est)* et caro mea contra
Babylonem, dicet *(vel,* dicat) habitatrix Sion, sanguis mens contra
habitatores Chaldaeae, dicat Jerusalem.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p4"></span>**36**. Therefore thus saith the LORD;
Behold, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will
dry up her sea, and make her springs dry.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p5"></span>**36**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova, Ecce
ego litigans litem tuam *(hoc est,* disceptans causam tuam, *vel,*
cognitor causae tuae,) et vindleans vindictam tuam; et arefaciam mare
ejus, et exsiccabo fontem ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p7"></span><span id="ii.iv.xli-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p8"></span>Jeremiah goes on with the same subject;
for, after having shown that the calamities of the people were not
unknown to God, he now, in an indirect way, exhorts the faithful to
deposit their complaints in the bosom of God, and to apply, or appeal to
him, as their defender. The design, then, of the Prophet is, (after
having explained how grievously the Jews had been afflicted,) to show
them that their only remedy was, to flee to God, and to plead their
cause before him.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p9"></span>And this passage is entitled to
particular notice, so that we may also learn in extreme evils, when all
things seem hopeless, to discover our evils to God, and thus to unburden
our anxieties in his bosom. For how is it, that sorrow often overwhelms
us, except that we do not follow what God’s Spirit prescribes to us? For
it is said in the Psalms,

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p10"></span>“Roll thy cares into God’s bosom, and he
will sustain thee, and will not give the righteous to a perpetual
change.”  
(<span id="ii.iv.xli-p10.2"></span>[Ps
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.xli-p10.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p11"></span>We may, then, by prayer, unburden
ourselves, and this is the best remedy: but we murmur, and sometimes
clamor, or at least we bite and champ the bridle, according to a common
proverb; and, in the meantime, we neglect the chief thing, and what the
Prophet teaches us here.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p12"></span>We ought, then, carefully to mark the
design of what is here taught, when it is said, *my violence and my
flesh* be *upon Babylon* When he adds, *Say will* (or let) *the daughter
of Sion,* he no doubt shows that the faithful have always this
consolation in their extreme calamities, that they can expostulate with
God as to their enemies and their cruelty. Then he says, *my plunder* or
violence; some render it “the plunder of me,” which is harsh. But the
meaning of the Prophet is not ambiguous, for it follows afterwards, *my
flesh* Then violence was that which was done by enemies. But the people
is here spoken of under the name of a woman, according to what is
commonly done, *Let the inhabitress of Sion say, My plunder and my
flesh.* By the second word the Prophet shows sufficiently plain what he
understood by plunder. *My flesh,* he says, (even that which the
Chaldeans had devoured and consumed,) be *on Babylon* This is of the
greatest weight, for by these words he intimates, that though the
Chaldeans thought that they had exercised with impunity their cruelty
towards the Jews, yet their innocent blood cried, and was opposed to
them as an enemy.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p13"></span>To the same purpose he afterwards adds,
*Let Jerusalem say, My blood is upon the Chaldeans.*

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p14"></span><span id="ii.iv.xli-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p15"></span>Then follows a clearer explanation, when
God promises that he would be the avenger of his chosen people, and that
whatever the Jews had suffered would be rendered to Babylon: *Therefore
thus saith Jehovah, Behold, I will litigate thy quarrel.* By this
passage we are taught to present our complaints to God, if we wish him
to undertake our cause; for when we are silent, he will in his turn
rest, as he considers us unworthy of being helped. But if we cry to him,
he will doubtless hear us. Then we must remember the order of things,
for the Prophet says on the one hand, *Let Jerusalem cry, let the
daughter of Sion say;* and on the other hand he says, Therefore God will
come and hear the cry of his people.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p16"></span>He says, first, *Behold, I will plead
thy cause,* and then, I *will vindicate or* avenge *thy vengeance.*
These are hard words to Latin ears; but yet they contain more force and
power than if we were to follow the elegance of the Latin tongue. It is
then better to retain the genuine terms than to study neatness too much.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p17"></span>In short, God promises to be the
defender of his people, and by using the demonstrative particle, he
doubtless removes every doubt, as though the thing was now present. We
know that more than seventy years had elapsed since God had spoken thus;
for as it has been already stated, it was not after the taking of the
city that Jeremiah prophesied against the Chaldeans: but though God
suspended his judgment and vengeance for seventy years after the
destruction of the city, yet this was said, *Behold, I,* as though he
brought the faithful to witness the event; and this was done for the
sake of certainty.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p18"></span>Now, we hence learn, that though God
humbles his people, and suffers them even to be overwhelmed with extreme
miseries, he will at length become the avenger of all the wrongs which
they may have endured; for what has been said of the destruction of the
people has a reference to us; nay, what is here said, has not been left
on record except for our benefit. And further, let us learn, as I have
before reminded you, to prepare our minds for patience whenever God
seems to forsake us. Let us, at the same time exercise ourselves
constantly in prayer, and God will hear our groans and complaints, and
regard our tears.

<span id="ii.iv.xli-p19"></span>It is afterwards added, *I will make dry
her sea;* for Babylon, as it has been already stated, was surrounded by
the streams of the Euphrates; and there was no easy access to it. The
Prophet then compares the fortifications of Babylon to a *sea* and *a
fountain.* For who would have thought that the Euphrates could be dried
up, which is so large a river, and has none equal to it in all Europe?
Even the Danube does not come up to the largeness of that river. Who
then would have thought it possible that such a river could be made dry,
which was like a sea, and its fountain inexhaustible? God then intimates
by these words, that such was his power, that all obstacles would vanish
away, and that he was resolved at the same time to execute his judgment
on the Babylonians. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xlii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#037)<span
id="ii.iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlii-p2"></span>**37**. And Babylon shall become heaps,
a dwellingplace for dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing, without an
inhabitant.

<span id="ii.iv.xlii-p3"></span>**37**. Et erit Babylon in acervos,
habitaculum draconum, stupor et sibilum, absque habitatore.

<span id="ii.iv.xlii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xlii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlii-p6"></span>He confirms what he had said, that when
God raised his hand against Babylon, such would be its destruction, that
the splendor, which before astonished all nations, would be reduced to
nothing. Perish, he says, shall all the wealth of Babylon — its towers
and its walls shall fall, and its people shall disappear; in short, *it
shall become heaps of stones,* as he said before, that it would become a
mountain of burning. It is then for the same purpose that he now says
that it would become heaps. But we must bear in mind what we observed
yesterday, that it would become such heaps that they would not be fit
for corners, that they could not be set in foundations; for the ruins
would be wholly useless as to any new building.

<span id="ii.iv.xlii-p7"></span>He says that it would become *an
astonishment and a hissing* Moses also used these words, when he
threatened the people with punishment, in case they transgressed the law
of God. (<span id="ii.iv.xlii-p7.1"></span>[De
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037)<span
id="ii.iv.xlii-p7.1"></span>.) But these threatenings extend to all the
ungodly, and the despisers of God. Then God fulfilled as to the
Babylonians what he had denounced by Moses on all the despisers of his
law. It then follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xliii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#038)<span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p2"></span>**38**. They shall roar together like
lions: they shall yell as lions’ whelps.

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p3"></span>**38**. Rugient tanquam leones, rugient
*(est quidem alium verbum sed ejusdem sensus)* tanquam catuli leonum.

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xliii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p6"></span>Here, by another figure, Jeremiah
expresses what he had said of the destruction of Babylon, even that in
the middle of the slaughter, they would have no strength to resist: they
would, at the same time, perish amidst great confusion; and thus he
anticipates what might have been advanced against his prophecy. For the
Babylonians had been superior to all other nations; how then could it
be, that a power so invincible should perish? Though they were as lions,
says the Prophet, yet that would avail nothing; they will indeed roar,
but roaring will be of no service to them; they will roar as the whelps
of lions, but still they will perish.

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p7"></span>We now, then, understand the object of
this comparison, even that the superior power by which the Babylonians
had terrified all men would avail them nothing, for nothing would remain
for them in their calamity except roaring.  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xliv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xliv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039)<span
id="ii.iv.xliv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p2"></span>**39**. In their heat I will make their
feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p3"></span>**39**. In calore ipsorum ponam convivia
ipsorum, et inebriabo eos, ut exultent, et dormiant somnum perpetuum, et
non expergiscantur, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xliv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p6"></span>Here, also, he describes the manner in
which Babylon was taken. And hence we learn, that the Prophet did not
speak darkly or ambiguously, but so showed, as it were by the finger,
the judgment of God, that the prophecy might be known by posterity, in
order that they might understand that God’s Spirit had revealed these
things by the mouth of the Prophet: for no mortal, had he been a hundred
times endowed with the spirit of divination, could ever have thus
clearly expressed a thing unknown. But as nothing is past or future with
God, he thus plainly spoke of the destruction of Babylon by his Prophet,
that posterity, confirmed by the event, might acknowledge him to have
been, of a certainty, the instrument of the Holy Spirit. And Daniel
afterwards sealed the prophecy of Jeremiah, when he historically related
what had taken place; nay, God extorted from heathen writers a
confession, so that they became witnesses to the truth of prophecy.
Though Xenophon was not, indeed, by design a witness to Jeremiah, yet
that unprincipled writer, whose object was flattery, did,
notwithstanding, render service for God, and sealed, by a public
testimony, what had been divinely predicted by Jeremiah.

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p7"></span>*In their heat,* he says, *I will make
their feasts,* that is, I will make them hot in their feasts; for when
the king of Babylon was drunk, he was slain, together with his princes
and counselors. I will inebriate them that they may exult, that is, that
they may become wanton. This refers to their sottishness, for they
thought that they should be always safe, and ridiculed Cyrus for
suffering so many hardships. For he lived in tents, and the siege had
been now long, and there was no want in the city. Thus, then, their
wantonness destroyed them. And hence the Prophet says that God would
make them hot, that they might become wanton in their pleasures; and
then, that they might *sleep a perpetual sleep,* that is, that they
might perish in their luxury:  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100)
though they had despised their enemy, yet they should never awake; for
Babylon, as we observed yesterday, might have resisted for a long time,
but it was at once taken. The Babylonians were not afterwards allowed to
have arms. Cyrus, indeed, suffered them to indulge in pleasures, but
took away from them the use of arms, deprived them of all authority, so
that they lived in a servile state, in the greatest degradation: and
then, in course of time, they became more and more contemptible, until
at length the city was so overthrown, that nothing remained but a few
cottages, and it became a mean village. We hence see that whatever God
had predicted by his servant Jeremiah was at length fulfilled, but at
the appropriate time, — at the time of treading or threshing, as it has
been stated. It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xlv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xlv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#040)<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p2"></span>**40**. I will bring them down like lambs
to the slaughter, like rams with he goats.

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p3"></span>**40**. Educam *(ad verbum est,*
descendere faciam) eos tanquam agnos ad mactationem, tanquam arietes
cure hircis.

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p6"></span>This is a comparison different from the
former, when the Prophet said that they would be like lions, but as to
roaring only. But he now shows how easy would that ruin be when it
should please God to destroy the Babylonians. Then as to their cry, they
were like lions; but as to the facility of their destruction, they were
like lambs led to the slaughter. God does not mean here that they would
be endued with so much gentleness as to give themselves up to a
voluntary death; but he means, that however strong the Babylonians might
have previously been, and however they might have threatened all other
nations, they would then be women in courage, and be led to the
slaughter as though they were lambs or rams.

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p7"></span>This is a comparison which occurs often
in the prophets, for sacrifices were then daily made; and then the
prophets considered the destruction of the ungodly as a kind of
sacrifice; for as sacrifices were offered under the Law as evidences of
piety and worship, so when God appears as a judge and takes vengeance on
the reprobate, it is the same as though he erected an altar, and thus
exhibited an evidence of the worship that is due to him; for his glory
and worship is honored, yea, and celebrated by such sacrifices. Then the
destruction of all the ungodly, as we have said, may be justly compared
to sacrifices; for in such instances the glory of God shines forth, and
this is what especially belongs to his worship. It at length follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xlvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#041)<span
id="ii.iv.xlvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p2"></span>**41**. How is Sheshach taken! and how
is the praise of the whole earth surprised! how is Babylon become an
astonishment among the nations!

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p3"></span>**41**. Quomodo capta est Sesak, et
comprehensa laus totius terrae? quomodo facta est Babylon in vastitatem
*(vel,* in stuporem) inter curtetas gentes?

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p6"></span>Here the wonder expressed by the Prophet
tended to confirm what he had said, for he thus dissipated those things
which usually disturbed the minds of the godly, so as not to give full
credit to his predictions. There is indeed no doubt but that the godly
thought of many things when they heard Jeremiah thus speaking of the
destruction of Babylon. It ever occurred to them, “How can this be?”
Hence Jeremiah anticipated such thoughts, and assumed himself the
character of one filled with wonder — *How is Shesbach taken?* as though
he had said, “Though the whole world should be astonished at the
destruction of Babylon, yet what I predict is certain; and thus shall
they find who now admit not the truth of what I say, as well as
posterity.”

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p7"></span>But he calls Babylon here Sheshach, as
in <span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p7.1"></span>[Jeremiah
25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p7.1"></span>.
Some think it to be there the proper name of a man, and others regard it
as the name of a celebrated city in Chaldea. But we see that what they
assert is groundless; for this passage puts an end to all controversy,
for in the first clause he mentions Sheshach, and in the second,
Babylon. That passage also in <span
id="ii.iv.xlvi-p7.2"></span>[Jeremiah
25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p7.2"></span>
cannot refer to anything else except to Babylon; for the Prophet said,

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p8"></span>“Drink shall all nations of God’s cup of
fury,  
and after them the king of Sheshach,”

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9"></span>that is, when God has chastised all
nations, at length the king of Babylon shall have his turn. But in this
place the Prophet clearly shows that Sheshach can be nothing else than
Babylon. The name is indeed formed by inverting the alphabet. Nor is
this a new notion; for they had this retrograding alphabet in the time
of Jerome. They put <span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9.1"></span>ת, *tau,* the last
letter, in the place of <span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9.2"></span>א, *aleph,*
the first; then <span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9.3"></span>ש, *shin,* for <span
id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9.4"></span>ב, *beth,* thus we see how they formed
Shesbach. The <span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9.5"></span>ש, *shin,* is found
twice in the word, the last letter but one being put for <span
id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9.6"></span>ב*, beth,* the first, letter but one; and
then <span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9.7"></span>כ, *caph,* is put in the place of
<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p9.8"></span>ל, *lamed,* according to the order of
the retrograde alphabet. There is no good reason for what some say, that
the Prophet spoke thus obscurely for the sake of the Jews, because the
prophecy was disliked, and might have created dangers to them; for why
did he mention Sheshach and then Babylon in the same verse?

<span id="ii.iv.xlvi-p10"></span>Many understand this passage
enigmatically; but there is no doubt but that that alphabet was then, as
we have stated, in common use, as we have *Ziphras,* as they call it, at
this day. In the meantime, though the Prophet was not timid, and
encouraged his own people to confidence, it yet pleased God that this
prophecy should in a manner be hidden, but not that it should be without
evidence of its certainty, for we shall see in the last verse but one of
this chapter that he commanded the volume to be thrown into the
Euphrates, until the event itself manifested the power of God, which for
a long time remained as it were buried, until the time of visitation
which of which he had spoken.

<span id="ii.iv.xlvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlvii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.xlvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
art pleased at this day to receive us for thy people, we may enjoy the
same favor to the end, and be sheltered under thy wings; and though we
deserve to be wholly cast away, yet, if thou chastise us for a time,
deal with us with moderate severity, and chastise us in judgment, and
not with extreme rigor; and then, after darkness, let thy serene face
appear, until we shall at length enjoy that full light to which thou
invitest us daily through Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.iv.xlviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlviii-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY FIRST

<span id="ii.iv.xlix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.xlix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#042)<span
id="ii.iv.xlix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlix-p2"></span>**42**. The sea is come up upon Babylon:
she is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof.

<span id="ii.iv.xlix-p3"></span>**42**. Ascendit contra Babylonem mare,
multitudine fluctuum ejus cooperta est *(vel,* obruta.)

<span id="ii.iv.xlix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.xlix-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.xlix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlix-p6"></span>THE Prophet here employs a comparison,
in order more fully to confirm his prophecy respecting the destruction
of Babylon; for, as it was incredible that it could be subdued by the
power or forces of men, he compares the calamity by which God would
overwhelm it to a deluge. He then says that the army of the Persians and
of the Medes would be like the sea, for it would irresistibly overflow;
as when a storm rises, the sea swells, so he says the Medes and the
Persians would come with such force, that Babylon would be overwhelmed
with a deluge rather than with the forces of men. We now then understand
the Prophet’s meaning, when he says that Babylon would be *covered with
waves* when the Medes and the Persians came It then follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.l"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.l-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.l-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#043)<span id="ii.iv.l-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.l-p2"></span>**43**. Her cities are a desolation, a dry
land, and a wilderness, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth
*any* son of man pass thereby.

<span id="ii.iv.l-p3"></span>**43**. Erunt urbes ejus in vastitatem,
terra deserti et siccitatis *(aut,* vastitatis) terra; non transibit per
eam quisquam (onmis homo,) et non habitabit in illa quisquam (et non
transibit in illa, *hoc est,* per illam) filius hominis.

<span id="ii.iv.l-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.l-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.l-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.l-p6"></span>He repeats what he had previously said, but
we have before reminded you why he speaks so largely on a subject in
itself not obscure. For he might have comprehended in a few words all
that he had said in the last chapter and also in this; but it was
difficult to convince men of what he taught — it was therefore necessary
to dwell at large on the subject.

<span id="ii.iv.l-p7"></span>He says now that the *cities* of Babylon,
that is, of that monarchy, would *become a desolation.* He seems to have
hitherto directed his threatenings against the city itself; but now he
declares that God’s vengeance would extend to all the cities under the
power of the Chaldean nation; and he speaks at large of their
desolation, for he says that it would be a *land of desert, a land of
drought,* or of filthiness, so that *no one would dwell in it.* And
though he uses the singular number and repeats it, yet he refers to
cities, *Pass through it shall no man, dwell in it shall no man*  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) He indeed speaks of the whole land,
but so that he properly refers to the cities, as though he had said,
that so great would be the destruction, that however far and wide the
monarchy of Babylon extended, all its cities would be cut off. It
afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.li"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.li-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.li-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044)<span id="ii.iv.li-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.li-p2"></span>**44**. And I will punish Bel in Babylon,
and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up:
and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall
of Babylon shall fall.

<span id="ii.iv.li-p3"></span>**44**. Et visitabo super Bel in Babylone,
et extraham quod voravit ab ore ejus; et non confluent ad ipsum amplius
gentes; etiam murus Babylonis cecidit.

<span id="ii.iv.li-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.li-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.li-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.li-p6"></span>God again declares that he would take
vengeance on the idols of Babylon; not that God is properly incensed
against idols, for they are nothing but things made by men; but that he
might show how much he detests all superstitious and idolatrous worship.
But he speaks of Bel as though it was an enemy to himself; yet God had
no quarrel with a dead figure, void of reason and feeling; and such a
contest would have been ridiculous. God, however, thus rises up against
Bel for the sake of men, and declares that it was an enemy to himself,
not because the idol, as we have said, of itself deserved any
punishment.

<span id="ii.iv.li-p7"></span>But we hence learn how detestable was that
corruption and that false religion. It appears evident from beathen
writers that Bel was the supreme god of the Chaldean nation; nay, that
idol was worshipped throughout all Assyria, as all testify with one
consent. They thought that there had been a king skillful in the
knowledge of the stars, and hence he was placed by erring men among the
gods. But we learn from the prophets that this was a very ancient
superstition; and it is hardly probable that there had been any king of
this name — for otherwise Isaiah and Jeremiah, when predicting the ruin
of this idol, would not have been silent on the subject. That common
opinion, then, does not appear to me probable; but I think that on the
contrary this name was given to the idol according to the fancies of
men; for no reason can be found why heathen nations so named their false
gods. It is indeed certain that divine honor was given to mortals by the
Greeks and the Romans, and by barbarous nations. But the worship of Bel
was more ancient than the time when such a thing was done. And in such
veneration was that idol held, that from it they called some of their
precious stones. They consecrated the eye-stone to the god of the
Assyrians, because it was a gem of great price. *(See Plin.* lib. 37,
chap. 10.)

<span id="ii.iv.li-p8"></span>Jeremiah, then, now declares that Bel
would be exposed to God’s vengeance, not that God, as we have said, was
angry with that statue, but he intended in this way to testify how much
he abominated the ungodly worship in which the Chaldeans delighted. Nor
did he so much regard the Chaldeans as the Jews; for I have often
reminded you that it was a hard trial, which might have easily
endangered the faith of the people, to think that the Chaldeans had not
obtained so many and so remarkable victories, except God had favored
them. The Jews might on this account have had some doubts respecting the
temple and the law itself. As then the Babylonians triumphed when
success accompanied them, it was necessary to fortify the minds, of the
godly, that they might remain firm, though the Babylonians boasted of
their victories. Lest the faithful should succumb under their trials,
the prophets supplied a suitable remedy, which is done here by Jeremiah.
God then declares that he would *visit Bel;* for what reason and to what
purpose? that the Jews might be convinced that that idol could do
nothing, but that they had been afflicted by the Babylonians on account
of their sins. That true religion, then, might not be discredited, God
testified that he would some time not only take vengeance on the
Chaldeans themselves, but also on their idol, which they had devised for
themselves; *I will* then *visit Bel in Babylon*

<span id="ii.iv.li-p9"></span>And he adds, *and I will bring* or draw
*out of his mouth what he has swallowed* The word <span
id="ii.iv.li-p9.1"></span>בעי, *belo,* means indeed what is devoured;
but the Prophet refers here to the sacred offerings by which Bel was
honored until that time. And there is no doubt but that many nations
presented gifts to that idol for the sake of the Chaldean nation, as we
find that gifts were brought from all parts of the world to Jupiter
Capitolinus when the Roman empire flourished; for when the Greeks, the
Asiatics, or the Egyptians, wished to obtain some favor, they sent
golden crowns, or chandeliers, or some precious vessels; and they sought
it as the highest privilege to dedicate their gifts to Jupiter
Capitolinus. So, then, there is no doubt but that many nations offered
their gifts to Bel, when they wished to flatter the Chaldeans. And hence
the Prophet declares that when God visited that idol, he would make it
disgorge what it had before swallowed. This is indeed not said with
strict propriety; but the Prophet had regard to the Jews, who might have
doubted whether the God of Israel was the only true God, while he
permitted that empty image to be honored with so many precious
offerings; for this was to transfer the honor of the true God to a dead
figure. Then he says, I *will draw out,* as though Bel had swallowed
what had been offered to it, — *I will draw out from its mouth what it
has swallowed* Though the language is not strictly correct, yet we see
that it was needful, so it might not disturb the minds of the Jews, that
almost all nations regarded that idol with so much veneration.

<span id="ii.iv.li-p10"></span>He afterwards expresses his meaning more
clearly by adding, *the nations shall no more flow together*  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) We hence then see what he meant by the
voracity of Bel, even because there was a resort from all parts to this
temple, for the nations, seeking to ingratiate themselves with the
Babylonians, directed their attention to their god. We, indeed, know
that the temple of Bel remained even after the city was conquered; there
is yet no doubt but that the predictions of Jeremiah and of Isaiah have
been accomplished. For Isaiah says,

<span id="ii.iv.li-p12"></span>“Lie prostrate does Bel, Nebo is broken.”
(<span id="ii.iv.li-p12.1"></span>[Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.li-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.li-p13"></span>He names some other god, who is not made
known by heathen writers; but it is sufficiently evident from this
testimony that Bel was in high repute. He afterwards says that it would
“be a burden to the beasts even to weariness.” We hence learn that Bel
was carried away, not that it was worshipped by the Medes and the
Persians, but because all the wealth was removed, and probably that idol
was made of gold.

<span id="ii.iv.li-p14"></span>It afterwards follows, *Even the wall of
Babylon has fallen* We have said elsewhere that this prophecy ought not
to be restricted to the first overthrow of Babylon, for its walls were
not then pulled down except in part, where the army entered, after the
streams of the Euphrates had been diverted. However, the ancient
splendor of the city still continued. But when Babylon was recovered by
Darius, the son of Hystaspes, then the walls were pulled down to their
foundations, as Herodotus writes, with whom other heathen authors agree.
For Babylon had revolted together with the Assyrians when the Magi
obtained the government; but when Darius recovered the kingdom, he
prepared an army against the Assyrians who had resorted to Babylon; and
their barbarous cruelty is narrated, for they strangled all the women
that they might not consume the provisions. Each one was allowed to keep
one woman as a servant to prepare food and to serve as a cook; but they
spared neither matrons nor wives, nor their own daughters. For a time
the Persians were stoutly repulsed by them. At length, through the
contrivance of Zopyrus, Darius entered the city; he then demolished the
walls and the gates, and afterwards Babylon was no better than a
village. Then also he hung the chief men of the city, to the number of
three or four thousand, which would be incredible were we not to
consider the extent of the city; for such a slaughter would be horrible
in a city of moderate size, even were men of all orders put to death.
But it hence appears what an atrocious cruelty it must have been, when
all the chief men were hung or fixed to crosses; and then also the walls
were demolished, though they were, as it has been elsewhere stated, of
incredible height and width. Their width was fifty feet; Herodotus names
fifty cubits, but I rather think they were feet; and yet their feet were
longer than common.

<span id="ii.iv.li-p15"></span>As, then, Jeremiah now says, that *the
wall of Babylon had fallen,* there is no doubt but his prophecy includes
this second calamity, which happened under Darius; and this confirms
what I have referred to elsewhere. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#045)<span id="ii.iv.lii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p2"></span>**45**. My people, go ye out of the midst
of her*,* and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the
LORD.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p3"></span>**45**. Exite e mediom ejus, popule mi,
et serrate quisque animam suam ab exeandescentia irae Jehovae.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet exhorts the Israelites
to flee from Chaldea and Assyria. Yet this exhortation was intended for
another purpose, to encourage them in the hope of deliverance; for it
was hardly credible that they should ever have a free exit, for Babylon
was to them like a sepulcher. As then he exhorts them as to their
deliverance*,* he intimates that God would be their redeemer, as he had
promised. But he shows that God’s vengeance on Babylon would be
dreadful, when he says, Flee from the *indignation of God’s wrath.*

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p7"></span>We must, however, observe, that the
faithful were thus awakened, lest, being inebriated with the indulgences
of the Chaldeans, they should obstinately remain there, when God
stretched forth his hand to them; for we know what happened when liberty
to return was given to the Israelites — a small portion only returned;
some despised the great favor of God; they were so accustomed to their
habitations, and were so fixed there, that they made no account of the
Temple, nor of the land promised them by God. The Prophet, then, that he
might withdraw the faithful from such indulgences, says, that all who,
in their torpor, remained there, would be miserable, because the
indignation of God would kindle against that city. We now perceive the
object of the Prophet.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p8"></span>It appears, indeed, but a simple
exhortation to the Jews to remove, that they might not be polluted with
the filth of Babylon, but another end is also to be regarded, proposed
by the holy Prophet. This exhortation, then, contains in it a promise of
return, as though he had said, that they were not to fear, because
liberty would at length be given them, as God had promised. In the
meantime, a stimulant is added to the promise, lest the Israelites
should be delighted with the pleasures of Chaldea, and thus despise the
inheritance promised them by God; for we know how great was the
pleasantness of that land, and how great was the abundance it possessed
of all blessings; for the fruitfulness of that land is more celebrated
than that of all other countries. No wonder, then, that the Prophet so
strongly urged the Jews to return, and that he set before them the
vengeance of God to frighten them with terror, in case they slumbered in
Chaldea. And he afterwards adds, —

<span id="ii.iv.liii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.liii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#046)<span
id="ii.iv.liii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p2"></span>**46**. And lest your heart faint, and
ye fear for the rumour that shall be heard in the land; a rumour shall
both come *one* year, and after that in *another* year *shall come* a
rumour, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler.

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p3"></span>**46**. Et ne forte mollescat cor
vestrum, et timeatis in rumore *(hoc est,* ob rumorem) qui audietar in
terra; veniet in anno rumor, et postea in anno (altero, *subaudiendum
est* anno posteriore) rumor, et violentia in terra, et dominator super
dominatorem.

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.liii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet in due time anticipates
a danger, lest the Jews should be disturbed in their minds, when they
saw those dreadful shakings which afterwards happened; for when their
minds were raised to an expectation of a return, great commotions began
to arise in Babylon. Babylon, as it is well known, was for a long time
besieged, and, as is usual in wars, every day brings forth something
new. As, then, God, in a manner, shook the whole land, it could not be,
especially under increasing evils, but that the miserable exiles should
become faint, being in constant fear; for they were exposed to the
wantonness of their enemies. Then the Prophet seasonably meets them
here, and shows that there was no cause for them to be disturbed,
whatever might happen.

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p7"></span>*Come,* he says, *and rise shall various
rumors;* but stand firm in your minds. Interpreters confine these rumors
to the first year of Belshazzar; but I know not whether such a view is
correct. I consider the words simply intended to strengthen weak minds,
lest they should be overwhelmed, or at least vacillate, through trials,
when they heard of grievous commotions.

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p8"></span>But there is a doctrine here especially
useful; for when God designs to aid his Church, he suffers the world to
be, in a manner, thrown into confusion, that the favor of redemption may
appear more remarkable. Unless, then, the faithful were to have some
knowledge of God’s mercy, they could never endure with courageous minds
the trials by which God proves them, and while Satan, on the other hand,
seeks to upset their faith. There is the prelude of this very thing to
be seen in the ancient people: God had promised to be their redeemer;
when the day drew nigh, war suddenly arose, and the Medes and the
Persians, as locusts, covered the whole land. We know what various evils
war brings with it. There is, then, no doubt but that the children of
God sustained many and grievous troubles, especially as they were exiles
there; they must have suffered want, they must have been harassed in
various ways. Now, as the event of war was uncertain, they might have
fainted a hundred times, had they not been supported by this prophecy.
But, as I have said, so now also God deals with his Church; for when a
deliverer appears, all things seem to threaten ruin rather than to
promise a joyful and happy deliverance. It is then necessary, that these
prophecies should come to our minds, and that we should apply, for our
own benefit, what happened formerly to our fathers, for we are the same
body. There is, therefore, no reason for us at this day to wonder, if
all things seem to get worse and worse, when yet God has promised that
the salvation of his Church will ever be precious to him, and that he
will take care of her: how so? because it is said, *Let not your heart
be faint, fear ye not when rumors arise,* one after another; when one
year brings tumults, and then another year brings new tumults, yet let
not all this disturb your minds.  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103)

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p14"></span>And Christ seems to allude to these
words of the Prophet, when he says,

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p15"></span>“Wars shall arise, and rumors of wars:
be ye not troubled.” (<span id="ii.iv.liii-p15.1"></span>[Mt
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.liii-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p16"></span>These words of Christ sufficiently warn
us not to think it strange, if the Church at this day be exposed to
violent waves, and be tossed as by continual storms: why so? because it
is right and just that our condition should be like that of the fathers,
or at least approach to it. We now, then, understand the design of the
Prophet, and the perpetual use that ought to be made of what is here
taught.

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p17"></span>He afterwards adds, *Violence in the
land,* and a *ruler upon* or after a *ruler.* This refers to Cyrus, who
succeeded Darius, whom some call Cyaxares. They, indeed, as it is well
known, both ruled; but Darius, who was older, had the honor of being the
supreme king. Afterwards Cyrus, when Darius was dead, became the king of
the whole monarchy. And Darius the Mede lived only one year after
Babylon was taken. But I doubt not but that the Prophet here bids the
Jews to be of good courage and of a cheerful mind, though the land
should often change its masters; for that change, however often, could
take away nothing from God’s authority and government. It afterwards
follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.liv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.liv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#047)<span id="ii.iv.liv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p2"></span>**47**. Therefore, behold, the days come,
that I will do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon: and her whole
land shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of
her.

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p3"></span>**47**. Propterea ecce dies veniunt, et
visitabo super simulachra Babylonis; et tota terra ejus pudefiet, et
omnes occisi ejus *(vel,* interfecti) cadent in medio ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.liv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p6"></span>He repeats a former sentence, that *God
would visit the idols of Babylon* He does not speak now of Bel only, but
includes all the false gods. We have already said why God raised his
hand against idols, which were yet mere inventions of no account. This
he did for the sake of men, that the Israelites might know that they had
been deceived by the wiles of Satan, and that the faithful might
understand that they ought not to ascribe it to false gods, when God for
a time spared the ungodly. However wanton, then, they might be, in their
prosperity, yet when they perished together with their idols, the
faithful would then learn by experience, that idols obtained no victory
for their worshippers.

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p7"></span>When, therefore, the Prophet now says,
*Behold, the days are coming, and I will visit, etc.,* he no doubt
intended to support the minds of the godly, who otherwise would have
been cast down. And it was the best support, patiently to wait for the
time of visitation, of which he now speaks;. *I will visit,* he says,
*all the images of Babylon;* and then he adds, *her whole land shall be
ashamed.* He speaks of the land, because the dominion of that monarchy
extended far, so that it was difficult to travel through all its
regions, and enemies could hardly have access to them. At length he
adds, *all her slain shall fall in the midst of her*  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) He then speaks first of the country,
and then he adds, that however fortified the city might be, yet. its
walls and towers would be of no moment, for conquerors would march
through her very streets, and everywhere kill those who thought
themselves hid in a safe place, and set, as it were, above the clouds.
He then adds, —

<span id="ii.iv.lv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.lv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:48](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#048)<span id="ii.iv.lv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p2"></span>**48**. Then the heaven and the earth, and
all that *is* therein, shall sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shall
come unto her from the north, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p3"></span>**48**. Et jubilabunt contra Babylonem
coeli et terra, et omnia quae in eis sunt; quia ab aquilone veniet illi
vastatores, (*est mutatio numeri,*) dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p6"></span>That, he might more fully convince the
Jews of the truth of all that he has hitherto said of the destruction of
Babylon, he declares that God would effect it, and that it would be
applauded by all the elements. *Shout,* he says, *shall heaven and
earth;* which is a kind of personification — for he ascribes knowledge
to heaven and earth. It might, indeed, be more refinedly explained, that
angels and men would shout for joy, but it would be a frigid
explanation; and the Prophet removes every ambiguity, by adding, *and
all that is in them:* he includes, no doubt, the stars, men, trees,
fishes, birds, fields, stones, and rivers. And the expression is very
emphatical when he says, that all created things, though without reason
and understanding, would yet be full of joy, so that they would, in a
manner, rejoice and sing praise. If such would be the feeling in dead
creatures, when God put forth his hand against Babylon, would it be
possible for that city to remain safe, which was so hated by heaven and
earth, and which was accursed by birds and wild beasts, by trees, and
everything void of understanding!

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p7"></span>We hence see that the Prophet heaps
together all kinds of figures and modes of speaking, in order to confirm
weak minds, so that they might confidently look forward to the
destruction of Babylon. He at the same time intimates that Babylon was
hated by all creatures, because it had reached to the highest pitch of
wickedness. He then shows the cause by the effect, as though he had said
that Babylon was hated by heaven and earth, so that heaven and earth
seemed as though they deemed themselves in a manner polluted by the
sight of that city. As long, then, as Babylon stood, heaven and earth
sighed: but, on the contrary, when God appeared as an avenger, then
heaven and earth, and all things in them, would shout with joy. Could it
then be that God, the judge of the world, would always connive at its
sins? If heaven and earth could not endure it, and Babylon was so
loathsome to all, and joy would arise from its destruction, could God
possibly allow that city, filled with so many sins, and detested by
heaven and earth, to escape with impunity his judgment?

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p8"></span>We now, then, more fully understand why
the Prophet says that triumph and joy would be in heaven and earth, and
among all created things.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p9"></span>He says, *because;* but the particle <span
id="ii.iv.lv-p9.1"></span>כי, *ki,* may be taken for an adverb of time:
then he says, *when from the north shall come wasters* He alludes to the
Medes, for the Persians were eastward. But as the Medes were nigher, and
also their monarch hr wealthier, the Prophet refers especially to the
Medes when he says that evil would come from the north. For the Medes
were north of Chaldea, as the Persians were eastward.

<span id="ii.iv.lvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou not
only testifiest to us that thou wilt be the Redeemer of thy Church, into
which thou hast been pleased to introduce us, but hast also really
manifested thyself to us in thine only-begotten Son, — O grant that we
may patiently bear all the contests and afflictions by which thou now
provest our faith, and that we may perseveringly fight under the cross,
until, having gone through all our trials, we shall at length enjoy
eternal glory, when we shall find thee to be our complete Redeemer,
through the same Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.iv.lvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvii-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY SECOND

<span id="ii.iv.lviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:49](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#049)<span
id="ii.iv.lviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p2"></span>**49**. As Babylon *hath caused* the
slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the
earth.

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p3"></span>**49**. Sicuti Babylon ut caderent
(*hoc est,* fecit ut caderent, *subaudiendum est aliquid*,) interfecti
Israelis, sic Babyloni cadent interfecti totius terrae.

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p6"></span>THE words literally read thus, “As
Babylon, that they might fall, the slain of Israel, so for Babylon they
shall fall, the slain of all the lands.” Some, omitting the <span
id="ii.iv.lviii-p6.1"></span>ל, *lamed,* in the second clause, render
the passage thus, “As the slain of Israel have fallen through Babylon,
so by Babylon shall they fall: “and others render the last like the
first, “through Babylon.” But the simpler rendering is that which I have
given, even that this would be the reward which God would render
Babylon, that they would fall everywhere through its whole land, as it
had slain the people of Israel. For the Prophet no doubt had this in
view, to alleviate the sorrow of the godly by some consolation; and the
ground of consolation was, that God would be the avenger of all the
evils which the Babylonians had brought on them. For it is a heavy trial
when we think that we are disregarded by God, and that our enemies with
impunity oppress us according to their own will. The Prophet, then,
testifies that God would by no means suffer that so many of the
Israelites should perish unpunished, for he would at length render to
the Babylonians what they deserved, even that they who destroyed others
should in their turn be destroyed.

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p7"></span>We may now easily gather what the
Prophet means, “As Babylon,” he says, “has made many in Israel to fall,
so now the Babylonians themselves shall fall.” To render <span
id="ii.iv.lviii-p7.1"></span>ל, *lamed,* by “through,” or, on account
of, is improper. Then he says the Babylonians themselves shall fall, the
slain of the whole land. By the whole land, I do not understand the
whole world, as other interpreters, but Chaldea only. Then everywhere in
Chaldea, they who had been so cruel as to shed innocent blood everywhere
would perish.  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) And though that
saying is generally true, Whoso sheddeth man’s blood shall be punished;
yet the word is especially addressed to the Church. God, then, avenges
all slaughters, because he cannot bear his own image to be violated,
which he has impressed on men. But as he has a paternal care for his
Church, he is in an especial manner the avenger of that cruelty which
the ungodly exercise towards the faithful.

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p11"></span>In short, the Prophet means, that
though God may suffer for a time the ungodly to rage against his Church,
yet he will be at the suitable season its avenger, so that they shall
everywhere be slain who have been thus cruel.

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p12"></span>But we hence learn that we ought by no
means to despair when God allows so much liberty to the ungodly, so that
they slay the miserable and the innocent, for the same thing happened
formerly to the ancient people. It was the Church of God in which the
Chaldeans committed that carnage of which the Prophet speaks: the
children of God were then slain as sheep. If the same thing should
happen to us at this day, there would be no reason for us to despond,
but to wait for the time of vengeance of which the Prophet speaks here;
for experience will then show how precious to God is the life of all the
godly. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:50](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#050)<span id="ii.iv.lix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p2"></span>**50**. Ye that have escaped the sword,
go away, stand not still: remember the LORD afar off, and let Jerusalem
come into your mind.

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p3"></span>**50**. Qui evasistis e gladio, abite, ne
stetis; recordamini e longinquo Jehovae, et Jerusalem ascendat in cor
vestrum.

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p6"></span>The Prophet again bids the faithful
quickly to flee from Chaldea; but he says, *They who remain from the
sword* He then intimates that the slaughter would be such, that it would
include many of God’s people, and that they would be destroyed. And we
know that many among them deserved such a sad end; but the Prophet now
turns to address those who had been preserved through God’s special
favor. He then bids them to *depart* and not to stand still or stay.

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p7"></span>Now, we said yesterday what was the
object of this exhortation, even that the faithful might feel assured of
their free return to their own country, from which, nevertheless, they
thought they were perpetually excluded; for they had wholly despaired of
deliverance, though it had been so often promised. This exhortation,
then, contains a promise; and in the meantime the Prophet reminds us,
that though God inflicted a temporary punishment on the chosen people,
yet his vengeance on the Babylonians would be perpetual. For God not
only tempers his rigor towards the faithful when he chastises them, but
he also gives them a happy issue, so that all their afflictions become
helps to their salvation, as Paul also teaches us. (<span
id="ii.iv.lix-p7.1"></span>[Ro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span
id="ii.iv.lix-p7.1"></span>.) In short, the punishments inflicted by God
on his children are so many medicines; for he always consults their
safety even when he manifests tokens of his wrath. But the case with the
ungodly is different; for all their punishments are perpetual, even
those which seem to have an end. How so? because they lead to eternal
ruin. This is what the Prophet means when he bids those who *remained,
to flee from Chaldea,* according to what we observed yesterday, when he
said, *Flee ye from the indignation of God’s wrath.* There is, then, an
implied comparison between the punishment which brings ultimate ruin on
the reprobate, and the temporary punishment inflicted by God on his
children.

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p8"></span>He bids them to *remember Jehovah from
afar* Some apply this to the seventy years, but, in my view, in a sense
too restricted. I then doubt not but that the Prophet bids them to
entertain hope and to look to God, however far they may have been driven
from him, as though he were wholly alienated from them. The Israelites
had then been driven into distant lands, as though God never meant to
restore them. As, then, the distance was so great between Chaldea and
Judea, what else could come into the minds of the miserable exiles but
that God was far removed from them, so that it was in vain for them to
seek or call upon him? The Prophet obviates this want of faith, and
raises their confidence, so that they might not cease to flee to God,
though they had been driven into distant lands: *Be,* then, *mindful of
Jehovah from afar*

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p9"></span>Then he adds, *Let Jerusalem ascend on
your heart;* that is, though so many obstacles may intercept your faith,
yet think of Jerusalem. The condition of the people required that they
should be thus animated, for they might otherwise, as it has been said,
have a hundred times despaired, and have thus become torpid in their
calamities. Then the Prophet testifies that an access to God was open to
them, and that though they were removed far, he yet had a care for them,
and was ready to bring help whenever called upon And for the same reason
he bids them to *direct their minds to Jerusalem,* so as to prefer the
Temple of God to all the world, and never to rest quiet until God
restored them, and liberty were given them of worshipping him there.

<span id="ii.iv.lix-p10"></span>Now this passage deserves special
notice, as it applies to us at this day; for when the scattering of the
Church takes place, we think that we are forsaken by God, and we also
conclude that he is far away from us, so that he is sought in vain. As,
then, we are wont, being inclined to distrust, to become soon torpid in
our calamities, as though we were very remote from God, and as though he
did not turn his eyes to look on our miseries, let us apply to ourselves
what is here said, even to *remember Jehovah from afar;* that is, when
we seem to be involved in extreme miseries, when God hides his face from
us and seems to be afar off; in short, when we think ourselves forsaken,
and circumstances appear as proving this, we ought still to contend with
all such obstacles until our faith triumphs, and to employ our thoughts
in remembering God, though he may be apparently alienated from us. Let
us also learn to direct our minds to the Church; for however miserable
our condition may be, it is yet better than the happiness which the
ungodly seek for themselves in the world. When, therefore, we see the
ungodly flattering themselves as to their possessions, when we see them
pleased and delighted as though God were dealing indulgently with them,
let then *Jerusalem come to our minds,* That is, let us prefer the state
of the Church, which may be yet sad and deformed, and such as we would
shun, were we to follow our own inclinations. Let then the condition of
the Church come to our minds, that is, let us embrace the miseries
common to the godly, and let it be more pleasant to us to be connected
with the children of God in all their afflictions, than to be inebriated
with the prosperity of those who only delight in the world, and are at
the same time accursed by God. This is the improvement which we ought to
make of what is here taught. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lx"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.lx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#051)<span id="ii.iv.lx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p2"></span>**51**. We are confounded, because we have
heard reproach: shame hath covered our faces: for strangers are come
into the sanctuaries of the LORD’S house.

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p3"></span>**51**. Pudefacti sumus, quia audivimus
opprobrium; operuit igno minia facies nostras, quia venerunt extranei in
sanctuaria domus Jehovae.

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p6"></span>It is thought that these words were spoken
by the Prophet to the faithful, to confirm them as to their return. But
I rather think that they were spoken by way of anticipation. They who
think that they were spoken as a formula to the Israelites, that they
might with more alacrity prepare themselves for their return, suppose a
verb understood, “Say ye, we are confounded (or ashamed), because we
have heard reproach;” even that sorrow would wound the minds of the
faithful, to the end that they might nevertheless go through all their
difficulties. But as I have said, the Prophet here repeats what the
faithful might have of themselves conceived in their own minds; and he
thus speaks by way of concession, as though he said, “I know that you
have in readiness these words, ‘We are ashamed, we are overwhelmed with
reproaches; strangers have entered into the sanctuary of God: since the
temple is polluted and the city overthrown, what any more remains for
us? and doubtless we see that all things supply reasons for despair.’”

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p7"></span>As, then, the thoughts of the flesh
suggested to the faithful such things as might have dejected their
minds, the Prophet meets them and recites their words. He then says, as
in their person, *We are confounded, because we have heard reproach;*
that is, because we have been harassed by the reproaches of our enemies.
For there is no doubt but that the Chaldeans heaped many reproaches on
that miserable people; for their pride and their cruelty were such that
they insulted the Jews, especially as their religion was wholly
different. As, then, the ears of the people were often annoyed by
reproaches, the Prophet declares here that they had some cause according
to the flesh, why they could hardly dare to entertain the hope of a
return.

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p8"></span>To the same purpose is what he adds,
*Shame hath covered our faces, because strangers have come into the
sanctuaries of Jehovah* For it was the chief glory of the chosen people
that they had a temple where they did not in vain call upon God; for
this promise was like an invaluable treasure,

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p9"></span>“I will dwell in the midst of you; this is
my rest, here will I dwell.” (<span id="ii.iv.lx-p9.1"></span>[Ps.
132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="ii.iv.lx-p9.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p10"></span>As, then, God was pleased to choose for
himself that throne and habitation in the world, it was, as I have said,
the principal dignity of the people. But when the temple was overthrown,
what more remained for them? it was as though religion was wholly
subverted, and as though God also had left them and moved elsewhere; in
short, all their hope of divine aid and of salvation was taken away from
there.

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p11"></span>We now, then, understand why the Prophet
speaks thus according to the common thoughts of the people, even that
they were *covered with shame, because strangers had come into God’s
sanctuaries;* for that habitation, which God had chosen for himself, was
polluted. And he says “sanctuaries,” in the plural number, because the
temple had many departments, as the tabernacle had; for there was rite
vestibule or the court where they killed the victims; and then there was
the holy place, and there was the holy of holies, which was the inner
sanctuary. It was then on this account that he said that the
*sanctuaries* of the house of God were possessed by strangers; for it
was a sad and shameful pollution when strangers took possession of God’s
temple, where even the common people were not admitted; for though the
whole of the people were consecrated to God, yet none but the priests
entered the temple. It was therefore a dreadful profanation of the
temple, when enemies entered it by force and for the sake of degrading
it. What then remained for the people, except despair?

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p12"></span>“This is your glory,” said Moses, “before
all nations; for what people so noble, what nation so illustrious, as to
have gods so near to it!” (<span id="ii.iv.lx-p12.1"></span>[De
4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.lx-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.iv.lx-p13"></span>When, therefore, God ceased to dwell
familiarly with the Jews, all their glory fell, and they were
overwhelmed with shame. But after the Prophet recited these complaints,
he immediately subjoins a consolation, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:52](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#052)<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p2"></span>**52**. Wherefore, behold, the days come,
saith the LORD, that I will do judgment upon her graven images: and
through all her land the wounded shall groan.

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p3"></span>**52**. Propterea ecce dies veniunt,
dicit Jehova, et visitabo super sculptilia ejus; et in tota terra ejus
clamabit vulneratus *(vel,* occisus, *hoc nomen* <span
id="ii.iv.lxi-p3.1"></span>חלל, *jam soepius vidimus.)*

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p6"></span>The design of the Prophet is, as I have
reminded you, to raise up the minds of the godly that they might not
succumb under their trials, on seeing that they were exposed to shame
and were destitute of all honors. He then says that the time would come
when God would take vengeance on the *idols* of Babylon. And thus God
claims for himself that power which seemed then to have almost
disappeared; for the temple being overthrown, the Babylonians seemed in
a manner to triumph over him, as God’s power in the temple was overcome.
Then as the ruin of it, as we have said, seemed to have extinguished
God’s power, the Prophet applies a remedy, and says that though the
temple was overthrown, yet God remained perfect and his power
unchangeable. But among other things he bids the faithful patiently to
wait, for he invites their attention to the hope of what was as yet
hidden.

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p7"></span>We now see how, these things, agree, and
why the Prophet uses the particle “therefore,” <span
id="ii.iv.lxi-p7.1"></span>לכן, *laken: Therefore, behold, the days are
coming,* that is, though ye are confounded, yet God will give you a
reason for glorying, so that ye shall again sing joyfully his praises.
But he says, “the days will come;” by these words he reminds us that we
are to cherish the hope of the promises until God completes his work;
and thus he corrected that ardor by which we are seized in the midst of
our afflictions, for we wish immediately to fly away to God. The
Prophet, then, here exhorts the faithful to sustain courage until the
time fixed by God; and so he refers them to God’s providence, lest they
assumed too much in wishing him to act as their own minds led them.
*Come then shall the days when I shall visit the graven images of
Babylon; and groan* or cry, etc.; for the word <span
id="ii.iv.lxi-p7.2"></span>אנק*, anak,* means to cry. Some render thus,
“groan shall the wounded;” and they render the last word “wounded,”
because they think it improper to say that the slain cry or groan. But
the Prophet means that the cry in that slaughter would be great, that
is, that while the Babylonians were slain, a great howling would be
everywhere. It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:53](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#053)<span
id="ii.iv.lxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p2"></span>**53**. Though Babylon should mount up
to heaven, and though she should fortify the height of her strength,
*yet* from me shall spoilers come unto her, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p3"></span>**53**. Si ascenderit Babylon in coelos,
et si munierit excelsum fortitudinis sum *(vel,* munierit fortitudinem
suam in excelso, *quod mihi magis placet*,) a me venient vastatores ei,
dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p6"></span>The Prophet again teaches us, that
however impregnable Babylon might be, there was yet no reason to fear
but that God would be its judge; for it is by no means right to measure
his power by our thoughts. And nothing does more hinder or prevent us
from embracing the promises of God, than to think of what may be done
naturally, or of what is probable. When, therefore, we thus consult our
own thoughts, we exclude the power of God, which is superior to all the
means that may be used.

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p7"></span>Hence the Prophet says here, that though
Babylon ascended above the heavens, and in the height fortified strength
for itself, *yet from me,* he says, *shall come wasters to it*  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) There is to be understood here a
contrast between God and men; for if there be a contest between men,
they fight one with another; but the way of God is different, for he can
thunder from heaven, and thus lay prostrate the highest mountains. We
now, then, perceive the purpose of the Prophet by saying, that
*desolators* would come from God to destroy Babylon, were it to ascend
above the clouds. It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:54](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#054)<span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p2"></span>**54**. A sound of a cry *cometh* from
Babylon, and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans:

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p3"></span>**54**. Vox clamoris e Babylone, et
confractio magna e terra Chaldaeorum.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p6"></span>Jeremiah in a manner exults over
Babylon, in order that the faithful, having had all obstacles removed or
surmounted, might feel assured that what the Prophet had predicted of
the fall of Babylon would be confirmed, he then brings them to the very
scene itself, when he says, that there would be the *voice of a cry from
Babylon,* and that there would be *great breaking* or *distress from the
land of the Chaldeams*

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p7"></span>We, at the same time, may render <span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p7.1"></span>שבר, *shober,* here “crashing,” so that it
may correspond with the previous clause: he had said, *The voice of a
cry from Babylon;* now he says, *a crashing from the land of the
Chaldeans* They call that sound crashing, which is produced by some
great shaking; as when a great mass falls, it does not happen without a
great noise. This, then, is properly what the Prophet means. We have
already stated why he used these words, even that the faithful might
have before their eyes the event itself, which as yet was incredible. It
follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:55](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#055)<span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p2"></span>**55**. Because the LORD hath spoiled
Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do
roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered:

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p3"></span>**55**. Quia perdens Jehova Babylonem
(*hoc est* perdet, *aut* vastabit *proprie est* <span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p3.1"></span>שדד) et perdet (*nunc aliud est verbum*) ex
ea vocem magnam *(vel,* magnificam;) et sonuerunt fluctus eorum tanquam
aquae magnae, editus est sonitus vocis eorum.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p6"></span>The reason for the crashing is now
added, even because God had resolved to lay waste Babylon, and to reduce
it to nothing. Jeremiah again calls the faithful to consider the power
of God. He then says, that it would not be a work done by men, because
God would put forth his great power, which cannot be comprehended by
human minds. He then sets the name of God in opposition to all
creatures, as though he had said, that what exceeds all the efforts of
men, would yet be easily done by God. He, indeed, represents God here as
before our eyes, and says that Babylon would perish, but that it was God
who would lay it waste. He thus sets forth God here as already armed for
the purpose of cutting off Babylon. *And he will destroy from her the
magnificent voice,* that is, her immoderate boasting.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p7"></span>What follows is explained by many
otherwise than I can approve; for they say that the waves made a noise
among the Babylonians at the time when the city was populous; for where
there is a great concourse of men, a great noise is heard, but solitude
and desolation bring silence. They thus, then, explain the words of the
Prophet, that though now waves, that is, noises, resounded in Babylon
like great waters, and the sound of their voice went forth, yet God
would destroy their great or magnificent voice. But I have no doubt but
that what the Prophet meant by their great voice, was their
grandiloquent boasting in which the Babylonians indulged during their
prosperity. While, then, the monarchy flourished, they spoke as from the
height. Their silence from fear and shame would follow, as the Prophet
intimates, when God checked that proud glorying.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p8"></span>But what follows I take in a different
sense; for I apply it to the Medes and the Persians: and so there is a
relative without an antecedent — a mode of speaking not unfrequent in
Hebrew. He then expresses the manner in which God would destroy or
abolish the grandiloquent boasting of the Babylonians, even *because
their waves,* that is, of the Persians, *would make a noise like great
waters;* that is, the Persians, and the Medes would rush on them like
impetuous waves, and thus the Babylonians would be brought to silence
and reduced to desolation.  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) When
they were at peace, and no enemy disturbed them, they then gave full
vent to their pride; and thus vaunting was the speech of Babylon as long
as it flourished; but when suddenly the enemies made an irruption, then
Babylon became silent or mute on account of the frightful sound within
it. We hence see why he compares the Persians and the Medes to violent
waves which would break and put an end to that sound which was before
heard in Babylon. It follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:56](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#056)<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p2"></span>**56** Because the spoiler is come upon
her, *even* upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, every one of
their bows is broken: for the LORD God of recompences shall surely
requite.

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p3"></span>**56**. Quia venit super eam*,* super
Babylonem, vastator; et deprehensus est fortis ejus (deprehensi sunt,
*vel,* capri, fortes ejus;) confractus est arcus eorum, quia Deus
retributionum Jehova reddendo reddet.

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p6"></span>He confirms the former verse; for as the
thing of which he speaks was difficult to be believed, he sets God
before them, and shows that he would be the author of that war. He now
continues his discourse and says, that *desolators shall come against
Babylon.* He had ascribed to God what he now transfers to the Medes and
the Persians. He had said, *Jehovah hath desolated* or wasted, <span
id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.1"></span>שדד יהוה, *shedad Jeve;* he says now, *coming
is a desolator,* <span id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.2"></span>שודד*, shudad.* Who is
he? not God, but Cyrus, together with the united army of the Persians
and the Medes; yea, with vast forces assembled from many nations, Now
that the same name is given to God and to the Persians, this is done
with regard to the ministration. Properly speaking, God was the
desolator of Babylon; but as in this expedition he employed the services
of men, and made the Persians and the Medes, as it were, his ministers,
and the executioners of his judgment, the name which properly belongs to
God is transferred to the ministers whom he employed. The same mode of
speaking is also used when blessings are spoken of. He is said to have
raised up saviors for his people, while yet he himself is the only
Savior, nor can any mortal assume that name without sacrilege. (<span
id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.3"></span>[Jud
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.4"></span>[2Ki
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.4"></span>.) For God’s peculiar glory is taken away,
when salvation is sought through the arm of men, as we have seen in
<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.5"></span>[Jeremiah
17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.5"></span>.
But though God is the only author of salvation, yet it is no objection
to this truth, that he employs men in effecting his purposes. So also he
converts men, illuminates their minds by the ministers of the gospel,
and also delivers them from eternal death. (<span
id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.6"></span>[Lu
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span
id="ii.iv.lxv-p6.6"></span>.) Doubtless were any one to arrogate to
himself what Christ is pleased to concede to the ministers of his
gospel, he could by no means be endured; but as I have already said, we
must bear this in mind, that though God acts by his own power and never
borrows anything from any one, nor stands in need of any help, yet what
properly belongs to him is, in a manner, applied to men, at least by way
of concession. So now, then, the Prophet calls God the desolator, and
afterwards he honors with the same title the Persians and the Medes.

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p7"></span>He adds, that *the valiant men of Babylon
were taken,* according to what we have before seen, that the city was so
taken that no one resisted. Then he adds, that *their bow was broken,*
there is a part stated for the whole; for under the word *bow* he
includes all kinds of armor. But as bows were used at a distance, and as
enemies were driven from the walls by casting arrows, the Prophet says
that there would be no use made of bows, because the enemies would skew
themselves in the middle of the city before the watchmen saw them, as we
know that such was really the case. We now perceive why the Prophet
mentions the bow rather than swords or other weapons.

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p8"></span>The reason follows, *Because Jehovah is
the God of retributions, and recompensing her recompenses,* that is, he
will recompense. The Prophet here confirms all that he had said, and
reasons from the nature or character of God himself. As then the fall of
Babylon would hardly be believed by the faithful, the Prophet does not
ask what God is in himself, but declares that he is the God of
retributions, as though he had said, that it belonged to God, and that
it could not be separated from his nature, to be the God of
retributions, otherwise his judgment would be nothing, his justice would
be nothing. For if the reprobate succeeded with impunity, and if the
righteous were oppressed without any aid, would not God be like a stock
of wood or an imaginary thing? For why has he power, except that he may
exercise justice? But God cannot be without power.

<span id="ii.iv.lxv-p9"></span>We now, then, see how forcible is this
confirmation, with which the Prophet doses his discourse: for it is the
same as if he had said, that no doubt could possibly be entertained as
to the fall of Babylon, because God is the God of retributions. Either
there is no God, he says, or Babylon must be destroyed; how so? for if
there be a God, he is the God of retributions; if he is the God of
retributions, then recompensing he will recompense. Now, it is well
known how wicked Babylon was, and in what various ways it had provoked
the wrath of God. Then it was impossible for it to escape his hand
unpunished, since it had in so many ways sought its own ruin.

<span id="ii.iv.lxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxvi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.lxvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that when thou
hidest at this day thy face from us, the miserable despair we apprehend
may not overwhelm our faith, nor obscure our view of thy goodness and
grace, but that in the thickest darkness thy power may ever appear to
us, which can raise us above the world, so that we may courageously
fight to the end, and never doubt but that thou wilt at length be the
defender of thy Church, which now seems to be oppressed, until we shall
enjoy our perfect happiness in heaven, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.iv.lxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxvii-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY THIRD

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057)<span
id="ii.iv.lxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p2"></span>**57**. And I will make drunk her
princes, and her wise *men*, her captains, and her rulers, and her
mighty men: and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith
the King, whose name *is* the LORD of hosts.

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p3"></span>**57**. Et inebriabo principes ejus et
sapientes ejus et duces ejus et praefectos ejus et fortes ejus; et
dormient somnum perpetuum, et non expergefient, dicit rex, cujus nomen
est Jehova exercituum.

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p6"></span>Jeremiah pursues the same subject, he
said yesterday that desolators would come to destroy Babylon. He now
confirms this by a similitude; and God himself speaks, *I will
inebriate* the princes and captains as well as the soldiers and all the
counselors. He seems here to allude to that feast of which Daniel
speaks, and of which heathen authors have written. (<span
id="ii.iv.lxviii-p6.1"></span>[Da
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.lxviii-p6.1"></span>) For while the feast was celebrated by
the Babylonians, the city was that night taken, not only through the
contrivance and valor of Cyrus, but also through the treachery of those
who had revolted from Belshazzar. As, then, they were taken while at the
feast, and as the king was that night slain together with his satraps,
God seems to refer to this event when he declares, that when he had
inebriated them, they would be overtaken with perpetual sleep; for death
immediately followed that feasting. They had prolonged their feast to
the middle of the night; and while they were sitting at table, a tumult
arose suddenly in the city, and the king heard that he was in the hand
of his enemies. As, then, feasting and death followed in close
succession*,* it is a striking allusion given by the Prophet, when God
threatens the Babylonians with perpetual sleep, after having inebriated
them.

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p7"></span>But he mentions here the *rulers* and
the *captains,* as well as the *counsellors* and *the wise* men. We,
indeed, know that the Babylonians were inflated by a twofold confidence,
— they thought themselves endued with consummate wisdom, and also that
they possessed warlike valor. This is the reason why the Prophet
expresses so distinctly, that all the captains and rulers in Babylon,
however superior in acuteness and prudence, would yet be overtaken with
perpetual sleep before they rose from their table. And we must observe
that Jeremiah had many years thus prophesied of Babylon; and hence we
conclude that his mind as well as his tongue was guided by the Spirit of
God, for he could not have possibly conjectured what would be after
eighty years: yet so long a time intervened between the prediction and
its accomplishment, as we shall presently see.

<span id="ii.iv.lxviii-p8"></span>Moreover, the Prophet uses here a mode
of speaking which often occurs in Scripture, even that insensibility is
a kind of drunkenness by which God dementates men through his hidden
judgment. It ought, then, to be noticed, that whatever prudence and
skill there is in the world, they are in such a way the gifts of God,
that whenever he pleases the wisest are blinded, and, like the drunken,
they either go astray or fall. But we must bear in mind what I have
already said, that the Prophet alludes to that very history, for there
was then an immediate transition from feasting to death. It now follows,

<span id="ii.iv.lxix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058)<span
id="ii.iv.lxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p2"></span>**58**. Thus saith the LORD of hosts;
The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken, and her high gates
shall be burned with fire; and the people shall labour in vain, and the
folk in the fire, and they shall be weary.

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p3"></span>**58**. Sic dicit Jehova exercituum,
Murus Babylonis latitudinis *(hoc est,* latus) dissipando dissipabitur,
et portae ejus excelsae igne comburentur, et laborabunt populi ad
nihilum, et gentes in igne, et fatigabuntur.

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p6"></span>The Prophet again introduces God as the
speaker, that what he said might obtain more attention from the Jews;
and for this reason he subjoined a eulogy to the last verse, and said
that the *king* spoke, *whose name is Jehovah of hosts* We have stated
elsewhere what is the design of such expressions, even that men may rise
above everything seen in the world when God’s power is mentioned, that
they may not try to contain it in their own small measure. Then the
Prophet now again repeats the name of God, that the Jews might receive
with becoming reverence what he announced.

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p7"></span>And what he says is, *The wall of
Babylon,* however *wide* it may be, *shall yet be surely demolished.* We
have said that the walls were fifty feet wide, and the feet were indeed
long, though Herodotus, as I have said, mentions cubits and not feet.
The width, indeed, was such that four horses abreast meeting, could
pass, there being space enough for them. It hence, then, appears, that
their thickness was so great, that the Babylonians confidently
disregarded whatever had been predicted by the Prophet; for no engines
of war could have ever beaten down walls so thick, especially as they
were made of bricks and cemented by bitumen. As, then, the material,
beside the thickness, was so firm and strong, this prophecy was
incredible. It did not indeed reach the Babylonians, but the Jews
themselves regarded as a fable all that they had heard from the mouth of
the Prophet. Yet God did not in vain refer to width of the wall, in
order that the faithful might feel assured that the walls of Babylon
could not possibly resist him, however firm they might be in their
materials and thickness. *The wall,* he says, *shall surely be
demolished.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p8"></span>He afterwards mentions the *gates,*
which Herodotus says were of brass when Darius took them away. He,
indeed, means the doors, but the Prophet includes the framework as well
as the brazen doors. He then says, they shall *be consumed with fire*
The Babylonians might have laughed at this threatening of Jeremiah, for
brass could not have been consumed with fire, even if enemies had been
permitted to set fire to them — for brass could not have been so soon
melted. But as the Prophet had predicted this by God’s command, so at
length his prophecy was verified when he was dead, because it was proved
by the event that this proceeded from God; for when the doors were
removed, the gates themselves were demolished; and it may have been that
Darius put fire to them, that he might the sooner destroy the gates and
the towers, which were very high, as well as the walls.

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *Labor shall the
people in vain, and the nations in the fire; they shall be wearied* So
this passage is commonly explained, as though the Prophet had said, that
when the walls of Babylon had begun to burn, and the gates to be
consumed with fire, there would be no remedy, though the Babylonians
might greatly weary themselves and fatigue themselves in attempting to
quench the fire. But this exposition seems to be forced and unnatural. I
therefore take the words, though future, in the past tense. And as the
walls of Babylon had not been erected without great labor, and a vast
number of men had been hired, some to bring bitumen, others to heap up
the earth, and others to make the bricks, the Prophet in this place
intimates that all this labor would be in vain, even because it was
spent for the fire, — that whatever they did who had been either hired
for wages or forced by authority to erect the walls, was labor for the
fire; that is, they labored that their work might eventually be consumed
by fire. This seems to me to be the real meaning of the Prophet. He then
says that *the people had labored in vain,* or for nothing, and why?
because they *labored for the fire.* The second clause is in my view an
explanation of the former.  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) It
now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxx"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059)<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p2"></span>**59**. The word which Jeremiah the
prophet commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when
he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth year
of his reign. And *this* Seraiah *was* a quiet prince.

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p3"></span>**59**. Sermo quem praecepit Jeremias
propheta Seraiae filio Neriae, filii Mahesiae, quum profectus est pro
Zedechia (*vel,* a Zedechia,) rege Jehudah, Babylonem, anno quarto regni
ipsius; Seraiah autem princeps quietis.

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p5"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p6"></span>This is a remarkable sealing of the whole
of what we have hitherto found said respecting the destruction of
Babylon; for the Prophet not only spoke and promulgated what the Spirit
of God had dictated, but also put it down in a book; and not contented
with this, he delivered the book to Seraiah the son of Neriah, when he
went to Babylon by the command of Zedekiah the king, that he might read
it there, east it into the Euphrates, and strengthen himself in the hope
of all those things which had been divinely predicted.

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p7"></span>He says first that he *commanded Seraiah*
what he was to do, even to read the volume and to throw it into the
Euphrates, as we shall hereafter see. But he points out the time and
mentions the disposition of Seraiah, that we might not think it strange
that the Prophet dared to give an authoritative command to the king’s
messenger, which a man of another character would have refused. As to
the time, it was the fourth year of the reign of Zedekiah; seven years
before the city was taken, being besieged the ninth year and taken the
eleventh. Then seven years before the destruction and ruin of the city,
Seraiah was sent by the king to Babylon. There is no doubt but that the
message was sent to pacify the king of Babylon, who had been offended
with the fickleness and perfidy of King Zedekiah; an ambassador was then
sent to seek pardon. But what the Jews say, that Zedekiah went to
Babylon, is wholly groundless; and we know that Sederola, whence they
have taken this, is full of all kinds of fables and trifles; and on such
a point as this, sacred history would not have been silent, for it was a
thing of great moment; and then the particle <span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p7.1"></span>את, *at,* expresses no such thing, but may be
rendered in this sense, that the messenger was *sent for,* or *by,* or
*in the place of Zedekiah*. Let us then be satisfied with this simple
and obvious explanation, that Seraiah was the king’s messenger sent to
remove the offenses taken by the Babylonians.  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) And this happened *in the fourth year
of Zedekiah.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p9"></span>Now, by calling Seraiah *a prince of
quietness,* I doubt not but that a reference is made to his gentleness
and meekness; and I wonder that in so plain a thing interpreters have
toiled so much. One renders it, even the Chaldean paraphrase, “the
prince of the oblations,” as though he was set over to examine the
presents offered to the king. Others imagine that he was a facetious man
who amused the king in his fears; and others think that he was called
“prince of quietness,” because he preserved the city in a quiet state.
But all these things are groundless.  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) No other view, then, seems to me
right, but that he was a prince of a quiet disposition. Therefore the
word “quietness” ought not to be referred to any office, but a noun in
the genitive case used instead of an adjective. He was, then, a quiet
prince, or one of a placid disposition. And this commendation was not
without reason added, because we know how haughtily the princes rejected
everything commanded them by the servants of God. Seraiah might have
objected, and said that he was sent to Babylon, not by a private person,
and one of the common people, but by the king himself. He might then
have haughtily reproved the Prophet for taking too much liberty with
him, “Who art thou, that thou darest to command me, when I sustain the
person of the king? and when I am going in his name to the king of
Babylon? and then thou seekest to create disturbances by ordering me to
read this volume. What if it be found on me? what if some were to
suspect that I carry such a thing to Babylon? would I not, in the first
place, carry death in my bosom? and would I not, in the second place, be
perfidious to my king? for thus my message would be extremely disliked.”

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p11"></span>As then Seraiah might have stated all
these things, and have rejected the command which Jeremiah gave him, his
gentleness is expressly mentioned, even that he was a meek man, and who
withheld not his service — who, in short, was ready to obey God and his
servant. What, in a word, is here commended*,* is the meekness of
Seraiah, that he received the Prophet with so much readiness, — that he
suffered himself to be commanded by him, and that he also hesitated not
to execute what he had commanded, when yet it might have been a capital
offense, and it might especially have been adverse to his mission, which
was to reconcile the king of Babylon. And surely it is an example worthy
of being noticed, that Seraiah was not deterred by danger from rendering
immediate obedience to the Prophet’s command, nor did he regard himself
nor the omee committed to him, so as to reject the Prophet, according to
the usual conduct of princes, under the pretext of their own dignity;
but laying aside his own honor and forgetting all his greatness, he
became a disciple to Jeremiah, who yet, as it is well known, had been
long despised by the people, and had sometimes been nearly brought to
death. It was, then, a remarkable instance of virtue in Seraiah, that he
received with so much modesty and readiness what had been said to him by
the Prophet, and that he obeyed his command, to the evident danger of
his own life. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
51:60-64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#060)<span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p2"></span>**60**. So Jeremiah wrote in a book all
the evil that should come upon Babylon, *even* all these words that are
written against Babylon.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p3"></span>**60**. Et scripsit Jeremias omne malum,
quod venturum erat contra Babylonem in libro uno, omnes sermones istos
scriptos contra Babylonem.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p4"></span>**61**. And Jeremiah said to Seraiah,
When thou comest to Babylon, and shalt see, and shalt read all these
words;

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p5"></span>**61**. Et dixit Jeremias ipsi Seraiae,
Quum ingressus fueris Babylonem, et conspexeris eam, tunc leges omnes
sermones istos,

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p6"></span>**62**. Then shalt thou say, O LORD,
thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall
remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate for
ever.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p7"></span>**62**. Et dices, Jehova, tu loquutus es
contra locum hunc, ad excidendum ipsum, ut non sit in eo habitator, ab
homine ad bestiam, quia vastationes perpetuae erit (hoc est, erit in
vastationes perpetuas, vel redigetur.)

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p8"></span>**63**. And it shall be, when thou hast
made an end of reading this book, *that* thou shalt bind a stone to it,
and cast it into the midst of Euphrates:

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p9"></span>**63**. Et erit quum finem feceris
legendo librum hunc, alligabis ad ipsum lapidem, et projicies in medium
Euphratem:

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p10"></span>**64**. And thou shalt say, Thus shall
Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon
her: and they shall be weary. Thus far *are* the words of Jeremiah.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p11"></span>**64**. Et dices, Sic mergetur Babylon,
et non exurget a facie mali quod ego immitto contra eam, et volabunt
(aut, fatigabunt.) Hue usque sermones Jeremiae.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p13"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p14"></span>Here we see, on one hand, what courage
the Prophet had, who dared to command the king’s messenger; for though
Seraiah was a meek man, so as to render himself submissive, yet Jeremiah
exposed himself to danger; for he might have been timid, though he was
neither proud nor arrogant; and thus, as men are wont to do when
terrified, he might have referred to the king what he had heard from the
Prophet. Then Jeremiah did what we here read, not without danger; and
hence appears his firmness. We then see that he was endued with the
spirit of invincible courage, so as to discharge his office freely and
intrepidly.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p15"></span>On the other hand, we have to observe
not only the meekness of Seraiah, but also his piety, together with his
modesty; for except he had in him a strong principle of religion, he
might have adduced plausible reasons for refusing. As, then, he was so
submissive, and dreaded no danger, it is evident that the real fear of
God was vigorous in his soul.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p16"></span>And these things ought to be carefully
noticed; for who of our cornfly princes can be found at this day who
will close his eyes to all dangers, and resolutely disregard all adverse
events, when God and his servants are to be obeyed? And then we see how
pusillanimous are those who profess to be God’s ambassadors, and claim
to themselves the name of Pastors. As, then, teachers dare not
faithfully to perform their office, so on the other hand courtly princes
are so devoted to themselves and to their own prudence, that they are
unwilling to undertake duties which are unpopular. On this account,
then, this passage, with all its circumstances, ought to be carefully
noticed.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p17"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p18"></span>Jeremiah, then, *wrote in a book all
the evil which was to come on Babylon,* even *all those words,* (he
refers to the prophecies which we have seen;) *and Jeremiah said to
Seraiah,*  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) *etc*. Here the
boldness of Jeremiah comes to view, that he hesitated not to command
Seraiah to read this book when he came to Babylon and had seen it. To
see it, is not mentioned here without reason, for the splendor of that
city might have astonished Seraiah. Then the Prophet here seasonably
meets the difficulty, and bids him to disregard the height of the walls
and towers; and that however Babylon might dazzle the eyes of others,
yet he was to look down, as from on high, on all that pomp and pride:
*When thou enterest* the city, *and hast seen it, then read this book*
The verb <span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p19.4"></span>קרא*, kora,* means to call,
to proclaim, and also to read. Then Seraiah must have read this book by
himself; nor do I doubt but that the words ought to be so understood, as
we shall see. It was not then necessary for Seraiah to have a pulpit, or
in a public way to read the book to an assembled people; but it was
sufficient to read it privately by himself, without any witnesses; and
this may be gathered from the context.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p20"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p21"></span>*And thou shalt say, Jehovah, thou hast
spoken against this place* It hence appears that Seraiah was commanded
to read the book, not for the benefit of hearers, for they would have
been doubly deaf to the words of Seraiah. And it is not probable that
the Hebrew language was then familiar to the Chaldeans. There is a great
affinity, as it is well known, in the languages, but there is also some
difference. But we conclude, from this passage, that the reading was in
a chamber, or in some secret place; for Seraiah is bidden to fix all his
thoughts on God, and to address his words to him. He did not then
undertake the work or office of a preacher, so as openly to proclaim all
these things to the Babylonians. But having inspected the city, he was
to read the book by himself, that is, what had been written.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p22"></span>And this also deserves to be noticed;
for however courageous we may be, yet our constancy and boldness are
more apparent when we have to do with men than when we are alone, and
God is the only witness; for when no one sees us, we tremble; and though
we may have previously appeared to have manly courage, yet when alone,
fear lays hold on us. There is hardly one in a hundred who is so bold as
he ought to be when God alone is witness. But shame renders us
courageous and constrains us to be firm, and the vigor which is almost
extinct in private is roused in public. As, then, ambition almost always
rules in men, this passage ought to be carefully noticed, where the
Prophet commands Seraiah to deal alone with God, and, though no mortal
was present, to strengthen himself, by relying on the certain and
infallible fidelity of God; *Thou shalt* then *say, Jehovah, etc.* And
it is doubtless a real experiment of faith, when we consider within
ourselves the promises of God, and go not forth before the public to
avow our firmness; for when any one in silence acknowledges God to be
true, and strengthens himself in his promises, and so disregards the
false judgments of all, that were he alone in the world, he would not
yet despond, — this is a true and real trial of faith.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p23"></span>*Thou shalt* then *say, Jehovah, thou
hast spoken against this place* The design of the words was, that
Seraiah might feel assured that God was true, and embrace in his
presence what he read, and not doubt but that the word, which came from
God, would, in due time, be accomplished: how so? because God is true.
The word *Jehovah,* then, ought to be regarded as emphatical; *and thou
shalt say, Thou, Jehovah,* *hast spoken against this place;* that is,
neither Jeremiah, nor any other mortal, is the author of this prophecy;
but thou, O Lord, has dictated to thy servant whatever is contained in
this volume.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p24"></span>*To destroy it, so that there should
not be an inhabitant in it, neither man nor beast:* how so? *because it
shall be reduced to desolations,* or the particle <span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p24.1"></span>כי*, ki,* may be taken adversatively, *but
it shall be reduced to perpetual desolations*  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112)

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p28"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p29"></span>He afterwards adds, *And when thou hast
made an end of reading, thou shalt tie a stone to it and cast it into
the Euphrates, and shalt say, Thus sink shall Babylon* Here is added an
external symbol to confirm the faith of Seraiah. We must yet bear in
mind, that this was not said to Seraiah for his own sake alone, but that
the people might also know, that the king’s messenger, who had been sent
for the sake of conciliating, was also the messenger of God and of the
Prophet, who might have otherwise been despised by the people. When,
therefore, the faithful knew this, they were in no ordinary way
confirmed in the truth of the prophecy. Jeremiah, then, not only
consulted the benefit of Seraiah alone, but that of all the godly; for
though this was unknown for a long time, yet the messenger afterwards
acknowledged that this command had been given him by Jeremiah, and that
he took the book and cast it into the Euphrates. This, then, was given
as a confirmation to all the godly.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p30"></span>As to the symbols by which God sealed
the prophecies in former times, we have spoken elsewhere; I therefore
pass them by slightly now: only we ought to bear in mind this one thing,
that these signs were only temporary sacraments; for ordinary sacraments
are permanent, as the holy supper and baptism. But the sign mentioned
here was temporary, and referred, as they say, to a special action: it
yet had the force and character of a sacrament, as to its use, the
confirmation of this prophecy. Seraiah was then bidden to *tie a stone*
to the book, and then to *cast it into the Euphrates:* why so? that the
volume might not swim on the surface of the water, but be sunk down to
the bottom; and the application follows, *Thou shalt say, etc*. We see
that words ought ever to be connected with signs. We hence conclude how
fatuous the Papists are, who practice many ceremonies, but without
knowledge. They are, indeed, dead and empty things, whatever signs men
may devise for themselves, except God’s word be added. *Thou shalt* then
*say, Thus sink shall Babylon, and shall not rise from the evil which I
shall bring upon her* In short, Seraiah was commanded, as the Prophet’s
messenger, to predict by himself concerning the fall of Babylon; but it
was for the sake of all the godly, who were afterwards taught what had
been done.  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113)

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p33"></span><span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p34"></span>The Conclusion follows, *Thus far the
words of Jeremiah* We have said that the prophets, after having spoken
in the Temple, or to the people, afterwards collected brief summaries,
and that these contained the principal things: from these the prophetic
books were made up. For Jeremiah did not write the volume as we have it
at this day, except the chapters; and it appears evident that it was not
written in the order in which he spoke. The order of time is not, then,
everywhere observed; but the scribes were careful in this respect, that
they collected the summaries affixed to the doors of the Temple; and so
they added this conclusion, *Thus far the words of Jeremiah* But this,
in my view, is not to be confined to the prophecies respecting the fall
of Babylon; for I doubt not but that the scribe who had collected all
his prophecies, added these words, that he had thus far transcribed the
words of Jeremiah.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p35"></span>We hence conclude that the last chapter
is not included in the prophetic book of Jeremiah, but that it contains
history only as far as was necessary to understand what is here taught:
for it appears evident that many parts of the prophecy could not be
understood without the knowledge of this history. As to the book of
Lamentations, we know that it was a work distinct from the prophecies of
Jeremiah: there is, then, no wonder that it has been added, *Thus far
the words of Jeremiah*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv.lxxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that Since thou
hast deigned to choose us for thy people, we may not doubt but that our
enemies will be before thee like Babylon, so that when thou hast
chastised us, thou wilt at length, by a fatal and perpetual destruction,
so lay them prostrate, that they shall rise up no more; and when thou
hast killed the body, manifest thyself as our deliverer, until we shall
at length be gathered into that celestial kingdom which has been
prepared for us by thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc21005.htm#fr_79) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p8.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p9"></span> The *Targ.* and the versions widely differ
from one another. The cabbalistic solution is very frivolous, by which
the two words <span id="ii.iv.i-p9.1"></span>לב and <span
id="ii.iv.i-p9.2"></span>קמי are made one, and made to signify
“Chaldeans,” according to what was called “Athbash,” by which *aleph,*
the first letter, was taken for *tau,* the last letter, and *beth,* the
second, for *shin,* the last but one; and so on through the whole
alphabet. But *Blayney* and others, such as *Gataker* and *Venema,* give
a satisfactory explanation of the words. The word <span
id="ii.iv.i-p9.3"></span>לב, the heart, often means the middle of
anything, as “the heart of heaven,” in <span
id="ii.iv.i-p9.4"></span>[De 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.i-p9.4"></span> means the midst of heaven; and “the heart of
the seas,” in <span id="ii.iv.i-p9.5"></span>[Ps
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv.i-p9.5"></span>,
means the midst of the seas. So here, “the heart of my adversaries,”
means the centre of the country of his adversaries. *i.e.,* Babylon, —

<span id="ii.iv.i-p10"></span>Against the inhabitants of the
metropolis  
of my adversaries.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p11"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc21005.htm#fr_80) <span
id="ii.iv.iii-p6.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p7"></span> It is singular that <span
id="ii.iv.iii-p7.1"></span>אל is omitted in the *Sept.* and the *Syr.,*
and retained in its negative sense in the *Vulg.* and the *Targ.,* which
makes no sense consistently with the context. There is evidently <span
id="ii.iv.iii-p7.2"></span>אשר understood before the first verb, as is
often the case when the verb is in the future tense. Then the literal
rendering would be this, —

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p8"></span>At him who bends let the bender bend his
bow, And at him who glories in his coat of mail; And spare ye not her
chosen men, Utterly destroy all her host.

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p9"></span>There is here perfect consistency. They
who take <span id="ii.iv.iii-p9.1"></span>אל as a negative say, that the
first part is addressed to the Chaldeans, and the second to their
enemies; but this would be strangely abrupt. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc21005.htm#fr_81) <span
id="ii.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p9"></span> The explanation of the last clasue is,
according to the Jewish commentators, not generally taken. The “land,”
by most is deemed to be the land of Israel and Judah. The word <span
id="ii.iv.vii-p9.1"></span>אשם, means not only guilt, but also guilt’s
penalty — judgement; and this seems to be its meaning here, —

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p10"></span>For not widowed is Israel, By his God,
by Jehovah of hosts; Though their land has been filled With judgement by
the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p11"></span>But if we render <span
id="ii.iv.vii-p11.1"></span>מ *before* or *against*, then the last line
would be, —

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p12"></span>With guilt (or sin) before the Holy One
of Israel.

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p13"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc21005.htm#fr_82) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p12"></span> Some render the last word “reel,” or
stagger, and perhaps more consistently with the comparison of
drunkenness. The verb in *Hithpael*, as here, means to be moved
violently, either through rage or joy. Moved or agitated is the
rendering of the versions and the *Targum*. To be moved with joy is to
exult or glory; and so *Blayney* renders it, and connects the end of
this verse with the following, *i.e*., that the nations gloried because
of the fall of Babylon, —

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p13"></span>Therefore shall nations glory,
\[saying,\] Babylon is suddenly fallen, etc.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p14"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc21005.htm#fr_83) <span
id="ii.iv.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p10"></span> Another view has been given of this
clause: It is a mode of speaking to express the greatness of a thing;
see <span id="ii.iv.xi-p10.1"></span>[Ps
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv.xi-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.iv.xi-p10.2"></span>[Ezr
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006)<span id="ii.iv.xi-p10.2"></span>.
The judgement or punishment of Babylon would be so great, that it might
be compared to what may reach to the heavens, and to the ethereal
regions; for such is the meaning of the last word, and is rendered
“stars,” by the *Sept*., —

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p11"></span>For to the heavens has reached her
judgement,  
And it has risen up to the ethereal regions.

<span id="ii.iv.xi-p12"></span>By “heavens,” are often meant the skies.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc21005.htm#fr_84) <span
id="ii.iv.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xv-p7"></span> The second clause in the versions and the
*Targ*. is, “Fill the quivers,” *i.e*., with arrows. But the word means
“shields:” hence some render the verb in the sense of filling up or
completing. “Complete the shields,” *i.e*., their number, or rather,
more consistently with sharpening or polishing the arrows, “Fill up,” or
mend, “the shields.” So *Venema* and *Parkhurst*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc21005.htm#fr_85) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p12"></span> Though the Hebrew here is exactly the
same as in <span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p12.1"></span>[Jer
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p12.1"></span>,
except that “Israel” is omitted here, yet the *Vulg*., the *Syr*., and
the *Targ*. give a different version; but in the *Sept*. it is the same.
But many copies have “Israel” here, which is no doubt the correct
reading. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc21005.htm#fr_86) <span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p16"></span> Many render this passage in the future
tense, according to all the Versions and the *Targ*., and consider Cyrus
to be intended by the “hammer;” but they render <span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p16.1"></span>בך, *by*, or *with thee*, contrary to the
*Targ*. and the Versions, which is rendered *in thee, i.e*., Babylon;
and *for thee* in the *Syr*. And this seems to be the view most
consistent with the whole passage, especially <span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p16.2"></span>[Jer
51:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#024)<span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p16.2"></span>. Babylon was the “hammer” which God had
employed, “<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p16.3"></span>[Jer
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p16.3"></span>) but he would hereafter employ, as it were,
a hammer, or a scatterer, in Babylon itself, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p17"></span>**20.** A scatterer (or a hammer) art
thou to me, A weapon of war; But I will scatter in thee nations, And
destroy in thee kingdoms;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p18"></span>**21.** And I will scatter in thee the
horse and its rider, And I will scatter in thee the chariot and its
rider;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p19"></span>**22.** And I will scatter in thee the
husband and the wife, And I will scatter in thee the old and the child,
And I will scatter in thee the young man and the maid;

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p20"></span>**23.** And I will scatter in thee the
shepard and his flock, And I will scatter in thee the plougman and his
team, And I will scatter in thee the governors and princes.

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p21"></span>The comes, naturally, a summary of the
whole, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p22"></span>**24.** And I will render to Babylon And
to all the inhabitants of Chaldea, All the evil which they have done in
Sion, Before your eyes, saith Jehova.

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p23"></span>The in the two following verse Babylon
is still addressed.

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p24"></span>“Scatter” is according to the *Sept*.,
the *Syr*., and the *Targ*.; “dash against one another” is the *Vulg*. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc21005.htm#fr_87) <span
id="ii.iv.xxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p10"></span> *Blayney* views “the mountain”
differently, as a metaphor for a nation, or a prince, rising above
others in power: and “the rocks” he considers to be the strongholds of
this mountain. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc21005.htm#fr_88) <span
id="ii.iv.xxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxx-p8"></span> Though the reatest part of the walls and
towers was built of bricks, yet there were stones no doubt used. Some
understand, by “stone,” a king or prince, and consider that an
intimation is given that Babylon would not hereafter have a king or its
own, but be tributary. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc21005.htm#fr_89) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10"></span> The Version and the *Targ*. all differ
as to the word <span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.1"></span>טפסר, rendered by
*Calvin*, “leader.” It is translated “commander” by *Blayney. Parkhurst*
says that it is a Chaldee word, from <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.2"></span>טפס, to reduce to order, and <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.3"></span>סר, a ruler. Then it means a commanding
officer, a caption, or a general. It occurs only here and in <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.4"></span>[Na
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#017)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.4"></span>. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc21005.htm#fr_90) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxii-p7"></span> The Hebrew is, “the kings of Media;”
but the *Sept*. and *Syr*. have “the king of Media;” which is required
by “his dominion” at the end of the verse: the pronoun affixed to
“captains” and “rulers” is “her,” referring to Media. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc21005.htm#fr_91) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p7"></span> The “earth” here is evidently the
land of Chaldea or Babylon, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p8"></span>And tremble shall the land and be in
pain; For confirmed respecting Babylon shall be the purposes of Jehovah,
To set the land of Babylon a waste, Without an inhabitant.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiii-p9"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc21005.htm#fr_92) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p9"></span> It seems to have been taken at its two
extremities: hence the runners met each other at the king’s palace, from
both ends of the city, and each said, that it was taken at its end. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc21005.htm#fr_93) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p8"></span> The word <span
id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>אגמים, properly pools, is probably a
metonomy for what they grow, even reeds or bulrushes, especially as the
same word, in somewhat another form, <span
id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p8.2"></span>אגמן, clearly means a reed. See <span
id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p8.3"></span>[Isa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p8.3"></span>; <span id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p8.4"></span>[Isa
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#015)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxvi-p8.4"></span>. But what these reeds were, authors are at
a loss to know. It is said in the thirtieth verse, that they “burnt her
habitations;” may it not have been, that they were such as were made of
reeds? Then the whole verse appears intelligible; the passages (that is,
the entrances from the river, whose streams were diverted) were seized
on, and such houses as were in part built of reeds were set on fire;
hence the men were frightened. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc21005.htm#fr_94) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p10"></span> By identifying the time of threshing
and the time of harvest, it is that we can see the meaning of this
verse. Mention is first made of threshing or treading — the punishment
prepared for Babylon; then it is said that what led to that — the
harvest, would shortly come. The verb “come” is to be understood in the
third line, it being given only in the last, —

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p11"></span>**33.** For thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel, — Babylon *shall be* like a threshing-floor;
*Come shall* the time of threshing her; Yet a little while, and come to
her shall the time of harvest.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p12"></span>The order as to the threshing and
harvest is similar to what is often found in the prophets, — the last
thing, being the main thing, is mentioned first, and then what precedes
or leads to it. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc21005.htm#fr_95) <span
id="ii.iv.xl-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p8"></span> The pronoun after the verbs in this verse
is in the plural number, *us*, according to the present Hebrew text, but
according to the *Keri* and several copies, it is in the singular
number, *me*. The authority as to MSS. is nearly equal; only the latter
reading is favored by the versions and the *Targ*, and also by the verse
which follows. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc21005.htm#fr_96) <span
id="ii.iv.xl-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p9"></span> The common meaning of the verb is,
violently to disturb, but it is evidently used in the sense of breaking,
crushing, or breaking in pieces, in <span id="ii.iv.xl-p9.1"></span>[Isa
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#028)<span id="ii.iv.xl-p9.1"></span>;
and this is the most suitable sense here, as it follows “devouring.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc21005.htm#fr_97) <span
id="ii.iv.xl-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p11"></span> Or a sea-monster, or a whale, who
devours smaller fish whole and entire. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc21005.htm#fr_98) <span
id="ii.iv.xl-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xl-p13"></span> The last verb is left out by the
*Sept*., rendered “cast out,” by the *Vulg*., “destroyed,” by the
*Syr*.; “made to emigrate,” by the *Targ*. The verb properly means to
drive out or away; and their ejection from the land is what is meant. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc21005.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p8"></span> Taking this verse is connection with
the following, *Gataker* and *Lowth* give somewhat another view, — that
the Babylonians roared like lions and shouted with exultation *before*
the city was taken. It is said by *Herodotus*, that “they ascended the
walls, and capered, and loaded Darius and his army with reproaches.”
They roared with rage at their enemies, and excited themselves as whelps
when beginning to hunt for themselves, full of life and animation, —

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p9"></span>Together as young lions shall they
roar. And rouse themselves as whelps of lionesses.

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p10"></span>There is a <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p10.1"></span>ו wanting before the last verb, which is
supplied by the *Vulg*., *Syr*., and the *Targ*.; and it is rendered
necessary by the tense of the verb. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc21005.htm#fr_100) <span
id="ii.iv.xliv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p8"></span> “In their heat,” that is, as it
appears, of rage, while they were roaring like lions. The word rendered
“feasts” by *Calvin* and in our version, properly means drinking, and it
is so rendered in the early versions, and more suitably here, —

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p9"></span>In their heat I will set *for them*
their drink, And will make them drunk, that they may leap for joy; And
they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, And shall not awake, saith Jehovah.

<span id="ii.iv.xliv-p10"></span>It is a clear allusion to the feast
celebrated in Babylon the very night it was taken. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc21005.htm#fr_101) <span
id="ii.iv.l-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.l-p8"></span> The *Sept*. and the *Syr*. remove the
incongruity that is in this verse; they supply <span
id="ii.iv.l-p8.1"></span>כ before the “land” that occurs first, and omit
the second “land.” Then the verse would read thus, —

<span id="ii.iv.l-p9"></span>**43.** Become have her cities a
desolation, Like a land of drought and a wilderness; Dwell in them shall
no man, And pass through them shall no son of man.

<span id="ii.iv.l-p10"></span>The second “land” is omitted in two MSS.;
and one has “in her,” instead of “in them.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc21005.htm#fr_102) <span
id="ii.iv.li-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.li-p11"></span> “The long processions of pilgrims,”
observes *Henderson*, “moving slowly along, are fitly expressed by <span
id="ii.iv.li-p11.1"></span>נהר, which properly signifies, *to flow as a
river*.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc21005.htm#fr_103) <span
id="ii.iv.liii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p9"></span> Some, as *Blayney*, following the
*Syr*., connect this verse with the preceding: The Jews are bidden to
leave Babylon, that they might escape the wrath of God, and lest their
hearts should faint at the evil romors that would spread there, —

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p10"></span>And lest your heart faint, And ye be
afraid of the rumor rumored in the land, — For it shall come in one
year, the romor, etc.

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p11"></span>But if <span
id="ii.iv.liii-p11.1"></span>פן, rendered *lest*, be taken, as it is
sometimes, a dissuasive particle, then the rendering would be as
follows, —

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p12"></span>And let not your heart be faint, Nor be
ye afraid of the rumor rumored in the land; When it shall come in one
year, the rumor, And afterwards in a year, the rumor, And violence
*shall be* in the land, ruler against ruler.

<span id="ii.iv.liii-p13"></span>The reference seems to be to the
commotions in Babylon before the liberation of the Jews. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc21005.htm#fr_104) <span
id="ii.iv.liv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p8"></span> Rather,

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p9"></span>And all her slain, they shall fall in the
midst of her.

<span id="ii.iv.liv-p10"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc21005.htm#fr_105) <span
id="ii.iv.lviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p8"></span> This verse may be deemed as the
shouting song at the fall of Babylon, —

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p9"></span>“As Babylon *made* to fall the slain of
Israel, So for Babylon have fallen the slain of all the land.”

<span id="ii.iv.lviii-p10"></span>It is said before, in <span
id="ii.iv.lviii-p10.1"></span>[Jer
51:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#047)<span
id="ii.iv.lviii-p10.1"></span>, that her slain should fall in the midst
of her land. “For Babylon” means, on account of what she had done. But
if it be “in Babylon,” means, on account of what she had done. But of
Babylon; and the intimation is, that there would be none led captive,
but slain in the land, except “all” be taken, as is often the case, as
signifying a large number. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc21005.htm#fr_106) <span
id="ii.iv.lxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p8"></span> The idea seems to be, if Babylon
ascended the heavens, or the skies, and fortified there a high place for
her strength, yet to this place desolators would come, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxii-p9"></span>Though Babylon mounted the skies, And
though she fortified the height *as* her strength, From me would come to
her destroyers, saith Jehovah. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc21005.htm#fr_107) <span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p9"></span> This is the meaning given by the
*Targum. Venema* and *Horsley* would put a colon or a period after <span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p9.1"></span>אבד, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p10"></span>**55.** For Jehovah is laying waste
Babylon and destroying her: From her comes a loud voice! And roar do
their waves like great waters, Going forth is the tumult of their voice.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p11"></span>According to the preceding verse, the
destruction of Babylon is represented as *then* taking place, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p12"></span>**54.** A voice of howling from
Babylon! And of great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans!

<span id="ii.iv.lxiv-p13"></span>The commotions and tumults, arising
from the invasion of enemies, seem to be set forth in <span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p13.1"></span>[Jer
51:55](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#055)<span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p13.1"></span>; and the beginning of the following, <span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p13.2"></span>[Jer
51:56](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#056)<span
id="ii.iv.lxiv-p13.2"></span>, ought to be rendered in the present
tense, the first verb being a participle. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc21005.htm#fr_108) <span
id="ii.iv.lxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p10"></span> The <span
id="ii.iv.lxix-p10.1"></span>ו before <span
id="ii.iv.lxix-p10.2"></span>יגעו is evidently conversive, and may be
rendered *so that*, or *therefore*, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p11"></span>Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, The wall
of Babylon, the brroad one, It shall be utterly laid in ruins; And her
gates, the lofty ones, They shall be consumed with fire: So that people
had labored for vanity, And nations for the fire, and wearied
themselves.

<span id="ii.iv.lxix-p12"></span>Several MSS. have <span
id="ii.iv.lxix-p12.1"></span>חמת, wall, and so it is in the *Sept*., as
required by “broad,” which is in the singular number. “For vanity” is
for the vain object; and “for the fire” means for what was to be
consumed by fire. The last words may be rendered “though they wearied
themselves.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc21005.htm#fr_109) <span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p8"></span> The *Vulg*. and *Syr*. have “with,” but
the *Sept*. and *Targ*. give it the meaning of “from;” and <span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p8.1"></span>את has often the meaning of <span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p8.2"></span>מאת; see <span id="ii.iv.lxx-p8.3"></span>[Ge
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p8.4"></span>[Ge
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p8.4"></span>;
<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p8.5"></span>[Gen.
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#009),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#025)<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p8.5"></span>.
So *Gataker, Venema*, and *Blayney*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc21005.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p10"></span> The variety in the early versions is
remarkable; the *Sept*. and the *Targ*. have “the prince of gifts” or
presents; the *Vulg*., “the prince of prophecy;” and the *Syr*., “the
prince of warfare.” A similar phrase is found in <span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p10.1"></span>[1Ch
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009)<span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p10.1"></span>; Solomon is said to be “a man of rest,”
<span id="ii.iv.lxx-p10.2"></span>איש <span
id="ii.iv.lxx-p10.3"></span>מנוחה. The meaning most suitable to this
passage is that if *Calvin* and of our version. So though *Gataker*; but
*Lowth* and *Parkhurst* regarded the words as pointing out his office as
the king’s chief chamberlain, “the prince of the resting-place,” or
chamber; but the objection to this is, that the word is never used in
this sense; it means not the rest of sleep, but the rest of peace and
quietness. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc21005.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p19"></span> That the connection may appear more
evident, <span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p19.1"></span>[Jer
51:60](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#060)<span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p19.1"></span> and the first sentence in <span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p19.2"></span>[Jeremiah
51:61](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#061)<span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p19.2"></span> ought to be put within a parenthesis; for
“the word which Jeremiah commanded Seraiah,” mentioned in <span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p19.3"></span>[Jer
51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059)<span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p19.3"></span>, is what follows, “When thou comest to
Babylon,” etc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc21005.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p25"></span> Literally the words are, —

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p26"></span>For desolations of perpetuity shall it
(or she) be.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p27"></span>Babylon is sometimes referred to as
masculine, and sometimes as feminine. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc21005.htm#fr_113) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p31"></span> Calvin takes no notice here of the
verb which closes this sentence, <span
id="ii.iv.lxxi-p31.1"></span>ויעפו; but in his version he renders it,
“and they shall fly,” or they shall be wearied. Critics know not what to
make of it: it is omitted in the *Sept*., and rendered by the *Vulg*.,
“and it shall be dissolved;” by the *Syr*., “but they shall be thrown
down;” and by the *Targ*., “and they shall fail.” It is left out in no
MS. *Blayney*, following the *Sept*., omits it. The best explanation is
given by *Junius* and *Tremelius*, “though they may weary themselves,”
that is, the citizens of Babylon: their attempt to rise and resist their
enemies would be ineffectual, however much they might toil in the
effort.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p32"></span>The emendator, *Houbigant*, proposes to
read the word, <span id="ii.iv.lxxi-p32.1"></span>ויספו, “and they shall
come to an end.” This agrees nearly with the *Targ*., “and they shall
fail.” — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 52](cc21006)
