[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sum329)  [Next](sum331.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF TALE-BEARING \[\*'Susurratio,' i.e. whispering\] (TWO ARTICLES)

We must now consider tale-bearing: under which head there are two points
of inquiry:

\(1\) Whether tale-bearing is a sin distinct from backbiting?

\(2\) Which of the two is the more grievous?

#### Whether tale-bearing is a sin distinct from backbiting?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that tale-bearing is not a distinct sin
from backbiting. Isidore says (Etym. x): "The susurro \[tale-bearer\]
takes his name from the sound of his speech, for he speaks disparagingly
not to the face but into the ear." But to speak of another disparagingly
belongs to backbiting. Therefore tale-bearing is not a distinct sin from
backbiting.

**Objection 2:** Further, it is written (<span
id="SS_Q74_A1-p3.1"></span>[Lev.
19:16](../../../bib/vul/lev019.htm#016).md): "Thou shalt not be an informer
\[Douay: 'a detractor'\] nor a tale-bearer \[Douay: 'whisperer'\] among
the people." But an informer is apparently the same as a backbiter.
Therefore neither does tale-bearing differ from backbiting.

**Objection 3:** Further, it is written (<span
id="SS_Q74_A1-p4.1"></span>[Ecclus.
28:15](../../../bib/vul/sir028.htm#015).md): "The tale-bearer \[Douay:
'whisperer'\] and the double-tongued is accursed." But a double-tongued
man is apparently the same as a backbiter, because a backbiter speaks
with a double tongue, with one in your absence, with another in your
presence. Therefore a tale-bearer is the same as a backbiter.

**On the contrary,** A gloss on<span id="SS_Q74_A1-p5.1"></span>[Rom.
1:29](../../../bib/vul/rom001.htm#029.md),
[30](../../../bib/vul/rom001.htm#030.md)"Tale-bearers, backbiters \[Douay:
'whisperers, detractors'\]" says: "Tale-bearers sow discord among
friends; backbiters deny or disparage others' good points."

**I answer that,** The tale-bearer and the backbiter agree in matter,
and also in form or mode of speaking, since they both speak evil
secretly of their neighbor: and for this reason these terms are
sometimes used one for the other. Hence a gloss on<span
id="SS_Q74_A1-p6.1"></span> [Ecclus.
5:16,](../../../bib/vul/sir005.htm#016.md) "Be not called a tale-bearer
\[Douay: 'whisperer'\]" says: "i.e. a backbiter." They differ however in
end, because the backbiter intends to blacken his neighbor's good name,
wherefore he brings forward those evils especially about his neighbor
which are likely to defame him, or at least to depreciate his good name:
whereas a tale-bearer intends to sever friendship, as appears from the
gloss quoted above and from the saying of<span
id="SS_Q74_A1-p6.2"></span> [Prov.
26:20,](../../../bib/vul/pro026.htm#020.md) "Where the tale-bearer is taken
away, contentions shall cease." Hence it is that a tale-bearer speaks
such ill about his neighbors as may stir his hearer's mind against them,
according to<span id="SS_Q74_A1-p6.3"></span> [Ecclus.
28:11,](../../../bib/vul/sir028.htm#011.md) "A sinful man will trouble his
friends, and bring in debate in the midst of them that are at peace."

**Reply to Objection 1:** A tale-bearer is called a backbiter in so far
as he speaks ill of another; yet he differs from a backbiter since he
intends not to speak ill as such, but to say anything that may stir one
man against another, though it be good simply, and yet has a semblance
of evil through being unpleasant to the hearer.

**Reply to Objection 2:** An informer differs from a tale-bearer and a
backbiter, for an informer is one who charges others publicly with
crimes, either by accusing or by railing them, which does not apply to a
backbiter or tale-bearer.

**Reply to Objection 3:** A double-tongued person is properly speaking a
tale-bearer. For since friendship is between two, the tale-bearer
strives to sever friendship on both sides. Hence he employs a double
tongue towards two persons, by speaking ill of one to the other:
wherefore it is written (<span id="SS_Q74_A1-p9.1"></span>[Ecclus.
28:15](../../../bib/vul/sir028.htm#015).md): "The tale-bearer \[Douay:
'whisperer'\] and the double-tongued is accursed," and then it is added,
"for he hath troubled many that were peace."

#### Whether backbiting is a graver sin than tale-bearing?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that backbiting is a graver sin than
tale-bearing. For sins of word consist in speaking evil. Now a backbiter
speaks of his neighbor things that are evil simply, for such things lead
to the loss or depreciation of his good name: whereas a tale-bearer is
only intent on saying what is apparently evil, because to wit they are
unpleasant to the hearer. Therefore backbiting is a graver sin than
tale-bearing.

**Objection 2:** Further, he that deprives. a man of his good name,
deprives him not merely of one friend, but of many, because everyone is
minded to scorn the friendship of a person with a bad name. Hence it is
reproached against a certain individual \[\*King Josaphat\] (<span
id="SS_Q74_A2-p3.1"></span>[2 Paralip
19:2](../../../bib/vul/ch2019.htm#002).md): "Thou art joined in friendship
with them that hate the Lord." But tale-bearing deprives one of only one
friend. Therefore backbiting is a graver sin than tale-bearing.

**Objection 3:** Further, it is written (<span
id="SS_Q74_A2-p4.1"></span>[James
4:11](../../../bib/vul/jam004.htm#011).md): "He that backbiteth
\[Douay:,'detracteth'\] his brother . . . detracteth the law," and
consequently God the giver of the law. Wherefore the sin of backbiting
seems to be a sin against God, which is most grievous, as stated above
(Q\[20\], A\[3\]; FS, Q\[73\], A\[3\]). On the other hand the sin of
tale-bearing is against one's neighbor. Therefore the sin of backbiting
is graver than the sin of tale-bearing.

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="SS_Q74_A2-p5.1"></span>[Ecclus.
5:17](../../../bib/vul/sir005.htm#017).md): "An evil mark of disgrace is
upon the double-tongued; but to the tale-bearer \[Douay: 'whisperer'\]
hatred, and enmity, and reproach."

**I answer that,** As stated above (Q\[73\], A\[3\]; FS, Q\[73\],
A\[8\]), sins against one's neighbor are the more grievous, according as
they inflict a greater injury on him: and an injury is so much the
greater, according to the greatness of the good which it takes away. Now
of all one's external goods a friend takes the first place, since "no
man can live without friends," as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. viii,
1). Hence it is written (<span id="SS_Q74_A2-p6.2"></span>[Ecclus.
6:15](../../../bib/vul/sir006.htm#015).md): "Nothing can be compared to a
faithful friend." Again, a man's good name whereof backbiting deprives
him, is most necessary to him that he may be fitted for friendship.
Therefore tale-bearing is a greater sin than backbiting or even
reviling, because a friend is better than honor, and to be loved is
better than to be honored, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii).

**Reply to Objection 1:** The species and gravity of a sin depend on the
end rather than on the material object, wherefore, by reason of its end,
tale-bearing is worse than backbiting, although sometimes the backbiter
says worse things.

**Reply to Objection 2:** A good name is a disposition for friendship,
and a bad name is a disposition for enmity. But a disposition falls
short of the thing for which it disposes. Hence to do anything that
leads to a disposition for enmity is a less grievous sin than to do what
conduces directly to enmity.

**Reply to Objection 3:** He that backbites his brother, seems to
detract the law, in so far as he despises the precept of love for one's
neighbor: while he that strives to sever friendship seems to act more
directly against this precept. Hence the latter sin is more specially
against God, because "God is charity" (<span
id="SS_Q74_A2-p9.1"></span>[1 Jn.
4:16](../../../bib/vul/jo1004.htm#016).md), and for this reason it is
written (<span id="SS_Q74_A2-p9.2"></span>[Prov.
6:16](../../../bib/vul/pro006.htm#016).md): "Six things there are, which
the Lord hateth, and the seventh His soul detesteth," and the seventh is
"he (<span id="SS_Q74_A2-p9.3"></span>[Prov.
6:19](../../../bib/vul/pro006.htm#019).md) that soweth discord among
brethren."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 75 - OF DERISION (TWO ARTICLES)](sum331.md)
