[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sum342)  [Next](sum344.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF TITHES (FOUR ARTICLES)

Next we must consider tithes, under which head there are four points of
inquiry:

\(1\) Whether men are bound by precept to pay tithes?

\(2\) Of what things ought tithes to be paid?

\(3\) To whom ought they to be paid?

\(4\) Who ought to pay tithes?

#### Whether men are bound to pay tithes under a necessity of precept?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that men are not bound by precept to pay
tithes. The commandment to pay tithes is contained in the Old Law (<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p2.1"></span>[Lev.
27:30](../../../bib/vul/lev027.htm#030).md), "All tithes of the land,
whether of corn or of the fruits of trees, are the Lord's," and further
on (<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p2.2"></span>[Lev.
27:32](../../../bib/vul/lev027.htm#032).md): "Of all the tithes of oxen and
sheep and goats, that pass under the shepherd's rod, every tenth that
cometh shall be sanctified to the Lord." This cannot be reckoned among
the moral precepts, because natural reason does not dictate that one
ought to give a tenth part, rather than a ninth or eleventh. Therefore
it is either a judicial or a ceremonial precept. Now, as stated above
(FS, Q\[103\], A\[3\]; FS, Q\[104\], A\[3\]), during the time of grace
men are hound neither to the ceremonial nor to the judicial precepts of
the Old Law. Therefore men are not bound now to pay tithes.

**Objection 2:** Further, during the time of grace men are bound only to
those things which were commanded by Christ through the Apostles,
according to <span id="SS_Q87_A1-p3.1"></span> [Mat.
28:20,](../../../bib/vul/mat028.htm#020.md) "Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you"; and Paul says (<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p3.2"></span>[Acts
20:27](../../../bib/vul/act020.htm#027).md): "I have not spared to declare
unto you all the counsel of God." Now neither in the teaching of Christ
nor in that of the apostles is there any mention of the paying of
tithes: for the saying of our Lord about tithes (<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p3.3"></span>[Mat.
23:23](../../../bib/vul/mat023.htm#023).md), "These things you ought to
have done" seems to refer to the past time of legal observance: thus
Hilary says (Super Matth. can. xxiv): "The tithing of herbs, which was
useful in foreshadowing the future, was not to be omitted." Therefore
during the time of grace men are not bound to pay tithes.

**Objection 3:** Further, during the time of grace, men are not more
bound to the legal observances than before the Law. But before the Law
tithes were given, by reason not of a precept but of a vow. For we read
(<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p4.1"></span>[Gen.
28:20](../../../bib/vul/gen028.htm#020.md),
[22](../../../bib/vul/gen028.htm#022).md) that Jacob "made a vow" saying:
"If God shall be with me, and shall keep me in the way by which I walk .
. . of all the things that Thou shalt give to me, I will offer tithes to
Thee." Neither, therefore, during the time of grace are men bound to pay
tithes.

**Objection 4:** Further, in the Old Law men were bound to pay three
kinds of tithe. For it is written (<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p5.1"></span>[Num.
18:23](../../../bib/vul/num018.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/vul/num018.htm#024).md): "The sons of Levi . . . shall .
. . be content with the oblation of tithes, which I have separated for
their uses and necessities." Again, there were other tithes of which we
read (<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p5.2"></span>[Deut.
14:22](../../../bib/vul/deu014.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/vul/deu014.htm#023).md): "Every year thou shalt set aside
the tithes of all thy fruits, that the earth bringeth forth year by
year; and thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God in the place which He
shall choose." And there were yet other tithes, of which it is written
(<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p5.3"></span>[Dt.
14:28](../../../bib/vul/deu014.htm#028).md): "The third year thou shalt
separate another tithe of all things that grow to thee at that time, and
shalt lay it up within thy gates. And the Levite that hath no other part
nor possession with thee, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the
widow, that are within thy gates, shall . . . eat and be filled." Now
during the time of grace men are not bound to pay the second and third
tithes. Neither therefore are they bound to pay the first.

**Objection 5:** Further, a debt that is due without any time being
fixed for its payment, must be paid at once under pain of sin.
Accordingly if during the time of grace men are bound, under necessity
of precept, to pay tithes in those countries where tithes are not paid,
they would all be in a state of mortal sin, and so would also be the
ministers of the Church for dissembling. But this seems unreasonable.
Therefore during the time of grace men are not bound under necessity of
precept to pay tithes.

**On the contrary,** Augustine \[\*Append. Serm. cclxxcii\], whose words
are quoted 16, qu. i \[\*Can. Decimae\], says: "It is a duty to pay
tithes, and whoever refuses to pay them takes what belongs to another."

**I answer that,** In the Old Law tithes were paid for the sustenance of
the ministers of God. Hence it is written (<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p8.1"></span>[Malach.
3:10](../../../bib/vul/mal003.htm#010).md): "Bring all the tithes into My
\[Vulg.: 'the'\] store-house that there may be meat in My house." Hence
the precept about the paying of tithes was partly moral and instilled in
the natural reason; and partly judicial, deriving its force from its
divine institution. Because natural reason dictates that the people
should administer the necessaries of life to those who minister the
divine worship for the welfare of the whole people even as it is the
people's duty to provide a livelihood for their rulers and soldiers and
so forth. Hence the Apostle proves this from human custom, saying (<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p8.2"></span>[1 Cor.
9:7](../../../bib/vul/co1009.htm#007).md): "Who serveth as a soldier at any
time at his own charge? Who planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the
fruit thereof?" But the fixing of the proportion to be offered to the
ministers of divine worship does not belong to the natural law, but was
determined by divine institution, in accordance with the condition of
that people to whom the law was being given. For they were divided into
twelve tribes, and the twelfth tribe, namely that of Levi, was engaged
exclusively in the divine ministry and had no possessions whence to
derive a livelihood: and so it was becomingly ordained that the
remaining eleven tribes should give one-tenth part of their revenues to
the Levites \[\*<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p8.3"></span>[Num.
18:21](../../../bib/vul/num018.htm#021.md)\] that the latter might live
respectably; and also because some, through negligence, would disregard
this precept. Hence, so far as the tenth part was fixed, the precept was
judicial, since all institutions established among this people for the
special purpose of preserving equality among men, in accordance with
this people's condition, are called "judicial precepts." Nevertheless by
way of consequence these institutions foreshadowed something in the
future, even as everything else connected with them, according to <span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p8.4"></span>[1 Cor. 12](../../../bib/vul/co1012.htm#000.md),
"All these things happened to them in figure." In this respect they had
something in common with the "ceremonial precepts," which were
instituted chiefly that they might be signs of the future. Hence the
precept about paying tithes foreshadowed something in the future. For
ten is, in a way, the perfect number (being the first numerical limit,
since the figures do not go beyond ten but begin over again from one),
and therefore he that gave a tenth, which is the sign of perfection,
reserving the nine other parts for himself, acknowledged by a sign that
imperfection was his part, and that the perfection which was to come
through Christ was to be hoped for from God. Yet this proves it to be,
not a ceremonial but a judicial precept, as stated above.

There is this difference between the ceremonial and judicial precepts of
the Law, as we stated above (FS, Q\[104\], A\[3\]), that it is unlawful
to observe the ceremonial precepts at the time of the New Law, whereas
there is no sin in keeping the judicial precepts during the time of
grace although they are not binding. Indeed they are bound to be
observed by some, if they be ordained by the authority of those who have
power to make laws. Thus it was a judicial precept of the Old Law that
he who stole a sheep should restore four sheep (<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p9.2"></span>[Ex. 22:1](../../../bib/vul/exo022.htm#001).md),
and if any king were to order this to be done his subjects would be
bound to obey. In like manner during the time of the New Law the
authority of the Church has established the payment of tithe; thus
showing a certain kindliness, lest the people of the New Law should give
less to the ministers of the New Testament than did the people of the
Old Law to the ministers of the Old Testament; for the people of the New
Law are under greater obligations, according to<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p9.3"></span> [Mat.
5:20,](../../../bib/vul/mat005.htm#020.md) "Unless your justice abound more
than that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven," and, moreover, the ministers of the New Testament
are of greater dignity than the ministers of the Old Testament, as the
Apostle shows (<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p9.4"></span>[2 Cor.
3:7](../../../bib/vul/co2003.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/vul/co2003.htm#008).md).

Accordingly it is evident that man's obligation to pay tithes arises
partly from natural law, partly from the institution of the Church; who,
nevertheless, in consideration of the requirements of time and persons
might ordain the payment of some other proportion.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

**Reply to Objection 2:** The precept about paying tithes, in so far as
it was a moral precept, was given in the Gospel by our Lord when He said
(<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p12.1"></span>[Mat.
10:10](../../../bib/vul/mat010.htm#010).md) \[\*The words as quoted are
from<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p12.2"></span> [Lk.
10:7](../../../bib/vul/luk010.htm#007.md): Matthew has 'meat' instead of
'hire'\]: "The workman is worthy of his hire," and the Apostle says the
same (<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p12.3"></span>[1 Cor.
9:4](../../../bib/vul/co1009.htm#004) seqq..md). But the fixing of the
particular proportion is left to the ordinance of the Church.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Before the time of the Old Law the ministry of
the divine worship was not entrusted to any particular person; although
it is stated that the first-born were priests, and that they received a
double portion. For this very reason no particular portion was directed
to be given to the ministers of the divine worship: but when they met
with one, each man of his own accord gave him what he deemed right. Thus
Abraham by a kind of prophetic instinct gave tithes to Melchisedech, the
priest of the Most High God, according to<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p13.1"></span> [Gn.
14:20,](../../../bib/vul/gen014.htm#020.md) and again Jacob made a vow to
give tithes \[\*<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p13.2"></span>[Gn.
28:20](../../../bib/vul/gen028.htm#020.md)\], although he appears to have
vowed to do so, not by paying them to ministers, but for the purpose of
the divine worship, for instance for the fulfilling of sacrifices, hence
he said significantly: "I will offer tithes to Thee."

**Reply to Objection 4:** The second kind of tithe, which was reserved
for the offering of sacrifices, has no place in the New Law, since the
legal victims had ceased. But the third kind of tithe which they had to
eat with the poor, is increased in the New Law, for our Lord commanded
us to give to the poor not merely the tenth part, but all our surplus,
according to<span id="SS_Q87_A1-p14.1"></span> [Lk.
11:41](../../../bib/vul/luk011.htm#041.md): "That which remaineth, give
alms." Moreover the tithes that are given to the ministers of the Church
should be dispensed by them for the use of the poor.

**Reply to Objection 5:** The ministers of the Church ought to be more
solicitous for the increase of spiritual goods in the people, than for
the amassing of temporal goods: and hence the Apostle was unwilling to
make use of the right given him by the Lord of receiving his livelihood
from those to whom he preached the Gospel, lest he should occasion a
hindrance to the Gospel of Christ \[\*<span
id="SS_Q87_A1-p15.1"></span>[1 Cor.
9:12](../../../bib/vul/co1009.htm#012.md)\]. Nor did they sin who did not
contribute to his upkeep, else the Apostle would not have omitted to
reprove them. In like manner the ministers of the Church rightly refrain
from demanding the Church's tithes, when they could not demand them
without scandal, on account of their having fallen into desuetude, or
for some other reason. Nevertheless those who do not give tithes in
places where the Church does not demand them are not in a state of
damnation, unless they be obstinate, and unwilling to pay even if tithes
were demanded of them.

#### Whether men are bound to pay tithes of all things?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that men are not bound to give tithes of
all things. The paying of tithes seems to be an institution of the Old
Law. Now the Old Law contains no precept about personal tithes, viz.
those that are payable on property acquired by one's own act, for
instance by commerce or soldiering. Therefore no man is bound to pay
tithes on such things.

**Objection 2:** Further, it is not right to make oblations of that
which is ill-gotten, as stated above (Q\[86\], A\[3\]). Now oblations,
being offered to God immediately, seem to be more closely connected with
the divine worship than tithes which are offered to the ministers.
Therefore neither should tithes be paid on ill-gotten goods.

**Objection 3:** Further, in the last chapter of Leviticus (30,32) the
precept of paying tithes refers only to "corn, fruits of trees" and
animals "that pass under the shepherd's rod." But man derives a revenue
from other smaller things, such as the herbs that grow in his garden and
so forth. Therefore neither on these things is a man bound to pay
tithes.

**Objection 4:** Further, man cannot pay except what is in his power.
Now a man does not always remain in possession of all his profit from
land and stock, since sometimes he loses them by theft or robbery;
sometimes they are transferred to another person by sale; sometimes they
are due to some other person, thus taxes are due to princes, and wages
due to workmen. Therefore one ought not to pay tithes on such like
things.

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="SS_Q87_A2-p6.1"></span>[Gn.
28:22](../../../bib/vul/gen028.htm#022).md): "Of all things that Thou shalt
give to me, I will offer tithes to Thee."

**I answer that,** In judging about a thing we should look to its
principle. Now the principle of the payment of tithes is the debt
whereby carnal things are due to those who sow spiritual things,
according to the saying of the Apostle (<span
id="SS_Q87_A2-p7.1"></span>[1 Cor.
9:11](../../../bib/vul/co1009.htm#011).md), "If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things?"
\[thus implying that on the contrary "it is no great matter if we reap
your carnal things"\] \[\*The phrase in the brackets is omitted in the
Leonine edition\]. For this debt is the principle on which is based the
commandment of the Church about the payment of tithes. Now whatever man
possesses comes under the designation of carnal things. Therefore tithes
must be paid on whatever one possesses.

**Reply to Objection 1:** In accordance with the condition of that
people there was a special reason why the Old Law did not include a
precept about personal tithes; because, to wit, all the other tribes had
certain possessions wherewith they were able to provide a sufficient
livelihood for the Levites who had no possessions, but were not
forbidden to make a profit out of other lawful occupations as the other
Jews did. On the other hand the people of the New Law are spread abroad
throughout the world, and many of them have no possessions, but live by
trade, and these would contribute nothing to the support of God's
ministers if they did not pay tithes on their trade profits. Moreover
the ministers of the New Law are more strictly forbidden to occupy
themselves in money-making trades, according to <span
id="SS_Q87_A2-p8.1"></span>[2 Tim.
2:4,](../../../bib/vul/ti2002.htm#004.md) "No man being a soldier to God,
entangleth himself with secular business." Wherefore in the New Law men
are bound to pay personal tithes, according to the custom of their
country and the needs of the ministers: hence Augustine, whose words are
quoted 16, qu. 1, cap. Decimae, says \[\*Append. Serm. cclxxvii\]:
"Tithes must be paid on the profits of soldiering, trade or craft."

**Reply to Objection 2:** Things are ill-gotten in two ways. First,
because the getting itself was unjust: such, for instance, are things
gotten by robbery, theft or usury: and these a man is bound to restore,
and not to pay tithes on them. If, however, a field be bought with the
profits of usury, the usurer is bound to pay tithes on the produce,
because the latter is not gotten usuriously but given by God. On the
other hand certain things are said to be ill-gotten, because they are
gotten of a shameful cause, for instance of whoredom or stage-playing,
and the like. Such things a man is not bound to restore, and
consequently he is bound to pay tithes on them in the same way as other
personal tithes. Nevertheless the Church must not accept the tithe so
long as those persons remain in sin, lest she appear to have a share in
their sins: but when they have done penance, tithes may be accepted from
them on these things.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Things directed to an end must be judged
according to their fittingness to the end. Now the payment of tithes is
due not for its own sake, but for the sake of the ministers, to whose
dignity it is unbecoming that they should demand minute things with
careful exactitude, for this is reckoned sinful according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 2). Hence the Old Law did not order the payment
of tithes on such like minute things, but left it to the judgment of
those who are willing to pay, because minute things are counted as
nothing. Wherefore the Pharisees who claimed for themselves the perfect
justice of the Law, paid tithes even on these minute things: nor are
they reproved by our Lord on that account, but only because they
despised greater, i.e. spiritual, precepts; and rather did He show them
to be deserving of praise in this particular, when He said (<span
id="SS_Q87_A2-p10.1"></span>[Mat.
23:23](../../../bib/vul/mat023.htm#023).md): "These things you ought to
have done," i.e. during the time of the Law, according to Chrysostom's
\[\*Hom. xliv in the Opus Imperfectum falsely ascribed to St. John
Chrysostom\] commentary. This also seems to denote fittingness rather
than obligation. Therefore now too men are not bound to pay tithes on
such minute things, except perhaps by reason of the custom of one's
country.

**Reply to Objection 4:** A man is not bound to pay tithes on what he
has lost by theft or robbery, before he recovers his property: unless he
has incurred the loss through his own fault or neglect, because the
Church ought not to be the loser on that account. If he sell wheat that
has not been tithed, the Church can command the tithes due to her, both
from the buyer who has a thing due to the Church, and from the seller,
because so far as he is concerned he has defrauded the Church: yet if
one pays, the other is not bound. Tithes are due on the fruits of the
earth, in so far as these fruits are the gift of God. Wherefore tithes
do not come under a tax, nor are they subject to workmen's wages. Hence
it is not right to deduct one's taxes and the wages paid to workmen,
before paying tithes: but tithes must be paid before anything else on
one's entire produce.

#### Whether tithes should be paid to the clergy?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that tithes should not be paid to the
clergy. Tithes were paid to the Levites in the Old Testament, because
they had no portion in the people's possessions, according to<span
id="SS_Q87_A3-p2.1"></span>[Num.
18:23](../../../bib/vul/num018.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/vul/num018.htm#024.md) But in the New Testament the
clergy have possessions not only ecclesiastical, but sometimes also
patrimonial: moreover they receive first-fruits, and oblations for the
living and the dead. Therefore it is unnecessary to pay tithes to them.

**Objection 2:** Further, it sometimes happens that a man dwells in one
parish, and farms in another; or a shepherd may take his flock within
the bounds of one parish during one part of the year, and within the
bounds of one parish during one part of the year, and within the bounds
of another parish during the other part of the year; or he may have his
sheepfold in one parish, and graze the sheep in another. Now in all
these and similar cases it seems impossible to decide to which clergy
the tithes ought to be paid. Therefore it would seem that no fixed tithe
ought to be paid to the clergy.

**Objection 3:** Further, it is the general custom in certain countries
for the soldiers to hold the tithes from the Church in fee; and certain
religious receive tithes. Therefore seemingly tithes are not due only to
those of the clergy who have care of souls.

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="SS_Q87_A3-p5.1"></span>[Num.
18:21](../../../bib/vul/num018.htm#021).md): "I have given to the sons of
Levi all the tithes of Israel for a possession, for the ministry
wherewith they serve Me in the Tabernacle." Now the clergy are the
successors of the sons of Levi in the New Testament. Therefore tithes
are due to the clergy alone.

**I answer that,** Two things have to be considered with regard to
tithes: namely, the right to receive tithes, and the things given in the
name of tithes. The right to receive tithes is a spiritual thing, for it
arises from the debt in virtue of which the ministers of the altar have
a right to the expenses of their ministry, and temporal things are due
to those who sow spiritual things. This debt concerns none but the
clergy who have care of souls, and so they alone are competent to have
this right.

On the other hand the things given in the name of tithes are material,
wherefore they may come to be used by anyone, and thus it is that they
fall into the hands of the laity.

**Reply to Objection 1:** In the Old Law, as stated above (A\[1\], ad
4), special tithes were earmarked for the assistance of the poor. But in
the New Law the tithes are given to the clergy, not only for their own
support, but also that the clergy may use them in assisting the poor.
Hence they are not unnecessary; indeed Church property, oblations and
first-fruits as well as tithes are all necessary for this same purpose.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Personal tithes are due to the church in whose
parish a man dwells, while predial tithes seem more reasonably to belong
to the church within whose bounds the land is situated. The law,
however, prescribes that in this matter a custom that has obtained for a
long time must be observed \[\*Cap. Cum sint, and Cap. Ad apostolicae,
de Decimis, etc.\]. The shepherd who grazes his flock at different
seasons in two parishes, should pay tithe proportionately to both
churches. And since the fruit of the flock is derived from the pasture,
the tithe of the flock is due to the church in whose lands the flock
grazes, rather than to the church on whose land the fold is situated.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Just as the Church can hand over to a layman
the things she receives under the title of tithe, so too can she allow
him to receive tithes that are yet to be paid, the right of receiving
being reserved to the ministers of the Church. The motive may be either
the need of the Church, as when tithes are due to certain soldiers
through being granted to them in fee by the Church, or it may be the
succoring of the poor; thus certain tithes have been granted by way of
alms to certain lay religious, or to those that have no care of souls.
Some religious, however, are competent to receive tithes, because they
have care of souls.

#### Whether the clergy also are bound to pay tithes?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that clerics also are bound to pay
tithes. By common law \[\*Cap. Cum homines, de Decimis, etc.\] the
parish church should receive the tithes on the lands which are in its
territory. Now it happens sometimes that the clergy have certain lands
of their own on the territory of some parish church, or that one church
has ecclesiastical property on the territory of another. Therefore it
would seem that the clergy are bound to pay predial tithes.

**Objection 2:** Further, some religious are clerics; and yet they are
bound to pay tithes to churches on account of the lands which they
cultivate even with their own hands \[\*Cap. Ex parte, and Cap.
Nuper.\]. Therefore it would seem that the clergy are not immune from
the payment of tithes.

**Objection 3:** Further, in the eighteenth chapter of Numbers (26,28),
it is prescribed not only that the Levites should receive tithes from
the people, but also that they should themselves pay tithes to the
high-priest. Therefore the clergy are bound to pay tithes to the
Sovereign Pontiff, no less than the laity are bound to pay tithes to the
clergy.

**Objection 4:** Further, tithes should serve not only for the support
of the clergy, but also for the assistance of the poor. Therefore, if
the clergy are exempt from paying tithes, so too are the poor. Yet the
latter is not true. Therefore the former is false.

**On the contrary,** A decretal of Pope Paschal \[\*Paschal II\] says:
"It is a new form of exaction when the clergy demand tithes from the
clergy" \[\*Cap. Novum genus, de Decimis, etc.\].

**I answer that,** The cause of giving cannot be the cause of receiving,
as neither can the cause of action be the cause of passion; yet it
happens that one and the same person is giver and receiver, even as
agent and patient, on account of different causes and from different
points of view. Now tithes are due to the clergy as being ministers of
the altar and sowers of spiritual things among the people. Wherefore
those members of the clergy as such, i.e. as having ecclesiastical
property, are not bound to pay tithes; whereas from some other cause
through holding property in their own right, either by inheriting it
from their kindred, or by purchase, or in any other similar manner, they
are bound to the payment of tithes.

Hence the Reply to the First Objection is clear, because the clergy like
anyone else are bound to pay tithes on their own lands to the parish
church, even though they be the clergy of that same church, because to
possess a thing as one's private property is not the same as possessing
it in common. But church lands are not tithable, even though they be
within the boundaries of another parish.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Religious who are clerics, if they have care
of souls, and dispense spiritual things to the people, are not bound to
pay tithes, but they may receive them. Another reason applies to other
religious, who though clerics do not dispense spiritual things to the
people; for according to the ordinary law they are bound to pay tithes,
but they are somewhat exempt by reason of various concessions granted by
the Apostolic See \[\*Cap. Ex multiplici, Ex parte, and Ad audientiam,
de Decimis, etc.\].

**Reply to Objection 3:** In the Old Law first-fruits were due to the
priests, and tithes to the Levites; and since the Levites were below the
priests, the Lord commanded that the former should pay the high-priest
"the tenth part of the tenth" \[\*<span
id="SS_Q87_A4-p10.1"></span>[Num.
18:26](../../../bib/vul/num018.htm#026.md)\] instead of first-fruits:
wherefore for the same reason the clergy are bound now to pay tithes to
the Sovereign Pontiff, if he demanded them. For natural reason dictates
that he who has charge of the common estate of a multitude should be
provided with all goods, so that he may be able to carry out whatever is
necessary for the common welfare.

**Reply to Objection 4:** Tithes should be employed for the assistance
of the poor, through the dispensation of the clergy. Hence the poor have
no reason for accepting tithes, but they are bound to pay them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 88 - SERVICE BY PROMISE (Q\[88\])](sum344.md)
