[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sum341)  [Next](sum343) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF OBLATIONS AND FIRST-FRUITS (FOUR ARTICLES)

We must next consider oblations and first-fruits. Under this head there
are four points of inquiry:

\(1\) Whether any oblations are necessary as a matter of precept?

\(2\) To whom are oblations due?

\(3\) of what things they should be made?

\(4\) In particular, as to first-fruits, whether men are bound to offer
them?

#### Whether men are under a necessity of precept to make oblations?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that men are not bound by precept to make
oblations. Men are not bound, at the time of the Gospel, to observe the
ceremonial precepts of the Old Law, as stated above (FS, Q\[103\],
AA\[3\] ,4). Now the offering of oblations is one of the ceremonial
precepts of the Old Law, since it is written (<span
id="SS_Q86_A1-p2.2"></span>[Ex.
23:14](../../../bib/vul/exo023.htm#014)): "Three times every year you
shall celebrate feasts with Me," and further on (<span
id="SS_Q86_A1-p2.3"></span>[Ex.
23:15](../../../bib/vul/exo023.htm#015)): "Thou shalt not appear empty
before Me." Therefore men are not now under a necessity of precept to
make oblations.

**Objection 2:** Further, before they are made, oblations depend on
man's will, as appears from our Lord's saying (<span
id="SS_Q86_A1-p3.1"></span>[Mat.
5:23](../../../bib/vul/mat005.htm#023)), "If . . . thou offer thy gift
at the altar," as though this were left to the choice of the offerer:
and when once oblations have been made, there is no way of offering them
again. Therefore in no way is a man under a necessity of precept to make
oblations.

**Objection 3:** Further, if anyone is bound to give a certain thing to
the Church, and fails to give it, he can be compelled to do so by being
deprived of the Church's sacraments. But it would seem unlawful to
refuse the sacraments of the Church to those who refuse to make
oblations according to a decree of the sixth council \[\*Can. Trullan,
xxiii\], quoted I, qu. i, can. Nullus: "Let none who dispense Holy
Communion exact anything of the recipient, and if they exact anything
let them be deposed." Therefore it is not necessary that men should make
oblations.

**On the contrary,** Gregory says \[\*Gregory VII; Concil. Roman. v,
can. xii\]: "Let every Christian take care that he offer something to
God at the celebration of Mass."

**I answer that,** As stated above (Q\[85\], A\[3\], ad 3), the term
"oblation" is common to all things offered for the Divine worship, so
that if a thing be offered to be destroyed in worship of God, as though
it were being made into something holy, it is both an oblation and a
sacrifice. Wherefore it is written (<span
id="SS_Q86_A1-p6.2"></span>[Ex.
29:18](../../../bib/vul/exo029.htm#018)): "Thou shalt offer the whole
ram for a burnt-offering upon the altar; it is an oblation to the Lord,
a most sweet savor of the victim of the Lord"; and (<span
id="SS_Q86_A1-p6.3"></span>[Lev. 2:1](../../../bib/vul/lev002.htm#001)):
"When anyone shall offer an oblation of sacrifice to the Lord, his
offering shall be of fine flour." If, on the other hand, it be offered
with a view to its remaining entire and being deputed to the worship of
God or to the use of His ministers, it will be an oblation and not a
sacrifice. Accordingly it is essential to oblations of this kind that
they be offered voluntarily, according to<span
id="SS_Q86_A1-p6.4"></span> [Ex. 25:2,](../../../bib/vul/exo025.htm#002)
of "every man that offereth of his own accord you shall take them."
Nevertheless it may happen in four ways that one is bound to make
oblations. First, on account of a previous agreement: as when a person
is granted a portion of Church land, that he may make certain oblations
at fixed times, although this has the character of rent. Secondly, by
reason of a previous assignment or promise; as when a man offers a gift
among the living, or by will bequeaths to the Church something whether
movable or immovable to be delivered at some future time. Thirdly, on
account of the need of the Church, for instance if her ministers were
without means of support. Fourthly, on account of custom; for the
faithful are bound at certain solemn feasts to make certain customary
oblations. In the last two cases, however, the oblation remains
voluntary, as regards, to wit, the quantity or kind of the thing
offered.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Under the New Law men are not bound to make
oblations on account of legal solemnities, as stated in Exodus, but on
account of certain other reasons, as stated above.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Some are bound to make oblations, both before
making them, as in the first, third, and. fourth cases, and after they
have made them by assignment or promise: for they are bound to offer in
reality that which has been already offered to the Church by way of
assignment.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Those who do not make the oblations they are
bound to make may be punished by being deprived of the sacraments, not
by the priest himself to whom the oblations should be made, lest he seem
to exact, something for bestowing the sacraments, but by someone
superior to him.

#### Whether oblations are due to priests alone?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that oblations are not due to priests
alone. For chief among oblations would seem to be those that are deputed
to the sacrifices of victims. Now whatever is given to the poor is
called a "victim in Scripture according to<span
id="SS_Q86_A2-p2.1"></span> [Heb.
13:16,](../../../bib/vul/heb013.htm#016) "Do not forget to do good and
to impart, for by such victims \[Douay: 'sacrifices'\] God's favor is
obtained. Much more therefore are oblations due to the poor.

**Objection 2:** Further, in many parishes monks have a share in the
oblations. Now "the case of clerics is distinct from the case of monks,"
as Jerome states \[\*Ep. xiv, ad Heliod.\]. Therefore oblations art not
due to priests alone.

**Objection 3:** Further, lay people with the consent of the Church buy
oblations such as loaves and so forth, and they do so for no other
reason than that they may make use thereof themselves. Therefore
oblations may have reference to the laity.

**On the contrary,** A canon of Pope Damasus \[\*Damasus I\] quoted X,
qu. i \[\*Can. Hanc consuetudinem\], says: "None but the priests whom
day by day we see serving the Lord may eat and drink of the oblations
which are offered within the precincts of the Holy Church: because in
the Old Testament the Lord forbade the children of Israel to eat the
sacred loaves, with the exception of Aaron and his sons" (<span
id="SS_Q86_A2-p5.1"></span>[Lev. 24:8](../../../bib/vul/lev024.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/vul/lev024.htm#009)).

**I answer that,** The priest is appointed mediator and stands, so to
speak, "between" the people and God, as we read of Moses (<span
id="SS_Q86_A2-p6.1"></span>[Dt. 5:5](../../../bib/vul/deu005.htm#005)),
wherefore it belongs to him to set forth the Divine teachings and
sacraments before the people; and besides to offer to the Lord things
appertaining to the people, their prayers, for instance, their
sacrifices and oblations. Thus the Apostle says (<span
id="SS_Q86_A2-p6.2"></span>[Heb. 5:1](../../../bib/vul/heb005.htm#001)):
"Every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in the
things that appertain to God, that he may offer up gifts and sacrifices
for sins." Hence the oblations which the people offer to God concern the
priests, not only as regards their turning them to their own use, but
also as regards the faithful dispensation thereof, by spending them
partly on things appertaining to the Divine worship, partly on things
touching their own livelihood (since they that serve the altar partake
with the altar, according to <span id="SS_Q86_A2-p6.3"></span>[1 Cor.
9:13](../../../bib/vul/co1009.htm#013)), and partly for the good of the
poor, who, as far as possible, should be supported from the possessions
of the Church: for our Lord had a purse for the use of the poor, as
Jerome observes on<span id="SS_Q86_A2-p6.4"></span> [Mat.
17:26,](../../../bib/vul/mat017.htm#026) "That we may not scandalize
them."

**Reply to Objection 1:** Whatever is given to the poor is not a
sacrifice properly speaking; yet it is called a sacrifice in so far as
it is given to them for God's sake. In like manner, and for the same
reason, it can be called an oblation, though not properly speaking,
since it is not given immediately to God. Oblations properly so called
fall to the use of the poor, not by the dispensation of the offerers,
but by the dispensation of the priests.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Monks or other religious may receive oblations
under three counts. First, as poor, either by the dispensation of the
priests, or by ordination of the Church; secondly, through being
ministers of the altar, and then they can accept oblations that are
freely offered; thirdly, if the parishes belong to them, and they can
accept oblations, having a right to them as rectors of the Church.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Oblations when once they are consecrated, such
as sacred vessels and vestments, cannot be granted to the use of the
laity: and this is the meaning of the words of Pope Damasus. But those
which are unconsecrated may be allowed to the use of layfolk by
permission of the priests, whether by way of gift or by way of sale.

#### Whether a man may make oblations of whatever he lawfully possesses?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that a man may not make oblations of
whatever he lawfully possesses. According to human law \[\*Dig. xii, v,
de Condict. ob. turp. vel iniust. caus. 4\] "the whore's is a shameful
trade in what she does but not in what she takes," and consequently what
she takes she possesses lawfully. Yet it is not lawful for her to make
an oblation with her gains, according to<span
id="SS_Q86_A3-p2.1"></span> [Dt.
23:18,](../../../bib/vul/deu023.htm#018) "Thou shalt not offer the hire
of a strumpet . . . in the house of the Lord thy God." Therefore it is
not lawful to make an oblation of whatever one possesses lawfully.

**Objection 2:** Further, in the same passage it is forbidden to offer
"the price of a dog" in the house of God. But it is evident that a man
possesses lawfully the price of a dog he has lawfully sold. Therefore it
is not lawful to make an oblation of whatever we possess lawfully.

**Objection 3:** Further, it is written (<span
id="SS_Q86_A3-p4.1"></span>[Malachi
1:8](../../../bib/vul/mal001.htm#008)): "If you offer the lame and the
sick, is it not evil?" Yet an animal though lame or sick is a lawful
possession. Therefore it would seem that not of every lawful possession
may one make an oblation.

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="SS_Q86_A3-p5.1"></span>[Prov.
3:9](../../../bib/vul/pro003.htm#009)): "Honor the Lord with thy
substance." Now whatever a man possesses lawfully belongs to his
substance. Therefore he may make oblations of whatever he possesses
lawfully.

**I answer that,** As Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. Serm. cxiii),
"shouldst thou plunder one weaker than thyself and give some of the
spoil to the judge, if he should pronounce in thy favor, such is the
force of justice that even thou wouldst not be pleased with him: and if
this should not please thee, neither does it please thy God." Hence it
is written (<span id="SS_Q86_A3-p6.1"></span>[Ecclus.
34:21](../../../bib/vul/sir034.htm#021)): "The offering of him that
sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully gotten is stained." Therefore it is
evident that an oblation must not be made of things unjustly acquired or
possessed. In the Old Law, however, wherein the figure was predominant,
certain things were reckoned unclean on account of their signification,
and it was forbidden to offer them. But in the New Law all God's
creatures are looked upon as clean, as stated in<span
id="SS_Q86_A3-p6.2"></span> [Titus
1:15](../../../bib/vul/tit001.htm#015): and consequently anything that
is lawfully possessed, considered in itself, may be offered in oblation.
But it may happen accidentally that one may not make an oblation of what
one possesses lawfully; for instance if it be detrimental to another
person, as in the case of a son who offers to God the means of
supporting his father (which our Lord condemns,<span
id="SS_Q86_A3-p6.3"></span> [Mat.
15:5](../../../bib/vul/mat015.htm#005)), or if it give rise to scandal
or contempt, or the like.

**Reply to Objection 1:** In the Old Law it was forbidden to make an
offering of the hire of a strumpet on account of its uncleanness, and in
the New Law, on account of scandal, lest the Church seem to favor sin if
she accept oblations from the profits of sin.

**Reply to Objection 2:** According to the Law, a dog was deemed an
unclean animal. Yet other unclean animals were redeemed and their price
could be offered, according to<span id="SS_Q86_A3-p8.1"></span> [Lev.
27:27,](../../../bib/vul/lev027.htm#027) "If it be an unclean animal, he
that offereth it shall redeem it." But a dog was neither offered nor
redeemed, both because idolaters used dogs in sacrifices to their idols,
and because they signify robbery, the proceeds of which cannot be
offered in oblation. However, this prohibition ceased under the New Law.

**Reply to Objection 3:** The oblation of a blind or lame animal was
declared unlawful for three reasons. First, on account of the purpose
for which it was offered, wherefore it is written (<span
id="SS_Q86_A3-p9.1"></span>[Malach.
1:8](../../../bib/vul/mal001.htm#008)): "If you offer the blind in
sacrifice, is it not evil?" and it behooved sacrifices to be without
blemish. Secondly, on account of contempt, wherefore the same text goes
on (<span id="SS_Q86_A3-p9.2"></span>[Malach.
1:12](../../../bib/vul/mal001.htm#012)): "You have profaned" My name,
"in that you say: The table of the Lord is defiled and that which is
laid thereupon is contemptible." Thirdly, on account of a previous vow,
whereby a man has bound himself to offer without blemish whatever he has
vowed: hence the same text says further on (<span
id="SS_Q86_A3-p9.3"></span>[Malach.
1:14](../../../bib/vul/mal001.htm#014)): "Cursed is the deceitful man
that hath in his flock a male, and making a vow offereth in sacrifice
that which is feeble to the Lord." The same reasons avail still in the
New Law, but when they do not apply the unlawfulness ceases.

#### Whether men are bound to pay first-fruits?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that men are not bound to pay
first-fruits. After giving the law of the first-born the text continues
(<span id="SS_Q86_A4-p2.1"></span>[Ex.
13:9](../../../bib/vul/exo013.htm#009)): "It shall be as a sign in thy
hand," so that, apparently, it is a ceremonial precept. But ceremonial
precepts are not to be observed in the New Law. Neither therefore ought
first-fruits to be paid.

**Objection 2:** Further, first-fruits were offered to the Lord for a
special favor conferred on that people, wherefore it is written (<span
id="SS_Q86_A4-p3.1"></span>[Deut.
26:2](../../../bib/vul/deu026.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/vul/deu026.htm#003)): "Thou shalt take the first of all
thy fruits . . . and thou shalt go to the priest that shall be in those
days, and say to him: I profess this day before the Lord thy God, that I
am come into the land, for which He swore to our fathers, that He would
give it us." Therefore other nations are not bound to pay first-fruits.

**Objection 3:** That which one is bound to do should be something
definite. But neither in the New Law nor in the Old do we find mention
of a definite amount of first-fruits. Therefore one is not bound of
necessity to pay them.

**On the contrary,** It is laid down (16, qu. vii, can. Decimas): "We
confirm the right of priests to tithes and first-fruits, and everybody
must pay them."

**I answer that,** First-fruits are a kind of oblation, because they are
offered to God with a certain profession (<span
id="SS_Q86_A4-p6.1"></span>[Dt. 26](../../../bib/vul/deu026.htm#000));
where the same passage continues: "The priest taking the basket
containing the first-fruits from the hand of him that bringeth the
first-fruits, shall set it before the altar of the Lord thy God," and
further on (<span id="SS_Q86_A4-p6.2"></span>[Dt.
26:10](../../../bib/vul/deu026.htm#010)) he is commanded to say:
"Therefore now I offer the first-fruits of the land, which the Lord hath
given me." Now the first-fruits were offered for a special reason,
namely, in recognition of the divine favor, as though man acknowledged
that he had received the fruits of the earth from God, and that he ought
to offer something to God in return, according to <span
id="SS_Q86_A4-p6.3"></span>[1 Paral
29:14,](../../../bib/vul/ch1029.htm#014) "We have given Thee what we
received of Thy hand." And since what we offer God ought to be something
special, hence it is that man was commanded to offer God his
first-fruits, as being a special part of the fruits of the earth: and
since a priest is "ordained for the people "in the things that appertain
to God" (<span id="SS_Q86_A4-p6.4"></span>[Heb.
5:1](../../../bib/vul/heb005.htm#001)), the first-fruits offered by the
people were granted to the priest's use." Wherefore it is written (<span
id="SS_Q86_A4-p6.5"></span>[Num.
18:8](../../../bib/vul/num018.htm#008)): "The Lord said to Aaron: Behold
I have given thee the charge of My first-fruits." Now it is a point of
natural law that man should make an offering in God's honor out of the
things he has received from God, but that the offering should be made to
any particular person, or out of his first-fruits, or in such or such a
quantity, was indeed determined in the Old Law by divine command; but in
the New Law it is fixed by the declaration of the Church, in virtue of
which men are bound to pay first-fruits according to the custom of their
country and the needs of the Church's ministers.

**Reply to Objection 1:** The ceremonial observances were properly
speaking signs of the future, and consequently they ceased when the
foreshadowed truth was actually present. But the offering of
first-fruits was for a sign of a past favor, whence arises the duty of
acknowledgment in accordance with the dictate of natural reason. Hence
taken in a general sense this obligation remains.

**Reply to Objection 2:** First-fruits were offered in the Old Law, not
only on account of the favor of the promised land given by God, but also
on account of the favor of the fruits of the earth, which were given by
God. Hence it is written (<span id="SS_Q86_A4-p8.1"></span>[Dt.
26:10](../../../bib/vul/deu026.htm#010)): "I offer the first-fruits of
the land which the Lord hath given me," which second motive is common
among all people. We may also reply that just as God granted the land of
promise to the Jews by a special favor, so by a general favor He
bestowed the lordship of the earth on the whole of mankind, according
to<span id="SS_Q86_A4-p8.2"></span> [Ps.
113:24,](../../../bib/vul/psa113.htm#024) "The earth He has given to the
children of men."

**Reply to Objection 3:** As Jerome says \[\*Comment. in<span
id="SS_Q86_A4-p9.1"></span>[Ezek.
45:13](../../../bib/vul/eze045.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/vul/eze045.htm#014); cf. Cap. Decimam, de Decim.
Primit. et Oblat.\]: "According to the tradition of the ancients the
custom arose for those who had most to give the priests a fortieth part,
and those who had least, one sixtieth, in lieu of first-fruits." Hence
it would seem that first-fruits should vary between these limits
according to the custom of one's country. And it was reasonable that the
amount of first-fruits should not be fixed by law, since, as stated
above, first-fruits are offered by way of oblation, a condition of which
is that it should be voluntary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 87 - OF TITHES (FOUR ARTICLES)](sum343)
