[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sum470)  [Next](sum472.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF CHRIST'S SUBJECTION TO THE FATHER (TWO ARTICLES)

We must now consider such things as belong to Christ in relation to the
Father. Some of these things are predicated of Him because of His
relation to the Father, e.g. that He was subject to Him, that He prayed
to Him, that He ministered, to Him by priesthood. And some are
predicated, or may be predicated, of Him because of the Father's
relation to Him, e.g. that the Father adopted Him and that He
predestined Him.

Hence we must consider (1) Christ's subjection to the Father; (2) His
prayer; (3) His priesthood; (4) Adoption---whether it is becoming to
Him; (5) His predestination.

Under the first head there are two points of inquiry:

\(1\) Whether Christ is subject to the Father?

\(2\) Whether He is subject to Himself?

#### Whether we may say that Christ is subject to the Father?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that we may not say that Christ was
subject to the Father. For everything subject to the Father is a
creature, since, as is said in De Eccles. Dogm. iv, "in the Trinity
there is no dependence or subjection." But we cannot say simply that
Christ is a creature, as was stated above (Q\[16\], A\[8\]). Therefore
we cannot say simply that Christ is subject to God the Father.

**Objection 2:** Further, a thing is said to be subject to God when it
is subservient to His dominion. But we cannot attribute subservience to
the human nature of Christ; for Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 21):
"We must bear in mind that we may not call it" (i.e. Christ's human
nature) "a servant; for the words 'subservience' and 'domination' are
not names of the nature, but of relations, as the words 'paternity' and
'filiation.'" Hence Christ in His human nature is not subject to God the
Father.

**Objection 3:** Further, it is written (<span
id="TP_Q20_A1-p4.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:28](../../../bib/vul/co1015.htm#028).md): "And when all things shall be
subdued unto Him, then the Son also Himself shall be subject unto Him
that put all things under Him." But, as is written (<span
id="TP_Q20_A1-p4.2"></span>[Heb. 2:8](../../../bib/vul/heb002.htm#008).md):
"We see not as yet all things subject to Him." Hence He is not yet
subject to the Father, Who has subjected all things to Him.

**On the contrary,** Our Lord says (<span
id="TP_Q20_A1-p5.1"></span>[Jn.
14:28](../../../bib/vul/joh014.htm#028).md), "The Father is greater than
I"; and Augustine says (De Trin. i, 7): "It is not without reason that
the Scripture mentions both, that the Son is equal to the Father and the
Father greater than the Son, for the first is said on account of the
form of God, and the second on account of the form of a servant, without
any confusion." Now the less is subject to the greater. Therefore in the
form of a servant Christ is subject to the Father.

**I answer that,** Whoever has a nature is competent to have what is
proper to that nature. Now human nature from its beginning has a
threefold subjection to God. The first regards the degree of goodness,
inasmuch as the Divine Nature is the very essence of goodness as is
clear from Dionysius (Div. Nom. i) while a created nature has a
participation of the Divine goodness, being subject, so to say, to the
rays of this goodness. Secondly, human nature is subject to God, as
regards God's power, inasmuch as human nature, even as every creature,
is subject to the operation of the Divine ordinance. Thirdly, human
nature is especially subject to God through its proper act, inasmuch as
by its own will it obeys His command. This triple subjection to God
Christ professes of Himself. The first (<span
id="TP_Q20_A1-p6.1"></span>[Mat.
19:17](../../../bib/vul/mat019.htm#017).md): "Why askest thou Me concerning
good? One is good, God." And on this Jerome remarks: "He who had called
Him a good master, and had not confessed Him to be God or the Son of
God, learns that no man, however holy, is good in comparison with God."
And hereby He gave us to understand that He Himself, in His human
nature, did not attain to the height of Divine goodness. And because "in
such things as are great, but not in bulk, to be great is the same as to
be good," as Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 8), for this reason the Father
is said to be greater than Christ in His human nature. The second
subjection is attributed to Christ, inasmuch as all that befell Christ
is believed to have happened by Divine appointment; hence Dionysius says
(Coel. Hier. iv) that Christ "is subject to the ordinance of God the
Father." And this is the subjection of subservience, whereby "every
creature serves God" (<span id="TP_Q20_A1-p6.2"></span>[Judith
16:17](../../../bib/vul/jdt016.htm#017).md), being subject to His
ordinance, according to<span id="TP_Q20_A1-p6.3"></span> [Wis.
16:24](../../../bib/vul/wis016.htm#024.md): "The creature serving Thee the
Creator." And in this way the Son of God (<span
id="TP_Q20_A1-p6.4"></span>[Phil. 2:7](../../../bib/vul/phi002.htm#007).md)
is said to have taken "the form of a servant." The third subjection He
attributes to Himself, saying (<span id="TP_Q20_A1-p6.5"></span>[Jn.
8:29](../../../bib/vul/joh008.htm#029).md): "I do always the things that
please Him." And this is the subjection to the Father, of obedience unto
death. Hence it is written (<span id="TP_Q20_A1-p6.6"></span>[Phil.
2:8](../../../bib/vul/phi002.htm#008).md) that he became "obedient" to the
Father "unto death."

**Reply to Objection 1:** As we are not to understand that Christ is a
creature simply, but only in His human nature, whether this
qualification be added or not, as stated above (Q\[16\], A\[8\]), so
also we are to understand that Christ is subject to the Father not
simply but in His human nature, even if this qualification be not added;
and yet it is better to add this qualification in order to avoid the
error of Arius, who held the Son to be less than the Father.

**Reply to Objection 2:** The relation of subservience and dominion is
based upon action and passion, inasmuch as it belongs to a servant to be
moved by the will of his master. Now to act is not attributed to the
nature as agent, but to the person, since "acts belong to supposita and
to singulars," according to the Philosopher (Metaph. i, 1). Nevertheless
action is attributed to the nature as to that whereby the person or
hypostasis acts. Hence, although the nature is not properly said to rule
or serve, yet every hypostasis or person may be properly said to be
ruling or serving in this or that nature. And in this way nothing
prevents Christ being subject or servant to the Father in human nature.

**Reply to Objection 3:** As Augustine says (De Trin. i, 8): "Christ
will give the kingdom to God and the Father, when He has brought the
faithful, over whom He now reigns by faith, to the vision," i.e. to see
the essence common to the Father and the Son: and then He will be
totally subject to the Father not only in Himself, but also in His
members by the full participation of the Godhead. And then all things
will be fully subject to Him by the final accomplishment of His will
concerning them; although even now all things are subject to Him as
regards His power, according to <span id="TP_Q20_A1-p9.1"></span> [Mat.
28:18](../../../bib/vul/mat028.htm#018.md): "All power is given to Me in
heaven and in earth."

#### Whether Christ is subject to Himself?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that Christ is not subject to Himself.
For Cyril says in a synodal letter which the Council of Ephesus (Part I,
ch. xxvi) received: "Christ is neither servant nor master of Himself. It
is foolish, or rather impious, to think or say this." And Damascene says
the same (De Fide Orth. iii, 21): "The one Being, Christ, cannot be the
servant or master of Himself." Now Christ is said to be the servant of
the Father inasmuch as He is subject to Him. Hence Christ is not subject
to Himself.

**Objection 2:** Further, servant has reference to master. Now nothing
has a relation to itself, hence Hilary says (De Trin. vii) that nothing
is like or equal to itself. Hence Christ cannot be said to be the
servant of Himself, and consequently to be subject to Himself.

**Objection 3:** Further, "as the rational soul and flesh are one man;
so God and man are one Christ," as Athanasius says (Symb. Fid.). Now man
is not said to be subject to himself or servant to himself or greater
than himself because his body is subject to his soul. Therefore, Christ
is not said to be subject to Himself because His Manhood is subject to
His Godhead.

**On the contrary,** Augustine says (De Trin. i, 7): "Truth shows in
this way" (i.e. whereby the Father is greater than Christ in human
nature) "that the Son is less than Himself."

Further, as he argues (De Trin. i, 7), the form of a servant was so
taken by the Son of God that the form of God was not lost. But because
of the form of God, which is common to the Father and the Son, the
Father is greater than the Son in human nature. Therefore the Son is
greater than Himself in human nature.

Further, Christ in His human nature is the servant of God the Father,
according to<span id="TP_Q20_A2-p7.1"></span> [Jn.
20:17](../../../bib/vul/joh020.htm#017.md): "I ascend to My Father and to
your Father to My God and your God." Now whoever is the servant of the
Father is the servant of the Son; otherwise not everything that belongs
to the Father would belong to the Son. Therefore Christ is His own
servant and is subject to Himself.

**I answer that,** As was said above (A\[1\], ad 2), to be master or
servant is attributed to a person or hypostasis according to a nature.
Hence when it is said that Christ is the master or servant of Himself,
or that the Word of God is the Master of the Man Christ, this may be
understood in two ways. First, so that this is understood to be said by
reason of another hypostasis or person, as if there was the person of
the Word of God ruling and the person of the man serving; and this is
the heresy of Nestorius. Hence in the condemnation of Nestorius it is
said in the Council of Ephesus (Part III, ch. i, anath. 6): "If anyone
say that the Word begotten of God the Father is the God or Lord of
Christ, and does not rather confess the same to be at once God and man
as the Word made flesh, according to the Scriptures, let him be
anathema." And in this sense it is denied by Cyril and Damascene
(OBJ\[1\]); and in the same sense must it be denied that Christ is less
than Himself or subject to Himself. Secondly, it may be understood of
the diversity of natures in the one person or hypostasis. And thus we
may say that in one of them, in which He agrees with the Father, He
presides and rules together with the Father; and in the other nature, in
which He agrees with us, He is subject and serves, and in this sense
Augustine says that "the Son is less than Himself."

Yet it must be borne in mind that since this name "Christ" is the name
of a Person, even as the name "Son," those things can be predicated
essentially and absolutely of Christ which belong to Him by reason of
the Person, Which is eternal; and especially those relations which seem
more properly to pertain to the Person or the hypostasis. But whatever
pertains to Him in His human nature is rather to be attributed to Him
with a qualification; so that we say that Christ is simply greatest,
Lord, Ruler, whereas to be subject or servant or less is to be
attributed to Him with the qualification, in His human nature.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Cyril and Damascene deny that Christ is the
head of Himself inasmuch as this implies a plurality of supposita, which
is required in order that anyone may be the master of another.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Simply speaking it is necessary that the
master and the servant should be distinct; yet a certain notion of
mastership and subservience may be preserved inasmuch as the same one is
master of Himself in different respects.

**Reply to Objection 3:** On account of the divers parts of man, one of
which is superior and the other inferior, the Philosopher says (Ethic.
v, 11) that there is justice between a man and himself inasmuch as the
irascible and concupiscible powers obey reason. Hence this way a man may
be said to be subject and subservient to Himself as regards His
different parts.

To the other arguments, the reply is clear from what has been said. For
Augustine asserts that the Son is less than, or subject to, Himself in
His human nature, and not by a diversity of supposita.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 21 - OF CHRIST'S PRAYER (FOUR ARTICLES)](sum472.md)
