[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sum405)  [Next](sum407) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF SOBRIETY (FOUR ARTICLES)

We must now consider sobriety and the contrary vice, namely drunkenness.
As regards sobriety there are four points of inquiry:

\(1\) What is the matter of sobriety?

\(2\) Whether it is a special virtue?

\(3\) Whether the use of wine is lawful?

\(4\) To whom especially is sobriety becoming?

#### Whether drink is the matter of sobriety?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that drink is not the matter proper to
sobriety. For it is written (<span id="SS_Q149_A1-p2.1"></span>[Rom.
12:3](../../../bib/vul/rom012.htm#003)): "Not to be more wise than it
behooveth to be wise, but to be wise unto sobriety." Therefore sobriety
is also about wisdom, and not only about drink.

**Objection 2:** Further, concerning the wisdom of God, it is written
(<span id="SS_Q149_A1-p3.1"></span>[Wis.
8:7](../../../bib/vul/wis008.htm#007)) that "she teacheth sobriety
\[Douay: 'temperance'\], and prudence, and justice, and fortitude,"
where sobriety stands for temperance. Now temperance is not only about
drink, but also about meat and sexual matters. Therefore sobriety is not
only about drink.

**Objection 3:** Further, sobriety would seem to take its name from
"measure" \[\*'Bria,' a measure, a cup; Cf. Facciolati and Forcellini's
Lexicon\]. Now we ought to be guided by the measure in all things
appertaining to us: for it is written (<span
id="SS_Q149_A1-p4.1"></span>[Titus
2:12](../../../bib/vul/tit002.htm#012)): "We should live soberly and
justly and godly," where a gloss remarks: "Soberly, in ourselves"; and
(<span id="SS_Q149_A1-p4.2"></span>[1 Tim.
2:9](../../../bib/vul/ti1002.htm#009)): "Women . . . in decent apparel,
adorning themselves with modesty and sobriety." Consequently it would
seem that sobriety regards not only the interior man, but also things
appertaining to external apparel. Therefore drink is not the matter
proper to sobriety.

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="SS_Q149_A1-p5.1"></span>[Ecclus.
31:32](../../../bib/vul/sir031.htm#032)): "Wine taken with sobriety is
equal life to men; if thou drink it moderately, thou shalt be sober."

**I answer that,** When a virtue is denominated from some condition
common to the virtues, the matter specially belonging to it is that in
which it is most difficult and most commendable to satisfy that
condition of virtue: thus fortitude is about dangers of death, and
temperance about pleasures of touch. Now sobriety takes its name from
"measure," for a man is said to be sober because he observes the "bria,"
i.e. the measure. Wherefore sobriety lays a special claim to that matter
wherein /the observance of the measure is most deserving of praise. Such
matter is the drinking of intoxicants, because the measured use thereof
is most profitable, while immoderate excess therein is most harmful,
since it hinders the use of reason even more than excessive eating.
Hence it is written (<span id="SS_Q149_A1-p6.1"></span>[Sir.
31:37](../../../bib/vul/sir031.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/vul/sir031.htm#038)): "Sober drinking is health to
soul and body; wine drunken with excess raiseth quarrels, and wrath and
many ruins." For this reason sobriety is especially concerned with
drink, not any kind of drink, but that which by reason of its volatility
is liable to disturb the brain, such as wine and all intoxicants.
Nevertheless, sobriety may be employed in a general sense so as to apply
to any matter, as stated above (Q\[123\], A\[2\]; Q\[141\], A\[2\]) with
regard to fortitude and temperance.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Just as the material wine intoxicates a man as
to his body, so too, speaking figuratively, the consideration of wisdom
is said to be an inebriating draught, because it allures the mind by its
delight, according to<span id="SS_Q149_A1-p7.1"></span> [Ps.
22:5,](../../../bib/vul/psa022.htm#005) "My chalice which inebriateth
me, how goodly is it!" Hence sobriety is applied by a kind of metaphor
in speaking of the contemplation of wisdom.

**Reply to Objection 2:** All the things that belong properly to
temperance are necessary to the present life, and their excess is
harmful. Wherefore it behooves one to apply a measure in all such
things. This is the business of sobriety: and for this reason sobriety
is used to designate temperance. Yet slight excess is more harmful in
drink than in other things, wherefore sobriety is especially concerned
with drink.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Although a measure is needful in all things,
sobriety is not properly employed in connection with all things, but
only in those wherein there is most need for a measure.

#### Whether sobriety is by itself a special virtue?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that sobriety is not by itself a special
virtue. For abstinence is concerned with both meat and drink. Now there
is no special virtue about meat. Therefore neither is sobriety, which is
about drink, a special virtue.

**Objection 2:** Further, abstinence and gluttony are about pleasures of
touch as sensitive to food. Now meat and drink combine together to make
food, since an animal needs a combination of wet and dry nourishment.
Therefore sobriety, which is about drink, is not a. special virtue.

**Objection 3:** Further, just as in things pertaining to nourishment,
drink is distinguished from meat, so are there various kinds of meats
and of drinks. Therefore if sobriety is by itself a special virtue,
seemingly there will be a special virtue corresponding to each different
kind of meat or drink, which is unreasonable. Therefore it would seem
that sobriety is not a special virtue.

**On the contrary,** Macrobius \[\*In Somno Scip. i, 8\] reckons
sobriety to be a special part of temperance.

**I answer that,** As stated above (Q\[146\], A\[2\]), it belongs to
moral virtue to safeguard the good of reason against those things which
may hinder it. Hence wherever we find a special hindrance to reason,
there must needs be a special virtue to remove it. Now intoxicating
drink is a special kind of hindrance to the use of reason, inasmuch as
it disturbs the brain by its fumes. Wherefore in order to remove this
hindrance to reason a special virtue, which is sobriety, is requisite.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Meat and drink are alike capable of hindering
the good of reason, by embroiling the reason with immoderate pleasure:
and in this respect abstinence is about both meat and drink alike. But
intoxicating drink is a special kind of hindrance, as stated above,
wherefore it requires a special virtue.

**Reply to Objection 2:** The virtue of abstinence is about meat and
drink, considered, not as food but as a hindrance to reason. Hence it
does not follow that special kinds of virtue correspond to different
kinds of food.

**Reply to Objection 3:** In all intoxicating drinks there is one kind
of hindrance to the use of reason: so that the difference of drinks
bears an accidental relation to virtue. Hence this difference does not
call for a difference of virtue. The same applies to the difference of
meats.

#### Whether the use of wine is altogether unlawful?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that the use of wine is altogether
unlawful. For without wisdom, a man cannot be in the state of salvation:
since it is written (<span id="SS_Q149_A3-p2.1"></span>[Wis.
7:28](../../../bib/vul/wis007.htm#028)): "God loveth none but him that
dwelleth with wisdom," and further on (<span
id="SS_Q149_A3-p2.2"></span>[Wis.
9:19](../../../bib/vul/wis009.htm#019)): "By wisdom they were healed,
whosoever have pleased Thee, O Lord, from the beginning." Now the use of
wine is a hindrance to wisdom, for it is written (<span
id="SS_Q149_A3-p2.3"></span>[Eccles.
2:3](../../../bib/vul/ecc002.htm#003)): "I thought in my heart to
withdraw my flesh from wine, that I might turn my mind to wisdom."
Therefore wine-drinking is altogether unlawful.

**Objection 2:** Further, the Apostle says (<span
id="SS_Q149_A3-p3.1"></span>[Rom.
14:21](../../../bib/vul/rom014.htm#021)): "It is good not to eat flesh,
and not to drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother is offended or
scandalized, or made weak." Now it is sinful to forsake the good of
virtue, as likewise to scandalize one's brethren. Therefore it is
unlawful to make use of wine.

**Objection 3:** Further, Jerome says \[\*Contra Jovin. i\] that "after
the deluge wine and flesh were sanctioned: but Christ came in the last
of the ages and brought back the end into line with the beginning."
Therefore it seems unlawful to use wine under the Christian law.

**On the contrary,** The Apostle says (<span
id="SS_Q149_A3-p5.1"></span>[1 Tim.
5:23](../../../bib/vul/ti1005.htm#023)): "Do not still drink water, but
use a little wine for thy stomach's sake, and thy frequent infirmities";
and it is written (<span id="SS_Q149_A3-p5.2"></span>[Ecclus.
31:36](../../../bib/vul/sir031.htm#036)): "Wine drunken with moderation
is the joy of the soul and the heart."

**I answer that,** No meat or drink, considered in itself, is unlawful,
according to<span id="SS_Q149_A3-p6.1"></span> [Mat.
15:11,](../../../bib/vul/mat015.htm#011) "Not that which goeth into the
mouth defileth a man." Wherefore it is not unlawful to drink wine as
such. Yet it may become unlawful accidentally. This is sometimes owing
to a circumstance on the part of the drinker, either because he is
easily the worse for taking wine, or because he is bound by a vow not to
drink wine: sometimes it results from the mode of drinking, because to
wit he exceeds the measure in drinking: and sometimes it is on account
of others who would be scandalized thereby.

**Reply to Objection 1:** A man may have wisdom in two ways. First, in a
general way, according as it is sufficient for salvation: and in this
way it is required, in order to have wisdom, not that a man abstain
altogether from wine, but that he abstain from its immoderate use.
Secondly, a man may have wisdom in some degree of perfection: and in
this way, in order to receive wisdom perfectly, it is requisite for
certain persons that they abstain altogether from wine, and this depends
on circumstances of certain persons and places.

**Reply to Objection 2:** The Apostle does not declare simply that it is
good to abstain from wine, but that it is good in the case where this
would give scandal to certain people.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Christ withdraws us from some things as being
altogether unlawful, and from others as being obstacles to perfection.
It is in the latter way that he withdraws some from the use of wine,
that they may aim at perfection, even as from riches and the like.

#### Whether sobriety is more requisite in persons of greater standing?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that sobriety is more requisite in
persons of greater standing. For old age gives a man a certain standing;
wherefore honor and reverence are due to the old, according to<span
id="SS_Q149_A4-p2.1"></span> [Lev.
19:32,](../../../bib/vul/lev019.htm#032) "Rise up before the hoary head,
and honor the person of the aged man." Now the Apostle declares that old
men especially should be exhorted to sobriety, according to<span
id="SS_Q149_A4-p2.2"></span> [Titus
2:2,](../../../bib/vul/tit002.htm#002) "That the aged man be sober."
Therefore sobriety is most requisite in persons of standing.

**Objection 2:** Further, a bishop has the highest degree in the Church:
and the Apostle commands him to be sober, according to <span
id="SS_Q149_A4-p3.1"></span>[1 Tim.
3:2,](../../../bib/vul/ti1003.htm#002) "It behooveth . . . a bishop to
be blameless, the husband of one wife, sober, prudent," etc. Therefore
sobriety is chiefly required in persons of high standing.

**Objection 3:** Further, sobriety denotes abstinence from wine. Now
wine is forbidden to kings, who hold the highest place in human affairs:
while it is allowed to those who are in a state of affliction, according
to <span id="SS_Q149_A4-p4.1"></span>[Prov.
31:4](../../../bib/vul/pro031.htm#004), "Give not wine to kings," and
further on (<span id="SS_Q149_A4-p4.2"></span>[Prov.
31:6](../../../bib/vul/pro031.htm#006)), "Give strong drink to them that
are sad, and wine to them that are grieved in mind." Therefore sobriety
is more requisite in persons of standing.

**On the contrary,** The Apostle says (<span
id="SS_Q149_A4-p5.1"></span>[1 Tim.
3:11](../../../bib/vul/ti1003.htm#011)): "The women in like manner,
chaste . . . sober," etc., and (<span id="SS_Q149_A4-p5.2"></span>[Titus
2:6](../../../bib/vul/tit002.htm#006)) "Young men in like manner exhort
that they be sober."

**I answer that,** Virtue includes relationship to two things, to the
contrary vices which it removes, and to the end to which it leads.
Accordingly a particular virtue is more requisite in certain persons for
two reasons. First, because they are more prone to the concupiscences
which need to be restrained by virtue, and to the vices which are
removed by virtue. In this respect, sobriety is most requisite in the
young and in women, because concupiscence of pleasure thrives in the
young on account of the heat of youth, while in women there is not
sufficient strength of mind to resist concupiscence. Hence, according to
Valerius Maximus \[\*Dict. Fact. Memor. ii, 1\] among the ancient Romans
women drank no wine. Secondly, sobriety is more requisite in certain
persons, as being more necessary for the operations proper to them. Now
immoderate use of wine is a notable obstacle to the use of reason:
wherefore sobriety is specially prescribed to the old, in whom reason
should be vigorous in instructing others: to bishops and all ministers
of the Church, who should fulfil their spiritual duties with a devout
mind; and to kings, who should rule their subjects with wisdom.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 150 - OF DRUNKENNESS (FOUR ARTICLES)](sum407)
