[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sum426)  [Next](sum428.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF THE PRECEPTS OF TEMPERANCE (TWO ARTICLES)

We must next consider the precepts of temperance:

\(1\) The precepts of temperance itself;

\(2\) The precepts of its parts.

#### Whether the precepts of temperance are suitably given in the Divine law?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that the precepts of temperance are
unsuitably given in the Divine law. Because fortitude is a greater
virtue than temperance, as stated above (Q\[123\], A\[12\]; Q\[141\],
A\[8\]; FS, Q\[66\], A\[4\] ). Now there is no precept of fortitude
among the precepts of the decalogue, which are the most important among
the precepts of the Law. Therefore it was unfitting to include among the
precepts of the decalogue the prohibition of adultery, which is contrary
to temperance, as stated above (Q\[154\], AA\[1\],8).

**Objection 2:** Further, temperance is not only about venereal matters,
but also about pleasures of meat and drink. Now the precepts of the
decalogue include no prohibition of a vice pertaining to pleasures of
meat and drink, or to any other species of lust. Neither, therefore,
should they include a precept prohibiting adultery, which pertains to
venereal pleasure.

**Objection 3:** Further, in the lawgiver's intention inducement to
virtue precedes the prohibition of vice, since vices are forbidden in
order that obstacles to virtue may be removed. Now the precepts of the
decalogue are the most important in the Divine law. Therefore the
precepts of the decalogue should have included an affirmative precept
directly prescribing the virtue of temperance, rather than a negative
precept forbidding adultery which is directly opposed thereto.

**On the contrary,** stands the authority of Scripture in the decalogue
(<span id="SS_Q170_A1-p5.1"></span>[Exod.
20:14](../../../bib/vul/exo020.htm#014.md),
[17](../../../bib/vul/exo020.htm#017).md).

**I answer that,** As the Apostle says (<span
id="SS_Q170_A1-p6.1"></span>[1 Tim.
1:5](../../../bib/vul/ti1001.htm#005).md), "the end of the commandment is
charity," which is enjoined upon us in the two precepts concerning the
love of God and of our neighbor. Wherefore the decalogue contains those
precepts which tend more directly to the love of God and of our
neighbor. Now among the vices opposed to temperance, adultery would seem
most of all opposed to the love of our neighbor, since thereby a man
lays hold of another's property for his own use, by abusing his
neighbor's wife. Wherefore the precepts of the decalogue include a
special prohibition of adultery, not only as committed in deed, but also
as desired in thought.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Among the species of vices opposed to
fortitude there is not one that is so directly opposed to the love of
our neighbor as adultery, which is a species of lust that is opposed to
temperance. And yet the vice of daring, which is opposed to fortitude,
is wont to be sometimes the cause of murder, which is forbidden by one
of the precepts of the decalogue: for it is written (<span
id="SS_Q170_A1-p7.1"></span>[Ecclus.
8:18](../../../bib/vul/sir008.htm#018).md): "Go not on the way with a bold
man lest he burden thee with his evils."

**Reply to Objection 2:** Gluttony is not directly opposed to the love
of our neighbor, as adultery is. Nor indeed is any other species of
lust, for a father is not so wronged by the seduction of the virgin over
whom he has no connubial right, as is the husband by the adultery of his
wife, for he, not the wife herself, has power over her body \[\*<span
id="SS_Q170_A1-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor.
7:4](../../../bib/vul/co1007.htm#004.md)\].

**Reply to Objection 3:** As stated above (Q\[122\], AA\[1\],4) the
precepts of the decalogue are universal principles of the Divine law;
hence they need to be common precepts. Now it was not possible to give
any common affirmative precepts of temperance, because the practice of
temperance varies according to different times, as Augustine remarks (De
Bono Conjug. xv, 7), and according to different human laws and customs.

#### Whether the precepts of the virtues annexed to temperance are suitably given in the Divine law?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that the precepts of the virtues annexed
to temperance are unsuitably given in the Divine law. For the precepts
of the Decalogue, as stated above (A\[1\], ad 3), are certain universal
principles of the whole Divine law. Now "pride is the beginning of all
sin," according to<span id="SS_Q170_A2-p2.1"></span> [Ecclus.
10:15.](../../../bib/vul/sir010.htm#015.md) Therefore among the precepts of
the Decalogue there should have been one forbidding pride.

**Objection 2:** Further, a place before all should have been given in
the decalogue to those precepts by which men are especially induced to
fulfil the Law, because these would seem to be the most important. Now
since humility subjects man to God, it would seem most of all to dispose
man to the fulfilment of the Divine law; wherefore obedience is
accounted one of the degrees of humility, as stated above (Q\[161\],
A\[6\]); and the same apparently applies to meekness, the effect of
which is that a man does not contradict the Divine Scriptures, as
Augustine observes (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 7). Therefore it seems that
the Decalogue should have contained precepts of humility and meekness.

**Objection 3:** Further, it was stated in the foregoing Article that
adultery is forbidden in the decalogue, because it is contrary to the
love of our neighbor. But inordinateness of outward movements, which is
contrary to modesty, is opposed to neighborly love: wherefore Augustine
says in his Rule (Ep. ccxii): "In all your movements let nothing be done
to offend the eye of any person whatever." Therefore it seems that this
kind of inordinateness should also have been forbidden by a precept of
the Decalogue.

**On the contrary,** suffices the authority of Scripture.

**I answer that,** The virtues annexed to temperance may be considered
in two ways: first, in themselves; secondly, in their effects.
Considered in themselves they have no direct connection with the love of
God or of our neighbor; rather do they regard a certain moderation of
things pertaining to man himself. But considered in their effects, they
may regard the love of God or of our neighbor: and in this respect the
decalogue contains precepts that relate to the prohibition of the
effects of the vices opposed to the parts of temperance. Thus the effect
of anger, which is opposed to meekness, is sometimes that a man goes on
to commit murder (and this is forbidden in the Decalogue), and sometimes
that he refuses due honor to his parents, which may also be the result
of pride, which leads many to transgress the precepts of the first
table.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Pride is the beginning of sin, but it lies
hidden in the heart; and its inordinateness is not perceived by all in
common. Hence there was no place for its prohibition among the precepts
of the Decalogue, which are like first self-evident principles.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Those precepts which are essentially an
inducement to the observance of the Law presuppose the Law to be already
given, wherefore they cannot be first precepts of the Law so as to have
a place in the Decalogue.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Inordinate outward movement is not injurious
to one's neighbor, if we consider the species of the act, as are murder,
adultery, and theft, which are forbidden in the decalogue; but only as
being signs of an inward inordinateness, as stated above (Q\[168\],
A\[1\], ad 1,3).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: TREATISE ON GRATUITOUS GRACES (QQ\[171\]-182)](sum428.md)
