[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sum576)  [Next](sum578.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ON WHOM SHOULD THIS SACRAMENT BE CONFERRED AND ON WHAT PART OF THE BODY? (SEVEN ARTICLES)

We must now consider on whom this sacrament should be conferred and on
what part of the body: under which head there are seven points of
inquiry:

\(1\) Whether this sacrament should be conferred on those who are in
good health?

\(2\) Whether it should be conferred in any kind of sickness?

\(3\) Whether it should be conferred on madmen and imbeciles?

\(4\) Whether it should be given to children?

\(5\) Whether, in this sacrament, the whole body should be anointed?

\(6\) Whether certain parts are suitably assigned to be anointed?

\(7\) Whether those who are deformed in the above parts ought to be
anointed thereon?

#### Whether this sacrament ought to be conferred on those who are in good health?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that this sacrament should be conferred
even on those who are in good health. For the healing of the mind is a
more important effect of this sacrament than the healing of the body, as
stated above (Q\[30\], A\[2\]). Now even those who are healthy in body
need to be healed in mind. Therefore this sacrament should be conferred
on them also.

**Objection 2:** Further, this is the sacrament of those who are
departing this life, just as Baptism is the sacrament of those who are
entering this life. Now Baptism is given to all who enter. Therefore
this sacrament should be given to all who are departing. But sometimes
those who are near departure are in good health, for instance those who
are to be beheaded. Therefore this sacrament should be conferred on
them.

**On the contrary,** It is written (<span
id="XP_Q32_A1-p4.1"></span>[James
5:14](../../../bib/vul/jam005.htm#014).md): "Is any man sick among you,"
etc. Therefore none but the sick are competent to receive this
sacrament.

**I answer that,** This sacrament is a spiritual healing, as stated
above (Q\[30\], AA\[1\],2), and is signified by way of a healing of the
body. Hence this sacrament should not be conferred on those who are not
subjects for bodily healing, those namely, who are in good health.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Although spiritual health is the principal
effect of this sacrament, yet this same spiritual healing needs to be
signified by a healing of the body, although bodily health may not
actually ensue. Consequently spiritual health can be conferred by this
sacrament on those alone who are competent to receive bodily healing,
viz. the sick; even as he alone can receive Baptism who is capable of a
bodily washing, and not a child yet in its mother's womb.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Even those who are entering into life cannot
receive Baptism unless they are capable of a bodily washing. And so
those who are departing this life cannot receive this sacrament, unless
they be subjects for a bodily healing.

#### Whether this sacrament ought to be given in any kind of sickness?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that this sacrament should be given in
any kind of sickness. For no kind of sickness is determined in the fifth
chapter of James where this sacrament is delivered to us. Therefore this
sacrament should be given in all kinds of sickness.

**Objection 2:** Further, the more excellent a remedy is, the more
generally should it be available. Now this sacrament is more excellent
than bodily medicine. Since then bodily medicine is given to all manner
of sick persons, it seems that this sacrament should be given in like
manner to all.

**On the contrary,** This sacrament is called by all Extreme Unction.
Now it is not every sickness that brings man to the extremity of his
life, since some ailments prolong life, according to the Philosopher (De
Long. et Brev. Vitae i). Therefore this sacrament should not be given in
every case of sickness.

**I answer that,** This sacrament is the last remedy that the Church can
give, since it is an immediate preparation for glory. Therefore it ought
to be given to those only, who are so sick as to be in a state of
departure from this life, through their sickness being of such a nature
as to cause death, the danger of which is to be feared.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Any sickness can cause death, if it be
aggravated. Hence if we consider the different kinds of disease, there
is none in which this sacrament cannot be given; and for this reason the
apostle does not determine any particular one. But if we consider the
degree and the stage of the complaint, this sacrament should not be
given to every sick person.

**Reply to Objection 2:** The principal effect of bodily medicine is
bodily health, which all sick people lack, whatever be the stage of
their sickness. But the principal effect of this sacrament is that
immunity from disorder which is needed by those who are taking their
departure from this life and setting out for the life of glory. Hence
the comparison fails.

#### Whether this sacrament ought to be given to madmen and imbeciles?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that this sacrament should be given to
madmen and imbeciles. For these diseases are full of danger and cause
death quickly. Now when there is danger it is the time to apply the
remedy. Therefore this sacrament, which was intended as a remedy to
human weakness, should be given to such people.

**Objection 2:** Further, Baptism is a greater sacrament than this. Now
Baptism is conferred on mad people as stated above (TP, Q\[68\],
A\[12\]). Therefore this sacrament also should be given to them.

**On the contrary,** This sacrament should be given to none but such as
acknowledge it. Now this does not apply to madmen and imbeciles.
Therefore it should not be given to them.

**I answer that,** The devotion of the recipient, the personal merit of
the minister, and the general merits of the whole Church, are of great
account towards the reception of the effect of this sacrament. This is
evident from the fact that the form of this sacrament is pronounced by
way of a prayer. Hence it should not be given those who cannot
acknowledge it, and especially to madmen and imbeciles, who might
dishonor the sacrament by their offensive conduct, unless they have
lucid intervals, when they would be capable of acknowledging the
sacrament, for then the sacrament should be given to children the same
in that state.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Although such people are sometimes in danger
of death; yet the remedy cannot be applied to them, on account of their
lack of devotion. Hence it should not be given to them.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Baptism does not require a movement of the
free-will, because it is given chiefly as a remedy for original sin,
which, in us, is not taken away by a movement of the free-will. On the
other hand this sacrament requires a movement of the free-will;
wherefore the comparison fails. Moreover Baptism is a necessary
sacrament, while Extreme Unction is not.

#### Whether this sacrament should be given to children?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that this sacrament ought to be given to
children. Because children suffer from the same ailments sometimes as
adults. Now the same disease requires the same remedy. Therefore this
sacrament should be given to children the same as to adults.

**Objection 2:** Further, this sacrament is given in order to remove the
remnants of sin, whether original or actual, as stated above (Q\[30\],
A\[1\]). Now the remnants of original sin are in children. Therefore
this sacrament should be given to them.

**On the contrary,** This sacrament should be given to none but those to
whom the form applies. But the form of this sacrament does not apply to
children, since they have not sinned by sight and hearing; as expressed
in the form. Therefore this sacrament should not be given to them.

**I answer that,** This sacrament, like the Eucharist, requires actual
devotion in the recipient. Therefore, just as the Eucharist ought not to
be given to children, so neither ought this sacrament to be given to
them.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Children's infirmities are not caused by
actual sin, as in adults, and this sacrament is given chiefly as a
remedy for infirmities that result from sins, being the remnants of sin,
as it were.

**Reply to Objection 2:** This sacrament is not given as a remedy for
the remnants of original sin, except in so far as they gather strength,
so to speak, from actual sins. Hence from the very form it appears that
it is given chiefly as a remedy for actual sins, which are not in
children.

#### Whether the whole body should be anointed in this sacrament?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that the whole body should be anointed in
this sacrament. For, according to Augustine (De Trin. vi, 6), "the whole
soul is in every part of the body." Now this sacrament is given chiefly
in order to heal the soul. Therefore the whole body ought to be
anointed.

**Objection 2:** Further, the remedy should be applied to the part
affected by the disease. But sometimes the disease is general, and
affects the whole body, as a fever does. Therefore the whole body should
be anointed.

**Objection 3:** Further, in Baptism the whole body is dipped under the
water. Therefore in this sacrament the whole body should be anointed.

**On the contrary,** stands the rite observed throughout the Church,
according to which in this sacrament the sick man is anointed, only in
certain fixed parts of the body.

**I answer that,** This sacrament is shown to us under the form of a
healing. Now bodily healing has to be effected, by applying the remedy,
not to the whole body, but to those parts where the root of the disease
is seated. Consequently the sacramental unction also ought to be applied
to those parts only in which the spiritual sickness is rooted.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Although the whole soul is, as to its essence,
in each part of the body, it is not as to its powers which are the roots
of sinful acts. Hence certain fixed parts have to be anointed, those,
namely, in which powers have their being.

**Reply to Objection 2:** The remedy is not always applied to the part
affected by the disease, but, with greater reason, to the part where the
root of the disease is seated.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Baptism is given under the form of washing:
and a bodily washing cleanses only the part to which it is applied; for
this reason Baptism is applied to the whole body. It is different with
Extreme Unction for the reason given above.

#### Whether the parts to be anointed are suitably assigned?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that these parts are unsuitably assigned,
namely, that the eyes, nose, ears, lips, hands, and feet should be
anointed. For a wise physician heals the disease in its root. Now "from
the heart come forth thoughts . . . that defile a man" (<span
id="XP_Q32_A6-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
15:19](../../../bib/vul/mat015.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/vul/mat015.htm#020).md). Therefore the breast ought to be
anointed.

**Objection 2:** Further, purity of mind is not less necessary to those
who are departing this life than to those who are entering therein. Now
those who are entering are anointed with chrism on the head by the
priest, to signify purity of mind. Therefore in this sacrament those who
are departing should be anointed on the head.

**Objection 3:** Further, the remedy should be applied where the disease
is most virulent. Now spiritual sickness is most virulent in the loins
in men, and in the navel in women, according to<span
id="XP_Q32_A6-p4.1"></span> [Job
40:11](../../../bib/vul/job040.htm#011.md): "His strength is in his loins,
and his force in the navel of his belly," as Gregory expounds the
passage (Moral. xxxii, 11). Therefore these parts should be anointed.

**Objection 4:** Further, sins are committed with other parts of the
body, no less than with the feet. Therefore, as the feet are anointed,
so ought other members of the body to be anointed.

**I answer that,** The principles of sinning are the same in us as the
principles of action, for a sin is an act. Now there are in us three
principles of action; the first is the directing principle, namely, the
cognitive power; the second is the commanding principle, namely, the
appetitive power; the third is the executive principle, namely, the
motive power.

Now all our knowledge has its origin in the senses. And, since the
remedy for sin should be applied where sin originates in us first, for
that reason the places of the five senses are anointed. the eyes, to
wit, on account of the sight, the ears on account of hearing, the
nostrils on account of the smell, the mouth on account of the taste, the
hands on account of the touch which is keenest in the finger tips, (in
some places too the loins are anointed on account of the appetite), and
the feet are anointed on account of the motive power of which they are
the chief instrument. And since the cognitive power is the first
principle of human activity, the anointing of the five senses is
observed by all, as being essential to the sacrament. But some do not
observe the other unctions---some also anoint the feet but not the
loins---because the appetitive and motive powers are secondary
principles.

**Reply to Objection 1:** No thought arises in the heart without an act
of the imagination which is a movement proceeding from sensation (De
Anima ii). Hence the primary root of thought is not the heart, but the
sensory organs, except in so far as the heart is a principle of the
whole body, albeit a remote principle.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Those who enter have to receive purity of the
mind, whereas those who are departing have to cleanse the mind. Hence
the latter need to be anointed in those parts in respect of which the
mind's purity may be sullied.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Some are wont to anoint the loins, because
they are the chief seat of the concupiscible appetite: however, as
stated above, the appetitive power is not the primary root.

**Reply to Objection 4:** The bodily organs which are the instruments of
sin, are the feet, hands, and tongue, all of which are anointed, and the
organs of generation which it would be unbecoming to anoint, on account
of their uncleanliness, and out of respect for the sacrament.

#### Whether those who are deformed in those parts should be anointed?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that those who are deformed should not be
anointed in those parts. For just as this sacrament demands a certain
disposition on the part of the recipient, viz. that he should be sick,
so it demands that he should be anointed in a certain part of the body.
Now he that is not sick cannot be anointed. Therefore neither can he be
anointed who lacks the part to be anointed.

**Objection 2:** Further, a man born blind does not sin by his sight.
Yet in the anointing of the eyes mention is made of sins by sight.
Therefore this anointing ought not to be applied to one born blind, and
in like manner as regards the other senses.

**On the contrary,** Bodily deformity is not an impediment to any other
sacrament. Therefore it should not be an impediment to this one. Now
each of the anointings is essential to the sacrament. Therefore all
should be applied to those who are deformed.

**I answer that,** Even those who are deformed should be anointed, and
that as near as possible to the part which ought to have been anointed.
For though they have not the members, nevertheless, they have, at least
radically, the powers of the soul, corresponding to those members, and
they may commit inwardly the sins that pertain to those members, though
they cannot outwardly.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 33 - OF THE REPETITION OF THIS SACRAMENT (TWO
ARTICLES)](sum578.md)
