[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Aquinas](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sum607)  [Next](sum609.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0870610635/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Summa Theologica*, by St. Thomas Aquinas, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF SECOND MARRIAGES (TWO ARTICLES)

In the next place we must consider second marriage. Under this head
there are two points of inquiry:

\(1\) Whether it is lawful?

\(2\) Whether it is a sacrament?

#### Whether a second marriage is lawful?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that a second marriage is unlawful.
Because we should judge of things according to truth. Now Chrysostom
\[\*Hom. xxxii in the Opus Imperfectum falsely ascribed to St. John
Chrysostom\] says that "to take a second husband is in truth
fornication," which is unlawful. Therefore neither is a second marriage
lawful.

**Objection 2:** Further, whatever is not good is unlawful. Now Ambrose
\[\*On <span id="XP_Q63_A1-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor.
7:40](../../../bib/vul/co1007.htm#040.md) and De Viduis\] says that a
second marriage is not good. Therefore it is unlawful.

**Objection 3:** Further, no one should be debarred from being present
at such things as are becoming and lawful. Yet priests are debarred from
being present at second marriages, as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D,
42). Therefore they are unlawful.

**Objection 4:** Further, no one incurs a penalty save for sin. Now a
person incurs the penalty of irregularity on account of being married
twice. Therefore a second marriage is unlawful.

**On the contrary,** We read of Abraham having contracted a second
marriage (<span id="XP_Q63_A1-p6.1"></span>[Gn.
25:1](../../../bib/vul/gen025.htm#001).md).

Further, the Apostle says (<span id="XP_Q63_A1-p7.1"></span>[1 Tim.
5:14](../../../bib/vul/ti1005.htm#014).md): "I will . . . that the
younger," namely widows, "should marry, bear children." Therefore second
marriages are lawful.

**I answer that,** The marriage tie lasts only until death (<span
id="XP_Q63_A1-p8.1"></span>[Rom. 7:2](../../../bib/vul/rom007.htm#002).md),
wherefore at the death of either spouse the marriage tie ceases: and
consequently when one dies the other is not hindered from marrying a
second time on account of the previous marriage. Therefore not only
second marriages are lawful, but even third and so on.

**Reply to Objection 1:** Chrysostom is speaking in reference to the
cause which is wont at times to incite a person to a second marriage,
namely concupiscence which incites also to fornication.

**Reply to Objection 2:** A second marriage is stated not to be good,
not that it is unlawful, but because it lacks the honor of the
signification which is in a first marriage, where one husband has one
wife, as in the case of Christ and the Church.

**Reply to Objection 3:** Men who are consecrated to Divine things are
debarred not only from unlawful things, but even from things which have
any appearance of turpitude; and consequently they are debarred from
second marriages, which lack the decorum which was in a first marriage.

**Reply to Objection 4:** Irregularity is not always incurred on account
of a sin, and may be incurred through a defect in a sacrament
\[\*"Defectus sacramenti," i.e. defect of signification; Cf. A\[2\],
OBJ\[3\]\]. Hence the argument is not to the point.

#### Whether a second marriage is a sacrament?

**Objection 1:** It would seem that a second marriage is not a
sacrament. For he who repeats a sacrament injures the sacrament. But no
sacrament should be done an injury. Therefore if a second marriage were
a sacrament, marriage ought nowise to be repeated.

**Objection 2:** Further, in every sacrament some kind of blessing is
given. But no blessing is given in a second marriage, as stated in the
text (Sent. iv, D, 42). Therefore no sacrament is conferred therein.

**Objection 3:** Further, signification is essential to a sacrament. But
the signification of marriage is not preserved in a second marriage,
because there is not a union of only one woman with only one man, as in
the case of Christ and the Church. Therefore it is not a sacrament.

**Objection 4:** Further, one sacrament is not an impediment to
receiving another. But a second marriage is an impediment to receiving
orders. Therefore it is not a sacrament.

**On the contrary,** Marital intercourse is excused from sin in a second
marriage even as in a first marriage. Now marital intercourse is excused
\[\*Cf. Q\[69\], A\[1\]\] by the marriage goods which are fidelity,
offspring, and sacrament. Therefore a second marriage is a sacrament.

Further, irregularity is not contracted through a second and
non-sacramental union, such as fornication. Yet irregularity is
contracted through a second marriage. Therefore it is a sacramental
union.

**I answer that,** Wherever we find the essentials of a sacrament, there
is a true sacrament. Wherefore, since in a second marriage we find all
the essentials of the sacrament of marriage (namely the due
matter---which results from the parties having the conditions prescribed
by law---and the due form, which is the expression of the inward consent
by words of the present), it is clear that a second marriage is a
sacrament even as a first.

**Reply to Objection 1:** This is true of a sacrament which causes an
everlasting effect: for then, if the sacrament be repeated, it is
implied that the first was not effective, and thus an injury is done to
the first, as is clear in all those sacraments which imprint a
character. But those sacraments which have not an everlasting effect can
be repeated without injury to the sacrament, as in the case of Penance.
And, since the marriage tie ceases with death, no injury is done to the
sacrament if a woman marry again after her husband's death.

**Reply to Objection 2:** Although the second marriage, considered in
itself, is a perfect sacrament, yet if we consider it in relation to the
first marriage, it is somewhat a defective sacrament, because it has not
its full signification, since there is not a union of only one woman
with only one man as in the marriage of Christ with the Church. And on
account of this defect the blessing is omitted in a second marriage.
This, however, refers to the case when it is a second marriage on the
part of both man and woman, or on the part of the woman only. For if a
virgin marry a man who has had another wife, the marriage is blessed
nevertheless. Because the signification is preserved to a certain extent
even in relation to the former marriage, since though Christ has but one
Church for His spouse, there are many persons espoused to Him in the one
Church. But the soul cannot be espoused to another besides Christ, else
it commits fornication with the devil. Nor is there a spiritual
marriage. For this reason when a woman marries a second time the
marriage is not blessed on account of the defect in the sacrament.

**Reply to Objection 3:** The perfect signification is found in a second
marriage considered in itself, not however if it be considered in
relation to the previous marriage, and it is thus that it is a defective
sacrament.

**Reply to Objection 4:** A second marriage in so far as there is a
defect in the sacrament, but not as a sacrament, is an impediment to the
sacrament of Order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question. 64 - OF THE THINGS ANNEXED TO MARRIAGE, AND FIRST OF
THE PAYMENT OF THE MARRIAGE DEBT (TEN ARTICLES)](sum609.md)
