[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Harper's New Monthly Magazine

# The Tribes of the Thirty-Fifth Parallel

#### September 1858

#### VOL. XVII.--No. 100.

<span id="img_448"></span>

[![](tn/448.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/448.jpg)

UNDER the 10th and 11th sections of the Military Appropriation Act,
approved 3rd March, 1853, directing such explorations and surveys to be
made "as might be deemed necessary in order to ascertain the most
practicable and economical route for a railroad from the Mississippi
River to the Pacific Ocean," the War Department (on May 14, 1853)
directed such "explorations and surveys" to be begun as would develop
the availability for that purpose of the portion of our territory lying
near the parallel of 35° north latitude; and a party was forthwith
organized under the command of First Lieutenant A. W. Whipple, of
Topographical Engineers, assisted by Brevet Second Lieutenant I. C.
Ives, T. E., together with such civil assistants as seemed to be
required.

The main party was ordered to rendezvous at some convenient point on the
Mississippi River, and thence proceed, by the most favorable route,
westward, toward the Rio del Norte:

"The reconnaissance will continue along the head-waters of the Canadian,
cross the Rio Pecos, turn the mountains east of the Rio del Norte, and
enter the valley of that river at some available point near Albuquerque.
Thence westward, extensive explorations must determine the most
practicable pass for a railway through the Sierra Madre, and the
mountains west of the Zuni and Moquis countries, to the Colorado. From
Walker's Pass it would be advisable to pursue the most direct and
practicable line to the Pacific Ocean, which will probably lead to San
Pedro, the port of Los Angeles, or San Diego."

On the 20th of May the last division of the party left Washington for
the Mississippi River and the frontier; on the 2d of July they arrived
at Fort Smith, just one hundred feet west of the western boundary of the
State of Arkansas; and here the business of the expedition began in
earnest.

Let us accompany Messrs. Whipple and Ives, for the sake of some new and
curious acquaintance-for which we shall be indebted to those intelligent
and experienced path-finders-with the interesting Indian tribes who hold
the right of way in the territory they traversed.

On July 15 the explorers struck camp and moved southwest ten miles. to
Ring's Plantation, within the country coded to the Choctaw nation,
wherein no white man can, in his own right, acquire a land-title or
residence without permission of the Indians or their agents. Ring
married a Choctaw woman, and in her name holds a valuable estate.

<span id="img_449"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/449.jpg"><img src="tn/449.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

From Ring's the route lay westwardly, over gentle slopes and through
wooded valleys, to Scullyville, the seat of the Choctaw Agency, whence a
party made an excursion to Fort Coffee, six miles distant, on the south
side of the Arkansas. This is no longer a military post, but a
flourishing academy for Choctaw boys, under the direction of Methodist
missionaries, whose system of education is strictly practical, and
includes agriculture as a special branch.

On the 18th of August the exploring party had traversed the whole extent
of country occupied by the semi-civilized Indians of the Choctaw nation,
and were now on the verge of the great Western prairies, over which the
veritable Bedouins of the Western continent hold undisputed sway. The
season had been remarkably dry; many streams and springs, usually
unfailing, were now waterless. The Canadian River was, almost without
precedent, low; and Black Beaver, a Delaware chief and famous guide,
apprehended that they would soon suffer for want of water.

Every inducement was held out to the tried guides of the neighborhood.
Black Beaver, the only Indian of the country who had traversed the route
to be taken, near the Canadian, was in ill health; nor could he, by any
means, be prevailed upon to accompany the party.

Johnson, the Shawnee guide, who had conducted them thus far, refused to
proceed, for fear of savages. John Bushman, the Delaware, said, "Maybe
you find no water--maybe you all die." Impressed with this idea, no
arguments, no money, could prevail on him to go.

Jesse Chisholm, the Cherokee, had just arrived. He is a man of
considerable wealth, and engaged in trade. In the prosecution of his
regular business he could realize twice the amount that Government would
be willing to pay for his services. Therefore he also declined. This was
the more to be regretted, as he is a man of excellent judgment, who has
decided influence among the wild tribes westward. At a great Indian
Council, held not long before his introduction to the Whipple party, he
was chosen Interpreter-General for all--Comanches, Kioways, Kichais,
Creeks, Delawares, Shawnees, Chickasaws, and Choctaws. He has traded
much among the Comanches, and understands not only their language but
their customs, traditions, and ceremonies, probably better than any
Indian not belonging to their tribe. Lieutenant Whipple succeeded in
compiling a tolerably accurate vocabulary of Comanche words, according
to his pronunciation.

Chisholm possesses several Mexican captives, purchased from the
Comanches. Among these was a bright, active, intelligent lad, named
Vicente, son of one Demensid, from Parras. Vicente was a long time among
the Comanches, and had learned to speak their language perfectly; so
that Chisholm, although much attached to the boy, very kindly permitted
the explorers, who greatly needed an interpreter, to take him with them.

<span id="img_450"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/450.jpg"><img src="tn/450.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

On the 23rd of August two Indians, professing to be Kichais, came into
the camp; one was tall and well-formed, the other ill-looking.

Their dress consisted of a blue cotton blanket, twisted around the
waist, a head-dress of eagle's feathers, brass-wire bracelets, and
moccasins. The outer cartilages\[sic\] of their ears were perforated in
many places, and short sticks inserted instead of rings. They were
painted I with vermilion, and carried bows of bois d'arc three feet
long, and cow skin quivers filled with arrows. The latter were about
twenty-six inches in length, with very sharp steel heads, tastefully and
skillfully made; the feathers with which they were tipped, and the
sinews that bound them, were prettily colored with red, blue, and green;
the shafts were colored red, and said to be poisoned.

After the two Indian visitors had eaten and smoked, Vicente, Chisholm's
" Spanish boy," was required to examine them. They understood neither
Comanche, Spanish, nor English, but the little interpreter was not at
all disconcerted by that difficulty. With an occasional word of Caddo,
which, to some extent, seems to be understood by all the tribes of the "
Canadian" region, and with signs, such as are comprehended by the
universal Indian race, a rapid conversation was maintained. The graceful
motions of their hands seemed to convey ideas faster than words could
have done, and our friends were highly amused and interested by the
performance.

The strangers now acknowledged that they were not Kichais, but Huecos,
and that they were on a hunting excursion; that their tribe numbered "
plenty," and lived beyond the Washita River, toward Texas. When they had
received some presents, and the accompanying sketch of them had been
taken, they took their leave, well pleased with the entertainment they
had met with. These Huecos wore neither beard nor mustache, so common
among the Shawnees and Delawares. Some of the Choctaws sport a heavy
board, for which manly development their intermixture of white blood may
account.

September 7th. A relief party, scouring the prairies, came across a
small party of mounted Comanches, whom they brought in prisoners;

they appeared wary and watchful. Having told their captors, glibly
enough, that on the other side of the Canadian were large numbers of
their tribe, they suddenly forgot all their Spanish, and by signs
protested that they could not understand a word that was said to them.
Indians consider it undignified to speak out of their native tongue,
hence all great chiefs have their interpreters. Vicente was sought for,
but as usual, when urgently needed, he was off, chasing deer and buffalo
over the prairies-that was his passion.

The Comanches declined an invitation to camp; but before suffering them
to depart, the explorers gave them pipes and tobacco to smoke. They
performed the operation in an especially noticeable manner: the first
two puffs, with much ceremony and muttering between, were discharged
toward the sun; the third, with equally imposing demonstrations, was
blown downward to the earth.

Speaking of the Comanches, Jesse Chisholm expressed much respect for
their intellect. Their language is copious, but difficult to learn
-there being often many words to express the same idea. They entertain
an unwavering confidence in the Great Spirit, and believe that, however
formidable the disproportion of numbers or strength, if He be on their
side the victory must surely fall to their share. If defeated, they say,
" He was angry with us, and He sends this punishment for some offense."
They have yearly gatherings to light the sacred fires; they build
numerous huts, and sit huddled about them, taking medicine for
purification, and fasting for seven days. Those who can endure to keep
the fast unbroken become sacred in the eyes of the others. While the
ceremony proceeds perfect silence reigns-not a word is spoken. But when
the " Spirit moves," they arise and dance until they are exhausted; then
resume their seats on the ground.

The custom of fasting is practiced by all the tribes of this region.
With the Cherokees it is the received mode of purification, and an
abstinence of seven days renders the devotee famous.

Seven is a magic number. The seventh son is necessarily a prophet, and
has the gift of healing by the touch.

On the 9th of September the path-finders entered upon a broad trail
which, leading through a deserted camp, soon brought them to an Indian
village. Their advent threw the red citizens into noisy excitement. The
scene presented was a strange one. On one side of the "Valley River"-a
rapid stream flowing into the Canadian a hundred yards below-was
gathered a crowd of wild Indians; on the other, the exploring party,
each ignorant of the other's purpose and temper. The Indians were
plainly prepared for battle, decked in their gayest attire, mounted on
spirited horses, having bows and arrows in their hands.

As the whites advanced, Vicente thought proper to attach a white
handkerchief to the end of a ramrod, and wave it; whereupon the Indians,
with friendly shouts, rode briskly toward the party. They called
themselves Kaiowas, and professed to be amicably disposed. They
presented quite a splendid spectacle as they flew to and fro, their
horses prancing, their silver trappings gayly glittering in the sun. An
old fellow, who appeared to be their chief-or, more probably, their
medicine-man--was on foot, and almost naked. He begged permission to
ride in the carretela, and informed the strangers, through Vicente,
that, as friends, they ought to encamp at the village and hold a
council. The road beyond, he said, was very bad. The explorers accepted
his invitation, and drove at once into the village, where, among a mixed
crowd of old men, women, and children, were two Mexicans, endeavoring to
trade flour, biscuits, and sugar, for horses and buffalo-robes. They
confirmed the Kaiowa's statement, that there was no better place for
encampment than this, and that our friends would be compelled to cross
the river at this point. They added that they were defenseless, with
only three peons to attend them; and, the Indians having robbed them of
nearly all their goods, they wished to accompany the exploring party
toward New Mexico.

The village contained about a dozen large conical tents and as many
wigwams. The tent-frames were of shapely poles, from fifteen to twenty
feet long, " stacked" at the top, and covering a circular area of about
twelve feet diameter--the whole being covered with buffalo-robes, with
the hair inside, the skins beautifully dressed and painted with curious
figures.

A pretty blue-eyed boy of twelve years made his appearance, to the
pleasant surprise of the voyageurs. His mother was a Mexican captive,
named José Maria, from Rio de Noces, who had been captured by the
Comanches when she was but twenty years of age, and had lived with them
seven years. Her pretty child was the son of a chief; but she earnestly
desired to quit her hard masters and accompany our friends, in the hope
of being restored to her home. She was closely watched, and with
difficulty stole a chance to speak with the strangers. There were other
captives; one, a man named Andres Nunares, from Chihuahua, who had been
a prisoner five years. On a pole in the centre of the village hung two
scalps, sacredly guarded by an old woman, who made much ado if any one
attempted to approach them.

<span id="img_452"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/452.jpg"><img src="tn/452.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Scarcely had the explorers pitched their tents when the Kiowas began to
assemble for the council. A wilder-looking crew could scarcely be
imagined; cunning, duplicity, treachery, were stamped upon every
lineament. Men, women, and children--all, indeed, except the
chiefs--wore fine blue blankets, which had been given them, they said,
by their good father, the white-haired man whom they had met on the
northern trail. They said he had assured them that the Americans would
continue to make them presents so long as they behaved well. This they
had apparently construed into a claim to tribute from every party of
whites they might meet.

Co-tat-Sin, the great chief of the Kaiowas, was said to be on a buffalo
hunt to the northward. Some who appeared to be petty chiefs had painted
their faces yellow, and colored the tops of their heads, where the long
black hair was parted, with vermilion. Their noses were long and
aquiline, their chins beardless, their eyes small, bright, and
sparkling, their foreheads retreating, their cheek-bones high and ugly.
They carried superb bows of bois d'arc, adorned with brass nails, silver
plates, and wampum beads; the arrows were about twenty-eight inches
long, with steel points and painted feather trimmings; the quiver and
belt, of wolf-skin, were wrought with beads. They wore moccasins and
buckskin leggins, bound with wampum and bead-work, and fastened with
silver buckles. From the crown of the head was suspended a queue of
horse-hair reaching nearly to the ground, and decorated with ten
circular plates of silver, from one to three inches in diameter, and
terminating in a silver crescent and wampum. They wore no pendents
\[sic\] to the nose, but in their ears were brass rings, to which were
attached chains and bugle-beads of bone or iridescent shells, hanging
low on the shoulders. Similar ornaments were worn on the neck; and all
had bracelets of brass wire or silver bands. One of the chiefs had
suspended from his neck a large silver cross, weighing half a pound or
more, curiously wrought, and terminating in a crescent-a trophy,
probably, from some Mexican church. Hanging on a post in the village was
a yet more elaborate head-dress--a cap, richly embroidered with wampum,
with a pendent eight feet long to trail behind, composed of a row of
scarlet goose-quills, which, when worn, stand out fiercely from the
back.

Our friends expressed a wish to purchase some of these fine vanities;
but the Indians said they loved their ornaments, and would not part with
them. In truth, there was nothing in the exploring train of equal
magnificence wherewith to tempt the red nabobs to exchange.

At length the chiefs were invited to be seated in what they styled the
Grand Council. A pipe was passed from hand to hand around the circle;
and it was especially noticeable that every man of them directed his
first puff toward the sun. The old chief then spoke.

<span id="img_453"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/453.jpg"><img src="tn/453.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

At a short distance, he said, were two other camps, where formidable
numbers of Kaiowns were congregated. He boasted of their invariably good
conduct toward Americans; claimed particular friendship with his present
guests; and closed by asking, without circumlocution, for the reward
which, he said, the good Indian agent had promised them.

Mr. Whipple replied, that the Great Chief at Washington had sent him and
his friends on a long journey through many Indian tribes, and had given
them merely a few presents, to indicate to the good people they might
meet his approbation, and in token of his assurance that, if they
continued friendly to small parties of emigrants, Government would
protect and assist them.

A red blanket, some beads, and tobacco were then offered to each of the
five chiefs. They looked disdainfully on the gifts, and said that the
good, white-haired Father had led them to expect at least a blanket for
each individual of the band, besides calico for the women and children,
and that on these terms only could they be friends with Americans.

They were told that the American Government gave free gifts only-nothing
on compulsion; if they were not satisfied with the presents they could
return them; no doubt the peace could be preserved with powder and ball.

Besides, there was another account to settle with them, regarding
certain Mexican captives who wished to return to their friends.

<span id="img_454"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/454.jpg"><img src="tn/454.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

This unexpected demand created a lively commotion. The old chief was
fairly convulsed with anger; his hitherto placid countenance assumed an
expression of dark malignity. He said it was not the part of a friend to
come among them separating wives and children from husbands and fathers.
He was assured that none would be taken save such as wished to go.

So, making a virtue of a necessity, he presently agreed that if they
really desired to leave, and their protectors would give him "a heap of
things," he would consent to their departure;

but he begged that his white brothers would bestow something to eat on
their red friends, who were hungry.

As the storm was lulled, and the fear of aggression now evidently on the
Indian side, the explorers could afford to be generous, and a cow was
presented. Good-humor was at once restored; the Kaiowas proposed to
entertain their guests by hunting and killing the cow, as if she were a
wild buffalo. So, mounting their horses, and goading the poor animal to
madness, they pursued her, piercing her with arrows until she fell
exhausted.

During the commotion in the tent Vicente was terribly frightened; he
disliked their smoking toward the sun, and said " they were bad men to
do that; they were sorcerers, and were casting a spell to do us harm."
Nothing could shake the boy's belief in the witchcraft he had seen
practiced among the Comanches. Andres, the Mexican captive, was asked
why the Kaiowas smoked to the sun; he replied, that they thus invoked
the blessing of their God.

Next day a chief, the reputed father of the pretty blue-eyed boy, came
into camp soon after daybreak, leading the child, for whom he begged a
present. Doubtless he thought that, by the judicious exhibition of a
little -paternal affection, he might be spared the costly pangs of
separation. The mother soon followed, riding up to the tents on a
vicious-looking pony, with a rough thong for a bridle and two strings
for stirrups. The old chief seemed vexed at her coming, she being his
third and favorite wife. He probably ordered her to return, for she
suddenly retired without speaking a word; the child followed her. The
woman seemed very sad; her looks eloquently supplicated for freedom.

While Messrs. Whipple and Jones (First Lieutenant 7th infantry, in
command of escort) were discussing, this matter, one of the Mexican
traders reported that the Indians had robbed him of several articles.
The chief was ordered to see them restored, and repaired to the village
as if to obey; but almost instantaneously their skins were packed, their
lodge-poles tied to the sides of their horses, and the whole party
mounted, ready for a start. Confiding in the fleetness of their horses,
and with their captives well guarded, they quietly awaited the departure
of the exploring party.

On the 14th of November we find the explorers at Covero--a small Mexican
town, of about sixty families, in one of the valleys between San Mateo
and the Rio San Jose. Covero being a frontier settlement, the people had
suffered much from incursions of the Navajos. Occasionally they had been
driven from their village to take refuge among the neighboring clifts,
where defiles and difficult passages afford- concealment and defense.
Many had been made captives by the Indians, and ransomed after years of
servitude. One of the men exhibited a Navajo shield called " chimal" -a
trophy he had won in battle. It was of raw hide, circular, about two
feet in diameter, with an image of a demon painted on one side; it had
also a border of red cloth, the ends of which hung in long streamers
trimmed with feathers.

The Navajos are not always hostile--they have frequently visited the
village on friendly terms; and probably the inhabitants have gained as
much in trade with them as they have lost in war. It was once the boast
of these Indians that, if they chose, they could exterminate the
Mexicans, and that they spared them only to save themselves the trouble
of raising corn and sheep. Caravajal, the Navajo chief seems to have
been a man of much enterprise and cunning. It is said that, formerly, he
was accustomed to hover about the settlements until a chance for pillage
presented itself, when he would communicate the fact to some band in the
vicinity, prepared to improve the opportunity; then, turning informer,
he put the Mexicans on the trail of the freebooters-thus securing a
reward from both sides.

<span id="img_455"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/455.jpg"><img src="tn/455.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

On the 23rd, the explorers entered the valley, several miles in width,
which leads to Zuni. The soil seemed light; but, where cultivated, it
produces fine crops without artificial irrigation. Not an acequia was to
be seen, and an Indian, who accompanied the party, said they were not
resorted to, the rains affording sum- cent moisture. Within the valley
were towers, here and there, whence laborers and herdsmen watched, to
prevent a surprise from Apaches.

Near the centre of the apparent plain stood, on an eminence, the compact
city of Zuni. Beside it flowed the river of the same name- said to be
sometimes a large stream, but at present an humble rivulet. The Zunian
guide was communicative by the way, and pointed out various places where
he had displayed valor in battle with the Navajos. Of the ruined pueblo
on the mesa, called by Simpson " Old Zuni," he related a tradition,
which he said had been handed down by the caciques from time immemorial.
In the most ancient times (tiempo quanto hai) their fathers came from
the West, and built the present town. Here they lived till one noche
triste, at midnight, a great flood came, rolling in from the west. The
people fled in terror-some to the mesa, and escaped; , the rest perished
in the deluge. The waters rose to near the top of the mesa, and there
rested; and the people built the pueblo crowning the hill. To appease
the angry spirit who had brought this calamity upon them, a young man
and a maiden were thrown from the cliff into the flood, which thereupon
subsided, leaving the victims transformed into statues of stone; and so
they stand to this day. The people then returned to the valley.

On reaching the town of Zuni a most revolting spectacle met the eyes of
our friends; smallpox had been making terrible ravages among the people,
and the strangers were soon surrounded by men, women, and children
infected with this loathsome disease in the different stages of its
progress. Passing beneath an arch, they entered a court consecrated to
the Montezuma dances-ceremonies of a most singular character: the
corn-dance, also, is a fantastic, annual festival. This court was quite
surrounded by houses of several receding stories, communicating by means
of ladders. One of three stories was pointed out as the residence of a
cacique, where frequently, at night, all the officers of Government met
in consultation. The caciques are the chief of these; they are four in
number-their office hereditary. The caciques exercise a general
superintendence over all that pertains to the public welfare, and have
the power of declaring war or peace. They appoint two chief captains,
whom they consult on all occasions-one is the war-chief the other a sort
of superintendent of police. The latter, mingling intimately with the
people, selects the most active and intelligent, whom he nominates to
the caciques for the appointment of Governor and subordinate officers.
Should any one of these prove avaricious and exacting, the people
complain to the caciques, and the offender is officially decapitated.
The caciques are supreme, though sometimes voluntarily deferring to the
will of the people.

The strangers ascended to the house-tops, climbing ladder after ladder,
and encountering on the way successive groups of miserable wretches who
bore unmistakable signs of incipient or departing disease. Here were
many tamed eagles; they are caught in the cliffs when young, and become
quite domesticated; the people are attached to them, and can not easily
be persuaded to part with them.

From the top the pueblo reminds one of an immense ant-hill, from the
denseness of its population, and even some similarity of form. There are
said to be white Indians in Zuni, with fair complexions, blue eyes, and
light hair; the prevalence of small-pox prevented the explorers from
seeing them. A sort of tradition, too vague to be worthy of credence,
prevails among the New Mexicans in explanation of this phenomenon. They
say that, many years ago-centuries perhaps-a company of Welsh miners,
with their wives and children, emigrated thither, and that the Zuaians
killed the men and married the women.

There is a most curious resemblance between certain Zuni and English
words: "Eat-a" is to eat; " Eat-on-o-way" signifies eaten enough: to
express admiration they exclaim, "Look ye!" or, sometimes, "Look ye
here!" These facts, known to Americans, may serve to explain the origin
or revival of the Welsh legend.

As the train unwound itself, stretching along in the direction of Zuni,
the explorers turned their looks wistfully toward the legendary
tableland that lay about a league away, on their left.

A Zuni captain, who had promised to conduct them, not appearing, Messrs.
Whipple and Parke and Dr. Bigelow resolved to find their own way to the
top, if possible. Striking a trail, they proceeded southward two miles,
to a deep canyon, where were springs of water, whence, by a zigzag
course, they led their mules up to the first bench of the ascent. Here,
hollowed from the rock, was an Indian cave, looking down into which they
saw, in the centre, six small birds, carefully placed side by side, m
two rows; as no other object was visible within the apartment, they
concluded that some superstitious rite was being performed. Beyond this
place, on the sandy slope, were orchards of peach-trees, which, although
the soil seemed dry, and there was no arrangement for artificial
irrigation, presented a flourishing appearance.

Overhead, the projecting summit of the cliff .seemed inaccessible, and
as Indians were here gathering fuel, an effort was made to engage their
services as guides; but, being very young men, and probably fearful of
offending their elders, they were shy and not to be tempted.

At length an old man, crippled by his weight of years, accepted the
reward, and pointed to the road, along which the young fellows now led
the way with alacrity; and the explorers, leaving their mules, followed
a trail which, with singular pains, had been hammered out from seam to
-seam of the rocks along the side of the precipice. At various points of
the ascent, wherever a projecting ledge permitted, were barricades of
stone, whence, the old man said, the Zunians had hurled rocks upon the
invading Spaniards. Having ascended about one thousand feet, they found
themselves on a plateau covered with thick cedars, the old man having
been left far behind. The young guides, who understood no Spanish, led
the way to the opposite side of the mesa, and pointed to a pair of stone
pillars, which, from description, were at once recognized as the
legendary statues of the Flood and the Sacrifice.

Jose Maria, the war-chief, on another occasion, repeated this story of
the flood:

Once, he said, the waves rolled in from the west, and water gushed from
the earth. It was at midnight. A few of the people fled to the top of
the mesa and were saved; the rest perished in the greedy waters.
Navajos, Apaches, and even wild beasts, save only such as took refuge on
the mountain-top, suffered a common fate. The Zunians, on the lofty
eminence, built a pueblo go await the subsidence of the waters. But as
time passed, and the waves still resounded from the sandstone cliffs
that begirt their island of refuge, it was evident that the Great Spirit
was angry. A sacrifice of signal honor and awfulness must be offered to
appease him. The youthful son of the cacique and a beautiful virgin were
the devoted ones.

Girt with sticks trimmed with feathers they were lowered into the deep.
Immediately the waters retired, leaving the young man and the maiden
solemn statues of everlasting stone.

Then the people returned to the valley, abandoning the city on the hill
till the Spaniards came, when once more they climbed the
heights--fortifying at every turn two steep approaches, by which alone
they could be assailed. " Old Zuni" was rebuilt; and by hurling down
stones upon the heads of their invaders, for a long time they held their
own. But at last the enemy were victorious--the heights were scaled; and
the Zunians say that, imprinted in the solid rock, as though in clay,
may be seen to this day the foot-print of the first white man that
reached the summit.

The top of the mesa, a mile in width, was of an irregular figure,
defined by perpendicular blurs. Three times our friends crossed it,
searching in vain for traces of a ruin; not even a fragment of pottery
could be found, and they were about to relinquish to pleasant fable all
claim to the vaunted pueblo, when the old Indian, to the surprise of
all, made his appearance, like Meg Merrilies, at the top of the cliff.
Probably the guide had waited for his permission;

for he now led the party at once to a spot which, on examination,
displayed interesting traces of art. A few very small fragments of
pottery were lying on the ground, and with some care the remains of a
thick wall, in the shape of a V, could be demonstrated.

But the guide hurried the party forward half a mile, where, indeed,
appeared the ruins of a city; crumbling walls, from two to twelve feet
high, were gathered, in confused heaps, over several acres of ground.
Covering every mass of rubbish were tall cacti, opuntia arborescens,
tipped with bright yellow fruit, that gave the place the appearance,
from a little distance, of a garden. On examining the pueblo, the
explorers found that the standing walls rested on ruins of greater
antiquity. The original masonry, as well as they could judge, must have
been about six feet thick; the more recent did not exceed a foot, or
eighteen inches, but the small sandstone blocks had been laid in mud
mortar with considerable skill.

<span id="img_457"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/457.jpg"><img src="tn/457.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Having gathered a few specimens of painted pottery, abundant in such
places, and an obsidian arrow-head that was found, the party again
Allowed the guide. Within a forest of cedars a secluded nook disclosed a
Zuni altar. An oval basin, seven feet in length, had been scooped from
the ground. Near one end stood a vertical shaft, two feet high, neatly
trimmed with feathers, and a circular not-work of cord.

Symmetrically placed upon the opposite side was a cedar post, about two
and a half feet high, and quaintly carved. Shells were suspended from
the centre; and below was inserted a grooved horizontal picco, decorated
with heads and shells. Between and around these was a little forest of
feathered sticks, planted generally in rows, and united by means of
twine.

Behind stood a thin board, two or three inches wide and three feet high,
with seven angular notches at the top; while, in regular order below,
were representations of a star, the moon, the sun, a T, and two parallel
lines. Back of all lay a flat rock, apparently placed for an altar,
though there were no signs of a fire or a ' sacrifice. Upon this rock
were piled a great number of sticks, cut precisely like those already
described, all partially decayed, and some in the last stage of
decomposition : it was evident that they had once, in their turn,
occupied places in the basin. Judging from the soundness of cedar ties
at El Moro, some of those remnants of carved pieces of wood indicated
great antiquity.

Although many sea-shells and other ornaments were lying around the guide
would not suffer the strangers to take away the least thing. When the
party were about to leave he took from his pouch a white powder, and,
muttering a prayer, blew it three times toward the altar.

He then followed the officers, intimating by signs that, on other
table-lands, cast, south, and west, were similar consecrated spots. The
white powder he had used was found to be " pinole," the flour of parched
corn. His object, he said, was "pidiendo fortuna," to ask the blessing
of Montezuma and the Sun on his daily bread.

On the 28th, a Mexican herder deserted. His services could not well be
spared, and, besides, should he have escaped, his example would have
been followed by others; so the Governor was requested to search the
town. The church bells were rung, and the chief of police passed through
the streets proclaiming the order. Very soon the fugitive was dragged
from his hiding place, and sent under escort to the train, where he was
delivered over to the safe-keeping of the guard. The promptness and
success with which the Governor discharged the duties of his office, in
this case, spoke well for his ability to maintain discipline among his
people.

Having heard that some curious manuscripts were in the keeping of the
chief cacique, several of the exploring party went to his house to see
them. Climbing a ladder, they entered a comfortable room where the old
man sat by the fire in the midst of his family. The papers were sent
for, and, after some delay, brought in by a very good-looking boy of
twelve years, with auburn hair, blue eyes, and fair complexion-a son of
the cacique, and claiming to be of pure Indian blood. These manuscripts
were found to consist of a correspondence between the Governor of New
Mexico and certain priests of Zuni, and one bore the date of 1757.

The old man declined giving them to his guests, saying that, a long time
ago, they had been found in a corner of the old church, and had ever
since been handed down from generation to generation, till now they were
regarded as a part of the insignia of the cacique's office.

Besides, they were sacred, and to part with them would bring evil upon
the pueblo. He consented that they might be copied; but there was not
time for that.

The Pueblo Indians say that there is but one God, but Montezuma is his
equal. Inferior to both of these is the Sun, to whom they smoke and
pray, because he looks upon them, knows their wants, and answers their
prayers. The Moon is the younger sister of the Sun, and the Stars are
their children; all are worshiped.

Besides these there is the Great Snake, to whom, by command of
Montezuma, they must look for life.

Some Pueblo Indians, called Tiguex, who visited the camp on the
Canadian, near the Llano Estacado, related many interesting traditions
of their tribe:

The Tiguex, they said, first appeared at Shipap, the northwest source of
the Rio del Norte. Whence they came is not known. They were wandering
without fixed abode, and sought shelter among the canyons of the river,
in caves which yet remain. They sojourned a while at Acoti, the
birth-place of Montezuma, who became the leader and guide of the
subsequent migration. He taught them to build pueblos, with lofty houses
and estufas, and to kindle sacred fires, to be guarded by priests. Taos
was the first pueblo established by him. Thence he proceeded southward,
forming settlements in the order of succession represented in a rude map
which they traced upon the ground. Acoma was strongly built and
fortified under his direction. Pecos also was one of his principal
towns. While here, Montezuma took a tall tree and planted it in an
inverted position, saying that when he should disappear a foreign race
would come and rule over his people, and there would be no rain; but he
commanded them to watch the sacred fire till that tree should fall, at
which time white men would pour into the land from the east, and
overthrow their oppressors; and he himself would reappear to restore his
kingdom; the earth would again be fertilized by rain, and the mountains
yield treasures of silver and gold.

From Pecos, which--as though it had fulfilled its destiny-is now
desolate, Montezuma continued southward, spreading pueblos far and wide,
till he reached the City of Mexico. There, they say, he lived till the
arrival of the Spaniards, when he disappeared.

"Since then," said the narrator, becoming quite excited by his story, "
the prediction has been verified, and the tree at Fecos fell as the
American army was entering Santa F6." For some time previous the Indians
of that pueblo had boon dwindling away; and soon after the falling of
the sacred tree an old priest, the last of his tribe, died at his post,
and the sacred fire was extinguished. They are now anxiously expecting
the return of Montezuma; and it is related that, in San Domingo, every
morning at sunrise, a sentinel climbs to a house-top and looks eastward
for his coming.

The Tiguex say that Comanches, Navajos, and, indeed, all tribes of
Indians, are alike descended from Montezuma. All smoke to the Sun, that
he may send them antelope to kill and Indians to trade with, and that he
may save them from their enemies.

The first of the Indian hieroglyphics discovered on the route were at
Rocky Dell Creek, between the edge of the Llano Estacado and the
Canadian. The stream flows through a gorge, on one side of which a
shelving sandstone rock forms a sort of cave. The roof is covered with
paintings, some evidently ancient; and beneath are innumerable carvings
of footprints, animals, and symmetrical lines.

<span id="img_459"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/459.jpg"><img src="tn/459.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The carvings are of horses and men, with combinations of right lines and
curves, producing various hieroglyphic figures. A favorite symbol is the
track of a moccasin. Seven is the number most frequently noted,
reminding one of Chisholm's remarks. The Tiguex reorganized these
hieroglyphics, and said that this place was once a favorite buffalo
range; here their fathers hunted, feasted, and danced; and then, sitting
by the water-side, recorded their deeds and thoughts upon the rocks.

In the valley of Zuni there is a singular spring, surrounded by high
walls of earth, on the top of which are many earthen jars in an inverted
position. Pedro Pino, Governor of Zuni, was questioned regarding this
fountain. He replied:

"We live in a country without ace'quias, and for the growth of our crops
depend upon rain.

To obtain this blessing from the Great Spirit it is necessary that we
perform the rites, and keep I holy the traditions, of our ancestors.
This spring has been ever sacred to the rain-goal; no animal may drink
of its waters. It must he annually cleansed with ancient vases,
transmitted from generation to generation by the caciques, and which,
having been thus used, are deposited upon the walls, never to be
removed.

The frog, the tortoise, and the rattlesnake, represented upon them, are
sacred to Montezuma, the patron of the place, who would consume by
lightning any sacrilegious hand that should dare to despoil the holy
place of its relies.

The caciques are priests as well as governors; and Pedro Pino is the
high priest-his special duty being to officiate before the water
deities. To him belong the invocations for rain.

Although tolerating in their pueblo a church of the Cross, and the
occasional visits of a Christian priest, these people seem to have but
little regard for the Catholic religion. In secret they glory in their
loyalty to Montezuma. They endeavor to keep their Spanish neighbors
ignorant of their ceremonies, but say that Americans are brothers of the
children of Montezuma, and their true friends; therefore they hide from
them neither their sacred dances in the courts nor the midnight meetings
of caciques in the estufa.

In passing through the Navajo country the natives kept obstinately aloof
from the exploring party. A Mexican herder, from Covero, who understood
their language, supplied the materials for a vocabulary. A few years
since, while playing at Covero spring, he was captured by Navajos. For
nine months he was a prisoner, and followed the Indians on their hunting
and war paths. He accompanied a party of one thousand warriors through
the Moqui country, and afterward spent much time among their rancherias
in the famous Canyon de Chelly. Though their fields are numerous, they
are cultivated by women alone-no man ever condescending to lend a
helping hand.

Their numbers, he says, can not be told. They are thickly spread from
Canyon de Chelly to Rio San Juan, and he believes them equal to the
total population of New Mexico. But these statements must be taken with
abatement, in consideration of the characteristic and invariable
exaggeration of these people. It is probable that the number of Navajos
exceeds the usual estimates. Their wealth, according to this herder's
account, consists of immense flocks and herds; some of the richer chiefs
own one thousand horses each, besides mules, cattle, and sheep.

The Navajo marriage-ceremony consists simply of to feast upon
horse-flesh. A plurality of wives is allowed, and a man may purchase
according to his means-the price being paid in horses; hence the wealthy
often keep from ten to twenty women-the wife last chosen being always
mistress of the household.

The Navajos believe in one Great Spirit, to whom, like the Zunians, they
make offerings of flesh and flour, imploring particular blessings, or
invoking general good fortune. They also erect altars, with stones, and
sticks trimmed with feathers. Sun, moon, and stars are sacred to them,
as the authors of rain and harvest.

But here the resemblance to the Pueblo Indians ceases; they do not
acknowledge Montezuma, nor is he referred to in their traditions.

Neither they nor any other tribe of Apaches regard rattlesnakes as
sacred, though they have a superstition which leads them to entertain a
particular veneration for bears, which they will neither kill nor eat.
Pork, also, they have been known to refuse, even when suffering from
hunger.

<span id="img_461"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/461.jpg"><img src="tn/461.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The tribe now occupying the region from Pueblo Creek to the junction of
the Rio Verde with the Salinas is called Tonto--a wild, rude people,
living in huts, ignorant of labor, and subsisting only upon game,
mezcal, and whatever nature yields spontaneously. "Tonto," in Spanish,
signifies stupid; but the Mexicans do not so characterize these Indians.
On the contrary, they consider them rather sharp, especially as thieves.
Therefore, as it is not a term of reproach, it is reasonable to suppose
that--as is frequently the case--"Tonto" is a Spanish corruption of the
original Indian name.

It is a coincidence worth noting, that when Father Marco de Nica, in
1539, was in search of the kingdom of Cevola (now Zuni), he met an
Indian from that place who gave him information of several great nations
and pueblos.

Having described Cevola, the friar adds: "Likewise he saith that the
kingdom of Totonteac lieth toward the west-a very mighty province,
replenished with infinite store of people and riches." The position
indicated (west from Zuni) would apply to Pueblo Creek; and from "
Totouteac" to " Tonto" is an easy corruption.

Don Jose Cortez calls them Apaches; but Savedra, a well-informed
Mexican, who has been much among the wild tribes, and is considered
authority as to whatsoever relates to them, says the Tontos are Indians
of Montezuma, like the Pueblo tribes of New Mexico; Pimas, Maricopas,
Cuchans, and Mojaves, also, he says, belong to the same great nation. In
proof of this he asserts that they have a custom in common-that of
cropping the front hair to meet the eyebrows, and suffering the rest,
behind the ears, to grow and hang down its full length. Lieutenant
Whipple says there is not an exception to this rule among the Gila and
Colorado Indians.

On the 29th of January, while the exploring party were at breakfast, an
Indian whoop was heard, and two tawny figures looked down upon them from
the hills. A couple of Mexicans were sent out to bring the savages into
camp which they did under cover of a flag of truce, and all the
ceremonious precautions that pertain to it. These fellows, calling
themselves Yampais, produced a fire-brand from behind a bush, and showed
a slender column of smoke as their signal of peace. One of them was
facetiously inclined, and without ceremony converted the Mexicans' flag
of truce, which happened to be a towel, into a breech-cloth for his
abominable person. These Yampais were broad-faced specimens of the red
man, with aquiline noses and small eyes, not unlike the Dieginos of
California.

Their language, also, bore some resemblance to that of the Dieginos. The
first word they uttered--"hanna," meaning good-was at once recognized as
an old acquaintance, learned several years before, from the Mission
Indians at San Diego. Two other words--"n'yatz," I; and "pook,"
beads--were likewise familiar as belonging to the language of the
Cuchans (Yumas) and of the Coco Maricopas. Their hair was rudely clipped
in front, to hang over the forehead, in the fashion of the Gila and
Colorado tribes. Their back hair hung down nearly to the waist, and was
bound with variegated fillets of Pima manufacture-a custom prevailing,
but not universal, among all the tribes that trim the hair in front. For
costume, the strangers were not remarkably distinguished; the
breech-cloth was, of course, the principal feature. One had a blue
woolen shirt, and the other a Navajo blanket, which, they said, were
obtained from the Moquis. Their moccasins were of buckskin, of home
manufacture; and one sported leggins, made from the skin of a mountain
sheep. This man had also a quiver of sheep-skin, on which the soft hair
of the same animal yet remained. On his neck he wore strings of white
and blue heads, which, he said, were obtained from Mojaves. Both had
painted their faces with red ochre.

<span id="img_462"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/462.jpg"><img src="tn/462.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Although the evidence is abundant that the Yampais are allied to, and,
as it were, a connecting link between, the Gila, Colorado, and Pueblo
Indians, they by no means display the fine muscular development and the
intelligence generally found among those nations, if the specimens seen
were fair samples of their tribe.

They permitted the explorers to purchase their best how and a quiver of
beautiful arrows. The former was of cedar, strung with sinews; the
arrows of reed, fledged with feathers, tipped with a wooden stem, and
pointed with stone. Some were of white quartz or agate, others of
obsidian-all exquisitely cut and highly finished. As lapidaries, these
Yampais would seem to excel the other tribes.

Savedra had already recounted some interesting examples of the courage
and daring of the Yampais. 110 had formerly joined a party of Moquis and
Mexicans, for the purpose of stealing children for slaves. On entering
this country they were met by the Yampais, and attacked with such fury
that the whole party fled.

They are said to possess in a most remarkable degree the characteristic
stoicism of the Indian race. Neither fear for their lives, nor the hope
of escape, nor despair, nor gratitude for freedom and for gifts,
disturbs even for a moment the quiet dignity of their deportment.

On the 22d of February, in the magnificent Valley of the Colorado, our
friends first came in contact with the Colorado Indians. As they entered
a ravine a whooping band sprang up on all sides, some armed with bows
and arrows, others without weapons, and many carrying articles of
private baggage abandoned at the last camp. They professed to be
Chemehuevis--a band of the great Pai-Ute nation--and spoke a language
bearing no relation to that of the Cuchans or the Mojaves.

About fifty Pai-Utes came into camp. The chief, followed by a long train
of warriors, approached to pay his respects. He was short, muscular, and
inclining to corpulency, his face oval and pleasing, though painted in
black-and-red stripes. His black hair was cropped in front and clubbed
behind, although some of his people wore it in plaits, matted with mud
and cut squarely, to hang in the middle of the back. His nose was wide
and slightly aquiline, his eyes small and oval, and surrounded by large
blue circles of paint. His dress consisted of an old blue flannel shirt,
instead of the simple apron worn by his people; but the white strangers
soon decked him in gay costume.

This excited among the rest the desire for finery, and they accordingly
brought in, for trade, considerable quantities of maize, wheat, beans,
and squashes--affording dainty fare for the camp.

These Pai-Utes are closely allied to the hand that massacred the
lamented Captain Gunnison and his party. Though supposed to maintain a
scanty and precarious subsistence, principally upon roots, they are
probably distinct from the Digger Indians of California. We have seen
that, in favorable localities, they sometimes cultivate a fair supply of
corn, wheat, and vegetables.

The Chemehuevis bind their infants to a board, and cover their heads
with a cradle-like contrivance made of osiers. The hands are not
confined, however, and the constraint does not seem irksome to the
child. Partly to this practice may be ascribed & the erect and faultless
forms for which the Colorado Indians are famous.

Leaving the beautiful valley of the Chemchuevis, we presently find our
friends among the shrewd, sprightly, and C hospitable Mojaves. On the
25th of February they were honored by a visit of ceremony from a pompous
old chief of the Mojaves, who presented credentials from Major
Heintzelman.--The Major wrote that the bearer, Captain Francisco, had
visited Fort Yuma, with a party of warriors, while on an expedition
against the Cocopas, and that he had professed friendship; but Americans
were advised not to trust him.

<span id="img_463"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/463.jpg"><img src="tn/463.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The parade and ceremony with which the visit was set off were not, in
this instance, altogether vain and idle, for without them that august
personage, Captain Francisco, might easily have been mistaken for the
veriest\[sic\] beggar of his tribe. He was old, shriveled, ugly, and
naked-but for a strip of dirty cloth suspended by a cord from his loins,
and an old black hat, band-less and torn, drawn down to his eyes. But
his credentials being satisfactory, he was received with all the honors,
and installed in a stately manner on a blanket. The object of the
expedition was explained to him, and he cordially promised aid and
comfort. A few trinkets, some tobacco, and red blankets cut into narrow
strips, were then presented for distribution among the warriors. The
chief would accept nothing for himself, so the council was dissolved.
The Mojave chiefs look upon foreign gifts in a national light, and
accept them only in the name of the people.

Savedra counted six hundred Indians in camp, of whom probably half had
brought bags of meal or baskets of corn for sale. The market was opened,
and all were crowding, eager to be the first at the stand, amidst
shouts, laughter, and a confusion of tongues-English, Spanish, and
Indian.

When the trading was concluded, the Mojave people sauntered about the
camp in picturesque and merry groups, making the air ring with peals of
laughter. Some of the young men selected a level spot, forty paces in
length, for a play-ground, and amused themselves with their favorite
game of hoop-and-poles. The hoop is six inches in diameter, and made of
elastic cord; the poles are straight, and about fifteen feet in length.
Rolling the hoop from one end of the course toward the other, two of the
players chase it half-way, and at the same time throw their poles. He
who succeeds in piercing the hoop wins the game.

Target-firing and archery were then practiced--the exploring party using
rifles and Colt's pistols, and the Indians shooting arrows.

The fire-arms were triumphant; and at last an old Mojave, mortified at
the discomfiture of his people, ran in a pet and tore down the target.
Notwithstanding the unity of language, the family resemblance, and amity
between the Cuchans and Mojaves, a jealousy, similar to that observed
among Pimas and Maricopas, continually disturbs their friendship. A
squaw detected her little son in the act of concealing a trinket that he
fancied. She snatched the bauble from him with a blow and a taunt,
saying, "Oh, you Cuchan!" Some one inquired if he belonged to that
tribe. "Oh no," she replied " he is a Mojave, but behaves like a Cuchan,
whose trade is stealing !" Nevertheless, the Cuchans are welcomed by the
Mojaves wherever they go.

These Indians are probably in as wild a state of nature as any tribe on
American territory.

They have not had sufficient intercourse with any civilized people to
acquire a knowledge of their language or their vices. It was said that
no white party had ever before passed through their country without
encountering hostility.

Nevertheless they appear intelligent, and to have naturally amiable
dispositions. The men are tall, erect, and well-proportioned; their
features inclined to European regularity; their eyes large, shaded by
long lashes, and surrounded by circles of blue pigment, that add to
their apparent size. The apron, or breech-cloth, for men, and a short
petticoat, made of strips of the inner bark of cotton-wood, for women,
are the only articles of dress deemed indispensable; but many of the
females have long robes, or cloaks, of fur. The young girls wear heads.

When married, their chins are tattooed with vertical blue lines, and
they wear a necklace with a single sea-shell in front, curiously
wrought.

Those shells are very ancient, and esteemed of great value.

From time to time they rode into the camp, mounted on spirited horses;
their bodies and limbs painted and oiled, so as to present the
appearance of highly-polished mahogany. The dandies paint their faces
perfectly black. Warriors add a streak of red across the forehead nose,
and chin. Their ornaments consist of leathern bracelets, adorned with
bright buttons, and worn on the left arm; a kind of tunic, made of
buckskin fringe, hanging from the shoulders; beautiful eagles' feathers,
called "sormeh"--sometimes white, sometimes of a crimson tint-tied to a
lock of hair, and floating from the top of the head; and, finally,
strings of wampum, made of circular pieces of shell, with holes in the
centre, by which they are strung, often to the length of several yards,
and worn in coils about the neck.

<span id="img_464"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/464.jpg"><img src="tn/464.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

These shell beads, which they call "pook," are their substitute for
money, and the wealth of an individual is estimated by the "pook" cash
he possesses. Among the Cuchans, in 1852, a foot of "pook" was equal in
value to a horse; and divisions to that amount are made by the insertion
of blue stones, such as by Coronado and Alargon were called "turkoises,"
\[turquoise\] and are now found among ancient Indian ruins.

The Mojave rancherias are surrounded by granaries filled with corn,
mesquite beans, and tortillas. The houses are constructed with an eye to
durability and warmth. They are built upon sandy soil, and are thirty or
forty feet square; the sides, about two feet thick, of wicker-work and
straw; the roofs matched, covered with earth, and supported by a dozen
cottonwood posts. Along the interior walls are ranged large earthen
pots, filled with stores of corn, beans, and flour, for daily use. In
front is a wide shed, a sort of piazza, nearly as large as the house
itself. Here they find shelter from rain and sun. Within, around a small
fire in the centre, they sleep. But their favorite resort seems to be
the roof, where could usually be counted from twenty to thirty persons,
all apparently at home. Near the houses were a great number of
cylindrical structures, with conical roofs, quite skillfully made of
osiers; these were the granaries, alluded to above, for their surplus
stores of corn and mesquite.

As the explorers passed these rancherias, the women and children watched
them from the house-tops; and the young men, for the moment, suspended
their sport with hoop and poles. At first only a few of the villagers
seemed inclined to follow them, but at length their little train swelled
to an army a mile in length.

On the 27th of February, being favored with a clear and calm morning,
they hastened to take advantage of it to cross the river; but the rapid
current and the long ropes upset their " gondola" in mid-stream. The
Mojaves, who are capital swimmers, plunged in, and aided them in saving
their property. Many had brought rafts to the spot, anticipating the
disaster. These were of simple construction, being merely bundles of
rushes placed side by side, and securely bound together with osiers.

But they were light and manageable, and their crews plied them with
considerable dexterity.

It was night when finally the great work was accomplished-the Colorado
crossed, and the camp pitched on the right bank.

<span id="img_465"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/465.jpg"><img src="tn/465.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Our friends had now quite exhausted their stock in trade in gifts,
although large quantities of grain were yet in camp for sale. When told
that their white brothers were too poor to buy, the Indians expressed no
disappointment, but strolled from fire to fire, laughing, joking,
curious but not meddlesome, trying, with a notable faculty of imitation,
to learn the white man's language, and to teach their own.

As long as our explorers were among them, these Mojaves were gay and
happy, talking vicariously, singing, laughing. Confiding in the good
intentions and kindness of the strangers, they laid aside for the time
their race's studious reserve. Tawny forms glided from one camp-fire to
another, or reclined around the blaze, their bright eyes and pearly
teeth glistening with animation and delight. They displayed a new phase
of Indian character, bestowing an insight into the domestic amusements
which are probably popular at their own firesides: mingling among the
soldiers and Mexicans, they engaged them in games and puzzles with
strings, and some of their inventions in this line were quite curious.

No doubt these simple people were really pleased with the first dawning
light of civilization.

They feel the want of comfortable clothing, and appreciate some of the
advantages of trade. There is no doubt that, before many years pass
away, a great change will have taken place in their country. The
advancing tide of emigration will sweep over it, and, unless the strong
arm of Government protects them, the Mojaves will be driven to the
mountains or exterminated.

When the exploring party wore about to leave, the chiefs came with an
interpreter, to say that a national council had been held, in which they
had approved of the plan for opening a great road through the Mojave
country. They knew that on the trail usually followed by the Pai' Utes
toward California the springs were scanty, and insufficient for the
train; that thus the mules might perish on the road, and the expedition
fail. Therefore they had selected a good man, who knew the country well,
and would send him to guide their white brothers by another route, where
an abundance of water and grass would be found. They wished their white
brothers to report favorably of their conduct to the Great Chief at
Washington, in order that he might send many more of his people to pass
that way, and bring clothing and utensils to exchange for the produce of
their fields.

Desiring to learn something of their notions regarding the Deity, death,
and a future existence, Lieutenant Whipple led an intelligent Mojave to
speak upon these subjects. 110 stooped and drew in the sand a circle,
which he said was to represent the former casa, or dwelling-place of
Mat-e-vil, Creator of Earth (which was a woman) and Heaven. After
speaking for some time with impressive, and yet almost unintelligible,
earnestness regarding the traditions of that bright era of their race
which all Indians delight in calling to remembrance, he referred again
to the circle, and suiting the action to the word, added:

<span id="img_466"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/466.jpg"><img src="tn/466.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

"This grand habitation was destroyed, the nations were dispersed, and
Mat-e-vil took his departure, going eastward over the great waters. 110
promised, however, to return to his people and dwell with them forever;
and the time of his coming they believe to be near at hand."

The narrator then became enthusiastic in the anticipation of that event,
which is expected to realize the Indian's hopes of a paradise on earth.
Much that he said was incomprehensible. The principal idea suggested was
the identity of their Deliverer, coming from the east, with the
Montezuma of the Pueblo Indians, or perhaps the Messiah of Israel; and
yet the name of Montezuma seemed utterly unknown to this Indian guide.
His ideas of a future existence appeared somewhat vague and undefined.
The Mojaves, he said, were accustomed to burn the bodies of the dead;
but they believe that an undying soul arises from the ashes of the
deceased, and takes its flight, over the mountains and waters, eastward
to the happy spirit-land.

Loroux says, that he has been told by a priest of California that the
Colorado Indians were Aztecs, driven from Mexico at the time of the
conquest of Cortez. He thinks the circle represents their ancient city,
and the water spoken of refers to the surrounding lakes. This idea
derives some plausibility from the fact, mentioned by Alargon, that, in
his memorable expedition up the Colorado River in 1540, he met with
tribes that spoke the same language as his Indian interpreters, who
accompanied him from the City of Mexico, or Culiacan.

It is to be regretted that the explorers had not a better medium of
communication with this people, as, on this subject, much that is
interesting might be learned from them. They have not yet received from
white men any impressions to conflict with or to change the traditions
handed down from their ancestors. They seem to be isolated even front
the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico. Although a blanket made by Moquis, and
a sash of Zuni manufacture, were found among them, they stated that
these had been brought to them by Pai-Utes and Yampais Indians.

Between the Mormon Road and the Pacific Ocean our attention is called to
but one tribe more. In the blooming valley that leads to Los Angeles,
and near the rancho of Cocomonga, a village of the wretched Cahuillas
was found. With them was an old Indian, attired in an entirely new suit,
in the fashion of a Californian ranchero, who professed to have come
from José Antonio, the general-in-chief of the tribe. His object was to
learn from the explorers, officially, whether the Californians had told
them the truth, in saying that Santa Anna was on his way thither to
drive the Americans from the land. The old fellow declared that he was
not a Cahuilla, but a Christian, because, when a boy, a priest of San
Luis Rey converted him. When questioned regarding the traditions and
religious notions of his tribe he became very reserved, as though he
suspected some sinister design beneath the inquiry. His people were a
filthy and miserable set, presenting a painful contrast to the Indians
on the Colorado.

The wilder bands of these Cahuillas range from the Mormon Road to the
Sierra Nevada, and frequently commit depredations upon the frontier
ranchos of California. They are not numerous-perhaps do not exceed five
hundred in number. Formerly, they all belonged to the California
missions; but since the decadence of those institutions they have been
peons on the ranchos, where many yet remain.

On the 24th of March we find Lieutenant Whipple and his party at San
Pedro, on the Pacific, whence all the officers, with the exception of
Messrs. White and Sherburne, immediately proceeded by steamer to San
Francisco en route for Washington.
