[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ts03)  [Next](ts05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (Introduction.)

THE Exalted One says:<sup>\[3\]</sup> (1-3)

Curses and blessings do not come through gates,<sup>\[4\]</sup> but man
himself invites their arrival.<sup>\[5\]</sup> (4-11)

The reward of good and evil is like the shadow accompanying a body, and
so it is apparent<sup>\[6\]</sup> that heaven and earth are possessed of
crime-recording spirits. (12-28)

According to<sup>\[7\]</sup> the lightness or gravity of his
transgressions,<sup>\[8\]</sup> the sinner's term of life is reduced.
Not only is his term of life reduced, but poverty<sup>\[9\]</sup> also
strikes him. Often he meets with calamity and misery.<sup>\[9\]</sup>
His neighbors<sup>\[10\]</sup> hate him. Punishments and curses pursue
him. Good luck shuns him. Evil stars threaten him; and when his term of
life comes to an end, he perishes. (29-67)

Further, there are the three councilor<sup>\[11\]</sup>, spirit-lords of
the northern constellation,<sup>\[12\]</sup> residing above the heads of
the people, recorders

{p. 52}

of men's crimes and sins,<sup>\[9\]</sup> cutting off terms of from
twelve years to a hundred days. (68-87)

Further, there are the three body-spirits<sup>\[13\]</sup> that live
within man's person. Whenever Kêng Shên day<sup>\[14\]</sup> comes, they
ascend to the heavenly master<sup>\[15\]</sup> and inform him of men's
crimes and trespasses. (88-110)

On the last day of the month the Hearth Spirit,<sup>\[16\]</sup> too,
does the same. (111-118)

Of all the offences which men commit, the greater ones cause a loss of
twelve years, the smaller ones of a hundred days. These their offences,
great as well as small, constitute some hundred affairs, and those who
are anxious for life everlasting,<sup>\[17\]</sup> should above all
avoid them.\[18\] (119-147)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moral Injunctions](ts05)
