[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ts12)  [Next](ts14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# EXPLANATORY NOTES.

1\. *T'ai-Shang*, "the Exalted One," also called *T'ai Shang Lao Chün*,
"the Exalted Ancient Master," is an honorary appellation of *Li Er*, who
is popularly known as *Lao Tze*, "the Ancient Philosopher."

2\. The title is commonly but not correctly translated "The Book of
Rewards and Punishments."

For an explanation of the meaning of "Response and Retribution" see the
Introduction.

3\. The word "says" can scarcely be construed to imply a claim that the
treatise has been written by T'ai Shang, i. e., Lao Tze; it simply means
that the doctrines here enunciated are his.

4\. The phrase, "have no gates," presents some difficulties. The obvious
meaning is that curses and blessings are not limited to special avenues,
on which they come down to mankind from heaven. There are no special
doors in our houses through which they enter; they are independent of
space and come in response to our actions. In other words, it is not
blind fate that directs curses and blessings, but we ourselves are the
forgers of our destiny. Curses and blessings come in exact proportion to
man's merit or demerit. Following the sense rather than the words,
Stanislas Julien translates: "Le malheur et le bonheur de

{p. 70}

l'homme s'attire lui même l'un ou l'autre par sa conduite." He adds the
following explanation: "L'expression *wou-men* (6-7) veut dire qu'il n'y
a point de porte ni de chemin déterminés d'avance par le ciel, qui
conduisent au bonheur ou au malheur."

5\. The word "arrival" does not stand in the original and is supplied by
the context.

6\. The two Chinese words here translated "therefore" are used (like the
Latin *ergo*) to introduce a logical conclusion. They imply that the
preceding statement is a proof for the truth of the following assertion.
Accordingly, we translate: "and so it is apparent that ......

7\. In the relative clause (words 29-34 of the Chinese text) the
preposition "proportionately to" belongs to the nouns "lightness" and
"gravity," and the whole relative clause, "man's of that in which he
transgresses," is, in the Chinese, inserted. In such constructions we
have a palpable instance of the incommensurability of the English and
the Chinese grammars.

8\. The character *i* is commonly translated by the preposition
"through," or "with," or "by." Here it is used as an adverb "thereby,"
or "thus," which can be omitted in English.

9\. In Chinese all words are monosyllables, and as there are more
characters than sounds, the language abounds in homophones, i. e., words
which sound alike but are written differently and have different
meanings. To avoid a misunderstanding, the Chinese like to add a synonym
to a doubtful word, so as to make sure of the meaning. Thus they add to
the word "calamity" the word "trouble," which both together

{p. 71}

fuse into one idea, and there is no need of translating them by two
terms. We have, as a rule, retained the Chinese mode of expressing one
idea by two synonyms.

10\. The Chinese character commonly translated by "all" has not the full
weight of the English equivalent. It may simply be translated by the
plural form of the following noun.

11\. The three councilor spirits are represented in the starry heavens
(according to Giles) by three stars (*iota, kappa, lambda*), according
to Stanislas Julien by the six stars (*iota, kappa; lambda, mu, nu, xi*)
in the Great Bear. See Giles, *Chin. Dict.*, s. v. *Tai* = "councilor,"
Morrison, II, p. 1072, and the Chinese Encyclopaedia, *San tsai tou
hoei* I, fol. 12. (Stanislas Julien, loc. cit. p. 13.)

12\. That part of the constellation Ursa Major (the Great Bear), which
is called "the Dipper" in the United States, is called "the Bushel" in
China. On account of the conspicuous place which it holds in the sky, it
is counted among the three measures of time, the other two being the sun
and the moon; and it is commonly regarded as sacred.

13\. According to Chinese views, the vital functions of man's body are
presided over by the three body-spirits called *san chi shên*. They are
the upper chi, *Peng-Kiu*; the middle chi, *Peng-chi*; and the lower
chi, *Peng-Kiao*. According to Basile's *Dictionnaire*, they reside in
the head, the stomach, and the abdomen. (See Julien, *Le livre des
récompenses*, p. 15.) Other authorities make different statements. See,
e. g., Du Bose's *Dragon, Image and Demon*, pp. 395-396.

When a man falls asleep on Kêng-shên day, the

{p. 72}

three body-spirits leave their habitation to bring the Heavenly Master
information concerning the sins which they have witnessed. Hence
originated the practice of keeping vigils on Kêng-shên days so as not to
be found sleeping at the time of judgment, or (as otherwise the custom
is explained) to prevent the three body-spirits from leaving the body.

14\. The Chinese calendar is a complicated affair. The names of days are
made up by a combination of two words belonging to two different sets of
names one of which is called the Ten Stems and the other the Twelve
Branches. The Ten Stems are repeated six times and the Twelve Branches
five times, which yields sixty combinations. The Kêng-shên day, the day
of judgment in the heavenly courts, is the fifty-seventh day in this
sexagesimal system. See for further information Dr. Paul Carus' "Chinese
Script and Thought" in The Monist, April, 1905.

15\. The "Heavenly Master" is a Taoist term denoting the governor and
judge of the world. He is also called the "Pearly Emperor" and is
identified with "Shang Ti," the Lord on High.

16\. The hearth-spirit watches the events in the house, and his day of
reckoning is the last day of every month, called *hwi* in Chinese, which
we translate in our verbatim translation by "ultimo" in the sense in
which the word is used in continental Europe.

17\. The character "long life" practically means "immortality" in
Chinese, and so we have here translated it by "life everlasting."
Stanislas Julien translates "L'immortalité."

18\. Stanislas Julien translates this passage: "Il faut

{p. 73}

d'avance les éviter avec soin, si l'on veut obtenir l'immortalité"

19\. The meaning of this sentence is that the right way is the one that
leads onward. Stanislas Julien (*loc. cit.* p. 32) translates: "Avancez
dans la bonne voie, et reculez devant la mauvaise voie." Legge (in the
S. B. E., Vol. XL, p. 237) translates: "Is his way right, he should go
forward in it; is it wrong, he should withdraw from it." Mr. Suzuki
insists that this interpretation though it makes excellent sense, is
positively untenable.

20\. "To be false to oneself" means "to do wrong," or "to sin."

21\. "In the dark room" simply means "in secret."

22\. This sentence is a condensed statement of Confucian morality.

23\. This sentence is a modified quotation from Lao Tze's
*Tao-Teh-King*. Lao Tze says (chap. 13): "Favor and disgrace bode awe."
The Chinese word *ching*, which, following the traditional
interpretation, (see Carus, *Lao Tze's Tao-Teh-King*, p. 163) means
"fearful surprise," or "awe," is the same that here simply means
"surprise." We need not add that by the omission of the word "disgrace"
the sense is somewhat altered. Yet, after all, the meaning of the word
combination "favor and disgrace" does not so much mean "favor" and also
"disgrace," but a condition of dependence, such as prevails in court
life, where "favor and disgrace" are the significant features. It is an
instance of an idea expressed in Chinese by the contrast of two
opposites of which the idea consists.

24\. For the word *tao* see Carus' Lao Tze's *Tao-Teh-King*,

{p. 74}

pp. 9 ff. and xxii-xxvi. The word *tao* is in one respect unlike its
equivalent in English which we translate by "reason." It is a religious
term with which is associated all the awe for the sanctity of the moral
world-order, such as is attached to its Greek equivalent, the word
*logos* or "word," i. e., "logical thought."

25\. Stanislas Julien translates: "La providence le protége."

26\. "Tous les démons s'éloignent de lui."

27\. The word "saint" consists of the symbols "man" and "mountain." The
Man of the Mountain was a hermit or recluse, and so the word acquired
the meaning "saint." The etymological significance, though still
noticeable in its etymology, is, however, lost sight of, and the word
now simply means, "saint" or "saintly." According to Eitel (*Handbook of
Buddhism*, p. 130), there are five degrees of saintliness: heavenly,
ærial, human, earthly, and ghostly. In the present passage only two
degrees of saintliness are referred to.

28\. All the following sentences are dependent upon this conjunction
*Kou*, i. e., "if," in this way: "*If* some people do not behave
righteously, (*if*) they are unreasonable, (*if*) they take pride in
evil, (*if*) they inflict wounds," etc., etc., down to the last sentence
of "*a description of evil-doers*." The main sentence begins with the
part entitled "Punishment of Evil-Doers" with the words (1059 ff.): "for
such crimes the controllers of destiny cut short people's lives." We
break up this long-winded construction to render our English version
more readable.

29\. The word "reason" is not here the same as *tao*, mentioned above,
but *li*, which means "logical correctness"

{p. 75}

or "rationality," i. e., "reason," in a secular sense. The meaning of
the sentence here is that unrighteousness is not only against the *tao*,
i. e., against religion, but even against common sense.

30\. Stanislas Julien translates: "Regarder la méchanceté comme une
preuve de talent."

31\. M. Julien translates this sentence: "Divulger les fautes de ses
parens."

32\. Stanislas Julien translates: "Ne pas savoir distinguer les
personnes qu'il faut rechercher ou fuir."

33\. The expression "heaven's people" is a Confucian term, which is used
in China in the same way as in Christian countries the phrase "God's
people" would mean all those who bear God's image and are dear to the
Deity.

34\. M. Julien translates: "Rejeter ses propres crimes sur les autres."

35\. The words *Fang-Shu*, here rendered "divination" and "craft,"
denote first of all the practice of diviners; but it is here used in a
general sense and applies to all skilled labor, especially the
professions. M. Julien translates: "Arrèter l'exercice des arts et des
métiers." He adds in a footnote: "According to the dictionary of the Fo
Kien dialect, the *Fang-Shu* are (1) physicians, (2) men of letters, (3)
painters, (4) diviners, (5) journalists, (6) merchants, (7) workmen, (8)
fishers, and (9) woodcutters." (*Ibid.* p. 221.) For further information
in regard to the Feng-Shui, see Dr. Carus' article "Chinese Occultism"
in *The Monist*, Vol. XV, p. 500.

36\. "Reason and virtue," i. e., *tao* and *teh*, are the two main
subjects of Lao Tze's doctrine. We are at

{p. 76}

liberty to translate "reason and virtue," or "the way of virtue."

37\. The term "bone and flesh" in Chinese means "family relations."

38\. The meaning may be either "to escape punishment" or "to shirk
duties."

39\. "To give away evil in marriage" is a Chinese phrase.

40\. Literally, "they cut and clip," which is a term in tailoring. The
meaning of the sentence is that they are wasteful with material, and it
goes without saying that it refers to wastefulness of any kind.

41\. It is customary in China to kill cattle on festivals only, and it
is considered improper and even irreligious to slay cattle for food
without due occasion.

42\. Wilful waste of food is rightly considered sinful in China.

43\. Among the Chinese superstitions which are common also in other
countries, is the habit of burying figures or worms, which are intended
to represent some person, for the purpose of inflicting injury upon
them, being a kind of black magic. This is called in Chinese "to bury
vermin."

44\. Stanislas Julien translates: "Cacher l'effigie d'un homme pour lui
donner le cauchemar."

45\. Associations or fraternities have always played an important part
in Chinese politics. The Boxer movement is a well-known instance in
modern times.

46\. M. Julien translates: "Tourner le dos à ses proches parens et
rechercher ses parens éloignés."

{p. 77}

47\. To point at heaven and earth or the stars is deemed disrespectful
in China, and the habit of making them witnesses of mean thoughts is
considered a defiance of the divine powers.

48 "Illegitimate profit" refers to the business not licensed by the
authorities, such as was the opium trade before the Opium War.

49 The following sentences refer alternately to husbands and wives,
which for clearness' sake has to be repeated in English.

50\. Literally, "the room," viz., the one in which the wife lives.
Denoting the sphere of the wife's activity, the word has become a
synonym for "wife."

51\. Literally, "outside." An outside heart means a "treacherous heart."

52\. According to the rules of Chinese grammar, the objective case of
"self" precedes the verb.

53\. It is considered disrespectful in China to step over the well, the
hearth, food, or a person.

54\. While the Chinese celebrate New Year's Eve as much as is done in
Western countries, the custom to sing and to dance on such festivals is
considered highly improper.

55\. No act that may be regarded as disrespectful should be done while
facing the North, and also in presence of the hearth which is the most
sacred place of the house.

56\. The proper way to light incense in olden times was to strike a
spark from a flint. To burn incense in the fire of the hearth is both
disrespectful for the hearth and improper so far as the incense is
concerned.

{p. 78}

57\. The command "not to expose one's nakedness in the night," is based
upon an ancient notion, (viz., that spirits, angels, or demons may have
intercourse with human beings,) a remnant of which is still preserved in
the Old Testament (Gen. vi. 2), where we read that the sons of Elohim
took to wives the daughters of men. One of the Chinese stories appended
to the *T'ai-Shang Kan-Ying P'ien* tells of a woman that conceived a
changeling from a demon, and the Apostle Paul, for the same reason that
underlies the notion of our present passage in the *T'ai-Shang Kan-Ying
P'ien*, requests women to wear a head covering (1 Cor. xi. 10).

58\. It is considered as irreligious to have executions take place on
festivals, a custom which is paralleled in the Jewish law, according to
which it is unlawful to have a man stoned or crucified on the feast day.

59\. The word "rainbow" is here as in many other places represented by
two words, the second of which means literally "colored cloud." See Note
9.

60\. The three luminaries (or more correctly the three kinds of
luminaries) are sun, moon, and stars.

61\. Hunting by setting the underbrush on fire in spring when animals
begin to hatch, is rightly denounced as cruel in China.

62\. I understand the sentence, "those who slay, exchange weapons," to
mean that "he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword"
(Rev. xiv. 10); and further, adds the Chinese moralist in the following
sentence, "such evil-doers will turn their swords against one another
and mutually kill

{p. 79}

themselves," which is a gradation, for it is stated that not only will
they be killed, but they will slay one another.

63\. Meat that has by carelessness been exposed to the water dripping
from the eaves has frequently proved fatal to those who partook of it.
Thus the term "dripping water meat" means "tainted meat."

64\. These passages are quotations from the *Dhammapada* which has
become a household book of religious devotion all over China.

65\. The threefold way of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, is
a proposition which, so far as we know, was first taught in the West by
Zarathushtra, the great prophet of Iran.

{p. 83}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moral Tales Illustrative of the Kan-ying P'ien](ts14)
