[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ts25)  [Next](ts27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE INCENSED GODDESS.

<span id="10800.jpg">![](img/10800.jpg)</span>

There was a shrine to the water-goddess in the village of Ch'ing Ch'i,
and her image that was placed there was so nicely carved that it looked
like a real goddess of splendid beauty. The villagers made her the
guardian of the district and paid her great respect.

It was the second month of the year when the pear-blossoms on the
grounds were very pretty, that a party of young students was passing by
and admired the flowers. One of them lifted the curtain that was hung
before the image of the goddess and exclaimed: "How lovely she is! If
she were alive I would make her my mistress!"

His friends were shocked, but he laughed at their scruples, saying that
spirits and gods have no reality; that it is well enough for the people
to believe in and fear them, because such superstition made them the
more amenable. He then composed a libelous poem and wrote it on the
wall, but his friends did not say anything more, knowing the uselessness
of their advice.

After this they all went to the examination

{p. 109}

hall, and stayed at the Wên Chang Dormitory. One evening the Lord Wên
Chang<sup>\[1\]</sup> appeared to them in a dream, and they were greatly
afraid to be in the presence of his august majesty. He had a roll on his
table and declared to them: "As you know well, any student who is guilty
of trifling with women is excluded from the list. Even a plain, ordinary
woman should be respected by you; and how much more this is true of a
holy goddess, you all must know. According to a report I have received
it seems there is one of your number who has insulted the goddess of
Ch'ing Ch'i." Having ascertained the name of the offender, the Lord
cancelled it from the list, adding that this was done because the man
was guilty of wronging a woman.

When the students met the following morning, they learned that each had
the same dream during the night. Yet the offender himself was obdurate
and said: "What has the Lord of Literature to do with such trifles? What
harm can an image of clay do to me?"

He entered an examination cell, and having written down his seven essays
with unusual vigor and brilliancy, felt assured of his

\[1. Wên Chang means "Scripture Glory" and he bears the title Ti-Chün,
"Lord Superior." He is worshiped all over China as the god of written
revelation and is the patron of all educational institutions.\]

{p. 110}

final success. But when the night was far advanced, there appeared
before him the goddess of water with her attendants. She censured him
for both his grave offence and impenitence, and then ordered her maids
to strike him with their sticks until the student lost his mind and
destroyed all of his papers. When he was carried out of the cell in the
morning, he was unconscious and died soon.

\[The accompanying picture illustrates the examination hall where every
candidate is seated in a separate cell. The row in the corner is
inscribed with the words, "Heaven-Character Number," which means "number
one." In explanation we have to state that one way of counting in
Chinese is according to the words of the Thousand Character Book, *Chien
Tzu Wen*, which begins with the words *Tien ti hsüan huang*. This book
is used as a primer in Chinese schools, and every partly educated
{Chinese} knows it by heart. It contains the thousand most important
characters used in daily life and no two characters are alike. Thus,
*tien* (heaven) means "one," *ti* (earth) means "two," *hsüan* (dark)
means "three," *huang* (yellow) means "four," etc.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spirit of the Hearth](ts27)
