[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ts30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A CHINESE HOME MISSION PUBLISHING COMPANY.

<span id="13200.jpg">![](img/13200.jpg)</span>

There are Bible societies in Europe and America, the contributors to
which deem it meritorious to publish and propagate the canonical books
of Christianity; and in China we meet with analogous sentiments which
prompt people to spread abroad religious books proclaiming the moral
principles of their faith. The Chinese think to gain merit by writing,
copying, or publishing such books as the *Kan Ying-P'ien*, and our
illustration represents a publishing office maintained either by some

{p. 133}

pious man who is possessed of sufficient wealth, or an association
inspired by the same motive. It is the picture of a Chinese Home Mission
Publishing Company.

We see in the lower left-hand corner two engravers busily employed in
writing characters upon engraving blocks. At the further end of the
table stands a pile of tracts, *Yü Hai Tze Hang*, which treat of the
"Voyage of Mercy over the Ocean of Desire," a Buddhist Pilgrim's
Progress. A man is engaged in storing away another tract, the *Hsing
T'ien Yüh Ching*, which discusses the subject "how with a heavenly
nature we may adjust ourselves to circumstances."

At the right-hand table where the three men are printing with brushes,
we see another tract, the Kung Kuo Ko, which means "the Table of Merits
and Demerits"--a curious little book which is incorporated as an
appendix to the Chinese copy of the *Kan Ying P'ien* in our possession.
It contains a list of all good and evil deeds, and marks their value in
figures in a system similar to that in use in our schools. Stopping a
fight counts +3; inducing people to abstain from eating flesh for one
year counts +20; gossiping with evil tongue, -3; to return favors, +20;
to keep a promise seems to

{p. 134}

be considered as a matter of course, for it counts but +1; to abstain
from taking things that do not belong to us, counts also but +1;
sincerity, or, as the book expresses it, "to speak as one thinks,"
counts +1 per day; betrayal of a neighbor's secrets counts -50. At the
end of the book there are blanks for lists of both meritorious and
demeritorious deeds, for the sums total on both sides, and for the
statement of the balance.

The pile of tracts which is just being carried to the shelves is a
volume of the same book, as may be recognized by the first word kung,
"merits."

The stacks in the background contain the following books: on the left
upper shelf are three rows of the *Kan-Ying P'ien*; on the left middle
shelf is the *Yin Chih Wên*, or *The Tract of the Quiet
Way*;<sup>\[1\]</sup> on the left lower shelf we read the title *Ti Chün
Hsiao King*, "The Imperial Lord's Book of Filial Piety," a work of
Taoist ethics, probably written in the same strain as the *Kan-Ying
P'ien*; on the right upper shelf is the "Canonical Book (*King*) of the
Pearly Emperor"; on the right middle shelf we see a Buddhist book called
"The Diamond Cutter," *Chin Kang King*, a

\[1. Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Co., 1906.\]

{p. 135}

well-known treatise published in English translation among the Sacred
Books of the East; and on the lowest right-hand shelf is to be found the
*Ta Chih King*, or "Book of Great Thoughts."
