[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Darwin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dom01)  [Next](dom03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0140436316/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Descent of Man*, by Charles Darwin, 2nd ed. \[1874\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CONTENTS.

INTRODUCTION.

PART I. THE DESCENT OR ORIGIN OF MAN.

CHAPTER I.

The Evidence of the Descent of Man from some Lower Form.

Nature of the evidence bearing on the origin of man--Homologous
structures in man and the lower animals--Miscellaneous points of
correspondence-- Development--Rudimentary structures, muscles,
sense-organs, hair, bones, reproductive organs, etc.--The bearing of
these three great classes of facts on the origin of man.

CHAPTER II.

On the Manner of Development of Man from some Lower Form.

Variability of body and mind in man--Inheritance--Causes of
variability-- Laws of variation the same in man as in the lower
animals--Direct action of the conditions of life--Effects of the
increased use and disuse of parts-- Arrested
development--Reversion--Correlated variation--Rate of increase-- Checks
to increase--Natural selection--Man the most dominant animal in the
world--Importance of his corporeal structure--The causes which have led
to his becoming erect--Consequent changes of structure--Decrease in size
of the canine teeth--Increased size and altered shape of the
skull--Nakedness --Absence of a tail--Defenceless condition of man.

CHAPTER III.

Comparison of the Mental Powers of Man and the Lower Animals.

The difference in mental power between the highest ape and the lowest
savage, immense--Certain instincts in common--The emotions--Curiosity--
Imitation--Attention--Memory--Imagination--Reason--Progressive
improvement --Tools and weapons used by animals--Abstraction,
Self-consciousness-- Language--Sense of beauty--Belief in God, spiritual
agencies, superstitions.

CHAPTER IV.

Comparison of the Mental Powers of Man and the Lower Animals--continued.

The moral sense--Fundamental proposition--The qualities of social
animals-- Origin of sociability--Struggle between opposed instincts--Man
a social animal--The more enduring social instincts conquer other less
persistent instincts--The social virtues alone regarded by savages--The
self-regarding virtues acquired at a later stage of development--The
importance of the judgment of the members of the same community on
conduct--Transmission of moral tendencies--Summary.

CHAPTER V.

On the Development of the Intellectual and Moral Faculties during
Primeval and Civilised times.

Advancement of the intellectual powers through natural selection--
Importance of imitation--Social and moral faculties--Their development
within the limits of the same tribe--Natural selection as affecting
civilised nations--Evidence that civilised nations were once barbarous.

CHAPTER VI.

On the Affinities and Genealogy of Man.

Position of man in the animal series--The natural system genealogical--
Adaptive characters of slight value--Various small points of resemblance
between man and the Quadrumana--Rank of man in the natural system--
Birthplace and antiquity of man--Absence of fossil
connecting-links--Lower stages in the genealogy of man, as inferred
firstly from his affinities and secondly from his structure--Early
androgynous condition of the Vertebrata --Conclusion.

CHAPTER VII.

On the Races of Man.

The nature and value of specific characters--Application to the races of
man--Arguments in favour of, and opposed to, ranking the so-called races
of man as distinct species--Sub-species--Monogenists and polygenists--
Convergence of character--Numerous points of resemblance in body and
mind between the most distinct races of man--The state of man when he
first spread over the earth--Each race not descended from a single
pair--The extinction of races--The formation of races--The effects of
crossing-- Slight influence of the direct action of the conditions of
life--Slight or no influence of natural selection--Sexual selection.

PART II. SEXUAL SELECTION.

CHAPTER VIII.

Principles of Sexual Selection.

Secondary sexual characters--Sexual selection--Manner of action--Excess
of males--Polygamy--The male alone generally modified through sexual
selection--Eagerness of the male--Variability of the male--Choice
exerted by the female--Sexual compared with natural
selection--Inheritance at corresponding periods of life, at
corresponding seasons of the year, and as limited by sex--Relations
between the several forms of inheritance--Causes why one sex and the
young are not modified through sexual selection-- Supplement on the
proportional numbers of the two sexes throughout the animal kingdom--
The proportion of the sexes in relation to natural selection.

CHAPTER IX.

Secondary Sexual Characters in the Lower Classes of the Animal Kingdom.

These characters are absent in the lowest classes--Brilliant colours--
Mollusca--Annelids--Crustacea, secondary sexual characters strongly
developed; dimorphism; colour; characters not acquired before maturity--
Spiders, sexual colours of; stridulation by the males--Myriapoda.

CHAPTER X.

Secondary Sexual Characters of Insects.

Diversified structures possessed by the males for seizing the females--
Differences between the sexes, of which the meaning is not understood--
Difference in size between the sexes--Thysanura--Diptera--Hemiptera--
Homoptera, musical powers possessed by the males alone--Orthoptera,
musical instruments of the males, much diversified in structure;
pugnacity; colours--Neuroptera, sexual differences in
colour--Hymenoptera, pugnacity and odours--Coleoptera, colours;
furnished with great horns, apparently as an ornament; battles;
stridulating organs generally common to both sexes.

CHAPTER XI.

Insects, continued.--Order Lepidoptera.

(Butterflies and Moths.)

Courtship of Butterflies--Battles--Ticking noise--Colours common to both
sexes, or more brilliant in the males--Examples--Not due to the direct
action of the conditions of life--Colours adapted for
protection--Colours of moths--Display--Perceptive powers of the
Lepidoptera--Variability-- Causes of the difference in colour between
the males and females--Mimicry, female butterflies more brilliantly
coloured than the males--Bright colours of caterpillars--Summary and
concluding remarks on the secondary sexual character of insects--Birds
and insects compared.

CHAPTER XII.

Secondary Sexual Characters of Fishes, Amphibians, and Reptiles.

Fishes: Courtship and battles of the males--Larger size of the females--
Males, bright colours and ornamental appendages; other strange
characters-- Colours and appendages acquired by the males during the
breeding-season alone--Fishes with both sexes brilliantly
coloured--Protective colours--The less conspicuous colours of the female
cannot be accounted for on the principle of protection--Male fishes
building nests, and taking charge of the ova and young. AMPHIBIANS:
Differences in structure and colour between the sexes--Vocal organs.
REPTILES: Chelonians--Crocodiles-- Snakes, colours in some cases
protective--Lizards, battles of--Ornamental appendages--Strange
differences in structure between the sexes--Colours-- Sexual differences
almost as great as with birds.

CHAPTER XIII.

Secondary Sexual Characters of Birds.

Sexual differences--Law of battle--Special weapons--Vocal organs--
Instrumental music--Love-antics and dances--Decorations, permanent and
seasonal--Double and single annual moults--Display of ornaments by the
males.

CHAPTER XIV.

Birds--continued.

Choice exerted by the female--Length of courtship--Unpaired
birds--Mental qualities and taste for the beautiful--Preference or
antipathy shewn by the female for particular males--Variability of
birds--Variations sometimes abrupt--Laws of variation--Formation of
ocelli--Gradations of character-- Case of Peacock, Argus pheasant, and
Urosticte.

CHAPTER XV.

Birds--continued.

Discussion as to why the males alone of some species, and both sexes of
others are brightly coloured--On sexually-limited inheritance, as
applied to various structures and to brightly-coloured
plumage--Nidification in relation to colour--Loss of nuptial plumage
during the winter.

CHAPTER XVI.

Birds--concluded.

The immature plumage in relation to the character of the plumage in both
sexes when adult--Six classes of cases--Sexual differences between the
males of closely-allied or representative species--The female assuming
the characters of the male--Plumage of the young in relation to the
summer and winter plumage of the adults--On the increase of beauty in
the birds of the world--Protective colouring--Conspicuously coloured
birds--Novelty appreciated--Summary of the four chapters on birds.

CHAPTER XVII.

Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals.

The law of battle--Special weapons, confined to the males--Cause of
absence of weapons in the female--Weapons common to both sexes, yet
primarily acquired by the male--Other uses of such weapons--Their high
importance-- Greater size of the male--Means of defence--On the
preference shewn by either sex in the pairing of quadrupeds.

CHAPTER XVIII.

Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals--continued.

Voice--Remarkable sexual peculiarities in seals--Odour--Development of
the hair--Colour of the hair and skin--Anomalous case of the female
being more ornamented than the male--Colour and ornaments due to sexual
selection-- Colour acquired for the sake of protection--Colour, though
common to both sexes, often due to sexual selection--On the
disappearance of spots and stripes in adult quadrupeds--On the colours
and ornaments of the Quadrumana--Summary.

PART III. SEXUAL SELECTION IN RELATION TO MAN, AND CONCLUSION.

CHAPTER XIX.

Secondary Sexual Characters of Man.

Differences between man and woman--Causes of such differences, and of
certain characters common to both sexes--Law of battle--Differences in
mental powers, and voice--On the influence of beauty in determining the
marriages of mankind--Attention paid by savages to ornaments--Their
ideas of beauty in women--The tendency to exaggerate each natural
peculiarity.

CHAPTER XX.

Secondary Sexual Characters of Man--continued.

On the effects of the continued selection of women according to a
different standard of beauty in each race--On the causes which interfere
with sexual selection in civilised and savage nations--Conditions
favourable to sexual selection during primeval times--On the manner of
action of sexual selection with mankind--On the women in savage tribes
having some power to choose their husbands--Absence of hair on the body,
and development of the beard--Colour of the skin--Summary.

CHAPTER XXI.

General Summary and Conclusion.

Main conclusion that man is descended from some lower form--Manner of
development--Genealogy of man--Intellectual and moral faculties--Sexual
selection--Concluding remarks.

SUPPLEMENTAL NOTE.

INDEX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](dom03)
