[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3321)  [Next](sbe3323) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 15. Exhorting the Witnesses.

\* 198. <span id="fr_274"></span>[198](#fn_274) (The judge), after
having summoned all the witnesses, and bound them down firmly by an
oath, shall examine them separately. (They should be men) of tried
integrity and conversant with the circumstances of the case.

199. <span id="fr_275"></span>[199](#fn_275) Let him cause a priest to
swear by Truth, a Kshatriya by his riding animal and weapons, a Vai*s*ya
by his cows, grain, or gold, a *S*ûdra by all sorts of crimes.

\* 200. By ancient sacred texts, extolling the excellence of Truth, and
denouncing the sinfulness of Falsehood, let him inspire them with deep
awe.

201. <span id="fr_276"></span>[201](#fn_276) He who gives false
testimony as a witness will enter his enemy's house, naked, with his
head shorn, tormented with hunger and thirst, and deprived of sight, to
beg food with a potsherd.

202\. Naked, with his head shorn, with a potsherd (for a begging-bowl),
standing hungry before the door

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of his adversary, shall he constantly meet his enemies who give false
testimony.

203. <span id="fr_277"></span>[203](#fn_277) A perjured witness shall
spend his nights in the same manner as a wife who has been superseded
(by another), or as a man who has been worsted in playing at dice, or as
one whose body is weighed down by a heavy burden.

204. <span id="fr_278"></span>[204](#fn_278) A witness who wavers in
giving evidence is sure to be fettered with a thousand bonds from the
chain of Varu*n*a.

205\. After the lapse of a hundred years, the cord is taken off him.
When he is free from the cord, the man becomes a woman.

206\. Thus is a man liberated from this fixed bondage. \* Now I will
state, in order, how many kinsmen a false witness kills,

\* 207. <span id="fr_279"></span>[207](#fn_279) If his evidence
concerns, respectively, (small) cattle, cows, horses, human beings,
gold, and land. Listen to me, my friend.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

\* 208. He kills five by false testimony concerning (small) cattle; he
kills ten by false testimony concerning kine; he kills a hundred by
false testimony concerning horses; (and he kills) a thousand by false
evidence concerning a human being.

\* 209. He kills the born and the unborn by giving false evidence (in a
cause) concerning gold; he kills everything by giving false evidence
concerning land; beware, then, of giving false evidence with regard to
land.

210\. Truth is said to be the one unequalled means of purification of
the soul. Truth is the ladder by which man ascends to heaven, as a ferry
(plies) from one bank of a river to the other.

211\. If truth and a thousand horse-sacrifices are balanced against one
another (it will be found that) truth weighs more heavily than a
thousand horse-sacrifices.

212\. A tank is better than a hundred wells, an offering better than a
hundred tanks, a son better than a hundred offerings, and truth better
than a hundred sons.

213\. It is truth which makes the earth bear all beings, truth which
makes the sun rise. It is through truth that winds blow, and that the
waters flow.

214\. Truth is the greatest gift, truth is the most efficacious kind of
austerity, truth is the highest duty in the world, thus it has been
revealed to us.

215\. The gods are truth simply, the human race is falsehood. He whose
mind is persistent in truth, obtains a divine state in this world even.

216\. Speak truth and discard falsehood. It is through truth that thou
shalt attain heaven. By

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

uttering a falsehood thou wilt precipitate thyself into a most dreadful
hellish abode.

\* 217. And in the hells the merciless attendants of Yama, endowed with
great strength, will cut off thy tongue and strike thee with swords,
constantly,

\* 218. And attack and pierce thee with spears, while thou art wailing
helpless. When thou art standing, they will fell thee to the ground and
fling thee into the flames.

\* 219. After having sustained thus for a long while the acute tortures
of hell, thou shalt enter in this world the horrid bodies of vultures,
crows, and other (despicable creatures).

\* 220. Having discovered these evils with which falsehood is attended,
and knowing, on the other hand, the advantages resulting from veracity,
thou must speak truth and (thereby) save thyself. Do not ruin thyself
wantonly.

221\. Neither relatives, nor friends, nor treasures, be they ever so
great, are able to protect those who are about to be plunged into the
tremendous darkness (of hell).

222\. Thy ancestors are in suspense, when thou hast been appointed to
give evidence (reflecting in their minds): 'Will he conduct us (into
heaven) or will he precipitate us (into hell)?'

223\. Truth is the self of man. Everything depends on truth. Therefore
thou must be intent on acquiring bliss by thy own effort, by speaking
truth.

224\. Whatever lies between that night in which thou wast born, and that
night in which thou art to die (thy whole life in fact) has been spent
in vain by thee, if thou givest false evidence.

225\. Those places of abode which are destined

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

for the murderer of a Brahman, and those which await the murderer of a
woman or child, and the regions awaiting an ungrateful man, are reserved
for a false witness.

226\. There is no higher virtue than veracity, nor heavier crime than
falsehood. A man must speak truth therefore, particularly when he has
been appointed to give evidence.

\* 227. There are two ancient verses (which run as follows): ‘If a man
is base enough to speak falsely in regard to the affairs of a stranger,
what may not such a wretch be expected to do, fearless of hell, where
his own welfare is concerned?

\* 228. <span id="fr_280"></span>[228](#fn_280) All affairs are
connected with speech, have speech for their root, and depend on speech.
He who steals a good speech (by violating truth) is capable of
committing any theft (or other crime).’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_274"></span>[91:198](sbe3322.htm#fr_274) 198-228. Manu
VIII, 79-101; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 73-75; Vish*n*u VIII, 19-37; Gautama
XIII, 12-23; Âpastamba II, 11, 29, 7-10; Baudhâyana I, 19, 10-12;
Vasish*th*a XVI, 32-34. Böhtlingk's Indische Sprüche.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[91:199](sbe3322.htm#fr_275) Identical with
Manu VIII, 113. See, too, Manu VIII, 88. The commentators of the Code of
Manu give various explanations of the latter verse. It may mean that a
false witness is threatened with the guilt of all offences committed
against riding animals, cows, grain, &c.; or with the guilt of stealing
riding animals, &c.; or with their loss; or that the judge shall exhort
witnesses to touch a cow, &c.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[91:201](sbe3322.htm#fr_276) 201, 202. Manu
VIII, 93; Vasish*th*a XVI, 33.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[92:203](sbe3322.htm#fr_277) This sentiment
shows that the condition of a superseded wife under Hindu law must have
been far from enviable. This is equally shown by the custom of
presenting a certain sum to her on her supersession by another wife. See
Vish*n*u XVII, 18; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 143.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[92:204](sbe3322.htm#fr_278) The snaky 'bonds
of Varu*n*a' seem to be an equivalent for dropsy, a disease attributed
to the influence of the ancient divinity Varu*n*a. See Professor
Bühler's note on Manu VIII, 82.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[92:207](sbe3322.htm#fr_279) 'Kills,' i.e.
sends to hell. This interpretation is given by the majority of Manu's
commentators. According to others, it means 'causes to fall from heaven
and to be reborn in the wombs of animals,' or 'incurs a guilt as great
as if he had killed.' See Professor Bühler's note on Manu VIII, 97. The
idea that a man, by telling a falsehood, ruins his kinsmen as well as
himself, belongs to the remotest antiquity, and recurs in the
Zendavesta. See Vendîdâd IV, 24 seq.; Jolly, translation of Book VIII of
the Code of Manu, note.

207-209. Nearly identical with Manu VIII, 97-99, &c.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[95:228](sbe3322.htm#fr_280) 'Theft' is a very
wide term under the Hindu law. The Code of Manu includes in the
denomination of theft, forgery of documents and of coins, unlawful
sales, and dishonesty generally. For hitâ*m* one might read hi ta*m*,
'For he who steals speech.' Manu IV, 256.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. Valid Evidence](sbe3323)
