[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3316)  [Next](sbe3318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 10. Documents.

\* 135. <span id="fr_230"></span>[135](#fn_230) Documents should be
known to be of two sorts: (the first), in the handwriting of the party
himself;

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (the second), in
that of another person, (the former being valid) without subscribing
witnesses, the latter requiring to be attested. The validity of both
depends on local usage.

\* 136. <span id="fr_231"></span>[136](#fn_231) That document is said to
be valid which is not adverse to the custom of the country, the contents
of which answer to the rules regarding pledges and other kinds of
security), and which is consistent in import and language.

\* 137. <span id="fr_232"></span>[137](#fn_232) That document is invalid
which has been executed by a person intoxicated, by one charged (with a
crime), by a woman, or by a child, and that which has been caused to be
written by forcible means, by intimidation, or by deception.

138. <span id="fr_233"></span>[138](#fn_233) A bond ceases to be valid
in that case also, if the witnesses, creditor, debtor, and scribe be
dead,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

unless its validity can be established by the existence of a pledge.

\* 139. <span id="fr_234"></span>[139](#fn_234) Pledges are declared to
be of two kinds, movable and immovable pledges; both are valid when
there is (actual) enjoyment, and not otherwise.

\* 140. <span id="fr_235"></span>[140](#fn_235) If a document has been
produced in due time, if (the demand recorded in it) has been
(repeatedly) urged, and (publicly) proclaimed, it remains valid for
ever, even after the death of the witnesses.

141. <span id="fr_236"></span>[141](#fn_236) A document which is unknown
and has never been heard of before does not obtain validity when it is
brought forward, even though the witnesses be living.

\* 142. <span id="fr_237"></span>[142](#fn_237) When a document has been
transferred

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

into another country, or burnt, or badly written, or stolen, a delay
must be granted, in case it should exist still; if it be no longer in
existence, the evidence of those who have seen it decides the matter.

143. <span id="fr_238"></span>[143](#fn_238) If a doubt should subsist,
as to whether a certain document be authentic or fabricated, its
authenticity has to be established by examining the handwriting (of the
party), the tenour of the document, peculiar marks, circumstantial
evidence, and the probabilities of the case.

\* 144. <span id="fr_239"></span>[144](#fn_239) If a document is signed
by a stranger and

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

meant for a different purpose, it has to be examined, in case its
genuineness should be suspected, by inquiring into the connexion
(previously existing between the two parties) and into the (probability
of) title, and by resorting to reasonable inference.

145. <span id="fr_240"></span>[145](#fn_240) An (obligation which has
been stated in) writing can only be annulled by (another) writing, and
an attested bond by witnesses. A writing is superior to witnesses;
witnesses are not superior to a writing.

\* 146. <span id="fr_241"></span>[146](#fn_241) If a document is split,
or torn, or stolen, or effaced, or lost, or badly written, another
document has to be executed. This is the rule regarding documents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_230"></span>[75:135](sbe3317.htm#fr_230) A document in the
handwriting of the party himself has the advantage of being valid
without subscribing witnesses. The custom <span id="page_76">p.
76</span> of the country, i.e. the usages prevailing in each country
with regard to the validity of documents, is supreme. A. Vish*n*u VII,
1-5; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 84-88.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[76:136](sbe3317.htm#fr_231) I have translated
the reading vyaktâdhividhilaksha*n*am. That writing is not adverse to
the custom of the country which does not record an invalid gift, or a
disposition in regard to a minor, &c. If the contents of a document are
in accordance with the rules regarding pledges, sureties, &c., and if
its import and language is free from obscurity and breaks, it is valid.
A. Vish*n*u VII, 11.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[76:137](sbe3317.htm#fr_232) What has been
written by one intoxicated, or charged with the murder of a Brahman or
other heavy crime, or by a woman or child; what has been caused to be
written by forcible means, the writer not being concerned in the subject
matter; and what has been written by one intimidated, or under a
delusion; all such documents are invalid. A. Vish*n*u VII, 6-10;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 89.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[76:138](sbe3317.htm#fr_233) The invalidity of
those documents, where the creditor, debtor, witnesses, and writer are
all dead, is declared for that reason, because such documents may be
suspected of forgery. Even after the actual death of all those persons,
however, a document retains its validity, where a pledge is in existence
and in the possession of the creditor. A.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[77:139](sbe3317.htm#fr_234) A pledge which is
only mentioned in a document, without being actually enjoyed, has no
legal validity. A.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[77:140](sbe3317.htm#fr_235) A document or bond
which the descendants of the creditor have repeatedly shown to the
descendants of the debtor whenever interest was due (prârthita*m*), or
which they have again and again read out, retains its validity for the
respective descendants of the creditor and debtor, even after the death
of the witnesses and all other persons concerned. A. I have translated
the term prârthita*m* as an [independent](errata.htm#0) clause.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[77:141](sbe3317.htm#fr_236) A document or
bond, the contents of which are unknown to the descendants of the
debtor, about which they have never heard from their ancestors, and
which has been suddenly presented to them only in a business
transaction, is not considered valid, even though the witnesses be
living. A.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[77:142](sbe3317.htm#fr_237) This rule is
equally applicable to a plaintiff and to a defendant in a lawsuit. 1. If
a creditor suing a debtor is unable to produce the bond on demand, the
judge shall give him time to search for it. If the bond has been
destroyed by fire or by some other accident, the fact of its former
existence may be established by the testimony of honest persons, who
have acted as scribe or as subscribing witnesses, or who happened to be
present while the bond was being executed. The statements of such
persons are equally decisive where the marks or part of the writing in a
document has been obliterated. 2. A debtor having been asked in <span
id="page_78">p. 78</span> court to discharge a certain debt, on the
strength of a bond signed by himself, says: 'It is true. I had written
that document. However, the money was not handed over to me, and I
omitted to cause the document to be torn, because it did not happen to
be at hand. A few days later the father of my would-be creditor informed
me that he had lost the bond and could not find it anywhere; that,
however, he was going to give me a written deed recording its loss. So
he actually did, and I have deposited that written deed in a certain box
while living in that house.' If the debtor pleads an excuse of this
sort, he must be allowed some delay to search for the document in
question. If it is no longer in existence, the statements of those who
saw it shall decide the matter. A.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[78:143](sbe3317.htm#fr_238) 'The handwriting,'
another specimen of the handwriting of the party. 'The tenour of the
document,' the names of the subscribing witnesses. 'Peculiar marks,'
flourishes in the handwriting of the scribe. 'Circumstantial evidence,'
'these two facts go together,' or 'they do not go together.' 'The
probabilities of the case,' 'how has he got hold of this document?' or
'is he nervous or is his manner of speaking composed and quiet?' By such
expedients as these shall doubts regarding the genuineness of a document
be removed. A. Vish*n*u VII, 12; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 92.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[78:144](sbe3317.htm#fr_239) If a document has
passed by purchase or acceptance from the original owner, who signed it,
into the possession of a stranger, who claims the loan recorded in it
from the debtor, the judge must examine the document. Kalyâ*n*abha*tt*a
has composed three verses in explanation of the technical terms âgama,
sa*m*bandha, and hetu. Sa*m*bandha, 'connexion,' according to him, may
be founded on descent, caste, marriage, friendship, and social
intercourse. <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> Âgama, 'a title,' may be
founded on inheritance, purchase, mortgaging, seizure, friendship, and
acquisition. Hetu, 'reasonable inference,' may be founded on reasoning
and an efficient cause. A. For other explanations of the terms âgama and
hetu in an analogous passage of Yâ*gñ*avalkya (II, 92), see the
Mitâksharâ. The Mayûkha agrees with Kalyâ*n*abha*tt*a.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[79:145](sbe3317.htm#fr_240) If the debtor
states that he has paid the debt, he must be able to produce an
acquittance in the creditor's handwriting. In the same way, if the
creditor pleads that the bond has been stolen, or lost, or burnt, &c.,
he must produce a certificate from the debtor stating its loss. Where,
however, the bond was attested by subscribing witnesses, the debt has to
be discharged in the presence of the same witnesses. A.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[79:146](sbe3317.htm#fr_241) Where a document
has met with any one out of the divers accidents mentioned in this
paragraph, the party by whom it was executed may be compelled to give
another document instead of it. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 91. Here ends the
chapter on documents, the eighth section of the law of debt. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Witnesses](sbe3318)
