[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3304)  [Next](sbe3306) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

#### I. LEGAL PROCEDURE.

\* 1. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) When mortals were bent on
doing their duty alone and habitually veracious, there existed neither
lawsuits, nor hatred, nor selfishness.

\* 2. The practice of duty having died out among mankind, lawsuits have
been introduced; and the king has been appointed to decide lawsuits,
because he has authority to punish.

3. <span id="fr_25"></span>[3](#fn_25) Documents and (the testimony of)
witnesses are declared to be the two methods for clearing up doubtful
matters, where two parties are quarrelling with one another.

\* 4. <span id="fr_26"></span>[4](#fn_26) Proceedings at law are of two
kinds; attended by a wager, or not attended by a wager. A lawsuit

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

attended by a wager is where (either of the two parties) stakes in
writing a certain sum which has to be paid besides the sum in dispute
(in case of defeat).

5. <span id="fr_27"></span>[5](#fn_27) In a lawsuit attended by a wager,
he of the two who is cast must pay his stake and a fine when his defeat
has been decided.

\* 6. <span id="fr_28"></span>[6](#fn_28) The plaint is declared to be
the essential part of a proceeding-at-law. If he succumbs with it, the
defendant loses the whole suit. If he can prove the charge, he gains the
suit.

\* 7. <span id="fr_29"></span>[7](#fn_29) Gatherings (kula),
corporations (*s*re*n*i), assemblies (ga*n*a), one appointed (by the
king), and the king (himself), are invested with the power to decide

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

lawsuits; and of these, each succeeding one is superior to the one
preceding him in order.

\* 8. Judicial procedure has four feet, four bases, four means, it
benefits four, reaches four, and produces four results. This has been
declared.

\* 9. It has eight members, eighteen topics, a hundred branches, three
efficient causes, two modes of plaint, two openings, and two issues.

\* 10. Virtue, a judicial proceeding, documentary evidence, and an edict
from the king are the four feet of a lawsuit. Each following one is
superior to the one previously named.

\* 11. <span id="fr_30"></span>[11](#fn_30) There virtue is based on
truth; a judicial proceeding (rests) on the statements of the witnesses;
documentary evidence (rests) on declarations reduced

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

to writing; an edict (depends) on the pleasure of the king.

\* 12. <span id="fr_31"></span>[12](#fn_31) Because the four means, of
conciliation and the rest, are adopted, it is said to have four means.
Because it protects the four orders, therefore it is said to benefit
four.

\* 13. <span id="fr_32"></span>[13](#fn_32) Because it affects
criminals, witnesses, the assessors of the court, and the king, to the
amount of one quarter each, therefore it is said to reach four.

\* 14. Because it produces these four, justice, gain, renown, and esteem
among men, therefore it is declared to produce four results.

\* 15. <span id="fr_33"></span>[15](#fn_33) Because it consists of these
eight, the king,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

his dutiful officer, the assessors of the court, the law-book, the
accountant and scribe, gold, fire, and water; therefore it is said to
have eight members.

\* 16. <span id="fr_34"></span>[16](#fn_34) Recovery of a debt,
deposits, partnership, resumption of gift, breach of a contract of
service,

\* 17. Non-payment of wages, sales effected by another than the rightful
owner, non-delivery of a sold chattel, rescission of purchase,

\* 18. Transgression of a compact, boundary disputes, the mutual duties
of husband and wife, law of inheritance, heinous offences,

\* 19. Abuse, assault, games, and miscellaneous, these are (the eighteen
titles of law) on account of which (judicial procedure) is said to have
eighteen topics.

\* 20. <span id="fr_35"></span>[20](#fn_35) Their branches amount to one
hundred and

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

thirty-two. On account of the multifariousness of human concerns, (a
judicial proceeding) is said to have a hundred branches.

21\. 'Recovery of a debt' has twenty-five divisions; 'deposits' has six;
'partnership' has three; 'resumption of gift' has four;

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

22\. 'Breach of service' consists of nine divisions; 'wages' has four
divisions; there are two divisions of 'sales effected by another than
the rightful owner;' 'non-delivery of a sold chattel' has a single
division only;

23\. 'Rescission of purchase' has four divisions; 'transgression of
compact' is onefold; 'boundary disputes' is twelvefold; there are twenty
divisions in 'mutual duties of husband and wife;'

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

24\. 'Law of inheritance' consists of nineteen divisions; 'heinous
offences' of twelve; of both 'abuse' and 'assault' there are three
divisions;

25\. 'Gambling with dice and betting on animals' has a single division;
'miscellaneous' has six divisions. Thus, adding up all these branches
(of the principal titles of law), there are one hundred and thirty-two
of them.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

\* 26. Because it proceeds from one of these three motives, carnal
desire, wrath, and greed; therefore it is said to have three efficient
causes. These are the three sources of lawsuits.

\* 27. <span id="fr_36"></span>[27](#fn_36) It is said to have two modes
of plaint, because a plaint may be either founded on suspicion or on
fact. It is founded on suspicion, when the defendant has been seen to
move in bad company. It is founded on fact, when the stolen chattels or
the like have come to light.

\* 28. Because it is based on the statements of the two litigants,
therefore it is said to have two openings. There the accusation is
called the plaint; the answer is called the declaration of the
defendant.

\* 29. <span id="fr_37"></span>[29](#fn_37) Because it may be founded
either on truth or on error, therefore it is said to have two issues.
Truth is what rests on true facts. Error is what rests on mistake of
facts.

30\. Ordeals even are rendered nugatory by artful men. Therefore let no
mistake be committed in regard to place, time, quantity, and so on.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

31. <span id="fr_38"></span>[31](#fn_38) There a king who acts justly
must neglect error when it is brought forward, and seek truth alone,
because prosperity depends on (the practice of) duty.

32. <span id="fr_39"></span>[32](#fn_39) As seven flames rise from fire,
even so will seven good things become manifest in a self-restrained king
who passes just sentences at trials.

33\. Religious merit, gain, fame, esteem among men, reverence on the
part of his subjects, conquests, and an everlasting residence in
paradise.

34. <span id="fr_40"></span>[34](#fn_40) Therefore let a king, after
having seated himself on the judgment seat, be equitable towards all
beings, discarding selfish interests and acting the part of (Yama)
Vaivasvata, (the judge of the dead).

\* 35. <span id="fr_41"></span>[35](#fn_41) Attending to (the dictates
of) the law-book and adhering to the opinion of his chief judge, let him
try causes in due order, adhibiting great care.

36. <span id="fr_42"></span>[36](#fn_42) The connection (âgama) must be
examined

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

first of all; then the title of law must be ascertained; thereupon
follows the cure; and the decision comes at the end. These are the four
parts of a trial.

37\. Avoiding carefully the violation of either the sacred law or the
dictates of prudence, he should conduct the trial attentively and
skilfully.

38. <span id="fr_43"></span>[38](#fn_43) As a huntsman traces the
vestiges of wounded deer in a thicket by the drops of blood, even so let
him trace justice.

\* 39. <span id="fr_44"></span>[39](#fn_44) Where the rules of sacred
law and the dictates of prudence are at variance, he must discard the
dictates of prudence and follow the rules of sacred law.

40. <span id="fr_45"></span>[40](#fn_45) When it is impossible to act up
to the precepts of sacred law, it becomes necessary tot, adopt a method
founded on reasoning, because custom decides everything and overrules
the sacred law.

41. <span id="fr_46"></span>[41](#fn_46) Divine law has a subtile
nature, and is occult

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

and difficult to understand. Therefore (the king) must try causes
according to the visible path.

\* 42. <span id="fr_47"></span>[42](#fn_47) One who has never committed
robbery may be charged with robbery. An actual robber, on the other
hand, may be acquitted of the charge of robbery. Mâ*nd*avya was tried
and declared to be a robber.

\* 43. <span id="fr_48"></span>[43](#fn_48) In the case of a woman, at
night, outside of

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the village, in the interior of a house, and by enemies; a sentence
passed under any one of these various circumstances may be reversed.

\* 44. <span id="fr_49"></span>[44](#fn_49) Owing to the recondite
nature of lawsuits, and the weakness of memory, the answer may be
delayed at pleasure in lawsuits relating to a debt or other subject,
with a view to ascertain the true facts.

\* 45. <span id="fr_50"></span>[45](#fn_50) Let him answer at once in
charges concerning a cow, landed property, gold, a woman, robbery,
abuse, an urgent affair, a heinous offence, or a calumny.

\* 46. One who tries to right himself in a quarrel, without having given
notice to the king, shall be severely punished and his cause must not be
heard.

\* 47. A defendant who absconds when the cause is about to be tried, and
he who does not take heed of what (the claimant) says, shall be arrested
by the plaintiff until the legal summons has been declared.

\* 48. <span id="fr_51"></span>[48](#fn_51) Local arrest, temporary
arrest, inhibition

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

from travelling, and arrest relating to karman; these are the four sorts
of arrest. One arrested must not break his arrest.

\* 49. <span id="fr_52"></span>[49](#fn_52) One arrested while crossing
a river, or in a forest (kântâra), or in a bad country, or during a
great calamity, or in another such predicament, commits no fault by
breaking his arrest.

\[50. <span id="fr_53"></span>[50](#fn_53) Those causes which have been
tried in the king's court, (or) by friends, connections, or relations,
shall be tried anew, after a fine of twice the original amount (of the
sum in dispute) has been imposed.\]

\* 51. <span id="fr_54"></span>[51](#fn_54) If one arrested at a proper
time breaks his arrest, he shall be punished. One who arrests improperly
is (equally) liable to punishment.

\* 52. <span id="fr_55"></span>[52](#fn_55) One about to marry; one
tormented by an illness; one about to offer a sacrifice; one afflicted
by a calamity; one accused by another; one employed in the king's
service;

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

\* 53. <span id="fr_56"></span>[53](#fn_56) Cowherds engaged in tending
cattle; cultivators in the act of cultivation; artizans, while engaged
in their own occupations; soldiers, during warfare;

\* 54. One who has not yet arrived at years of discretion; a messenger;
one about to give alms; one fulfilling a vow; one harassed by
difficulties: a person belonging to any of these categories must not be
arrested, nor shall the king summon him (before a court of justice).

\* 55. <span id="fr_57"></span>[55](#fn_57) One accused of an offence
must not lodge a plaint himself, unless he have refuted the charge
raised by the other party. Neither (is he allowed to accuse) one who has
already been accused by a different party. It is wrong to strike one
again who has already been struck (by another).

56. <span id="fr_58"></span>[56](#fn_58) When he has proffered a charge,
he must not

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

again alter it. He must not recede from his previous claim. By doing so
he will lose his suit.

57\. He must not lodge a false plaint. He is a sinner who proffers a
false charge (against any one). Whatever fine is declared in a suit of
this sort has to be paid by the claimant.

58. <span id="fr_59"></span>[58](#fn_59) If a man delays his answer
under false pretences, or if he stands mute at the trial, or if he
revokes his own former statements: these are the signs by which a loser
of his cause may be known.

59. <span id="fr_60"></span>[59](#fn_60) One who absconds after having
received the summons, or who does not make any defence after having
arrived in court, shall be punished by the king, because his cause is
lost.

60. <span id="fr_61"></span>[60](#fn_61) If a man being questioned does
not uphold

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

a statement duly made by himself (at a former stage of the trial); or if
he ends by admitting what had been previously negatived by himself;

61. <span id="fr_62"></span>[61](#fn_62) Or if he is unable to produce
any witnesses, after having declared that they are in existence and
having been asked to produce them: by all such signs as these persons
devoid of virtue may be known.

\* 62. <span id="fr_63"></span>[62](#fn_63) When a lawsuit has been
decided evidence becomes useless, unless a document or witnesses can be
produced who or which had not been announced at a former stage of the
trial.

\* 63. As the (fertilizing) power of rain is thrown away on ripe grain,
even so evidence becomes useless when the suit has been decided.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

64. <span id="fr_64"></span>[64](#fn_64) False statements even have to
be examined if they have been made in due season. That, on the other
hand, which has been passed over in silence through inadvertency, fails
to produce any result, even though it be true.

\* 65. <span id="fr_65"></span>[65](#fn_65) If a man is of opinion that
the suit has been decided and punishment declared in a way contrary to
justice, he may have the cause tried once more, provided he should pay
twice the amount of the fine inflicted.

\* 66. <span id="fr_66"></span>[66](#fn_66) If a verdict contrary to
justice has been passed, the assessors of the court must pay that fine;
because nobody certainly can act as a judge without incurring the risk
of being punished (eventually).

67. <span id="fr_67"></span>[67](#fn_67) When a member of a court of
justice, actuated by wrath, ignorance, or covetousness, has passed an

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

unjust sentence, he shall be declared unworthy to be a member of the
court, and the king shall punish him for his offence.

\* 68. <span id="fr_68"></span>[68](#fn_68) That king, however, who is
intent on doing his duty, must be particularly anxious to discover what
is right and what is wrong, because there is a variety of dispositions
among mankind.

69\. There are some who give false evidence from covetousness. There are
other villainous wretches who resort to forging documentary evidence.

70\. Therefore both (sorts of evidence) must be tested by the king with
great care: documents, according to the rules regarding writings;
witnesses, according to the law of witnesses.

\* 71. Liars may have the appearance of veracious men, and veracious men
may resemble liars. There are many different characters. Therefore it is
necessary to examine (everything).

\* 72. <span id="fr_69"></span>[72](#fn_69) The firmament has the
appearance of a flat surface, and the fire-fly looks like fire. Yet
there is no surface to the sky, nor fire in the fire-fly.

\* 73. Therefore it is proper to investigate a matter, even though it
should have happened before one's own eyes. One who does not deliver his
opinion till he has investigated the matter will not violate justice.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

\* 74. Thus a king, constantly trying lawsuits with attention, will
acquire widespread and brilliant renown in this life and the abode of
Indra after his death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[5:1](sbe3305.htm#fr_24) I, 1. Where the sun
shines, there is no shade. Where there is shade, there the sun does not
shine. Similarly, where virtue reigns, there are neither lawsuits, nor
hatred, nor selfishness. On the other hand, where these three are, there
virtue is not to be found. A. The object of this introductory portion is
to show how far judicial procedure is connected with Dharma 'Virtue,' or
'Duty,' the principal subject of an Indian law-book. The Vîramitrodaya
and other compilations attribute a further hemistich to Nârada, in which
the happy age here alluded to is referred to the period 'when Manu, the
father of mankind, was reigning on earth.'

<span id="fn_25"></span>[5:3](sbe3305.htm#fr_25) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 22;
Vasish*th*a XVI, 10; Vish*n*u VI, 23.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[5:4](sbe3305.htm#fr_26) 'A lawsuit attended by
a wager' is where one of the parties promises in writing to pay a
certain sum to the king, over and above the amount in dispute. 'A
lawsuit not attended by a wager' is one devoid of a stipulation of this
sort. Vîramitrodaya. This is apparently the correct explanation. Asahâya
observes that the amount staked may be much smaller than the amount in
dispute. <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> Thus, although the sum in dispute
be very considerable, one may stake two hundred Pa*n*as, or a hundred
Pa*n*as, or fifty Pa*n*as only.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[6:5](sbe3305.htm#fr_27) According to Asahâya,
the wager must not be laid till the two first stages of the trial, the
charge and the answer, are over. The wager may be laid either by the
plaintiff or by the defendant. The plaintiff, whose declaration has been
refuted by the defendant, stakes a certain sum on the issue of the case.
Or the defendant, after having denied the correctness of the charge,
stakes a certain sum on the correctness of his own statements, to be
proved by the issue of the case. Asahâya does not say to whom the sum
staked has to be paid in his opinion. It may be observed that, according
to Burmese law, which is an offshoot of the early law of India, ten per
cent. of the sum staked should be given to the judge and to the
pleaders, and the remainder to the victorious party; see Richard-son's
Dhammathat, p. 73. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 18 (see Mitâksharâ).

<span id="fn_28"></span>[6:6](sbe3305.htm#fr_28) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 8.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[6:7](sbe3305.htm#fr_29) Kula means an
assemblage consisting of a few persons. Sre*n*i denotes an assemblage of
eminent merchants, &c. Ga*n*a denotes a fellowship, such as e.g. the
Brahman caste. A. Other commentators take kula to mean a family meeting;
*s*re*n*i, a company of artizans; ga*n*a, an assembly of cohabitants.
These three stages of private arbitration may be compared to the modern
Panchayats of India.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[7:11](sbe3305.htm#fr_30) Where both parties
adhere strictly to truth in their statements, there is virtue or justice
clearly enough, judicial procedure, written proof, and a royal edict
being quite unnecessary in that case. Where either of the two parties is
suspected to have made a false statement, judicial procedure has to be
resorted to, which depends on the evidence given by witnesses.
Documentary evidence (*k*aritra) is where the statements of witnesses
are consulted, written in their own hand, on a leaf, or on birch-bark,
or on a strip of rind, or some other writing material. That suit,
however, which has been decided by an edict from the king himself, is
superior to all the rest, according to the saying, 'What has been
decided in a village, goes into the town. What has been decided in the
town, goes before the king. What has been decided by the king, though
wrongly decided, cannot be tried anew.' A. The term *k*aritra has been
rendered in conformity with this interpretation, which is confirmed by
the remarks of *K*ande*s*vara on this *s*loka. Other commentators and
several MSS. of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti read svîkara*n*e or pra*s*nakara*n*e
for pustakara*n*e. These commentators explain the term *k*aritra in
conformity with a text of B*ri*haspati, Whatever is practised by a man,
proper or improper, in accordance with local usage, is termed *k*aritra
(custom).

<span id="fn_31"></span>[8:12](sbe3305.htm#fr_31) Because a lawsuit is
decided by resorting, as the case maybe, to any one of the four means of
success, viz. conciliation, division, bribery, and force, therefore it
is said to have four means. Because it protects or guards the four
castes and the four orders, therefore it is said to benefit four. A. The
four orders are the four stages in the life of a twice-born man:
student, householder, hermit, and ascetic.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[8:13](sbe3305.htm#fr_32) If unjustly decided,
it brings evil on the four persons mentioned in this *s*loka. If justly
decided, it confers good on them. A.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[8:15](sbe3305.htm#fr_33) The several functions
of the eight (or ten) 'members' of a judicial proceeding are thus
described in a *s*loka attributed to B*ri*haspati. ‘The chief judge
publishes the sentence. The king passes it. The assessors investigate
the facts of the case. The law-book dictates the judgment, i.e. the
victory of the one party, and the fine imposed on the other party. Gold
and silver serve the purpose of administering ordeals. Water is used for
relieving thirst or appeasing hunger. The accountant has to compute the
sums. The scribe has to record the proceedings. The attendant must
compel the defendant and the witnesses to appear in court, and detain
both plaintiff and defendant, if they have given no sureties.’ According
to Asahâya, the term 'the king's righteous officer' has to be referred
to the king's chief judge, and by 'law-books' <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> are meant the compositions of Manu, Nârada, Vi*s*varûpa, and
others.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[9:16](sbe3305.htm#fr_34) 16-19. Manu VIII, 4-8.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[9:20](sbe3305.htm#fr_35) 20-25. The 132
divisions of the eighteen titles of law are stated as follows by
Asahâya:—

1\. Recovery of a debt.

1\. Which debts have to be paid, and which not, &c.; 2. debts (in
general); 3. property; 4. means of livelihood of a Brahman in times of
distress; 5. modes of proof; 6. lending money at interest; 7. usurers;
8. sureties; 9. pledges; 10. documents; 11. incompetent witnesses; 12.
witnesses for the plaintiff; 13. witnesses for the defendant; 14. six
cases where witnesses are unnecessary; 15. validity of testimony, how
long retained; 16. false witnesses; 17. exhorting the witnesses; 18.
valid evidence; 19. invalid evidence; 20. what has to be done, where
both witnesses and documents are wanting; 21. ordeal by balance; 22.
ordeal by fire; 23. ordeal by water; 24. ordeal by poison; 25. ordeal by
sacred libation.

2\. Deposits.

1\. Nyasa (common deposits); 2. aupanidhika (sealed deposits); <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> 3. yâ*k*itaka (loans for use); 4. anvâhita*k*a
(deposits for delivery); 5. *s*ilpihastagata (bailments with an
artizan); 6. poga*nd*adhana property of a minor).

3\. Partnership.

1\. The common undertakings of partners in business; 2. sacrifices
offered by officiating priests; 3. tolls.

4\. Resumption of gift.

1\. What may be given; 2. what may not be given; 3. valid gifts; 4.
invalid gifts.

5\. Breach of a contract of service.

1\. Service; 2. impure work; 3. conduct of a student; 4. rules of
conduct for an apprentice; 5. rules of conduct for a manager; 6. fifteen
sorts of slaves; 7. emancipation from slavery; 8. legal position of a
slave; 9. release of a slave by the favour of his master.

6\. Non-payment of wages.

1\. The wages of servants; 2. cowherds and the rest; 3. fee of a public
woman; 4. questions arising in regard to the payment of rent.

7\. Sales effected by another than the rightful owner.

1\. Sale without ownership; 2. treasure-trove.

8\. Non-delivery of a sold chattel.

9\. Rescission of purchase.

1\. Time; 2. worn clothes; 3. loss on metals (caused by working them);
4. preparing cloth.

10\. Transgression of a compact.

11\. Boundary disputes.

1\. Quarrels regarding a field; 2. quarrels regarding a house; 3.
quarrels regarding a garden; 4. quarrels regarding a well; 5. <span
id="page_11">p. 11</span> quarrels regarding a sanctuary; 6. quarrels
regarding (the boundary of) a village; 7. prohibition to decorate (to
cause nuisance in?) across-road, &c.; 8. making a dike; 9. waste land;
10. protection of grain; 11. compensation for grain (destroyed by
cattle); 12. the foundation (of a householder's existence).

12\. Mutual duties of husband and wife.

1\. Examination of a man's virile potency; 2. gift of a maiden in
marriage; 3. the offence of insulting an officiating priest; 4. the
right time for giving a maiden in marriage; 5. the offence of casting a
blemish on an unblemished maiden, or suitor; 6. marriage forms; 7. rule
regarding incontinent females and other (unchaste women); 8. what
constitutes legitimate issue; 9. illicit intercourse; 10. punishment of
adultery; 11. incest; 12. intercourse with cattle, and other crimes of
this sort; 13. raising issue where there is no husband; 14. the
offspring of adulterous intercourse; 15, 16. authorised and unauthorised
intercourse of a woman with one not her husband; 17, 18. rule regarding
bad wives and husbands; 19. conduct prescribed for a woman whose husband
is absent; 20. definition of a rendezvous,

13\. Law of inheritance.

1\. Definition of heritage; 2. its distribution; 3. indivisible
property; 4. what constitutes strîdhana; 5. descent of strîdhana after
the death of the proprietress; 6. rules regarding the property of
brothers; 7. division of the property between parents and sons; 8. case
of a daughter whose father is unknown, &c.; 9. case of a father
unauthorised (to raise issue); to. share of a son suffering from a
chronic or agonising disease, or otherwise (incapable of inheriting);
11. division among the sons of a reunited coparcener; <span
id="page_12">p. 12</span> 12. management of the property of a deceased
or absent brother; 13. work done by one to whom the management of the
family property has been entrusted, &c.; 14. decision in the case of a
contested partition; 15. enumeration of the divers kinds of sons.
\[There ought to be nineteen subdivisions of the law of inheritance,
instead of fifteen. That number might be obtained by counting each
reason of exclusion from inheritance as a separate division.\]

14\. Heinous offences.

1\. What constitutes a heinous offence; 2. punishments ordained for
heinous offences; 3. robbery; 4. distinction between articles of
inferior, middling, and superior value; 5, 6. the two kinds of robbers;
7. seizure of robbers; 8. granting food or shelter (to thieves), &c.; 9.
thieves; to. punishment of heinous offences and larceny; 11. tracing a
thief by the foot-marks; 12. confiscation of the property of thieves or
others, when the stolen goods have not been recovered.

15, 16. Abuse and assault.

1\. Abuse; 2. assault; 3. punishments ordained for both offences.

17\. Gambling with dice, and betting on animals.

18\. Miscellaneous.

1\. Protection of the (four) castes and (four) orders by the king in
person; 2. dignity of a king; 3. maintenance of Brahmans by the king; 4.
authorisation from the king to bestow one's property (on Brahmans); 5.
description of the various modes of subsistence permitted to a Brahman;
6. eight things worthy of reverence.

It should be noted that Asahâya himself, in the sequel of his
commentary, does not adhere strictly to this division, and gives <span
id="page_13">p. 13</span> a number of different headings, which will be
quoted in the notes to this translation.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[13:27](sbe3305.htm#fr_36) Supposing that the
owner of a lost chattel casts his suspicion on a man who is constantly
seen in the company of well-known thieves and other bad characters, or
who lives with prostitutes, or is addicted to gambling, if he impeaches
that man, it is called a charge founded on suspicion. If a man is
impeached, after having been taken with the maner, the stolen goods
having been found among his property, it is called a charge founded on
fact. In a charge founded on suspicion, the decision must be referred to
the gods (i.e. to an ordeal). In a charge founded on fact, the decision
rests with the king's judge. A.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[13:29](sbe3305.htm#fr_37) The issue of a
lawsuit, like its beginning, may be twofold. Either a just decision is
given, in accordance with fact, or the decision is erroneous. A.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[14:31](sbe3305.htm#fr_38) 'Brought forward,'
i.e. stated by the plaintiff. The king shall neglect it, i.e. not accept
it as correct. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 19.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[14:32](sbe3305.htm#fr_39) The idea that fire is
composed of seven rays or flames is derived, no doubt, from the seven
rays of the sun-god Sûrya, who is represented down to the present day as
riding in a chariot drawn by seven horses.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[14:34](sbe3305.htm#fr_40) 'Discarding selfish
motives,' i.e. free from love or wrath (sine ira et studio). 'The part
of Yama,' the king of righteousness, i.e. the distribution of the
rewards and punishments due to good and bad actions. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya
II, 1; Vish*n*u III, 92, &c.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[14:35](sbe3305.htm#fr_41) While consulting the
law-book, he should take heed at the same time of whatever is brought
forward by the assessors of the court conjointly with the chief judge.
He should abide by the opinion delivered by the latter. He should try
causes in due order, i.e. so that the four feet of a judicial proceeding
follow one another in due succession. A.  Manu VIII, 1, 8, 9;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 1, &c.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[14:36](sbe3305.htm#fr_42) Âgama, 'the
connection,' i.e. the relation of the case in hand to the entire system
of law; 'the title of law,' its appertaining to a subdivision of this or
that title of law; its 'cure,' i.e. it must <span id="page_15">p.
15</span> be cured like an illness, by carrying it through the four
parts of a judicial proceeding. A.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[15:38](sbe3305.htm#fr_43) As deer in a thick
forest is difficult to catch, even so justice is difficult of
attainment. A huntsman traces the game by following up the drops of
blood to the spot, though the soil may be covered by thick grass, where
the wounded deer is seen by him. Similarly a king, following the course
of the lawsuit, traces law to the point where justice shines forth
clearly. A. Manu VIII, 44.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[15:39](sbe3305.htm#fr_44) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 21.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[15:40](sbe3305.htm#fr_45) According to A., this
verse inculcates the superiority of custom to written law. Thus both the
practice of raising offspring to a deceased or disabled brother, and the
remarriage of widows (see twelfth title of law) are specially sanctioned
in the sacred law-books. Yet these two customs are opposed to
established practice. Therefore subtle ratiocination is required. A.
quotes a verse to the effect that the immemorial usages of every
province, which have been handed down from generation to generation, can
never be overruled by a rule of the sacred law. Vasish*th*a XVI, 4;
Gautama XI, 23.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[15:41](sbe3305.htm#fr_46) 'The visible path'
means either ratiocination founded on <span id="page_16">p. 16</span>
internal or circumstantial evidence, or it may mean a sound decision. A.
Gautama XI, 24.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[16:42](sbe3305.htm#fr_47) 'Justice has been
stated (in 41) to be difficult to attain, because a man may be suspected
to be a thief merely on account of stolen chattels being found amongst
his property. Thus the great sage Mâ*nd*avya even was reproached with
theft by an injudicious king, because, faithful to his vow of silence,
he did not make a reply when he was charged with theft. Therefore it is
necessary to adhibit great care in discerning righteous men from
evil-doers.' A. The history of Mâ*nd*avya is related in the Mahâbhârata
I, 4306 foll. A gang of robbers (Dasyus) being pursued by a guard,
dropped their booty in the habitation of Mâ*nd*avya the ascetic, and hid
themselves in his hermitage. Soon after, their pursuers arrived, and
asked Mâ*nd*avya in which direction the robbers had proceeded. The saint
made no reply, whereupon the guard took to searching the hermitage, in
which they discovered both the robbers and the stolen chattels. The
thing looking suspicious, they conducted both the saint and the robbers
before the tribunal of the king, who ordered the saint to be tied to a
stake. However, though tied to the stake and left without food, the
saint remained alive. After some time, the king ordered him to be
released, and asked his forgiveness for the ill-usage offered to him.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[16:43](sbe3305.htm#fr_48) 'In the case of a
woman,' i.e. if the lawsuit has been instituted by a wife or daughter;
or if it has been decided by a woman. 'At night,' as the night is the
proper time for sleeping, and not the proper time for attending to
judicial business; for it is obviously impossible to try a cause at
night. 'Outside of the village,' means 'in the wood.' A lawsuit, when
decided in one of these places (or special circumstances), is not
finally decided and settled; the cause has therefore to be tried anew.
Such is the meaning of this rule. A.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[17:44](sbe3305.htm#fr_49) Owing to the
recondite nature of lawsuits, and on account of the weakness of men's
memory, which renders them unable to remember distinctly any event that
has occurred long ago, the defendant in a lawsuit must be allowed
sufficient time to prepare his answer. A. Read *rin*âdishu in the text.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[17:45](sbe3305.htm#fr_50) 45, 46. The first
rule constitutes an exception to the preceding one. In the cases here
mentioned the answer should be tendered at once. A. Gautama XIII, 40,
41; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 12, 16.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[17:48](sbe3305.htm#fr_51) Local arrest is in
this form: 'If you move from this place, the king will arrest you.'
Temporary arrest is in this form: 'You must not leave this house for a
certain period.' Inhibition from travelling consists of a prohibition
not to undertake a journey on which one has determined. Arrest relating
to karman is in this form: 'You must not persevere in performing this or
that karman (religious ceremony).' Thus according to A. and
Vîramitrodaya, p. 55. When placed under arrest of any one out of these
four kinds, the person arrested must not break the arrest. Otherwise he
will become guilty of an offence against the king. A.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[18:49](sbe3305.htm#fr_52) Kântâra, 'a fearful
forest,' 'a bad country,' a dangerous place, 'a great calamity,' a
public disaster or a heavy affliction and the like. One who breaks an
arrest which has been put on him in one of the places or on one of the
occasions hitherto mentioned, does not commit a criminal offence by
doing so. A.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[18:50](sbe3305.htm#fr_53) A. observes that this
verse, though it ought not to come in here, has been inserted from the
original work (of Nârada?). It means, according to him, that both those
lawsuits which have been decided by the king in person, and those which
have been decided by friends, connections, or relatives, shall be tried
anew, in case the double amount of the fine ordained has been paid.
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 305. Perhaps the word '(or)' had better be omitted.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[18:51](sbe3305.htm#fr_54) 'A proper time' means
'a suitable time,' i.e. any other time besides the various occasions
mentioned in paragraph 45. 'One who arrests improperly,' is either one
who arrests on one of the prohibited occasions, or one who arrests
without sufficient reason. A.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[18:52](sbe3305.htm#fr_55) Artizans, i.e. manual
labourers, while engaged in their work. A.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[19:53](sbe3305.htm#fr_56) 53, 54. 'One who has
not yet arrived at years of discretion,' i.e. a boy. 'A messenger,'
whether employed in the affairs of the king, or by a private person.
'One about to give alms,' at one of the 'Parvan' days (the days of the
four changes of the moon). 'One fulfilling a vow,' performing a special
religious observance. 'One harassed by difficulties,' i.e. one who has
been befallen, at the time being, by a calamity from the king or from
fate. All persons in any such situation must not be arrested. A.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[19:55](sbe3305.htm#fr_57) The defendant, after
having been accused by the plaintiff, must not proffer a counter plaint
against the plaintiff, without having previously cleared himself of the
charge raised against himself, because two different causes cannot be
tried at one and the same time. Neither must a new plaint be lodged
against one who has already been impeached by another, because one
already hit must not be hit again. If a deer has been first hit by one
huntsman, and is again hit by another hunter, the effort of the latter
is to no purpose. The first huntsman may justly claim the deer, and not
the second. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 9.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[19:56](sbe3305.htm#fr_58) 'He must not alter
the charge,' as e.g. by claiming a larger or a smaller sum afterwards
than he had done before. If e.g. after <span id="page_20">p. 20</span>
having first claimed, as being his due, a sum amounting to 20
Gadyâ*n*akas of gold, he says afterwards: This man has to give 50
drammas (drachmas) to my son, it is called 'receding from one's first
claim and proffering another claim.' A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 9.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[20:58](sbe3305.htm#fr_59) Delaying one's answer
under false pretences is e.g. if a man says, 'I am unwell just now,' or
'I am unclean just now. I make no answer.' Likewise, if a man, after
having been asked by the judges, does not speak, or if having made a
statement previously he revokes it; by such signs as these a man may be
known to have lost his cause. A.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[20:59](sbe3305.htm#fr_60) He who, after having
been summoned by the king, makes off; or who, having decamped and having
been seized with difficulty by the king's officers, does not make any
reply to the questions put to him, shall be fined by the king, because
he loses his suit. A. Manu VIII, 55, 56; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 16.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[20:60](sbe3305.htm#fr_61) If, being questioned
by the judges, he does not uphold, i.e. maintain, a statement previously
made by himself. A. The commentators of Manu, in commenting on an
analogous passage of the Code of Manu (VIII, 54), give the following
example. A man has made a certain statement regarding the money in
dispute. The judge asks him afterwards, 'Why did you tender or accept
the money at night?' The man thereupon does not abide by his own former
statement. (See Jolly, translation of the eighth chapter of <span
id="page_21">p. 21</span> the Code of Manu.) 'He who, after having
answered a question in the negative previously, makes an opposite
statement afterwards.' The meaning is as follows: He is cast, if, having
been interrogated by the judges, 'Can you adduce any witnesses or
documents?' he replies at first by saying 'I have none,' and goes on to
say 'I have witnesses and documents.' A. The reading seems faulty. See
Manu.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[21:61](sbe3305.htm#fr_62) If a man says he has
documents or witnesses, and the judges, having heard this, say to him,
'If you have witnesses, show them,' i.e. exhibit them; if thereupon he
does not adduce them, he loses his suit. A. Manu VIII, 57.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[21:62](sbe3305.htm#fr_63) 'This wicked debtor
owes me money. He declines to restore it, though I can prove his
obligation to pay me by witnesses and documentary evidence. Therefore I
must cite him before the tribunal of the king.' If the claimant says so
and does not produce evidence at the time when he proffers his claim,
but produces it afterwards, it does not make evidence. If, however, a
statement of this kind had been previously made, and the claimant, owing
to some unfortunate accident, or to forgetfulness, &c., has merely
failed to repeat it at the third stage of the trial (i.e. during the
judicial inquiry), it may be renewed, and shall be examined by the
judges, although the case had already been decided, and sureties been
given and taken. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 20.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[22:64](sbe3305.htm#fr_64) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 19.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[22:65](sbe3305.htm#fr_65) A lawsuit is
'decided' at the time when the judges, after having come to a unanimous
agreement about the verdict to be passed on the plaintiff and defendant,
give them a written record of their respective victory and defeat. The
'punishment has been declared' when the judges, after passing the
verdict, dictate a certain punishment, in accordance with the
comparative heaviness or lightness of the offence committed. In both
cases, if a man considers himself to have lost his cause through an
unjust sentence, he may have the cause tried anew, if he pledges himself
to pay twice the amount of the fine to the king's judge. A.
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 305.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[22:66](sbe3305.htm#fr_66) 'Where an unjust
sentence has been passed, the blame attaches to the assessors of the
court. Therefore they have to pay that fine.' A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 4.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[22:67](sbe3305.htm#fr_67) 'Wrath' is when he
bears him an old grudge. 'Ignorance' means folly. That is done 'through
covetousness' which is done in consideration of a bribe. 'He who passes
an unjust sentence,' i.e. who says what is opposed to justice. Such an
assessor has to be considered as 'no assessor of the court,' i.e. he is
unworthy to sit in the court. A.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[23:68](sbe3305.htm#fr_68) The two following
paragraphs show what is meant by 'the diversity of men's minds.' A.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[23:72](sbe3305.htm#fr_69) As the sky has the
appearance of a level plain like the earth, yet there is nothing like
earth about it; and as there is no fire in the fire-fly, although it
sparks like fire; even so the utterances of men are often untrue, though
they may have the appearance of true statements. Therefore it is
necessary to examine strictly even what a man professes to have seen
with his own eyes. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Plaint](sbe3306)
