[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3358)  [Next](sbe3360) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

# B*RI*HASPATI.

### I. CONSTITUTION OF A COURT OF JUSTICE.

1. <span id="fr_850"></span>[1](#fn_849) In former ages men were
strictly virtuous and devoid of mischievous propensities. Now that
avarice and malice have taken possession of them, judicial proceedings
have been established.

2. <span id="fr_851"></span>[2](#fn_850) A judicial assembly is declared
to be of four sorts: stationary, not stationary, furnished with (the
king's) signet-ring, and directed (by the king). The judges are of as
many sorts.

3\. A stationary (court meets) in a town or village; one not stationary
is called movable; one furnished with (the king's) signet-ring is
superintended by the chief judge; one directed (by the king) is held in
the king's presence.

4. <span id="fr_852"></span>[4](#fn_851) The king, his chosen
representative (the chief judge), the judges, the law (Sm*ri*ti), the
accountant and scribe, gold, fire, water, and the king's own officer are
ten members of legal procedure.

5\. A court of justice is composed of these ten members; and a judicial
assembly of this sort, in which the king examines causes attentively, is
comparable to an act of religion.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

6\. The office of these ten (members) is separately declared for each.
The chief judge decides causes; the king inflicts punishments; the
judges investigate the merits of the case.

7\. The law furnishes the decree, whether victory or defeat; gold and
fire serve the purpose of administering ordeals; water is required for
persons suffering from thirst or hunger.

8\. The accountant should compute the sum (in dispute); the scribe
should record the proceedings; the king's own officer should compel the
attendance of the defendant, assessors, and witnesses.

9\. And he should constantly keep both the plaintiff and defendant in
custody, if they have given no sureties. Of these members (of a court of
justice) the king is the head; the chief judge is the mouth;

10\. The judges are both arms; the law is both hands; the accountant and
the scribe are the legs; gold, fire, and water are the eyes and the
heart; and the king's own officer is the feet.

11. <span id="fr_853"></span>[11](#fn_852) That judicial assembly is
equal (in sanctity) to a sacrificial meeting in which there sit seven or
five or three Brahmans, who are acquainted with the world, with (the
contents of) the Veda, and with law.

12. <span id="fr_854"></span>[12](#fn_853) In a controversy he examines
the (plaint in) question and the answer; he speaks gently at first

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (prâg vadati).
Therefore he is called Prâ*d*vivâka (judge).

13. <span id="fr_855"></span>[13](#fn_854) Men qualified by the
performance of devotional acts, strictly veracious and virtuous, void of
wrath and covetousness, and familiar with (legal) lore, should be
appointed by the ruler as judges (or assessors of the court).

14. <span id="fr_856"></span>[14](#fn_855) Two persons thoroughly
familiar with grammar and vocabulary, skilled in (the art of)
computation, honest, and acquainted with various modes of writing,
should be appointed by the king as accountant and scribe (respectively).

15. <span id="fr_857"></span>[15](#fn_856) A veracious man, who pays
obedience to the judges, should be appointed (by the king) as his own
officer, to summon and to keep in custody the witnesses, plaintiff, and
defendant.

16\. The king should sit facing the east; the judges, facing the north;
the accountant, facing the west; and the scribe, facing the south.

17. <span id="fr_858"></span>[17](#fn_857) The king should cause gold,
fire, water, and codes of the sacred law to be placed in the midst of
them, also (other) holy and auspicious things.

18. <span id="fr_859"></span>[18](#fn_858) In the middle of his
fortress, he should build a house, with water and trees adjacent to it,
apart (from other buildings), and let him use as court of justice (a
room situated) on the eastern side of it, properly constituted and
facing the east,

19\. Furnished with garlands and with a throne,

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

supplied with grain, (decorated) with jewels, adorned with statues,
pictures, and images of deities, and (provided) with fire and water.

20. <span id="fr_860"></span>[20](#fn_859) Let the king try causes,
attended by three judges, after having entered the excellent judicial
assembly, in a sitting or standing posture.

21. <span id="fr_861"></span>[21](#fn_860) The king having risen early
in the morning and performed ablutions according to rule, and having
shown due honour to Gurus (persons entitled to respect), astronomers,
physicians, deities, Brahmans, and domestic priests,

22\. And having saluted the Gurus and the rest, should enter the
court-room, decorated with flowers, ornaments, and (fine) clothes, with
a cheerful countenance.

23. <span id="fr_862"></span>[23](#fn_861) Having entered the judicial
assembly in the forenoon, together with the seniors, ministers, and
attendants, he should try causes and should listen to (the expositions
of) the Purâ*n*as, codes of law, and rules of polity.

24. <span id="fr_863"></span>[24](#fn_862) Let the king or a member of a
twice-born caste officiating as chief judge try causes, acting on
principles of equity, and abiding by the opinion of the judges, and by
the doctrine of the sacred law.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

25. <span id="fr_864"></span>[25](#fn_863) For persons roaming the
forest, a court should be held in the forest; for warriors, in the camp;
and for merchants, in the caravan.

26. <span id="fr_865"></span>[26](#fn_864) Cultivators, artizans (such
as carpenters or others), artists, money-lenders, companies (of
tradesmen), dancers, persons wearing the token of a religious order
(such as Pâ*s*upatas), and robbers should adjust their disputes
according to the rules of their own profession.

27\. (The king) should cause the disputes of ascetics and of persons
versed in sorcery and witchcraft to be settled by persons familiar with
the three Vedas only, and not (decide them) himself, for fear of rousing
their resentment.

28. <span id="fr_866"></span>[28](#fn_865) Relatives, companies (of
artizans), assemblies (of co-habitants) and other persons duly
authorized by the king, should decide lawsuits among men, excepting
causes concerning violent crimes (sâhasa).

29\. (Meetings of) kindred, companies (of artizans), assemblies (of
co-habitants), and chief judges, are declared to be resorts for the
passing of a sentence, to whom he whose cause has been previously tried
may appeal in succession.

30\. When a cause has not been (duly) investigated by (meetings of)
kindred, it should be decided after due deliberation by companies (of
artizans); when it has not been (duly) examined by companies (of
artizans, it should be decided) by assemblies (of co-habitants); and
when it has not been (sufficiently) made out by such assemblies, (it
should be tried) by appointed (judges).

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

31\. Judges are superior in authority to (meetings of) kindred and the
rest; the chief judge is placed above them; and the king is superior to
all, because he passes just sentences.

32\. The insight of princes surpasses by far the understandings (of
other persons), in the decision of the highest, lowest, and middling
controversies.

33. <span id="fr_867"></span>[33](#fn_866) They who are ignorant of the
customs of the country, unbelievers, despisers of the sacred books,
insane, irate, avaricious, or troubled (by pain or illness) should not
be consulted in the decision of a cause.

34. <span id="fr_868"></span>[34](#fn_867) A Brahman is the root of the
tree of justice; the sovereign prince is its stem and branches; the
ministers are its leaves and blossoms; just government is its fruit.

35\. Renown and wealth are the sap of its fruit; a dignified station,
invincibility, esteem among men, and an eternal residence in paradise is
enjoying its fruit.

36\. Having recognised these advantages in (the pursuit of) justice, a
king should be equitable towards litigants, and should pass a just
sentence, discarding avarice and other (evil propensities).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_849"></span>[277:1](sbe3359.htm#fr_850) I, 1. Vîram. p. 5.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[277:2](sbe3359.htm#fr_851) 2-10. Sm*ri*ti*k*.

2, 3. Aparârka. pratish*th*itâpratish*th*itâ mudritâ *s*âsitâ tathâ \|
*k*aturvidhâ sabhâ proktâ sabhyâ*s* *k*aiva tathâvidhâ*h* \|\|
pratish*th*itâ pure grâme *k*alâ nâmâpratish*th*itâ \|
mudritâdhyakshasa*m*yutâ râ*g*ayuktâ *k*a *s*âsitâ \|\| The
Sm*ri*ti*k*andrikâ reads *s*âstritâ, 'governed by the science of law,'
for *s*âsitâ, 'directed.'

<span id="fn_851"></span>[277:4](sbe3359.htm#fr_852) 4-10. Vîram. pp.
41, 42.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[278:11](sbe3359.htm#fr_853) M. Macn. I, 1, 11.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[278:12](sbe3359.htm#fr_854) Vîram. p.37. If
the reading be correct, a double etymology of the term prâ*d*vivâka, 'a
judge,' is propounded in this text: (2) he who asks or examines
(p*rikkh*ati) and afterwards decides (vadati); (2) he who speaks gently
at first (prâg vadati). There is another reading, pravadati for prâg
vadati, under which the former etymology is the only one propounded in
this text. It is beyond doubt the true etymology.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[279:13](sbe3359.htm#fr_855) Aparârka.
sâdhukarmakriyâyuktâ*h* satyadharmaparâya*n*â*h* \| akrodhalobhâ*h*
*s*âstra*gñ*â*h* sabhyâ*h* kâryâ mahîbhu*g*â \|\|

<span id="fn_855"></span>[279:14](sbe3359.htm#fr_856) 14, 15. Vîram. p.
42.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[279:15](sbe3359.htm#fr_857) 15, 16. May. p. 4
(Mandlik).

<span id="fn_857"></span>[279:17](sbe3359.htm#fr_858) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
hira*n*yam agnim udaka*m* dharma*s*âstrâ*n*i *k*aiva hi \| tanmadhye
sthâpayed râ*g*â pu*n*yâni *k*a hitâni *k*a \|\|

<span id="fn_858"></span>[279:18](sbe3359.htm#fr_859) 18, 19. Vîram. p.
10. The epithet laksha*n*yâ*m*, 'properly constituted,' <span
id="page_280">p. 280</span>means 'constructed according to the rules of
architecture.' Vîram.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[280:20](sbe3359.htm#fr_860) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
râ*g*â kâryâ*n*i sa*m*pa*s*yet sabhyair eva tribhir v*ri*ta*h* \|
sabhâ*m* eva pravi*s*yâgryâm âsîna*h* sthita eva vâ \|\| Nearly
identical with Manu VIII, 10.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[280:21](sbe3359.htm#fr_861) 21, 22.
Sm*ri*ti*k*. prâtar utthâya n*ri*pati*h* *s*au*k*a*m* k*ri*tvâ
vidhânata*h* \| gurû*ñ* *g*yotirvido vaidyân devân viprân purohitân \|\|
yathârham etân sa*m*pû*g*ya sapushpâbhara*n*âmbara*h* \| abhivâdya
*k*agurvâdîn sumukha*h* pravi*s*et sabhâm \|\|

<span id="fn_861"></span>[280:23](sbe3359.htm#fr_862) May. p. 5.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[280:24](sbe3359.htm#fr_863) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
râ*g*â kâryâ*n*i sa*m*pa*s*yet prâ*d*vivâko<sup>ऽ</sup>thavâ dvi*g*a*h*
\| nyâyâ*ñg*âny agrata*h* k*ri*tvâ sabhya*s*âstramate sthita*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_863"></span>[281:25](sbe3359.htm#fr_864) May. p. 4.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[281:26](sbe3359.htm#fr_865) 26, 27. Vîram. p.
30.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[281:28](sbe3359.htm#fr_866) 28-32. Vîram. p.
40.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[282:33](sbe3359.htm#fr_867) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
de*s*â*k*ârânabhi*gñ*â ye nâstika*h* *s*âstravar*g*itâ*h* \|
unmattakruddhalubdhârtâ na prash*t*avyâ vinir*n*aye \|\|

<span id="fn_867"></span>[282:34](sbe3359.htm#fr_868) 34-36. Vîram. p.
14. Read bhogo<sup>ऽ</sup>tha grahapû*g*anam in 35; vivâdinâm \| tyaktvâ
lobhâdika*m* râ*g*â dharmya*m* in 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. General Rules of Procedure](sbe3360)
