[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3364)  [Next](sbe3366) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

### VII. WITNESSES.

1. <span id="fr_928"></span>[1](#fn_927) A subscribing witness, one
caused to be written, a secret witness, one who has been reminded, a
member of the family, a messenger, a spontaneous witness, an indirect
witness, a stranger who has accidentally witnessed the deed,

2. <span id="fr_929"></span>[2](#fn_928) The king, a chief judge, and
the (people of the) village: thus have the twelve kinds of witnesses
been declared. I am going to declare precisely in order their respective
characteristics.

3. <span id="fr_930"></span>[3](#fn_929) He is called a subscribing
witness who enters in a deed his own as well as his father's caste,
name, and so forth, and his place of residence.

4\. He is termed one caused to be written, who has been distinctly
entered in the deed, together with the details of the agreement, by the
plaintiff when writing a contract of loan or another (contract).

5\. He is called a secret witness who is made to listen to the speeches
of the debtor, standing concealed behind a wall, (and relates them) just
as they were spoken, (when the debtor tries to deny them.)

6. <span id="fr_931"></span>[6](#fn_930) He is called one reminded who,
after having been appointed and invited to be present at a transaction
concerning a loan, deposit, purchase, or the like, is repeatedly
reminded of it.

7\. He is designed as a family witness who is appointed by both parties
to witness a deed of partition, gift, or sale, being connected and on
good

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

terms with both parties, and acquainted with (the rules of) duty.

8\. He is denominated a messenger who is a respectable man, esteemed and
appointed by both parties, and has come near to listen to the speeches
of the plaintiff and defendant.

9\. He is a spontaneous witness who declares that he has witnessed the
transaction, after having approached the court of his own accord, while
a cause is being heard.

10\. That witness who communicates what he has heard to another man, at
a time when he is about to go abroad, or lying on his deathbed, should
be considered as an indirect witness.

11. <span id="fr_932"></span>[11](#fn_931) He also is called an indirect
witness who repeats, from his own hearing or from hearsay, the previous
statements of actual witnesses.

12\. He is called a secret witness to whom an affair has been entrusted
or communicated by both parties, or who happens to witness the
transaction.

13\. The king in person having heard the speeches of plaintiff and
defendant, may act as witness if both should quarrel with one another.

14\. If after the decision of a suit a fresh trial should take place,
the chief judge, together with the assessors, may act as a witness
there, but not in any other case.

15\. The (people of the) village may no doubt give testimony, even
without a special appointment, as to what has been anywhere spoiled or
damaged in the boundary line.

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

16. <span id="fr_933"></span>[16](#fn_932) There should be nine, seven,
five, four, or three witnesses; or two only, if they are learned
Brahmans, are proper (to be examined); but let him never examine a
single witness.

17\. Of subscribing and secret witnesses, there should be two (of each
sort); of spontaneous, reminded, family witnesses, and indirect
witnesses, there should be three, four, or five (of each sort).

18\. A single witness even may furnish valid proof, if he is a
messenger, an accountant, one who has accidentally witnessed the
transaction, or a king, or chief judge.

19. <span id="fr_934"></span>[19](#fn_933) (A witness) should be
exhorted by judges acquainted with law, by speeches extolling veracity
and denouncing falsehood.

20\. Whatever religious merit has been acquired by thee from the time of
thy birth to the time of thy death, all that will be lost by thy telling
a falsehood.

21\. An iniquitous judge, a false witness, and the slayer of a Brahman
are pronounced to be criminal in an equal degree; nor is a killer of an
embryo or a destroyer of wealth considered as a greater sinner than they
are.

22\. Knowing this, a witness should give evidence according to truth.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

23. <span id="fr_935"></span>[23](#fn_934) After putting off his shoes
and his turban, he should stretch out his right hand, and declare the
truth, after taking in his hands gold, cow-dung, or blades of sacred
grass.

24. <span id="fr_936"></span>[24](#fn_935) When witnesses summoned (in a
suit) are faulty, the opponent may expose them. But a litigant trying to
cast a blemish on faultless witnesses is liable to pay a fine to the
same amount (as the property in dispute).

25. <span id="fr_937"></span>[25](#fn_936) Whatever faults there may be
in a document or in witnesses, they should be exposed at the time of the
trial; those cannot be used as valid objections which are declared
afterwards.

26. <span id="fr_938"></span>[26](#fn_937) He whose documents or
witnesses are objected to in a suit, cannot gain his cause till he has
removed the objections raised against it.

27. <span id="fr_939"></span>[27](#fn_938) I will now state, according
to the rules of science, which men may be appointed as witnesses, and
which others should be avoided as being low wretches.

28\. Those may be witnesses who are in the habit of performing religious
ceremonies taught in the Vedas and Sm*ri*tis, free from covetousness and
malice, of respectable parentage, irreproachable, and zealous in
performing austerities, practising liberality, and exhibiting sympathy
(with all living creatures).

29. <span id="fr_940"></span>[29](#fn_939) The mother's father, the
father's brother, the

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

wife's brother and maternal uncle, a brother, a friend, and a son-in-law
are inadmissible witnesses in all disputes.

30. <span id="fr_941"></span>[30](#fn_940) Persons addicted to adultery
or to drinking, gamblers, those who calumniate everybody, the insane,
the suffering, violent persons, and unbelievers cannot act as witnesses.

31. <span id="fr_942"></span>[31](#fn_941) If a witness being summoned
does not make his appearance, without being ill, he should be made to
pay the debt and a fine, after the lapse of three fortnights.

32. <span id="fr_943"></span>[32](#fn_942) Where the contents of the
plaint have been fully corroborated by the witnesses, it is (valid)
testimony; in every other case (the plaintiff) will not succeed with his
claim.

33. <span id="fr_944"></span>[33](#fn_943) When nothing less (than what
has been declared in the plaint) is stated with regard to place, time,
age, caste, number, matter, and quantity, the cause should be considered
to have been proved.

34. <span id="fr_945"></span>[34](#fn_944) Let him preserve, even by
telling a lie, a Brahman who has once sinned through error and is in
peril of his life and oppressed by rogues or other (enemies).

35. <span id="fr_946"></span>[35](#fn_945) In a conflict between
witnesses, (the testimony of) the majority should be received; when the
number is equal (on both sides, the testimony of)

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

the more virtuous ones; when the virtuous (witnesses) are divided, (the
testimony of) those specially eminent for the performance of acts of
religion; when they are divided, (the testimony of) those endowed with a
superior memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_927"></span>[299:1](sbe3365.htm#fr_928) VII, 1, 2 a. May.
p. 23.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[299:2](sbe3365.htm#fr_929) 2 b-15. Vîram. pp.
544, 545.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[299:3](sbe3365.htm#fr_930) I read
*g*âtinâmâdi, with Sm*ri*ti*k*andrikâ.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[299:6](sbe3365.htm#fr_931) I read krayâdike,
with Sm*ri*ti*k*andrikâ.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[300:11](sbe3365.htm#fr_932) The reading
bhâshatâm in the Vîramitrodaya is a misprint for bhâshate.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[301:16](sbe3365.htm#fr_933) 16-18. May. p. 23.
The 'accountant' is a species of 'messenger.' Vîramitrodaya. Regarding
the 'witness who has accidentally witnessed the transaction,' see VII,
12.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[301:19](sbe3365.htm#fr_934) 19-22. *T*o*d*.
satyapra*s*a*m*sâva*k*anair an*ri*tasyâpavâdanai*h* \| sabhyai*h* sa
bodhanîyas tu dharma*s*âstrapravedibhi*h* \|\| â *g*anmata*s* *k*â
mara*n*ât suk*ri*ta*m* yadupâr*g*itam \| tat sarva*m* nâ*s*am âyâti
an*ri*tasyâbhi*s*a*m*sanât \|\| kû*t*asabhya*h* kû*t*asâkshî brahmahâ
*k*a samâ*h* sm*ri*tâ*h* \| bhrû*n*ahâ vittahâ *k*aishâ*m* nâdhika*h*
samudâh*ri*ta*h* \|\| eva*m* viditvâ tat sâkshî yathâbhûta*m* vadet
tata*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_934"></span>[302:23](sbe3365.htm#fr_935) Vîram. p. 172.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[302:24](sbe3365.htm#fr_936) May. p. 25. I read
arthî, for arthe, with Vîram.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[302:25](sbe3365.htm#fr_937) May. p. 26.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[302:26](sbe3365.htm#fr_938) May. p. 27.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[302:27](sbe3365.htm#fr_939) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
prash*t*avyâ*h* sâkshi*n*o ye tu var*g*yâ*s* *k*aiva narâdhama*h* \| tân
aha*m* kathayishyâmi sâ*m*prata*m* *s*âstra*k*oditân \|\|
*s*rautasmârtakriyâyuktâ lobhadveshavivar*g*itâ*h* \| kulînâ*h*
sâkshi*n*o<sup>ऽ</sup>nindyâs tapodânadayânvitâ*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_939"></span>[302:29](sbe3365.htm#fr_940) May. p. 25.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[303:30](sbe3365.htm#fr_941) Vîram. p. 160.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[303:31](sbe3365.htm#fr_942) Sm*ri*ti*k*. âhûto
yas tu nâga*kkh*et sâkshî rogavivar*g*ita*h* \| *rin*a*m* dama*m* *k*a
dâpya*h* syât tripakshât paratas tu sa*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_942"></span>[303:32](sbe3365.htm#fr_943) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
yatrâ*s*eshâ*h* prati*gñ*ârthâ*h* sâkshibhi*h* prativar*n*itâ*h* \|
sâkshya*m* syâd anyathâ tu ta*m* sâdhyârtha*m* na samâpnuyât \|\|

<span id="fn_943"></span>[303:33](sbe3365.htm#fr_944) May. p. 29.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[303:34](sbe3365.htm#fr_945) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
sak*ri*t pramâdâparâdhivipra*m* vyâpadi pî*d*itam \| *s*a*t*âdibhir
vadhyamâna*m* rakshed uktvân*ri*tâny api \|\|

<span id="fn_945"></span>[303:35](sbe3365.htm#fr_946) *T*o*d*.
sâkshidvaidhe prabhûtâs tu grâhyâ*h* sâmye gu*n*âdhikâ*h* \|
gu*n*idvaidhe kriyâyuktâs tatsâmye sm*ri*timattarâ*h* \|\|

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Documents](sbe3366)
