[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3305)  [Next](sbe3307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### II. THE PLAINT.

1. <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) The claimant, after having
produced a pledge the value of which has been well ascertained, shall
cause the plaint to be written. (He must have been impelled) to proffer
his claim, by the nature of the claim, and must be intent on promoting
the victory of his cause.

\* 2. <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71) The defendant (creditor),
immediately after having become acquainted with the tenour of the
plaint, shall write down his answer, which must correspond to the tenour
of the plaint.

\* 3. <span id="fr_72"></span>[3](#fn_72) Or let him (the defendant)
deliver his answer on the next day, or three days, or seven days later.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The plaintiff no
doubt duly obtains his victory at once, when the trial has reached the
third stage (the examination of the evidence).

\* 4. <span id="fr_73"></span>[4](#fn_73) An answer is fourfold; a
denial, a confession, a special plea, and that which is based on a plea
of former judgment.

\* 5. A denial is fourfold (being couched in any one out of the four
forms hereafter mentioned). 'This is false,' or 'I do not know anything
about it,' or 'I was not present at the transaction,' or 'I was not in
existence at the time when this event took place.'

6. <span id="fr_74"></span>[6](#fn_74) A contradiction, the reverse, a
retort, and a friendly counsel; in one out of these four forms should
the answer be given, and it should be in conformity with the tenour of
the plaint.

\* 7. <span id="fr_75"></span>[7](#fn_75) Before the answer to the
plaint has been tendered by the defendant, the plaintiff may amend his
own statements as much as he desires.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

\* 8. <span id="fr_76"></span>[8](#fn_76) These are called the defects
of a plaint: (1) if it relates to a different subject; (2) if it is
unmeaning; (3) if the amount (of the sum claimed) has not been properly
stated; (4) if it is wanting in propriety; (5) if the writing is
deficient; (6) or redundant; (7) if it has been damaged.

9. <span id="fr_77"></span>[9](#fn_77) By whomsoever a claim is raised,
whatever and from whomsoever it may have been claimed: from that very
person must the claimant receive that very thing, and it must not be
(claimed) mutually, or (claimed) from a stranger. Thus 'a claim relating
to a different subject' may be of three kinds.

10. <span id="fr_78"></span>[10](#fn_78) Thy friend here has thought in
his mind, that I am his enemy. On account of this great intolerance I
have impeached thee here.

11. <span id="fr_79"></span>[11](#fn_79) If he omits to state the amount
of the thing (claimed), and forgets to aim at brevity(?): this fault of
a plaint is called omission of the amount (claimed), and it should be
avoided.

12\. Let him avoid improper statements in the plaint (e.g. an accusation
which is raised) by a plurality of persons against one single-handed; or

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (a cause which) is
opposed to (the interests of) the city or kingdom (in which he lives).

13\. A plaint in which a mere dot is omitted, or where a word or a
syllable has been obliterated, or where too little or too much has been
written, or which is absurd; such a plaint should be carefully avoided.

14\. He should (equally) avoid a plaint which has been destroyed or
damaged (by an accident), or which has been soiled by water, oil, or
other (liquids), even though the purport and meaning of the plaint be
quite plain.

\* 15. A plaint, though otherwise established, is not correct, if it is
contrary to established law and usage.

16\. A claim which is proffered in this form—'I gave this to him while
he was in a state of intoxication with fragrance (through a smell of
perfume)'—cannot succeed, because it is contrary to established usage.

\* 17. <span id="fr_80"></span>[17](#fn_80) Where different words are
(subsequently) inserted (in the plaint), and where the sense becomes
different (in consequence), there the judicial investigation becomes
confused, and the evidence itself is thrown into confusion.

\* 18. <span id="fr_81"></span>[18](#fn_81) When the claimant, in a
passion, and actuated

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

by one of the immoral motives, such as partiality, makes some special
statement, it shall at once be completely reduced to writing on a board
or other (writing material).

19\. Other statements than those (taken down at first)regarding the
plaintiff on a board or other (writing material) shall be removed, after
careful consideration, by persons versed in law, (when reporting on the
trial) for the information of the king's judge.

20. <span id="fr_82"></span>[20](#fn_82) Let such persons reduce to
writing the statements of each party, and whatever else has been written
on the board, together with the names of the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

witnesses, as well as those statements in which both parties concur.

21. <span id="fr_83"></span>[21](#fn_83) Additional statements of the
plaintiff (or defendant), which are not contained in the writings of
both parties, shall be (subsequently) entered into his (their)
declaration. They are called Pratyâkalita ('what is interposed').

\* 22. <span id="fr_84"></span>[22](#fn_84) If one deputed by the
claimant, or chosen as his representative by the defendant, speaks for
his client in court, the victory or defeat concerns the party (himself
and not the representative).

\* 23. <span id="fr_85"></span>[23](#fn_85) He deserves punishment who
speaks in behalf of another, without being either the brother, the
father, the son, or the appointed agent; and so does he who contradicts
himself at the trial.

\* 24. <span id="fr_86"></span>[24](#fn_86) He who forsakes his original
claim and produces a new one, loses his suit, because he confounds two
plaints with one another.

\* 25. <span id="fr_87"></span>[25](#fn_87) A verbal error does not
annul the claim in

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

actions of any kind. So if the case relates to cattle, or to a woman, or
to land, or to a debt, he is liable to punishment, but his claim is not
annulled.

26. <span id="fr_88"></span>[26](#fn_88) Where the defendant denies the
charge, the claimant has to prove his accusation, unless the denial
should have been in the form called Pratyavaskandana.

\* 27. <span id="fr_89"></span>[27](#fn_89) What the claimant has fully
declared word for word in the plaint that he must substantiate by
adducing evidence at the third stage of the trial.

\* 28. Proof is said to be of two kinds, human and divine. Human proof
consists of documentary and oral evidence. By divine proof is meant the
ordeal by balance and the other (modes of divine test).

29. <span id="fr_90"></span>[29](#fn_90) Where a transaction has taken
place by day,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

in a village or town, or in the presence of witnesses, divine test is
not applicable.

\* 30. <span id="fr_91"></span>[30](#fn_91) Divine test is applicable
(where the transaction has taken place) in a solitary forest, at night,
or in the interior of a house, and in cases of violence, or of denial of
a deposit.

31. <span id="fr_92"></span>[31](#fn_92) Where the defendant has evaded
the plaint by means of a special plea, it becomes incumbent on him to
prove his assertion, and he is placed in the position of a claimant.

\* 32. <span id="fr_93"></span>[32](#fn_93) One who takes to flight
after having received the summons; one who remains silent; one who is
convicted (of untruth) by (the deposition of) the witnesses; and one who
makes a confession himself: these are the four kinds of Avasannas
(losers of their suit).

\* 33. <span id="fr_94"></span>[33](#fn_94) One who alters his former
statements; one

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

who shuns the judicial investigation; one who does not make his
appearance (before the tribunal); one who makes no reply; and one who
absconds after receiving the summons: these five kinds of persons are
called Hîna (cast in their present suit).

34. <span id="fr_95"></span>[34](#fn_95) Precious stones, such as
rubies, golden ornaments, such as Dînâras, pearls, coral, shells, and
other (jewels and precious metals) shall be returned

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

to their owner, in case they turn out to be imitations only.

35. <span id="fr_96"></span>[35](#fn_96) If a man seizes perfumes, or
garlands—other than those which have been given to him—or ornaments, or
clothes, or shoes, which belong to the king, he deserves to be
corporally punished.

\* 36. <span id="fr_97"></span>[36](#fn_97) The price or value of a
commodity, wages, a deposit, a fine, what has been abandoned (by one and
found by another), what has been idly promised, and what has been won at
play; none of these articles yields interest, except under a special
agreement to the purpose.

37. <span id="fr_98"></span>[37](#fn_98) Men of the *S*ûdra caste, who
proffer a false accusation against a member of a twice-born (Aryan)
caste, shall have their tongue slit by (the officers of) the king, and
he shall cause them to be put on stakes.

38. <span id="fr_99"></span>[38](#fn_99) A royal edict, a (private)
document, a written

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

title, a grant, a pledge, a (promise reduced to) writing, a sale, or
purchase: one who brings a claim in regard to any one of these before
the king is known as defendant among those conversant with the rules (of
legal pleading).

\* 39. <span id="fr_100"></span>[39](#fn_100) Where the deposition of
the witnesses has been objected to, it becomes necessary first of all to
clear the witnesses from suspicion. When the witnesses themselves have
been cleared from suspicion, he may undertake to remove the doubts which
have been raised against their deposition.

\* 40. <span id="fr_101"></span>[40](#fn_101) When a man has lost his
cause through the dishonesty of witnesses or judges, the cause may be
tried anew. When, however, a man has been cast through his own conduct,
the trial cannot be renewed.

41. <span id="fr_102"></span>[41](#fn_102) One convicted by his own
confession, one

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

cast through his own conduct, and one whom the judicial investigation
has proved to be in the wrong: (these three) deserve to have their final
defeat declared at the hand of the judges.

42. <span id="fr_103"></span>[42](#fn_103) Whenever the (false)
assertions have been removed, the judges shall pass a decree. If they
pass a judgment, before the false statements have been removed, they
will cause evil in the next world and in this.

43. <span id="fr_104"></span>[43](#fn_104) One condemned by the judges
shall be punished by the king according to law. The victorious party
shall receive a document recording his victory, and couched in
appropriate language.

44. <span id="fr_105"></span>[44](#fn_105) This has been formerly
declared by the self-existent Being to be the mouth of a lawsuit. If the
mouth of a lawsuit is in order, the whole suit is in order, but not
otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[24:1](sbe3306.htm#fr_70) II, 1. The term
suni*sk*itabalâdhânas, which has been taken to mean 'after having
produced a pledge the value (or competence) of which has been well
ascertained,' is by no means clear, and admits of several different
interpretations. Thus it might be rendered, 'after having carefully
explored the nature of the wrong offered to him.' A. does not explain
this obscure term 'Impelled by the nature of his claim;' not by the
king, or by an enemy, but merely by his own cause. 'Intent on promoting
the victory of his cause,' i.e. absolutely determined not to embark in
any other undertaking, previous to having gained his cause. A.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[24:2](sbe3306.htm#fr_71) The creditor is called
plaintiff. The debtor is called defendant. The defendant, after having
heard the tenour of the plaint which has been tendered in writing by the
plaintiff, shall write an answer, i.e. make a reply, which corresponds
to the tenour of the plaint. A. Read pratyarthî in the text.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[24:3](sbe3306.htm#fr_72) The defendant may
tender his written answer on the next day, or three days, or seven days
after he has heard the accusation. The plaintiff, on the other hand, is
not allowed any time to reply to the statements of the defendant. His
victory (or defeat) is <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> decided at once,
by examining the proofs that have been adduced. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 7.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[25:4](sbe3306.htm#fr_73) A special plea is when
the defendant admits a fact, but qualifies or explains it so as not to
allow it to be matter of accusation. A plea of former judgment is when
the defendant pleads that the very same cause has been previously tried
at the tribunal of this or that judge, and that his adversary has been
cast. A.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[25:6](sbe3306.htm#fr_74) This paragraph, says
A., occurs in the original work, and has therefore been inserted in this
place, though it is difficult of explanation and a mere paraphrase of
the preceding paragraph. It has been rendered in accordance with his
interpretation. 'The reverse' means confession. 'A retort' means a
special plea. 'A friendly counsel' means plea of former judgment. A.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[25:7](sbe3306.htm#fr_75) The plaintiff may go
on altering and improving his written declaration, till the defendant
gives in his answer. When, however, the plaint has been answered, he is
no longer at liberty to make any further amendments. A.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[26:8](sbe3306.htm#fr_76) A. does not explain
the rather obscure terms occurring in several of the following
paragraphs. He confines himself to stating that they contain an accurate
definition of the 'seven defects of a plaint,' as enumerated in
paragraph 8, to which the defect described in paragraphs 55, 16 has to
be added as an eighth.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[26:9](sbe3306.htm#fr_77) The three kinds of 'a
claim relating to a different subject' appear, therefore, to be these:
where it proceeds from a different person than the creditor; where the
amount of the sum claimed has not been stated correctly; and where the
plaint has been addressed to a wrong person.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[26:10](sbe3306.htm#fr_78) This is an instance
of an unmeaning or frivolous accusation. A.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[26:11](sbe3306.htm#fr_79) The reading of this
paragraph is uncertain.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[27:17](sbe3306.htm#fr_80) A. illustrates this
rule by the following example. The claimant has claimed a certain sum.
At the time of the trial he names a larger sum than he did before. Thus
the judicial investigation becomes confused.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[27:18](sbe3306.htm#fr_81) If a man actuated by
one of the three passions, sexual desire, wrath, and covetousness,
mentions some special (important) circumstance at the trial, the scribe
shall enter it at once in writing on a board, or leaf, or Bhûr*g*a-bark,
or box, or wall. A. This rule seems to relate to incidental statements,
which escape one of the parties through inadvertency. Thus in the
well-known drama M*rikkh*aka*t*ikâ, the wicked prince Sa*m*sthânaka,
when informing the <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> judge that
Vasantasenâ has been murdered, adds, 'not by myself.' The judge pounces
upon the latter statement, suspicious as it looks, and causes the scribe
to put it down in writing on the floor. The prince, perceiving that he
has committed himself, effaces the writing with his foot. The custom of
writing the statements of the parties on the floor is repeatedly
referred to in the Indian dramas. From what B*ri*haspati says, it would
seem that in the time of this law-writer the statements of the parties
had first to be written on a board, and then on a leaf, after all the
required corrections had been entered. Nârada seems to refer to the same
custom in paragraphs 19 and 20.

According to Dr. Burnell, the boards referred to in the law-books must
have been a sort of black wooden boards. See Burnell, South Indian
Palæography, 2nd ed., p. 87.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[28:20](sbe3306.htm#fr_82) In translating this
paragraph, the obscurity of which is only surpassed by the preceding
paragraph, I have deviated from the interpretation proposed by the
commentator.

A. takes this paragraph as containing four independent clauses: 1. what
has been stated or admitted by both parties; 2. whatever else has been
written on the board; 3. the depositions of the witnesses; 4. what each
party has conceded to the other. These four things should be reduced to
writing by the persons entrusted with the judicial investigation.
'Whatever else has been written on the board,' i.e. whatever the
plaintiff amends or adds, while the plaint is being reduced to writing.
Such statements, as shown in the next paragraph, are called
Pratyâkalita.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[29:21](sbe3306.htm#fr_83) A. infers from the
use of the term 'both parties' that a Pratyâkalita statement may proceed
from the defendant as well as from the plaintiff, though the plaintiff
alone is specially mentioned. A. adds that this rule applies equally to
all those kinds of statements, which are mentioned in paragraph 20.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[29:22](sbe3306.htm#fr_84) This rule applies
equally where a party is prevented from appearing before the court by
illness, and where the party is not a good speaker, and has appointed an
agent or attorney for that reason. A.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[29:23](sbe3306.htm#fr_85) This prohibition
relates to those who, from love, anger, or avarice, meddle with the
affairs of strangers, and pretend to act in their behalf at court. A.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[29:24](sbe3306.htm#fr_86) If a claimant, on
finding himself unable to prove his claim at the trial, proffers a
different claim, he must be pronounced the losing party, on account of
the confusion caused by him. A.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[29:25](sbe3306.htm#fr_87) An erroneous
statement does not necessarily cause the defeat <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> of the plaintiff. This is particularly the case in one of the
following important actions: a case relating to a cow, female buffalo,
or other cattle; a case relating to a woman; a case relating to landed
property, i.e. a house, field, &c.; and a case relating to one of the
twenty-five subdivisions of the law of debt. In any case he is not
defeated, merely on account of an erroneous statement contained in the
suit. He does not lose the suit instituted by him, though he is liable
to punishment. A. The Mitâksharâ (p. 23) has a long gloss on this rule
of Nârada, from which it appears that the 'erroneous statements' here
referred to are statements made through inadvertency, and that this rule
applies to civil, as opposed to criminal actions. Read vâk*kh*ale in the
Sanskrit text.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[30:26](sbe3306.htm#fr_88) An answer in the form
called Pratyavaskandana is where the defendant admits the facts adduced
by the plaintiff, but explains them so as not to be matter of
accusation.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[30:27](sbe3306.htm#fr_89) The claimant must
prove, at the judicial investigation, whatever he has committed to
writing in the plaint. A.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[30:29](sbe3306.htm#fr_90) The divers kinds of
divine test will be declared below. In the case of all those
transactions which take place during day-time eye- and ear-witnesses are
present. Documentary evidence, likewise, is generally available in such
cases. Therefore, divine proof should not be resorted to. Where a
transaction is known to have <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> taken place
in the presence of witnesses, divine proof is also not applicable. A.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[31:30](sbe3306.htm#fr_91) In all the places and
occasions mentioned in this paragraph human proof is not applicable,
wherefore divine test has to be resorted to. A.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[31:31](sbe3306.htm#fr_92) Where the defendant
has recourse to the mode of defence called Pratyavaskandana, i.e. where
he admits the charge, but adduces a special circumstance to exonerate
himself, the plaint becomes purposeless. To the defendant, however,
belongs the onus probandi in regard to the special circumstance
mentioned by him. He is, therefore, reduced to the position of a
claimant, in that it is incumbent on him to prove his assertion at the
time of the judicial investigation (kriyâ). A.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[31:32](sbe3306.htm#fr_93) One who, though
summoned by the king's officers, absconds through fear of the accusation
brought against him; one who stands mute in the assembly when he is
asked to make his declaration; one who is cast by the depositions of the
witnesses; and one who confesses to be in the wrong himself: these four
persons are non-suited. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 16; Manu VIII, 55-58.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[31:33](sbe3306.htm#fr_94) Two out of the four
'losers of their suit,' who are referred <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>
to in the preceding paragraph, may be said to have lost their cause for
once and all, viz. one who is convicted of untruth by the deposition of
the witnesses, and one who confesses his wrong himself. The two others,
viz. one who remains silent and one who absconds, are liable to
punishment, but they do not entirely lose their suit, as their cause may
be tried anew. Similarly, the five persons mentioned in par. 33, though
non-suited in the case in hand, may have their cause tried anew. 'One
who alters his statements,' i.e. one who, from forgetfulness, says
something different from what he had stated before. 'One who shuns the
judicial investigation,' i.e. one who, from repugnance against judicial
investigation, throws the proceedings into confusion. 'One who does not
make his appearance before the tribunal,' i.e. on account of a calamity
which has befallen him through the king or through fate, &c. 'One who
makes no reply,' i.e. one who does not give in his answer at once, and
asks for delay to prepare it. 'One who absconds' from fear of an enemy.
A. This interpretation has evidently been called forth by a desire to
reconcile par. 33 with the preceding paragraph, as the persons called
Hîna are partly identical with those designed as Avasannas. It may be
doubted, however, whether par. 32 belongs to the original work of
Nârada, as the identical rule is elsewhere attributed to B*ri*haspati
(see Vîram., p. 102), and as it is certainly difficult to reconcile the
two paragraphs with one another.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[32:34](sbe3306.htm#fr_95) If the owner of the
articles mentioned in this rule sells them for genuine, and the
purchaser, putting belief in his statements, accepts them as such, and
pays for them, but finds out afterwards that they are not genuine, the
seller must take them back, and must give other articles in exchange for
them which are really valuable, or he must make good their value to the
purchaser. A. As for the meaning of the term Dînâra, which corresponds
to the Latin denarius, see the Introduction.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[33:35](sbe3306.htm#fr_96) One who, from pride,
seizes (or uses) one of the above articles, shall be corporally
punished, if they belong to the king. A. The reading of this paragraph
is quite uncertain.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[33:36](sbe3306.htm#fr_97) 'The price of a
commodity,' the price paid for a saleable commodity which has been sold.
'A deposit,' a trust. 'A fine,' an amercement which has been inflicted
by the king's judges. 'What has been abandoned,' what has been seized
after its dereliction (by the original owner). 'What has been idly
promised' to bards or other worthless persons.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[33:37](sbe3306.htm#fr_98) If the *S*ûdras, by
whom this crime has been committed, are punished by the king, he becomes
free from blame. Otherwise, the blame falls on him, as it is his duty to
reward the honest, and to punish evil-doers. A.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[33:38](sbe3306.htm#fr_99) The divers forms in
which a plaint is instituted in each of these several cases (excepting a
single case, a transaction of sale) are stated as follows by A.: '1.
This man has not taken notice of a certain royal edict. 2. This man has
(unduly) availed himself of a certain document relating to its owner. 3.
This man, by virtue of a certain written title, has appropriated a slave
girl belonging to <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> myself. 4. This man
raises the revenue of a certain village which has been granted to
myself. The grant relates to myself only. 5. This property has first
been pledged tome by the debtor. How can any one else enjoy it? 6. Why
does not this man deliver this chattel to me, which has been promised to
me in writing? 7. I have purchased this commodity from him, and paid for
it. He does not make the commodity over to me.'—Read â*gñ*â.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[34:39](sbe3306.htm#fr_100) Where the defendant
raises groundless objections against the trustworthiness of the
depositions of witnesses, he is liable to punishment, like one who shuns
the judicial investigation, and loses his suit in consequence. After the
witnesses have been cleared from suspicion, their statements have to be
examined in order to remove what looks suspicious in them. A.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[34:40](sbe3306.htm#fr_101) Those who have lost
their cause, either through the statements of their own witnesses, or
through the decision of the judges, may have their cause tried anew,
according to a rule previously laid down. If, however, a man has been
convicted by his own conduct, or if the witnesses adduced by him should
turn out to have been corrupted by him, the case cannot again be opened.
A.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[34:41](sbe3306.htm#fr_102) 1. One who pleads
guilty; 2. one convicted by his own <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>
conduct, as e.g. by adducing false witnesses or forged documents; 3. one
convicted by the witnesses: those three shall not be punished till they
have been condemned by the judges. A.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[35:42](sbe3306.htm#fr_103) When the time for
passing a decree has arrived, the judges shall carefully remove all mere
assertions of either party. Should they omit to do so, they would be in
danger of condemning an innocent man, and might produce evil in this
world by causing loss of money, and in the next world by barring the way
to paradise to themselves, as it is the duty of kings to restrain
evil-doers and to protect the righteous. A.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[35:43](sbe3306.htm#fr_104) According to
B*ri*haspati, the document of victory which has to be given to the
victorious party shall contain an accurate record of the plaint, of the
answer, and of the judicial investigation.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[35:44](sbe3306.htm#fr_105) The general rules
regarding judicial proceedings, which have been laid down in the
preceding section, are declared to be the mouth of a lawsuit, because
they are applicable to the trial of every suit. 'The self-existent
Being,' i.e. Brahman. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Courts of Justice](sbe3307)
