[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3339)  [Next](sbe3341) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# EIGHTH TITLE OF LAW.

##### NON-DELIVERY OF A SOLD CHATTEL.

\* 1. When merchandise has been sold for a (certain) price and is not
delivered to the purchaser, it is termed Non-delivery of a Sold Chattel,
a title of law.

\* 2. Property in this world is of two kinds, movable and immovable. All
that is termed merchandise in the laws regarding purchase and sale.

\* 3. <span id="fr_434"></span>[3](#fn_434) The rule regarding the gift
and receipt of

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

merchandise is declared sixfold by the learned: (what is sold) by tale,
by weight, by measure, according to work, according to its beauty, and
according to its splendour.

\* 4. <span id="fr_435"></span>[4](#fn_435) If a man sells property for
a certain price, and does not hand it over to the purchaser, he shall
have to pay its produce, if it is immovable, and the profits arising on
it, if it is movable property.

\* 5. <span id="fr_436"></span>[5](#fn_436) If there has been a fall in
the market value of the article in question (in the interval, the
purchaser) shall receive both the article itself, and together with it
the difference (in point of value). This law applies to those who are
inhabitants of the same place; but to those who travel abroad, the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

profit arising from (dealing in) foreign countries shall be made over
(as well).

\* 6. <span id="fr_437"></span>[6](#fn_437) If the article (sold) should
have been injured, or destroyed by fire, or carried off, the loss shall
be charged to the seller, because he did not deliver it after it had
been sold by him.

\* 7. When a man shows one thing, which is faultless (to the intending
purchaser), and (afterwards) delivers another thing to him, which has a
blemish, he shall be compelled to pay twice its value (to the
purchaser), and an equal amount as a fine.

\* 8. <span id="fr_438"></span>[8](#fn_438) So when a man sells
something to one person, and (afterwards) delivers it to another person,
he shall be compelled to pay twice its value (to the purchaser), and a
fine to the king.

\* 9. <span id="fr_439"></span>[9](#fn_439) When a purchaser does not
accept an article purchased by himself, which is delivered to him (by
the vendor), the vendor commits no wrong by selling it to a different
person.

\* 10. <span id="fr_440"></span>[10](#fn_440) Thus has the rule been
declared with regard

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

to that merchandise for which the price has been tendered. When the
price has not been tendered, there is no offence to be imputed to the
vendor, except in the case of a special agreement.

\* 11. It is for the sake of gain that merchants are in the habit of
buying and selling merchandise of every sort. That gain is, in
proportion to the price, either great or the reverse.

\* 12. Therefore shall merchants fix a just price for their merchandise,
according to the locality and season, and let them refrain from
dishonest dealings. Thus (by adhering to these principles) traffic
becomes an honest profession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_434"></span>[146:3](sbe3340.htm#fr_434) VIII, 3. 'Gift'
means sale. 'Receipt' means purchase. What <span id="page_147">p.
147</span> is counted before selling it is said to be sold 'by tale.'
Betel-nuts may be mentioned as an instance. 'What is sold by weight,'
such as gold or sandal-wood and the like substances, which are weighed
on a pair of scales. 'What is sold by measure,' such as rice or the
like. 'By work,' such as animals giving milk or used for draught or
burden. 'According to its beauty,' something handsome, as e.g. a
handsome prostitute. 'According to its splendour,' or lustre, as e.g.
rubies. Vîramitrodaya, p. 437. A similar exposition is delivered in the
Ratnâkara, as quoted in Colebrooke's Digest, III, 3, 3.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[147:4](sbe3340.htm#fr_435) 'The profits
arising on it,' such as e.g. the milk of a cow. Vîramitrodaya, p. 437.
The Vivâda*k*intâma*n*i (p. 55) and the Ratnâkara, as quoted in
Colebrooke's Digest (III, 3, 18), take the term kriyâphalam as a Dvandva
compound, denoting 'the work, such as the carrying of burdens and the
like, and the profits, such as milk and the like.' Vish*n*u V, 127;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 254.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[147:5](sbe3340.htm#fr_436) The previous
paragraph contains the rule for those cases where the value of the
property has increased after its sale. The present rule refers to. those
cases where the value of the property has diminished after the sale.
Vîramitrodaya, p. 437. Those who travel abroad, i.e. who are in the
habit of visiting other countries (for trading purposes), may claim the
profit which might have accrued to them from travelling abroad.
Vivâda*k*intâma*n*i, pp. 55, 56. Vish*n*u V, 129; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 254.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[148:6](sbe3340.htm#fr_437) According to
*G*agannâtha, this rule has reference to those cases only where the
purchaser has not formally asked for the delivery of the property
purchased by himself. He infers from a text of Yâ*gñ*avalkya that after
a demand the loss shall fall on the vendor, even though the property was
injured in one of the modes mentioned by that authority, i.e. by force
majeure. See Colebrooke's Digest, III, 3, 27. It is quite doubtful,
however, whether the compiler of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti had this
distinction in view. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 256.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[148:8](sbe3340.htm#fr_438) 8, 9. Both he who
shows unblemished goods, and sells blemished goods afterwards, and he
who sells property to one man and afterwards sells the same property to
another man, though the first sale has not been rescinded by the
purchaser, shall pay twice the value of the property sold as a fine.
Vîramitrodaya, p. 440. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 257.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[148:9](sbe3340.htm#fr_439) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
255.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[148:10](sbe3340.htm#fr_440) Consequently,
where there is no agreement as to the time of <span id="page_149">p.
149</span> delivery, the vendor commits no wrong by retaining a
commodity sold, on purpose to obtain payment. Thus according to the
gloss in Colebrooke's Digest, III, 3, 20. The Vîramitrodaya (p. 441) has
a slightly different explanation. 'Where the price for a sold chattel
has not been paid, and the purchase concluded through a verbal
engagement merely, there is no offence whether it be ratified or not,
unless there should be an agreement in this form, "This purchase cannot
be rescinded."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ninth Title of Law. Rescission of Purchase](sbe3341)
