[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3371)  [Next](sbe3373) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIV. CONCERNS OF A PARTNERSHIP.

1. <span id="fr_1085"></span>[1](#fn_1084) Trade or other occupations
should not be carried on by prudent men jointly with incompetent or lazy
persons, or with such as are afflicted by an illness, ill-fated, or
destitute.

2\. A man should carry on business jointly with persons of noble
parentage, clever, active, intelligent, familiar with coins, skilled in
revenue and expenditure, honest, and enterprising.

3. <span id="fr_1086"></span>[3](#fn_1085) As an equal, smaller, or
larger share (of the

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

joint stock) has been contributed by a partner, in the same proportion
shall he defray charges, perform labour, and obtain profit.

4. <span id="fr_1087"></span>[4](#fn_1086) Of those who lend (jointly)
gold, grain, liquids and condiments, or the like, the gain shall be
equal to their respective shares (of the joint expenditure), whether
equal, more, or less.

5. <span id="fr_1088"></span>[5](#fn_1087) Whatever property one partner
may give (or lend), authorized by many, or whatever contract he may
cause to be executed, all that is (considered as having been) done by
all.

6\. They are themselves pronounced to be arbitrators and witnesses for
one another in doubtful cases, and when a fraudulent act has been
discovered, unless a (previous) feud should exist between them.

7\. When any one among them is found out to have practised deceit in a
purchase or sale, he must be cleared by an oath (or ordeal); such is the
rule in all disputes (of this sort).

8. <span id="fr_1089"></span>[8](#fn_1088) When a loss or diminution has
occurred through fate or the king, it is ordained that it should be
borne by all (partners) in proportion to their respective shares.

9. <span id="fr_1090"></span>[9](#fn_1089) When (a single partner
acting) without the assent (of the other partners) or against their
express instructions injures (their joint property)

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

through his negligence, he must by himself give a compensation to all
his partners.

10. <span id="fr_1091"></span>[10](#fn_1090) That (partner), on the
other hand, who by his own efforts preserves (the common stock) from a
danger apprehended through fate or the king, shall be allowed a tenth
part of it (as a reward), the remainder being distributed among the
other (partners), according to their shares (in the stock).

11. <span id="fr_1092"></span>[11](#fn_1091) Should any such partner in
trade happen to die through want of proper care, his goods must be shown
(and delivered) to officers appointed by the king.

12\. And when any one comes forward claiming that man's property as heir
(to the deceased partner), he shall prove his right to it by (the
evidence of) other men, and then let him take it.

13. <span id="fr_1093"></span>[13](#fn_1092) The king shall take a
sixth, a ninth, and a twelfth part respectively from the property of a
*S*ûdra, Vai*s*ya, and Kshatriya; and a twentieth from the property of a
Brahman.

14\. But after the lapse of three years, if no owner should come forward
by any means, the king shall take that property; the wealth of a Brahman
he shall bestow on (other) Brahmans.

15. <span id="fr_1094"></span>[15](#fn_1093) So among (several) persons
jointly performing a ceremony, if any one should meet with an accident,
his (part of) the ceremony shall be performed by a kinsman of his, or by
all his associates (in work).

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

16. <span id="fr_1095"></span>[16](#fn_1094) They (the officiating
priests) are pronounced to be threefold; coming (of their own accord),
hereditary in the family, and appointed by (the sacrificer) himself;
their business should be performed by them accordingly.

17. <span id="fr_1096"></span>[17](#fn_1095) To a kinsman, relative, or
friend one may lend money with a pledge (only); a loan to others must be
guaranteed by a surety, or there must be a written contract or
witnesses.

18. <span id="fr_1097"></span>[18](#fn_1096) Gold or silver may be lent
according to one's own choice; liquids and condiments, and grain, for a
specified period only; it is by local custom that both the loan and its
recovery should be regulated.

19\. That, however, which has been lent by several persons in common,
must be recovered by them jointly; any (such lender) who fails to demand
(the loan together with his partners) shall forfeit interest.

20. <span id="fr_1098"></span>[20](#fn_1097) The law regarding loans
has-been declared before, (therefore) it is referred to in an abridged
form only in the present chapter. Listen to the legal rules regarding
cultivators of the soil and other (associates in work), which are
declared as follows.

21\. Tillage should be undertaken by a sensible

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

man jointly with those who are his equals in point of cattle, workmen,
seeds, and the like, as well as implements of husbandry.

22\. They should refrain anxiously from cultivating an enclosed
pasture-ground, land adjacent to a town, or to the king's highway,
barren soil, and ground infested by mice.

23\. That man will enjoy produce who sows fertile land, which has many
holes and is wet, capable of irrigation, surrounded by fields on all
sides, and cultivated in due season.

24\. A sensible cultivator must not admit cattle which is lean, very
old, tiny, diseased, apt to run away, blind of one eye, or lame.

25\. When by the deficiency of one (partner) as to cattle or seeds a
loss happens in (the produce of) the field, it must be made good by him
to all the husbandmen.

26\. This primeval set of rules has been declared for cultivators of the
soil.

27. <span id="fr_1099"></span>[27](#fn_1098) One able to work up gold,
silver, thread, wood, stone, or leather, and acquainted with the
articles to be manufactured (with such materials), is called *S*ilpin
(an artizan or artist) by the wise.

28\. When goldsmiths or other (artists) practise their art jointly, they
shall share the profits in due proportion, corresponding to the nature
of their work.

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

29. <span id="fr_1100"></span>[29](#fn_1099) The headman among a number
of workmen jointly building a house or temple, or digging a pool or
making articles of leather, is entitled to a double share (of the
remuneration).

30. <span id="fr_1101"></span>[30](#fn_1100) The same rule has been
declared by virtuous men for musicians; he who knows how to beat the
time shall take a share and a half, but the singers shall take equal
shares.

31. <span id="fr_1102"></span>[31](#fn_1101) When anything has been
brought from a hostile country by freebooters, with the permission of
their lord, they shall give a sixth part to the king and share (the
remainder) in due proportion.

32\. Four shares shall be awarded to their chief; he who is (specially)
valiant shall receive three shares; one (particularly) able shall take
two; and the remaining associates shall share alike.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[336:1](sbe3372.htm#fr_1085) XIV, 1, 2. Ratn.
p. 111; Col. Dig. II, 3, 2; Vîram. pp. 383, 384.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[336:3](sbe3372.htm#fr_1086) Ratn. p. 112;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 5.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[337:4](sbe3372.htm#fr_1087) Ratn. p. 123;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 45.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[337:5](sbe3372.htm#fr_1088) 5-7. Ratn. pp.
123, 113; Col. Dig. II, 3, 45, 9, 10; May. p. 121; Vîram. p. 385.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[337:8](sbe3372.htm#fr_1089) Ratn. p. 113;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 11. 'A loss,' destruction of the principal;
'diminution,' loss of profits. Ratn.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[337:9](sbe3372.htm#fr_1090) Ratn. p. 113;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 12; Viv. p. 61; Vîram. p. 385.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[338:10](sbe3372.htm#fr_1091) Ratn. p. 114;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 15; Viv. p. 61; Vîram. p. 386.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[338:11](sbe3372.htm#fr_1092) 11, 12. Ratn. p.
116; Col. Dig. II, 3, 21; Viv. p. 63.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[338:13](sbe3372.htm#fr_1093) 13, 14. Ratn. p.
116; Col. Dig. II, 3, 22; Viv. p. 64.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[338:15](sbe3372.htm#fr_1094) Ratn. p. 117;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 29; Viv. p. 65. 'A ceremony,' such as a sacrifice.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[339:16](sbe3372.htm#fr_1095) Ratn. p. 120;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 44. The analogous text of Nârada shows that officiating
priests are the persons intended by this rule.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[339:17](sbe3372.htm#fr_1096) 17-26. Ratn. pp.
123, 124; Col. Dig. II, 3, 47-51.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[339:18](sbe3372.htm#fr_1097) In a loan of
gold, a definite period for its return need not he specified; but for
liquids, &c. the stipulation of a fixed term is necessary. Ratn.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[339:20](sbe3372.htm#fr_1098) 'Declared
before,' i.e. in Chapter XI. All the rules declared in that chapter are
equally applicable to loans made by an association.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[340:27](sbe3372.htm#fr_1099) 27, 28. Ratn. p.
124; Col. Dig. II, 3, 52; Viv. p. 70; Vîram. p. 396. Some compilations
exhibit the readings kupya, 'base metals,' for rûpya, 'silver;' pattra,
'leaves,' for sûtra, 'thread;' tattatkalâbhi*gñ*a*h*, 'acquainted with
the minute particles of these materials,' for *k*a phalâbhi*gñ*a*h*,
'and acquainted with the articles to be manufactured.'

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[341:29](sbe3372.htm#fr_1100) Ratn. p. 125;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 54; May. p. 121; Viv. p. 70; Vîram. p. 390. The last
two works read vâpi for vâpî, and under this reading the clause 'or
digging a pool ' would have to be omitted. The Mayûkha reads dhârmika,
'sacred articles,' for *k*ârmika, 'articles made of leather.'

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[341:30](sbe3372.htm#fr_1101) Ratn. p. 125;
Col. Dig. II, 3, 55; Viv. p. 71; Vîram. p. 391; May. p. 121.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[341:31](sbe3372.htm#fr_1102) 31, 32. Ratn. p.
125; Col. Dig. II, 3, 56; Viv. p. 71; Vîram. p. 391. 'Their chief,' i.e.
one who exerts mind and body. Ratn., Viv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. Resumption of Gifts](sbe3373)
