[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3346)  [Next](sbe3348) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

# FIFTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH TITLES OF LAW.

##### ABUSE AND ASSAULT.

\* 1. <span id="fr_622"></span>[1](#fn_622) Abusive speeches, couched in
offensive and violent terms, regarding the native country, caste,
family, and so forth (of a man), are termed Abuse, (a title of law.)

\* 2. It is divided into three species, called respectively Nish*th*ura,
A*s*lîla, and Tîvra. The punishment for each increases in severity
according as the insult is of a more (or less) serious nature.

\* 3. <span id="fr_623"></span>[3](#fn_623) Abuse combined with
reproaches has to be regarded as Nish*th*ura; abuse couched in insulting
language is A*s*lîla; charging one with an offence causing expulsion
from caste is called Tîvra by the learned.

\* 4. Hurting the limbs of another person with a hand, foot, weapon or
otherwise, or defiling him

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

with ashes or other (impure substances), is termed Assault.

\* 5. There are three species of that also, as it may be either light,
or of a middling sort, or heavy, according as it consists in the raising
(of a hand or weapon for the purpose of striking a blow), or in an
unexpected attack, or in striking a wound.

\* 6. <span id="fr_624"></span>[6](#fn_624) Stealing articles of small,
middling, or superior value, is called the three kinds of Sâhasa; there
the thorny weeds (sinners) should be extirpated.

\* 7. <span id="fr_625"></span>[7](#fn_625) In both kinds (of insult)
five cases are distinguished, when the respective innocence or guilt of
the two parties has to be established.

\* 8. <span id="fr_626"></span>[8](#fn_626) When two parties have been
guilty of insult, and both have commenced to quarrel at the same time,
they shall suffer the same punishment, in case that no difference (in
their respective culpability) becomes apparent.

\* 9. He who is the first to offer an insult is decidedly criminal; he
who returns the insult is likewise culpable; but the one who began shall
suffer the heavier punishment (of the two).

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

\* 10. When both parties are implicated equally, he of the two shall
receive punishment who follows up his attack, whether he was
(originally) the aggressor or the defendant.

\* 11. <span id="fr_627"></span>[11](#fn_627) If a *S*vapâka, Meda,
*K*a*nd*âla, cripple, one who gains his substance by killing (animals),
an elephant-driver, one deprived of his caste for nonperformance of the
ceremony of initiation, a slave, or one who treats a Guru or spiritual
teacher with disregard,

\* 12. <span id="fr_628"></span>[12](#fn_628) Should offend a superior,
he shall be punished by whipping him on the spot. Nor do the sages
regard bodily injury done to a man of this stamp as (an offence equal
to) theft.

\* 13. Should any such low person, abhorred by men, insult another man
(his superior), that man himself shall punish him. The king has nothing
to do with the penalty (to be inflicted on him).

\* 14. For these people are the refuse of human society, and their
property is (likewise) impure. The king also is at liberty to whip them,
but he must not amerce them with a fine.

15. <span id="fr_629"></span>[15](#fn_629) A Kshatriya who reviles a
Brahman must

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

pay one hundred (Pa*n*as) as a fine. A Vai*s*ya (must pay) one and a
half hundred, or two hundred. A *S*ûdra deserves corporal punishment.

16\. A Brahman shall be fined fifty (Pa*n*as) for calumniating a
Kshatriya; in the case of a Vai*s*ya, the fine shall be half of fifty
(i.e. twenty-five); in the case of a *S*ûdra, (it shall amount to)
twelve (Pa*n*as).

17. <span id="fr_630"></span>[17](#fn_630) When a twice-born man offends
against a member of his own caste, (he shall pay) twelve (Pa*n*as as a
fine). When he utters calumnies which ought never to be uttered, the
fine shall be twice as high.

18. <span id="fr_631"></span>[18](#fn_631) Even he who in accordance
with fact (contemptuously) calls another man one-eyed, lame, or the like
(names), shall be fined by the king not less than one Kârshâpa*n*a.

19\. One must not tax with his offence a man who has done penance
according to law, or who has received due punishment from the king. By
transgressing this rule one becomes liable to punishment.

20\. Two persons, a Brahman and a king, are declared to be exempt from
censure and corporal punishment in this world; for these two sustain the
visible world.

\* 21. One who calls an outcast an outcast, or a thief a thief, is
equally criminal with those whom he taxes (with their offence). (If he
reproaches them) without reason, he is twice as guilty as they are.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

22. <span id="fr_632"></span>[22](#fn_632) A once-born man (or *S*ûdra),
who insults members of a twice-born caste with gross invectives, shall
have his tongue cut out; for he is of low origin.

23. <span id="fr_633"></span>[23](#fn_633) If he refers to their name or
caste in terms indicating contempt, an iron rod, ten Aṅgulas long, shall
be thrust red-hot into his mouth.

24. <span id="fr_634"></span>[24](#fn_634) If he is insolent enough to
give lessons regarding their duty to Brahmans, the king shall order hot
oil to be poured into his mouth and ears.

\* 25. <span id="fr_635"></span>[25](#fn_635) With whatever limb a man
of low caste offends against a Brahman, that very limb of his shall be
cut off; such shall be the atonement for his crime.

26. <span id="fr_636"></span>[26](#fn_636) A low-born man, who tries to
place himself on the same seat with his superior in caste, shall be
branded on his hip and banished, or (the king) shall cause his backside
to be gashed.

27\. If through arrogance he spits (on a superior), the king shall cause
both his lips to be cut off; if he makes water (on him), the penis; if
he breaks wind (against him), the buttocks.

28. <span id="fr_637"></span>[28](#fn_637) If he pulls (a superior) by
the hair, (the king) shall unhesitatingly cause his hands to be cut off,
likewise (if he seizes him) by the feet, beard, neck, or scrotum.

29. <span id="fr_638"></span>[29](#fn_638) If a man breaks the skin (of
his equal) or

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

fetches blood (from him), he shall be fined a hundred (Pa*n*as); if he
cuts the flesh, six Nishkas; if he breaks a bone, he shall be banished.

\* 30. If a man censures a king devoted to the discharge of his duties,
he shall have his tongue cut out or his entire property confiscated, as
an atonement for such crime.

\* 31. When an evil-minded man assails a wicked king even, he shall be
(fastened) on a stake and burnt in fire; (for he is) more criminal than
one who has committed a hundred times the crime of killing a Brahman.

\* 32. A father is not liable to be punished for an offence committed by
his son; nor is the owner of a horse, dog, or monkey (responsible for
any damage caused by one of these animals), unless he should have set
them to do it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_622"></span>[207:1](sbe3347.htm#fr_622) XV, XVI, 1. Thus,
e.g. when a man says, 'The Gau*d*as (Bengalis) are quarrelsome,' he
abuses another man's native country. When a man says, 'Brahmans are very
avaricious,' he abuses another man's caste. When he says, 'The
Vi*s*vâmitras are a ferocious race,' he abuses another man's family. The
clause 'and so forth' is added, in order to include abusive speeches
levelled against learned men, artizans, or the like persons, whose
learning or art has been abused. 'Violent terms,' i.e. terms which ought
never to be used. Mitâksharâ, p. 285; Vîramitrodaya, p. 482.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[207:3](sbe3347.htm#fr_623) 'Abuse combined
with reproaches' is when e.g. a man says, 'What a fool,' or 'What a
rascal.' 'Abuse couched in insulting language' is when a man says, 'I
will visit your sister,' or the like. 'Charging one with a mortal sin
causing expulsion from caste,' such as e.g. the drinking of spirituous
liquor. See loc. cit.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[208:6](sbe3347.htm#fr_624) The above
translation of this paragraph follows the reading of the MSS. If that
reading be correct, this paragraph contains a rule relating to the
subject of theft or Sâhasa. The quotations have a different reading,
under which this paragraph has to be closely connected with the
preceding one, and has to be referred equally to the three degrees of
assault.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[208:7](sbe3347.htm#fr_625) The Nepalese MS.
and the commentaries insert the following paragraph here: \* 'When an
insult has occurred between two men engaged in a violent quarrel, he who
suffers the insult patiently is struck, but the offender is punishable.'

<span id="fn_626"></span>[208:8](sbe3347.htm#fr_626) 8-10. The one who
has first commenced a quarrel shall receive the heavier punishment of
the two. That man is liable to punishment who persists in hostility.
When it is impossible to ascertain any <span id="page_209">p. 209</span>
difference in the culpability of the two parties, their punishment shall
be equal. Vîramitrodaya, p. 472. Read pûrvam.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[209:11](sbe3347.htm#fr_627) *S*vapâka,
literally 'dog-cooking,' is the name of a particular degraded tribe,
whose only office is to act as public executioners. Meda is the name of
another mixed caste. *K*a*nd*âlas are the lowest caste of all, see XII,
113. The Nepalese MS. and the commentaries read sha*ndh*a, 'a eunuch,'
instead of Meda.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[209:12](sbe3347.htm#fr_628) 12-14. When a
*S*vapâka or the like should have insulted an Ârya or member of the
three higher castes, honourable men shall be entitled to punish them in
person. When the (honourable men) are unable to do so, the king shall
punish them; but he must not confiscate their property. Vîramitrodaya,
p. 472.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[209:15](sbe3347.htm#fr_629) 15-17. Nearly
identical with Manu VIII, 267-269.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[210:17](sbe3347.htm#fr_630) According to the
commentators of Manu, the term 'calumnies which ought never to be
uttered' has to be referred to insinuations against the honour of a
man's mother, sisters, or other female relatives. See Professor Bühler's
note on Manu VIII, 269.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[210:18](sbe3347.htm#fr_631) Manu VIII, 274;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 204.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[211:22](sbe3347.htm#fr_632) 'He is of low
origin,' because the *S*ûdra caste has been produced from Brahman's
feet. Identical with Manu VIII, 270.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[211:23](sbe3347.htm#fr_633) Nearly identical
with Manu VIII, 271.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[211:24](sbe3347.htm#fr_634) Nearly identical
with Manu VIII, 272.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[211:25](sbe3347.htm#fr_635) Nearly identical
with Manu VIII, 279.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[211:26](sbe3347.htm#fr_636) 26, 27. Nearly
identical with Manu VIII, 281, 282. In paragraph 27 the Nepalese MS. has
'the nose' instead of 'the beard.'

<span id="fn_637"></span>[211:28](sbe3347.htm#fr_637) Identical with
Manu VIII, 283.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[211:29](sbe3347.htm#fr_638) According to the
majority of the commentators of Manu, <span id="page_212">p. 212</span>
this rule has reference to an equal in caste. Nearly identical with Manu
VIII, 284.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seventeenth Title of Law. Games](sbe3348)
