[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3308)  [Next](sbe3310) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 2. Valid and Invalid Transactions.

26\. The sages declare that the transactions of a woman have no
validity, especially the gift, hypothecation, or sale of a house or
field.

27\. Such transactions are valid when they are sanctioned by the
husband; or, on failure of the husband, by the son; or, on failure of
husband and son, by the king.

\* 28. <span id="fr_144"></span>[28](#fn_144) What has been given to a
wife by her loving

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

husband, that she may spend or give away as she likes after his death
even, excepting immovables.

\* 29. In the same way the transactions of a slave are declared invalid,
unless they have been sanctioned by his master. A slave is not his own
master.

\* 30. <span id="fr_145"></span>[30](#fn_145) If a son has transacted
any business without authorization from his father, it is also declared
an invalid transaction. A slave and a son are equal in that respect.

\* 31. <span id="fr_146"></span>[31](#fn_146) A youth who, though
independent, has not yet arrived at years of discretion, is not capable
of contracting valid debts. (Real) independence belongs to the eldest
son (only); (the right of) seniority is based on both capacity and age.

\* 32. <span id="fr_147"></span>[32](#fn_147) Three persons are
independent in this world: a king, a spiritual teacher, and in all
castes successively a householder in his own household.

\* 33. <span id="fr_148"></span>[33](#fn_148) All subjects are
dependent; the ruler of the country is independent; a student is
pronounced to be dependent; independence belongs to the teacher.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

\* 34. <span id="fr_149"></span>[34](#fn_149) Wives, sons, slaves and
other attendants are dependent. The head of the family, to whom the
property has descended by right of inheritance, is independent with
regard to it.

\* 35. <span id="fr_150"></span>[35](#fn_150) A child is comparable to
an embryo up to his eighth year. A youth, who has not yet reached the
age of sixteen, is called Poga*nd*a.

\* 36. <span id="fr_151"></span>[36](#fn_151) Afterwards he is no longer
a minor and independent, in case his parents are dead. While they are
alive he can never acquire independence, even though he may have reached
a mature age.

\* 37. Of the two (parents), the father has the greater authority,
because the seed is superior (to the womb); on failure of the begetter,
the mother; on failure of the mother, the eldest son.

\* 38. <span id="fr_152"></span>[38](#fn_152) All these persons are
independent at all times of those who depend on others. They have

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

authority in regard to coercion the relinquishment and the sale (of
property).

\* 39. <span id="fr_153"></span>[39](#fn_153) If a boy or one who
possesses no independence transacts anything, it is declared an invalid
transaction by persons acquainted with the law.

\* 40. <span id="fr_154"></span>[40](#fn_154) That also which an
independent person does, who has lost the control over his actions, is
declared an invalid transaction, on account of his want of (real)
independence.

\* 41. Those are declared to have lost the control over their actions
who are actuated by love or anger, or tormented (by an illness), or
oppressed by fear or misfortune, or biassed by friendship or hatred.

42. <span id="fr_155"></span>[42](#fn_155) That is declared a valid
transaction which is done by the senior or head of a family and by one
who has not lost the control over his actions. That is not valid which
has been transacted by one who does not enjoy independence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[49:28](sbe3309.htm#fr_144) 'Immovables,' such
as houses, fields, and the like. A. This rule is frequently quoted in
the mediaeval and modern compilations on the law of inheritance, as
indicating the extent of a woman's power over her property.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[50:30](sbe3309.htm#fr_145) A son who has not
come to a partition of the family estate with his father, continues
dependent on him till the father dies. A.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[50:31](sbe3309.htm#fr_146) This rule
constitutes an exception to the general independence of the son after
the death of his father. During the period of his minority, he is unable
to contract a valid debt. A. The rule that seniority is based both on
capacity and age, is certainly remarkable. It is, however, in accordance
with the view enounced further on (XIII, 5) by Nârada, that the
management of the family property may be undertaken by the youngest
brother even, if capable, because the prosperity of a family depends on
ability.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[50:32](sbe3309.htm#fr_147) The king is
independent of his subjects. A teacher is independent of his pupils. The
head of a household is independent of his family and attendants. A.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[50:33](sbe3309.htm#fr_148) 33, 34. These two
paragraphs are intended to show the respective dependence and
independence of wives, sons, householders, &c. A.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[51:34](sbe3309.htm#fr_149) Colebrooke (Dig.
II, 4, 15) has translated a different reading of paragraph 34, thus, 'A
householder is not uncontrolled in regard to what has descended from an
ancestor.' See, as to the distinction between inherited and
self-acquired wealth, Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 121.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[51:35](sbe3309.htm#fr_150) 'Comparable to an
embryo' is one who is not yet allowed to perform purificatory and other
rites. From his eighth year onwards a boy may perform purificatory
ceremonies and commence sacred study. He is called Poga*nd*a (a young
man), because he is not yet capable of transacting legal business. A.
This rule of Nârada has become the foundation of the modern law
regarding the duration of minority. A controversy has recently arisen as
to whether minority terminates at the end or at the beginning of the
sixteenth year. Most, if not all, Indian writers seem to agree in taking
the latter view. A. seems to be of the same opinion, though he does not
express himself very clearly.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[51:36](sbe3309.htm#fr_151) He remains
dependent during the lifetime of his parents, i.e. if he continues to
live in union of interests with them. A.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[51:38](sbe3309.htm#fr_152) 'Coercion,' i.e.
punishment or beating; 'relinquishment,' i.e. renouncing. A.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[52:39](sbe3309.htm#fr_153) Both what a minor
does, and the transactions of one grown up but dependent on others, as
e.g. of a slave, are declared invalid by those conversant with law. A.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[52:40](sbe3309.htm#fr_154) 'One who has lost
the control over his actions,' i.e. one whose natural disposition has
been perverted, owing to possession by a demon, or to his addiction to
gambling or other vicious propensities. A.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[52:42](sbe3309.htm#fr_155) Here ends the
second section of the law of debt, which treats of valid and invalid
transactions. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Property](sbe3310)
