[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3382)  [Next](sbe3384) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXV. THE LAW OF INHERITANCE.

1. <span id="fr_1220"></span>[1](#fn_1219) After the death of both
parents, division of the property among brothers has been ordained (to
take

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

place). It may take place even in their lifetime, if the mother be past
child-bearing.

2. <span id="fr_1221"></span>[2](#fn_1220) Houses and landed property
inherited from an ancestor shall be shared equally by the father and
sons; but the sons cannot claim a share of their father's own property
without the consent of the father.

3. <span id="fr_1222"></span>[3](#fn_1221) Of property acquired by the
grandfather, whether immovable or movable, father and son are declared
to be entitled to equal shares.

4. <span id="fr_1223"></span>[4](#fn_1222) Those (sons) for whom their
shares have been arranged by the father, whether equal, less, or
greater, must be compelled to abide by such arrangement. Otherwise (if
they try to alter the arrangement), they shall be punished.

5. <span id="fr_1224"></span>[5](#fn_1223) When a partition is made
during (the father's) life, the father shall reserve a couple of shares
for himself.

6. <span id="fr_1225"></span>[6](#fn_1224) The worship of the Manes,
gods, and Brahmans by those residing (together) and cooking their food
(in one house) is single. But when they divide the

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

property, (the worship) takes place separately in each house.

7. <span id="fr_1226"></span>[7](#fn_1225) Partition among coparceners
is declared to be of two kinds; one is with attention to priority of
birth, the other consists of the allotment of equal shares.

8. <span id="fr_1227"></span>[8](#fn_1226) All sons of the twice-born,
begotten on women equal in caste (to their husbands), shall take equal
shares, after giving a preferential share to the eldest.

9. <span id="fr_1228"></span>[9](#fn_1227) He who is the first by birth,
sacred knowledge, or good qualities, shall take a couple of shares out
of the partible wealth, and the rest shall take equal shares; but he
stands to them in the relation of a father, as it were.

10. <span id="fr_1229"></span>[10](#fn_1228) When they divide their
father's heritage, all the sons shall share alike; but he who is
distinguished by sacred knowledge and virtue, shall obtain a greater
share (than the rest).

11. <span id="fr_1230"></span>[11](#fn_1229) They are parents in the
true sense of the term who have a son whose fame is spread in the world
for sacred knowledge, cleverness, valour, wealth, and for knowledge,
liberality, and pious acts.

12. <span id="fr_1231"></span>[12](#fn_1230) In property belonging to
the grandfather which had been taken away and has been (afterwards)
recovered by the father through his own

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

ability, as well as in property acquired by sacred knowledge, valour in
arms, &c., the father's ownership has been declared.

13\. He may make a gift out of that property, or even consume it, at his
will. But in his default, his sons are pronounced to be equal sharers.

14. <span id="fr_1232"></span>[14](#fn_1231) Whatever has been acquired
by all together, in that property they all have equal shares. Their
sons, whether unequal or equal (in number), are declared (to be) heirs
of the shares of their (respective) fathers.

15. <span id="fr_1233"></span>[15](#fn_1232) When there are many sons
sprung from one father, equal in caste and number, but born of different
mothers, a legal division (of the property) may be effected by adjusting
the shares according to the mothers.

16. <span id="fr_1234"></span>[16](#fn_1233) (When there are several
brothers) equal in caste, but varying in number (of sons begotten with
each wife), a division according to males is ordained.

17. <span id="fr_1235"></span>[17](#fn_1234) When step-brothers born of
different mothers or uterine brothers have come to a division with their
father, afterborn brothers shall take their father's share.

18. <span id="fr_1236"></span>[18](#fn_1235) A son born before
(partition) has no claim to the paternal wealth; nor (can) a brother's
wealth (be claimed by) one born after partition.

19. <span id="fr_1237"></span>[19](#fn_1236) Whatever has been acquired,
with his own

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

effort, by a father who has come to a partition with his sons, all that
belongs to the son born after partition. Those born before it are
declared to have no right.

20. <span id="fr_1238"></span>[20](#fn_1237) In regard to the property
as well as regards debts, gifts, pledges, and purchases, they are
independent of each other, excepting impurity (caused by a death) and
offerings consisting of water libations.

21. <span id="fr_1239"></span>[21](#fn_1238) Should there be younger
brothers, whose initiation has not been performed, they must be
initiated by the other brothers (the expense being defrayed) out of the
family property (inherited) from the father.

22. <span id="fr_1240"></span>[22](#fn_1239) Whether partition has or
has not been made, whenever an heir comes forward, he shall receive a
share of such wealth as he can prove to be the joint property (of the
family).

23\. Whether it be a debt, or a document, or house, or field, which has
been inherited from the paternal grandfather, he shall take his proper
share of it, when he returns after a protracted absence even.

24. <span id="fr_1241"></span>[24](#fn_1240) When a man has gone abroad,
leaving the joint estate of his family, his share must undoubtedly be
given to his descendant who has returned from abroad.

25. <span id="fr_1242"></span>[25](#fn_1241) Whether he be the third or
the fifth or even the seventh in descent, he shall receive the share
belonging to him by right of succession, his

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

birth and family name having been ascertained (first).

26\. He whom indigenous inhabitants and neighbours know to be the
(legal) owner, to the descendants of that man must the land be
surrendered by his kinsmen, when they make their appearance.

27. <span id="fr_1243"></span>[27](#fn_1242) Let Brahmans, Kshatriyas,
Vai*s*yas, and *S*ûdras, begotten in order by a Brahman, take four,
three, two shares, and one share, in succession.

28. <span id="fr_1244"></span>[28](#fn_1243) Let those begotten by a
Kshatriya (take) three shares, two shares, and one share (respectively).
Let those begotten by a Vai*s*ya take two shares and one share.

29. <span id="fr_1245"></span>[29](#fn_1244) The son by a Kshatriya
wife, if elder by birth and endowed with superior qualities, shall take
an equal share with the Brahman (son); and so shall a son by a Vai*s*ya
wife (share equally) with a Kshatriya son.

30. <span id="fr_1246"></span>[30](#fn_1245) Land obtained by acceptance
of a gift must never be given to the son of a Kshatriya woman or other
(wife inferior in caste to her husband). Though their father may have
given it to them, the son by a Brahman wife shall take it after the
death (of the father).

31. <span id="fr_1247"></span>[31](#fn_1246) An obedient and excellent
son of a man having no other male issue, shall receive a maintenance
(though he be born) of a *S*ûdra woman; let the Sapi*nd*as take the
remainder.

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

32. <span id="fr_1248"></span>[32](#fn_1247) A son begotten with a
*S*ûdra woman by a twice-born man is not entitled to a share of the
landed property; one begotten with a woman of equal caste shall take
all. Thus has the law been settled.

33. <span id="fr_1249"></span>[33](#fn_1248) Of the thirteen sons
mentioned in succession by Manu, the legitimate son of the body (Aurasa)
and the appointed daughter (Putrikâ) continue the family.

34\. As in default of ghee, oil is admitted by the virtuous as a
substitute (at sacrifices), so are the eleven sons (admitted as
substitutes), in default of a legitimate son of the body and of an
appointed daughter.

35. <span id="fr_1250"></span>[35](#fn_1249) No one but a legitimate son
of the body is declared to be heir of his father's wealth. An appointed
daughter is said to be equal to him. All the others are stated to have a
claim to maintenance (only).

36. <span id="fr_1251"></span>[36](#fn_1250) Because a son (Putra) saves
his father from the hell called Put by the very sight of his face,
therefore should a man be anxious to beget a son.

37. <span id="fr_1252"></span>[37](#fn_1251) Both a son's son and the
son of an appointed daughter cause a man to attain heaven. Both are
pronounced to be equal as regards their right of inheritance and the
duty of offering funeral balls of meal (Pi*nd*as).

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

38. <span id="fr_1253"></span>[38](#fn_1252) Gautama has declared that a
daughter is appointed after performing a sacrifice to Agni and
Pra*g*âpati; others have said that she is an appointed daughter
(Putrikâ) who was merely supposed to be one (before her birth) by a man
having no male issue.

39. <span id="fr_1254"></span>[39](#fn_1253) The other sons, beginning
with the son begotten on a wife (Kshetra*g*a), shall (respectively) take
a fifth, a sixth, and a seventh part.

40. <span id="fr_1255"></span>[40](#fn_1254) The son given, the son cast
off, the son bought, the son made (or adopted), the son by a *S*ûdra
wife: these, when pure by caste and irreproachable as to their conduct,
are considered sons of middle rank.

41\. The son begotten on a wife (Kshetra*g*a) is despised by the
virtuous; and so are the son begotten on a woman twice married, the son
of an unmarried damsel, the son received with the wife, and the son
secretly born.

42. <span id="fr_1256"></span>[42](#fn_1255) Though born of a wife of
the same caste, a son destitute of good qualities is unworthy to obtain
the paternal wealth; it shall go to those learned (kinsmen) who offer
the funeral ball of meal (Pi*nd*a) for the father.

43\. A son redeems his father from the highest

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

and lowest debts; consequently there is no use of him who acts
otherwise.

44\. What can be done with a cow which neither gives milk nor is (ever)
pregnant? What is the good of a son being born who is neither learned
nor virtuous?

45\. A son who is destitute of learning, valour, and wealth, void of
devotion and insight, and unobservant of good custom, such a son is
declared to be no better than urine and fæces.

46. <span id="fr_1257"></span>[46](#fn_1256) In the revealed texts (of
the Veda), in the traditional law (of the Sm*ri*tis), and in popular
usage, the wife is declared to be half the body (of her husband),
equally sharing the outcome of good and evil acts.

47. <span id="fr_1258"></span>[47](#fn_1257) Of him whose wife is not
dead, half his body survives. How should any one else take the property,
while half (his) body lives?

48. <span id="fr_1259"></span>[48](#fn_1258) Although kinsmen
(Sakulyas), although his father and mother, although uterine brothers be
living, the wife of him who dies without leaving male issue shall
succeed to his share.

49\. A wife deceased before (her husband) takes away his consecrated
fire (Agnihotra); but if the husband dies before the wife, she takes his
property, if she has been faithful to him. This is an eternal law.

50\. After having received all the movable and immovable property, the
gold, base metals and grain, liquids and wearing apparel, she shall
cause

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

his monthly, sixmonthly, and annual *S*râddhas to be performed.

51\. Let her propitiate with funeral oblations and pious liberality her
husband's paternal uncles, Gurus, daughter's sons, sister's sons, and
maternal uncles; also aged or helpless persons, guests, and women
(belonging to the family).

52\. Should agnates (Sapi*nd*as) or cognates (Bândhavas) or enemies
injure the property, let the king inflict on them the punishment
destined for a thief.

53. <span id="fr_1260"></span>[53](#fn_1259) The husband being separated
(in interests from his former coparceners), his wife shall take after
his death a pledge and whatever else is recognised as property,
excepting the immovable wealth.

54\. A wife, though preserving her character and though partition have
been made, is unworthy to obtain immovable property. Food or a portion
of the arable land shall be given to her at will (for her support).

55. <span id="fr_1261"></span>[55](#fn_1260) The wife is declared to
succeed to her husband's property, and in her default, the daughter.

56. <span id="fr_1262"></span>[56](#fn_1261) A daughter, like a son,
springs from each member of a man; how then should any other mortal
inherit the father's property while she lives?

57\. Equal in caste (to her father) and married to a man of the same
caste as her own, virtuous, habitually submissive, she shall inherit her
father's property, whether she may have been (expressly) appointed or
not.

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

58\. As her father's wealth becomes her property, though kinsmen be in
existence, even so her son becomes the owner of his mother's and
maternal grandfather's wealth.

59. <span id="fr_1263"></span>[59](#fn_1262) In default of them, uterine
brothers or brother's sons, agnates (Sakulyas) and cognates (Bândhavas),
pupils, or learned Brahmans are entitled to the inheritance.

60. <span id="fr_1264"></span>[60](#fn_1263) When a man dies leaving no
issue, nor wife, nor brother, nor father, nor mother, all his Sapi*nd*as
shall divide his property in due shares.

61. <span id="fr_1265"></span>[61](#fn_1264) Half the entire wealth,
however, shall first be set apart for the benefit of the deceased
(owner) and carefully assigned for his monthly, sixmonthly, and annual
*S*râddhas.

62. <span id="fr_1266"></span>[62](#fn_1265) When there are several
relatives, agnates (Sakulyas), and cognates (Bândhavas), whosoever of
them is the nearest shall take the wealth of him who died leaving no
issue.

63. <span id="fr_1267"></span>[63](#fn_1266) When a man dies without
leaving either wife or male issue, the mother has to be considered as
her son's heiress, or a brother (may succeed) if she consents to it.

64. <span id="fr_1268"></span>[64](#fn_1267) But on his death the mother
shall take a son's share. The mothers shall share equally with the sons,
the maidens shall take fourth-part shares.

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

65, 66. <span id="fr_1269"></span>[65](#fn_1268) To a father the funeral
ball (Pi*nd*a) and water oblation shall be offered by his son; in
default of a son, the widow (succeeds); in her default, a uterine
brother; in default of him, the co-heirs (dâyâdâ*h*); afterwards, the
property goes to the daughter's son.

67. <span id="fr_1270"></span>[67](#fn_1269) Should a Kshatriya,
Vai*s*ya, or *S*ûdra die without leaving male issue, or wife, or
brother, their property shall be taken (as escheat) by the king, for he
is the lord of all.

68. <span id="fr_1271"></span>[68](#fn_1270) Except in the case of a
Brahman; but a king bent on the practice of virtue must allot a
maintenance to his women. Thus has the law of inheritance been declared.

69\. For her food (he must assign) a Prastha of rice every afternoon,
together with fuel, and one dress purchased for three Pa*n*as must be
given to her every three months.

70\. What is left after setting apart property sufficient

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

for the expense of her dress, food, and for the washerman, shall be made
over to the co-heirs.

71\. (The widow) shall recite the Dhûmâvasânika prayer in the evening,
bathe frequently, and pay no regard to dwelling, food, or clothing after
her husband's death.

72. <span id="fr_1272"></span>[72](#fn_1271) He who (having been
divided) is again living, through affection, together with his father or
brother, or with his uncle even, is said to be reunited with them.

73. <span id="fr_1273"></span>[73](#fn_1272) When brothers formerly
divided are again living together through affection and arrange a second
division, the right of primogeniture does not accrue in that case.

74\. When any one (brother) should die or anyhow renounce worldly
interests, his share is not lost; it is allotted to his uterine brother.

75\. If there be a sister, she is entitled to a share of his property.
This is the law regarding (the wealth of) one destitute of issue, and
who has no wife or father.

76. <span id="fr_1274"></span>[76](#fn_1273) When two (coparceners) have
again established together, they shall mutually inherit their property.

77. <span id="fr_1275"></span>[77](#fn_1274) If among reunited
coparceners any one should acquire property through learning, valour, or
other (independent effort of his own), a double share must be given to
him; the rest shall take equal shares.

78. <span id="fr_1276"></span>[78](#fn_1275) Whatever has been given by
the paternal

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

grandfather, the father, or the mother, (all that) shall not be taken
from him (who possesses it); (he may keep), likewise, property acquired
by valour and the wealth of his wife.

79. <span id="fr_1277"></span>[79](#fn_1276) Those by whom clothes and
the like articles have been declared indivisible have not decided
properly. The wealth of the rich depends on clothes and ornaments.

80. <span id="fr_1278"></span>[80](#fn_1277) (Such wealth) when withheld
from partition will yield no profit; but neither can it be allotted to a
single (coparcener). Therefore it has to be divided with some skill; or
else it would be useless.

81\. Clothes and ornaments are divided by (distributing the proceeds
after) selling them; a written bond (concerning a debt, is divided)
after recovering the sum lent; prepared food (is divided) by an exchange
for (an equal amount of) unprepared food.

82\. The water of a well or pool shall be drawn and used according to
need. A single female (slave) shall be (successively) set to work at
their houses (by the several sharers) according to their shares (of the
inheritance).

83\. If there are many of them, they shall be divided equally. The same
rule applies to male slaves as well. Property obtained for a pious
purpose shall be divided in equal shares.

84\. Fields and embankments shall be divided according to their several
shares. A common (road or) pasture-ground shall be always used by the
coheirs in due proportion to their several shares.

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

85. <span id="fr_1279"></span>[85](#fn_1278) The clothes, ornaments,
bed, and the like, as well as the vehicle and the like, appertaining to
the father, shall be given to the person who partakes of his funeral
repast, after honouring him with fragrant drugs and flowers.

86. <span id="fr_1280"></span>[86](#fn_1279) Such property, whether
immovable or other, as has been given to women by their father-in-law,
can never be taken away from them by the co-heirs.

87. <span id="fr_1281"></span>[87](#fn_1280) Strîdhana goes to the
children, and the daughter if not betrothed has a share in it. If she is
married, she shall receive an honorary trifle only.

88. <span id="fr_1282"></span>[88](#fn_1281) The mother's sister, the
wife of a maternal uncle, a paternal uncle's wife, a father's sister, a
mother-in-law, and an elder brother's wife are declared to be equal to a
mother.

89\. If they have no legitimate son of the body, nor (other) son, nor
daughter's son, nor their son, their sister's son, &c. shall inherit
their property.

90. <span id="fr_1283"></span>[90](#fn_1282) A heinous crime, (a claim
regarding) immovable property, a deposit, and a previous partition among
co-heirs, have to be ascertained by circumstantial evidence, in default
of documents and witnesses.

91\. A family feud, mutual malice, or the discovery of stolen goods, may
be evidence of a heinous crime; possession of the land may be proof of
property; and separate property is an argument of partition.

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

92. <span id="fr_1284"></span>[92](#fn_1283) Those who keep their
income, expenditure, and mortgages distinct, and engage in mutual
transactions in money-lending and traffic, are undoubtedly separate.

93. <span id="fr_1285"></span>[93](#fn_1284) Whether kinsmen are united
or separate, they are all alike as regards immovable property, as no one
of them has power in any case to give, mortgage, or sell it.

94, 95. <span id="fr_1286"></span>[94](#fn_1285) Whatever share is
enjoyed by each, must not be changed from him. If he should subsequently
contest a distribution, which was made with his own consent, he shall be
compelled by the king to content himself with his share, and shall be
punished if he should persist in contention.

96. <span id="fr_1287"></span>[96](#fn_1286) When the loan or mortgaging
of joint property is concealed with a fraudulent purpose, the king.
shall recover it from the cheat by artifice, but not use violence to
extort it from him.

97\. Cheats, robbers of wealth, crafty and covetous men, shall be
reclaimed by friendly expostulation, by the loss of their own property,
or by stratagem.

98. <span id="fr_1288"></span>[98](#fn_1287) Household utensils, beasts
of burden and the like, milch cattle, ornaments, and workmen have to be
divided on being discovered. When property is (supposed to be) hidden,
proof by sacred libation is ordained.

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

99. <span id="fr_1289"></span>[99](#fn_1288) When there are many uterine
brothers sprung from one (father), and a son is born even to one of them
only, they all are declared to have male offspring (through that son).

100\. The same rule is declared for a plurality of wives of one
(husband); if one of them has male issue, that (son) shall present the
funeral ball of meal to them all.

101. <span id="fr_1290"></span>[101](#fn_1289) (For one leaving no male
issue), a brother, or brother's son, or a Sapi*nd*a, or a pupil, should
first perform the ceremony of uniting him with the Sapi*nd*as (to be
worshipped at a *S*râddha offering), and then offer him the funeral
ceremonies customary on joyful occasions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[369:1](sbe3383.htm#fr_1220) XXV, 1. Col. Dig.
V, 2, 99, 115; D. II, 1; May. p. 39; V. p. 46; <span id="page_370">p.
370</span> Ratn. p. 462. The author of the Dâyabhâga and other writers
of the Bengal school hold that this rule applies to ancestral wealth
only, and that, moreover, the consent of the father is required in every
division of his property during his lifetime. In the other schools of
law, this text is given its plain meaning.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[370:2](sbe3383.htm#fr_1221) Col. Dig. V, 2,
94 ('Vyâsa'); May. p. 39. The Mayûkha deduces from this text the
doctrine, generally held by the followers of the Mitâksharâ, that
partition of property inherited from a grandfather or more remote
ancestor may be instituted by sons even against their father's wish.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[370:3](sbe3383.htm#fr_1222) Col. Dig. V, 2,
93; D. II, 50; V. p. 66; May. p. 43.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[370:4](sbe3383.htm#fr_1223) Col. Dig. V, I,
31; D. II, 75; V. p. 56; Ratn. p. 468.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[370:5](sbe3383.htm#fr_1224) Col. Dig. V, 2,
97; D. II, 46; Ratn. p. 465.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[370:6](sbe3383.htm#fr_1225) V. pp. 53, 257;
Ratn. p. 459; Viv. p. 227; Col. Dig. V, 6, 388.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[371:7](sbe3383.htm#fr_1226) Col. Dig. V, I,
30; D. II, 80.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[371:8](sbe3383.htm#fr_1227) Col. Dig. V, I,
53; D. II, 42.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[371:9](sbe3383.htm#fr_1228) Col. Dig. V, 1,
45; D. II, 42; V. p. 67; Viv. p. 235.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[371:10](sbe3383.htm#fr_1229) Col. Dig. V, 1,
67; V, 3, 116.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[371:11](sbe3383.htm#fr_1230) Col. Dig. V, 3,
116; Ratn. p. 484.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[371:12](sbe3383.htm#fr_1231) 12, 13. Col.
Dig. V, 2, 90; D. VI, 2, 34; V. p. 126; May. p. 40; Ratn. p. 461. Some
compilations read bhâga*m*, 'withhold it from partition,' for bhoga*m*,
'consume it.'

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[372:14](sbe3383.htm#fr_1232) Ratn. p. 481;
Aparârka.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[372:15](sbe3383.htm#fr_1233) Col. Dig. V, 1,
62; D. III, 1, 12; May. p. 46; V. p. 76; Ratn. p. 975.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[372:16](sbe3383.htm#fr_1234) Col. Dig. V, 1,
63; May. p. 46; V. p. 76.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[372:17](sbe3383.htm#fr_1235) 17, 18. Col.
Dig. V, 2, 100; D. VII, 5; V. p. 93; Ratn. p. 538.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[372:18](sbe3383.htm#fr_1236) M. I, 6, 4; V.
p. 219.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[372:19](sbe3383.htm#fr_1237) M. I, 6, 6; Col.
Dig. V, 7, 392.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[373:20](sbe3383.htm#fr_1238) 19, 20. Ratn. p.
539; May. p. 47; D. VII, 6; V. pp. 93, 219.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[373:21](sbe3383.htm#fr_1239) Col. Dig. V, 3,
132; May. p. 48; V. p. 86; Viv. p. 277.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[373:22](sbe3383.htm#fr_1240) 22-26. Col. Dig.
V, 7, 394; D. VIII, 1-3; Ratn. p. 540.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[373:24](sbe3383.htm#fr_1241) 24-26. Viv. p.
241.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[373:25](sbe3383.htm#fr_1242) May. p. 46.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[374:27](sbe3383.htm#fr_1243) U*gg*valâ, p.
79; Varadarâ*g*a, p. 19.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[374:28](sbe3383.htm#fr_1244) Varadarâ*g*a, p.
19.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[374:29](sbe3383.htm#fr_1245) Col. Dig. V, 3,
156; D. IX, 15; V. p. 98.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[374:30](sbe3383.htm#fr_1246) Col. Dig. V, 3,
161; D. IX, 19; M. I, 4, 36, I, 8, 8; May. p. 46; V. p. 99; Viv. p. 272.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[374:31](sbe3383.htm#fr_1247) Col. Dig. V, 3,
168; D. IX, 28; Viv. p. 274; May. p. 47.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[375:32](sbe3383.htm#fr_1248) Col. Dig. V, 3,
164; V. p. 99; Ratn. p. 534. The Ratnâkara after this text inserts two
other texts on the right of a Nishâda son, which are elsewhere
attributed to Devala.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[375:33](sbe3383.htm#fr_1249) 33, 34. V. p.
120. See Manu IX, 126, 158-160.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[375:35](sbe3383.htm#fr_1250) Col. Dig. V, 4,
215; Viv. p. 285; V. p. 121.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[375:36](sbe3383.htm#fr_1251) Col. Dig. V, 4,
304. punnâmno narakât putra*h* pitara*m* trâyate yata*h* \|
mukhasa*m*dar*s*anenâpi tadutpattau yateta sa*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[375:37](sbe3383.htm#fr_1252) Col. Dig. V, 4,
304; U*gg*valâ, p. 80.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[376:38](sbe3383.htm#fr_1253) Col. Dig. V, 4,
225; Ratn. p. 562. See Gautama XXVIII, 18.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[376:39](sbe3383.htm#fr_1254) Col. Dig. V, 4,
246; Ratn. p. 545; V. p. 125. The Vîramitrodaya reads samabhâgina*h* for
sapta bhâgina*h*, 'The other five or six sons beginning with the wife's
son are equal sharers.' Regarding the wife's son (Kshetra*g*a), see Manu
IX, 167; B*ri*haspati XXIV, 12-14.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[376:40](sbe3383.htm#fr_1255) 40, 41. Col.
Dig. V, 4, 202; V. p. 128; Ratn. p. 552.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[376:42](sbe3383.htm#fr_1256) 42, 43. May. p.
101.

42-45. Col. Dig. V, 4,264; V, 319; D. V, 4; V. p. 256; Viv. p.242.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[377:46](sbe3383.htm#fr_1257) See XXIV, 11.

46-52. Col. Dig. V, 8, 399; V. 8, 416; D. XI, 1, 2; Ratn. p. 589.

46-49. V. pp. 141, 142.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[377:47](sbe3383.htm#fr_1258) M. II, 1, 6.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[377:48](sbe3383.htm#fr_1259) 48-52. Viv. pp.
289, 290.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[378:53](sbe3383.htm#fr_1260) 53, 54. May. p.
77; Y. pp. 134, 135, 173.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[378:55](sbe3383.htm#fr_1261) 55, 56. M. II,
2, 2; Sm*ri*ti*k*. (K. Iyer's translation) XI, 2, 113.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[378:56](sbe3383.htm#fr_1262) 56-58. Col. Dig.
V, 4, 224; D. XI, 2, 8, 17; V. pp. 176, 180, 183; Viv. pp. 292-294.

56, 57. Ratn. p. 591.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[379:59](sbe3383.htm#fr_1263) Col. Dig. V, 8,
422; D. XI, 2, 26. 'In default of them,' i.e. of a daughter or
daughter's son.

59-62. Col. Dig. V, 8, 437; Ratn. p. 595.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[379:60](sbe3383.htm#fr_1264) V. p. 216.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[379:61](sbe3383.htm#fr_1265) D. XI, 6, 13.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[379:62](sbe3383.htm#fr_1266) V. p. 194; May.
p. 81.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[379:63](sbe3383.htm#fr_1267) Col. Dig. V, 8,
423; V. p. 191; Viv. p. 293; D. XI, 3, 2.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[379:64](sbe3383.htm#fr_1268) Col. Dig. V, 2,
85; V. pp. 81, 84, &c. 'On his death,' i.e. on the father's death. For
tanayâ*m*sasamâ*m*sinî, 'shall take a son's share,' the Vîramitrodaya
reads tanayâ vâ samâ*m*sinî, 'or the <span id="page_380">p. 380</span>
daughter shall take an equal share.' Vâ*k*aspatimi*s*ra, Kamalâkara,
Nandapa*nd*ita, and other commentators explain the term mâtara*h*,
'mothers,' as denoting step-mothers who have no issue, whereas in the
first clause the term 'mother' (*g*ananî), according to them, denotes a
woman who has male issue. It seems more natural, however, to interpret
the term 'mother' in the same way in both clauses. Vish*n*u (XVIII, 34,
35) has the analogous precept that mothers and maiden daughters shall
receive shares corresponding to the shares of sons. Vish*n*u's rule
relates to a division of property among sons differing in caste, and the
present text of B*ri*haspati seems to apply to the same case.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[380:65](sbe3383.htm#fr_1269) 65, 66.
Aparârka; Sm*ri*ti*k*. XI, 4, 19 (Iyer). These texts are quoted in some
works only, and it is certainly difficult to reconcile them with the
other texts of B*ri*haspati on inheritance.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[380:67](sbe3383.htm#fr_1270) Col. Dig. V, 8,
446; D. XI, I, 49; May. p. 83; Viv. p. 298.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[380:68](sbe3383.htm#fr_1271) 68-71.
Nandapa*nd*ita's Vai*g*ayantî; U*gg*valâ, p. 82; Gautamîyâ Mitâksharâ.
The reading in 71 is uncertain.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[381:72](sbe3383.htm#fr_1272) Col. Dig. V, 8,
430; M. II, 9, 3; May. p. 84; V. pp. 40, 162, 205; Viv. p. 300; D. XI,
1, 30, XII, 3; Ratn. p. 605.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[381:73](sbe3383.htm#fr_1273) 73-75. Col. Dig.
V, 8, 407; Viv. p. 302; V. p. 159.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[381:76](sbe3383.htm#fr_1274) May. p. 88; Viv.
p. 305; Ratn. p. 602.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[381:77](sbe3383.htm#fr_1275) Col. Dig. V, 8,
460; V. p. 205; May. p. 85; Viv. p. 302.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[381:78](sbe3383.htm#fr_1276) May. p. 69;
Sm*ri*ti*k*. (Iyer) VII, 23.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[382:79](sbe3383.htm#fr_1277) 79-84. Col. Dig.
V, 5, 366; May. pp. 71, 72; Sm*ri*ti*k*. (Iyer) VII, 41-43, &c. The
arrangement of these texts varies in the several works.

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[382:80](sbe3383.htm#fr_1278) 80 b, 82. D. I,
10; V, 3.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[383:85](sbe3383.htm#fr_1279) M. I, 4, 17;
May. p. 70; V. p. 250.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[383:86](sbe3383.htm#fr_1280) V. p. 174;
Sm*ri*ti*k*. XI, 1, 44.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[383:87](sbe3383.htm#fr_1281) Col. Dig. V, 9,
487; D. IV, 2, 3; Viv. p. 267; V. p. 229. The two first works read, 'she
does not take her mother's wealth' for 'she shall receive an honorary
trifle only.'

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[383:88](sbe3383.htm#fr_1282) 88, 89. Col.
Dig. V, 9, 513; D. VI, 3, 31; May. p. 98; V. p. 243.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[383:90](sbe3383.htm#fr_1283) 90-92. Col. Dig.
V, 6, 389; D. XIV, 8.

90, 92. V. p. 261.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[384:92](sbe3383.htm#fr_1284) May. p. 75; Viv.
p. 313; Ratn. p. 608.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[384:93](sbe3383.htm#fr_1285) M. I, 1, 30;
May. p. 76; V. pp. 87, 158; D. II, 27 ('Vyâsa'). For 'kinsmen' some
works read 'coparceners' or 'co-heirs' (dâyâdâ*h*). The general meaning
remains the same.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[384:94](sbe3383.htm#fr_1286) 94, 95. Col.
Dig. V, 6, 378; May. p. 76; V. pp. 258, 259.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[384:96](sbe3383.htm#fr_1287) 96, 97. Col.
Dig. V, 6, 379; Ratn. p. 526.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[384:98](sbe3383.htm#fr_1288) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
(Iyer) VI, 11.

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[385:99](sbe3383.htm#fr_1289) 99, 100. Ratn.
p. 583; Varadarâ*g*a, p. 27.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[385:101](sbe3383.htm#fr_1290) Ratn. p. 600;
Col. Dig. V, 8, 454.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVI. Gambling and Betting](sbe3384)
