[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3379)  [Next](sbe3381) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXII. ROBBERY AND VIOLENCE.

1. <span id="fr_1180"></span>[1](#fn_1179) Homicide, theft, assault on
another man's wife, and the two kinds of injury (abuse and assault) are
the four species of violence (Sâhasa).

2. <span id="fr_1181"></span>[2](#fn_1180) Thieves are declared to be of
two kinds, open and concealed, These are subdivided a thousandfold,

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

according to their skill, ability, and mode of cheating.

3\. (Fraudulent) traders, quacks, gamblers, (corruptible) judges, those
who accept bribes, cheats, persons (pretending) to know how to interpret
evil omens, or to practise propitiatory rites, low artists, forgers,

4\. (Hired servants) refusing to do their work, (roguish) umpires,
perjured witnesses, and, lastly, jugglers: these are termed open
thieves.

5. <span id="fr_1182"></span>[5](#fn_1181) Housebreakers, highwaymen,
robbers of bipeds or quadrupeds, thieves of clothes and the like, and
stealers of grain, should be considered secret thieves.

6. <span id="fr_1183"></span>[6](#fn_1182) (Thieves or robbers) having
been found out by the king's attendants by their associating (with
thieves) or by marks of their criminality, or by their being possessed
of stolen goods, shall be compelled to restore their plunder, and shall
be visited with punishments ordained in law.

7. <span id="fr_1184"></span>[7](#fn_1183) A merchant who conceals the
blemish of an article which he is selling, or mixes bad and good
articles together, or sells (old articles) after repairing them, shall
be compelled to give the double quantity (to the purchaser) and to pay a
fine equal (in amount) to the value of. the article.

8\. A physician who, though unacquainted with drugs and spells, or
ignorant of the nature of a disease, yet takes money from the sick,
shall be punished like a thief.

9\. Gamblers playing with false dice, prostitutes,

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

those who appropriate what belongs to the king, and those who cheat an
association, are pronounced to be impostors, and punishable as such.

10. <span id="fr_1185"></span>[10](#fn_1184) Judges passing an unjust
sentence, those who live by taking bribes, and those who disappoint
confidence (placed in them): all such persons shall be banished.

11\. Those who, without knowing the science of stars, or portents,
expound them to the people from avarice, shall be punished by all means.

12\. Those who show themselves in public wearing a staff, a skin, and
the like (insignia of a religious order), and injure mankind by
deceiving them, shall be corporally punished by the king's officers.

13\. Those who by artificially getting up articles of small value cause
them to appear very valuable, and deceive women or children (by doing
so), shall be punished in proportion to their gain.

14\. Those who make false gold or factitious gems or coral shall be
compelled to restore their price to the purchaser, and to pay the double
amount to the king as a fine.

15\. Arbitrators who cheat either party from partiality, avarice or some
other motive, and witnesses who give false evidence, shall be compelled
to pay twice the amount (in dispute) as a fine.

16\. Those who procure gain by means of spells or medicines (shall be
compelled to give up) their gain; those who practise incantations with
roots shall be banished by the ruler of the land.

17. <span id="fr_1186"></span>[17](#fn_1185) Housebreakers shall be
compelled to relinquish their plunder and be impaled on a stake
afterwards,

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

and highwaymen shall be bound and hanged by the neck from a tree.

18. <span id="fr_1187"></span>[18](#fn_1186) Those who have kidnapped a
man shall be burned by the king with a fire kept up with straw; the
stealer of a woman (shall be placed) on a bed of hot iron, or burned
with a fire kept up with straw.

19. <span id="fr_1188"></span>[19](#fn_1187) Stealers of grain shall be
compelled to give ten times as much (to the owner), and the double
amount as a fine; a cow-stealer shall have his nose cut off, and shall
be plunged into water, after having been fettered.

20. <span id="fr_1189"></span>[20](#fn_1188) When a man takes grass,
wood, flowers, or fruit without asking permission to do so, he deserves
to have a hand cut off.

21. <span id="fr_1190"></span>[21](#fn_1189) On him who steals more than
ten kumbhas of grain, corporal punishment (or execution) shall be
inflicted; (for stealing) less than that, a man shall be fined eleven
times the quantity stolen, and shall restore his property to the owner.

22. <span id="fr_1191"></span>[22](#fn_1190) When a religious man and
diligent reader of the Veda has committed theft, he shall be kept in
prison for a long time, and shall be caused to perform a penance after
having been compelled to restore the stolen goods to the owner.

23. <span id="fr_1192"></span>[23](#fn_1191) Hear now (the law
regarding) theft coupled with violence, which springs from either wrath
or avarice.

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

24. <span id="fr_1193"></span>[24](#fn_1192) It is declared to be
threefold, as it may be (theft or violence) of the lowest, second, or
highest kind; the punishment in each case should also be of the lowest,
middling, or highest sort, according to the (nature of the) article
(stolen or injured).

25\. He who destroys or takes implements of husbandry, an embankment,
flowers, roots, or fruit, shall be fined a hundred (Pa*n*as) or more,
according (to the nature of his offence).

26\. So one injuring or stealing cattle, clothes, food, drinks, or
household utensils, shall be compelled to pay a fine of not less than
two hundred (Pa*n*as), like a thief.

27\. In the case of women, men, gold, gems, the property of a deity or
Brahman, silk, and (other) precious things, the fine shall be equal to
the value (of the article stolen).

28\. Or the double amount shall be inflicted by the king as a fine; or
the thief shall be executed, to prevent a repetition (of the offence).

29. <span id="fr_1194"></span>[29](#fn_1193) Violence is declared to be
of five sorts, and of these, manslaughter is declared to be the worst;
those who have perpetrated it, shall not be amerced in a fine, they
shall be put to death by all means.

30. <span id="fr_1195"></span>[30](#fn_1194) Both notorious murderers
and secret assassins shall be put to death by the king by various modes
of execution, after their property has been duly seized.

31. <span id="fr_1196"></span>[31](#fn_1195) When several persons in a
passion beat a single individual (and kill him), the responsibility

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

for his death shall be charged to him who strikes the fatal blow.

32\. He who struck the fatal blow shall have to atone for his offence as
directed; the first aggressor and the associates shall be punished half
as much.

33\. The decision should be given after carefully ascertaining by signs
the less or greater severity of a wound, the seat of vital power, the
strength (of the murdered individual), and the repetition (of the blows
or cuts).

34. <span id="fr_1197"></span>[34](#fn_1196) Where the corpse is found,
but the murderer cannot be discovered, the king shall trace him by
drawing an inference from previous enmities of his.

35. <span id="fr_1198"></span>[35](#fn_1197) His immediate neighbours,
and their neighbours, as well as his friends, enemies, and relatives,
shall be questioned by the king's officers, employing towards them the
(four) expedients of conciliation and so forth.

36\. The (guilty) person may be found out from his keeping bad company,
from signs (of the crime committed), and from the possession of stolen
property. Thus has been declared the method of discovering murderers and
robbers.

37. <span id="fr_1199"></span>[37](#fn_1198) He who has been arrested on
suspicion and does not confess his guilt, shall clear himself (from
suspicion) by ordeal; this rule holds good for causes of every sort.

38\. He who has been cleared of guilt by ordeal shall be released; he
who has been convicted shall be put to death. By punishment (of the
wicked)

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

and release (of the virtuous), the renown and religious merit of a king
is increased.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[359:1](sbe3380.htm#fr_1180) XXII, 1. May. p.
145.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[359:2](sbe3380.htm#fr_1181) 2-4. Ratn. p.
289; Vîram. p. 491.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[360:5](sbe3380.htm#fr_1182) Ratn. p. 292.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[360:6](sbe3380.htm#fr_1183) Viv. p. 157;
Ratn. p. 293.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[360:7](sbe3380.htm#fr_1184) 7-15. Ratn. pp.
297, 306-311, 314; May. p. 142; Vîram. p. 492; Viv. pp. 159-165. The
readings of the Ratnâkara have been followed throughout, in preference
to those found in the other works.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[361:10](sbe3380.htm#fr_1185) Ratn. p. 315.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[361:17](sbe3380.htm#fr_1186) Ratn. p. 317.;
May. p. 143; Vîram. p. 494; Viv. p. 166.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[362:18](sbe3380.htm#fr_1187) Ratn. p. 317;
Viv. p. 166.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[362:19](sbe3380.htm#fr_1188) Ratn. p. 322;
Vîram. p. 494; May. p. 143.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[362:20](sbe3380.htm#fr_1189) Ratn. p. 329;
Viv. p. 174.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[362:21](sbe3380.htm#fr_1190) Viv. p. 169.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[362:22](sbe3380.htm#fr_1191) Ratn. p. 331;
Viv. p. 176. Under the version found in the latter work, the punishment
does not take place when the Brahman performs a penance.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[362:23](sbe3380.htm#fr_1192) Vîram. p. 503.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[363:24](sbe3380.htm#fr_1193) 24-28. Ratn. p.
350; May. p. 147.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[363:29](sbe3380.htm#fr_1194) 29, 30. Ratn. p.
371; Viv. p. 192.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[363:30](sbe3380.htm#fr_1195) May. p. 145;
Vîram. p. 501.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[363:31](sbe3380.htm#fr_1196) 31-33. Ratn. p.
373; Viv. p. 194.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[364:34](sbe3380.htm#fr_1197) 34-36. Ratn. p.
377; Viv. p. 197 (the better version).

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[364:35](sbe3380.htm#fr_1198) The three other
expedients are, bribery, intimidation, and violence.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[364:37](sbe3380.htm#fr_1199) 37, 38. Ratn.
pp. 377, 378; Viv. p. 198.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. Adultery](sbe3381)
