[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3328)  [Next](sbe3330) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 22. The Ordeal by Water.

304\. I will now proclaim the excellent law regarding the (ordeal by)
water, (which may be performed at all seasons) one after the other,
excepting the winter and dewy seasons.

\* 305. <span id="fr_322"></span>[305](#fn_322) (This ordeal may be
performed) in streams

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

which have not too swift a course, in oceans, in rivers, in lakes, in
ponds dug by the gods, in tanks, and in pools.

\* 306. <span id="fr_323"></span>[306](#fn_323) The diving shall take
place after three arrows have been discharged from a bow which must not
be too strong. Wise men (have declared) what its strength should be.

\* 307. <span id="fr_324"></span>[307](#fn_324) A strong bow is declared
to be 107 (Aṅgulas) long, a moderate bow 106, and an inferior bow 105
(Aṅgulas). This is declared to be the rule regarding the bow.

\* 308. A strong man should be placed like a pillar in water, reaching
to his navel. The defendant should seize him by the thigh and dive under
water.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

\* 309. From the place where the arrows have been discharged, a young
man endowed with swiftness of limb should walk as quickly as possible to
the place where the middlemost arrow has fallen down.

\* 310. Another man, who must be an equally swift runner, should seize
the middlemost arrow and return with it quickly to the place from which
the (first) man has proceeded.

311\. If he who took the arrow does not see the defendant in water on
arriving, because he is completely under water, the defendant must be
acquitted.

\* 312. Otherwise he is guilty, though only one limb of his have become
visible. (He is pronounced guilty) equally, if he has moved to a
different place than that where he was first immersed.

\* 313. Women or children must not be subjected to the ordeal by water
by persons acquainted with the law; nor sick, superannuated, or feeble
men.

\* 314. Cowards, those tormented by pain, and persons afflicted by a
calamity should also be held exempt from this trial. Such persons perish
immediately after diving, because they are declared to have hardly any
breath.

\* 315. Should they even have appeared before the court on account of a
serious crime, he must not cause them to dive under water, nor must he
subject them to the ordeal by fire, or give them poison.

\* 316. <span id="fr_325"></span>[316](#fn_325) ‘Nothing is more capable
than water and fire of showing the difference between right and wrong.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Because fire has
arisen from the waters, therefore suspected persons

\* 317. Are subjected to this proof by preference, by persons thoroughly
conversant with the law. Therefore deign, O venerable Lord of Waters, to
effect acquittal through truth.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_322"></span>[111:305](sbe3329.htm#fr_322) 305-317. Vish*n*u
XII; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 108, 109.

The ordeal by water may be briefly described as follows: 1. This ordeal
should be either performed in a tank or in a river which has no swift
current. 2. Three arrows should be discharged from a bow of middling
size. 3. After that, a strong man should enter the water as far as his
navel. The defendant should seize him by the thigh and dive under water.
4. A swift runner should be sent after the second arrow. When he has
reached the place where it has fallen, another equally swift runner
should be sent back with it to the place where the defendant has entered
the water. 5. The defendant is declared innocent, if he has remained
under water till the arrow has been brought back. He is declared guilty,
if any one of his limbs have been seen, or if he were to emerge from the
water in a different spot from that where he entered it. 6. During the
proceeding, a prayer is addressed to the deity of water, in which it is
asserted, that fire arose from water, and that the water ordeal is
superior therefore to the ordeal by fire.

305\. The winter season comprises the months Agrahâya*n*a and <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> Pausha. The dewy or cold season (*S*i*s*ira)
comprises the months Mâgha and Phâlguna. It appears, therefore, that the
ordeal by water must not be performed during the period extending from
the middle of November to the middle of March, i.e. during the cold
weather. This is no doubt because the low temperature of the water
during the cold weather might affect the capacity of the defendant to
hold out under water sufficiently long.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[112:306](sbe3329.htm#fr_323) Devakhâta. 'a
pond dug by the gods,' denotes a natural hollow or lake. (Böhtlingk's
Dictionary.) Nandapa*nd*ita, in his Commentary of the Vish*n*u-sm*ri*ti
(LXIV, 16), gives the well-known lake of Pushkara, near A*g*mîr, as an
instance of a Devakhâta.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[112:307](sbe3329.htm#fr_324) It seems strange
that the difference in length between the bows should not amount to more
than one Aṅgula or inch. The commentators take the three numerals in
this paragraph to denote 105, 106, and 107 respectively, and I have
translated in accordance with this interpretation. It is, however,
possible to translate the three numerals by 500, 600, and 100
respectively, and to refer them to the number of Hastas (1 Hasta = 18
inches) traversed by each of the three arrows. According to another
text, which is wrongly attributed to Nârada by some commentators, the
arrows shall be shot at a target, which has to be placed at a distance
of 150 Hastas from the marksman.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[113:316](sbe3329.htm#fr_325) 316, 317. These
two paragraphs contain the prayer by which the deity of water should be
addressed. A. Vish*n*u XII, 8; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 108.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. The Ordeal by Poison](sbe3330)
