[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3366)  [Next](sbe3368) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IX. POSSESSION.

1. <span id="fr_964"></span>[1](#fn_963) This set of rules regarding
witnesses and documents has been propounded. The law concerning the
acquisition of immovable property and possession will be proclaimed
next.

2\. Immovable property may be acquired in seven different ways, viz. by
learning, by purchase, by mortgaging, by valour, with a wife (as her
dowry), by inheritance (from an ancestor), and by succession to the
property of a kinsman who has no issue.

3\. In the case of property acquired by one of these seven methods, viz.
inheritance from a father (or other ancestor), acquisition (in the shape
of a dowry), purchase, hypothecation, succession, valour, or learned
knowledge, possession coupled with a legitimate title constitutes
proprietary right.

4\. That possession which is hereditary, or founded on a royal order, or
coupled with purchase, hypothecation or a legitimate title: possession
of this kind constitutes proprietary right.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

5. <span id="fr_965"></span>[5](#fn_964) Immovable property obtained by
a division (of the estate among co-heirs), or by purchase, or inherited
from a father (or other ancestor), or presented by the king, is
acknowledged as one's lawful property; it is lost by forbearance in the
case of adverse possession.

6\. He who is holding possession (of an estate) after having merely
taken it, occupying it without meeting with resistance, becomes its
legitimate owner thus; and it is lost (to the owner) by such
forbearance.

7\. He whose possession has been continuous from the time of occupation,
and has never been interrupted for a period of thirty years, cannot be
deprived of such property.

8. <span id="fr_966"></span>[8](#fn_965) That property which is publicly
given by coheirs or others to a stranger who is enjoying it, cannot be
recovered afterwards by him (who is its legitimate owner).

9\. He who does not raise a protest when a stranger is giving away (his)
landed property in his sight, cannot again recover that estate, even
though he be possessed of a written title to it.

10. <span id="fr_967"></span>[10](#fn_966) Possession held by three
generations produces ownership for strangers, no doubt, when they are
related to one another in the degree of a Sapi*nd*a; it does not stand
good in the case of Sakulyas.

11\. A house, field, commodity or other property having been held by
another person than the owner,

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

is not lost (to the owner) by mere force of possession, if the possessor
stands to him in the relation of a friend, relative, or kinsman.

12\. Such wealth as is possessed by a son-in-law, a learned Brahman, or
by the king or his ministers, does not become legitimate property for
them after the lapse of a very long period even.

13\. Forcible means must not be resorted to by the present occupant or
his son, in maintaining possession of the property of an infant, or of a
learned Brahman, or of that which has been legitimately inherited from a
father,

14\. Nor (in maintaining possession) of cattle, a woman, a slave, or
other (property). This is a legal rule.

15. <span id="fr_968"></span>[15](#fn_967) If a doubt should arise in
regard to a house or field, of which its occupant has not held
possession uninterruptedly, he should undertake to prove (his enjoyment
of it) by means of documents, (the depositions of) persons knowing him
as possessor, and witnesses.

16. <span id="fr_969"></span>[16](#fn_968) Those are witnesses in a
contest of this kind who know the name, the boundary, the title (of
acquisition), the quantity, the time, the quarter of the sky, and the
reason why possession has been interrupted..

17\. By such means should a question regarding occupation and possession
be decided in a contest concerning landed property; but in a cause in
which

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

no (human) evidence is forthcoming, divine test should be resorted to.

18. <span id="fr_970"></span>[18](#fn_969) When a village, field, or
garden is referred to in one and the same grant, they are (considered to
be) possessed of all of them, though possession be held of part of them
only. (On the other hand) that title has no force which is not
accompanied by a slight measure of possession even.

19. <span id="fr_971"></span>[19](#fn_970) Not to possess landed
property, not to show a document in the proper time, and not to remind
witnesses (of their deposition): this is the way to lose one's property.

20\. Therefore evidence should be preserved carefully; if this be done,
lawsuits whether relating to immovable or to movable property are sure
to succeed.

21. <span id="fr_972"></span>[21](#fn_971) Female slaves can never be
acquired by possession, without a written title; nor (does possession
create ownership) in the case of property belonging to a king, or to a
learned Brahman, or to an idiot, or infant.

22. <span id="fr_973"></span>[22](#fn_972) It is not by mere force of
possession that land becomes a man's property; a legitimate title also
having been proved, it is converted into property by both (possession
and title), but not otherwise.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

23 <span id="fr_974"></span>[23](#fn_973) Should even the father,
grandfather, and great-grandfather of a man be alive, land having been
possessed by him for thirty years, without intervention of strangers,

24\. It should be considered as possession extending over one
generation; possession continued for twice that period (is called
possession) extending over two generations; possession continued for
three times that period (is called possession) extending over three
generations. (Possession continued) longer than that even, is (called)
possession of long standing.

25. <span id="fr_975"></span>[25](#fn_974) When the present occupant is
impeached, a document or witness is (considered as) decisive. When he is
no longer in existence, possession alone is decisive for his sons.

26. <span id="fr_976"></span>[26](#fn_975) When possession extending
over three generations has descended to the fourth generation, it
becomes legitimate possession, and a title must never be inquired for.

27. <span id="fr_977"></span>[27](#fn_976) When possession undisturbed
(by others) has been held by three generations (in succession), it is
not necessary to produce a title; possession is decisive in that case.

28. <span id="fr_978"></span>[28](#fn_977) In suits regarding immovable
property, (possession)

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

held by three generations in succession, should be considered as valid,
and makes evidence in the decision of a cause.

29. <span id="fr_979"></span>[29](#fn_978) He whose possession has
passed through three lives, and is duly substantiated by a written
title, cannot be deprived of it; such possession is equal to the gift of
the Veda.

30. <span id="fr_980"></span>[30](#fn_979) He whose possession has
passed through three lives and has been inherited from his ancestors,
cannot be deprived of it, unless a previous grant should be in existence
(in which the same property has been granted to a different person by
the king).

31. <span id="fr_981"></span>[31](#fn_980) That possession is valid in
law which is uninterrupted and of long standing; interrupted possession
even is (recognised as valid), if it has been substantiated by an
ancestor.

32. <span id="fr_982"></span>[32](#fn_981) A witness prevails over
inference; a writing prevails over witnesses; undisturbed possession
which has passed through three lives prevails over both.

33. <span id="fr_983"></span>[33](#fn_982) When an event (forming the
subject, of a plaint) has occurred long ago, and no witnesses are
forthcoming, he should examine indirect witnesses, or he should
administer oaths, or should try artifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_963"></span>[309:1](sbe3367.htm#fr_964) IX, 1-7. Vîram. pp.
203, 204.

1\. The Vîramitrodaya argues that, although immovable property is
principally referred to, the same law applies a fortiori to movable
property.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[310:5](sbe3367.htm#fr_965) 5, 6. Col. Dig. V,
6, 384.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[310:8](sbe3367.htm#fr_966) 8, 9. Vîram. p.
209.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[310:10](sbe3367.htm#fr_967) 10-12. Col. Dig.
V, 7, 396.

10-14. Vîram. p. 221. Sapi*nd*aship in this rule includes four
generations; the term Sakulya is used to denote more remote relations.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[311:15](sbe3367.htm#fr_968) 15-17. Vîram. p.
222.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[311:16](sbe3367.htm#fr_969) Read
nâmâghâ*t*âgama*m*. 'The title,' the cause of ownership, such as gift.
'The quantity,' of land. 'The quarter of the sky,' a description of the
region in which a certain estate is situated. 'The time,' at which the
estate was acquired. *T*o*d*arânanda.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[312:18](sbe3367.htm#fr_970) Vîram. pp. 221,
222; Col. Dig. V, 6, 383.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[312:19](sbe3367.htm#fr_971) 19, 20. *T*o*d*.
bhûmer abhuktir lekhyasya yathâkâlam adar*s*anam \| asmâra*n*a*m*
sâkshi*n*â*m* *k*a svârthahânikarâ*n*i *k*a \|\| tasmâd yatnena
kartavya*m* pramâ*n*aparipâlanam \| tena kâryâ*n*i sidhyanti
sthâvarâ*n*i *k*arâ*n*i *k*a \|\|

<span id="fn_971"></span>[312:21](sbe3367.htm#fr_972) Sm*ri*ti*k*. na
strî*n*âm upabhoga*h* syâd vinâ lekhya*m* katha*mk*ana \|
râ*g*a*s*rotriyavitte *k*a *g*a*d*abâladhane tathâ \|\|

<span id="fn_972"></span>[312:22](sbe3367.htm#fr_973) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
bhuktikevalayâ naiva bhûmi*h* siddhim avâpnuyât \| âgamenâpi *s*uddhena
dvâbhyâ*m* sidhyati nânyathâ \|\|

<span id="fn_973"></span>[313:23](sbe3367.htm#fr_974) 23, 24.
Sm*ri*ti*k*. pitâ pitâmaho yasya *g*îve*k* *k*a prapitâmaha*h* \|
tri*ms*at samâ yâ tu bhuktâ bhûmir avyâhatâ parai*h* \|\| bhukti*h* sâ
paurushî *gñ*eyâ dvigu*n*â *k*a dvipaurushî \| tripaurushî *k*a
trigu*n*â parata*h* syâ*k* *k*irantanî \|\|

<span id="fn_974"></span>[313:25](sbe3367.htm#fr_975) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
yatrâhartâbhiyukta*h* syâl lekhya*m* sâkshî tadâ guru*h* \| tadabhâve tu
putrâ*n*â*m* bhuktir ekâ garîyasî \|\|

<span id="fn_975"></span>[313:26](sbe3367.htm#fr_976) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
bhuktis tripurushî yâ *k*a *k*aturthe sampravartitâ \| tad
bhogasthiratâ*m* yâti na p*rikkh*ed âgama*m* kva*k*it \|\|

<span id="fn_976"></span>[313:27](sbe3367.htm#fr_977) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
anishedhena yad bhukta*m* purushais tribhir eva tu \| tatra naivâgama*h*
kâryo bhuktis tatra garîyasî \|\|

<span id="fn_977"></span>[313:28](sbe3367.htm#fr_978) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
sthâvareshu vivâdeshu kramât tripurushî *k*a yâ \| svatantraiva hi sâ
*gñ*eyâ pramâ*n*a*m* sâdhyanir*n*aye \|\|

<span id="fn_978"></span>[314:29](sbe3367.htm#fr_979) Sm*ri*ti*k*. yasya
tripurushâ bhukti*h* samyag lekhyasamanvitâ \| eva*m*vidhâ brahmadeyâ
hartu*m* tasya na *s*akyate \|\| The 'gift of the Veda,' i.e.
instruction is mentioned as an instance of an inalienable gift.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[314:30](sbe3367.htm#fr_980) Sm*ri*ti*k*. yasya
tripurushâ bhukti*h* pâra*m*paryakramâgatâ \| na sâ *k*âlayitu*m*
*s*akyâ pûrvakâ*k* *kh*âsanâd *ri*te \|\|

<span id="fn_980"></span>[314:31](sbe3367.htm#fr_981) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
bhuktir balavatî *s*âstre<sup>ऽ</sup>py avi*kkh*innâ *k*irantanî \|
vi*kkh*innâpi hi sâ *gñ*eyâ yâ tu pûrvaprasâdhitâ \|\| 'If it has been
substantiated by an ancestor,' i.e. if a previous possessor has adduced
a legitimate title.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[314:32](sbe3367.htm#fr_982) Raghunandana, p.
49.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[314:33](sbe3367.htm#fr_983) Vîram. p. 223.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. Ordeals](sbe3368)
