[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3306)  [Next](sbe3308) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

#### III. COURTS OF JUSTICE.

\* 1. <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) One who has not been
authorized must not speak on any account at the trial. But authorized
persons must deliver their opinion in an unbiassed spirit.

\* 2. <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107) Whether unauthorized or
authorized, one acquainted with the law shall give his opinion. He
passes a divine sentence who acts up to the dictates of law.

3. <span id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108) If he delivers a fair opinion,
a member of the court will incur neither hatred nor sin. But if he
speaks otherwise he at once incurs both.

\* 4. <span id="fr_109"></span>[4](#fn_109) Let the king appoint, as
members of a court

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

of justice, honourable men, of tried integrity, who are able to bear,
like good bulls, the burden of the administration of justice.

\* 5. <span id="fr_110"></span>[5](#fn_110) The members of a royal court
of justice must be acquainted with the sacred law and with rules of
prudence, noble, veracious, and impartial towards friend and foe.

6. <span id="fr_111"></span>[6](#fn_111) Justice is said to depend on
them, and the king is the fountain head of justice. Therefore the king
should try causes properly, attended by good assessors.

7. <span id="fr_112"></span>[7](#fn_112) When lawsuits are decided
properly, the members of the court are cleared from guilt. Their purity
depends on the justice (of the sentences passed by them). Therefore one
must deliver a fair judgment.

8. <span id="fr_113"></span>[8](#fn_113) Where justice is slain by
injustice, and truth by falsehood, the members of the court, who look on
with indifference, are doomed to destruction themselves.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

9. <span id="fr_114"></span>[9](#fn_114) Where justice, having been hit
by injustice, enters a court of justice, and the members of the court do
not extract the dart from the wound, they are hit by it themselves.

10. <span id="fr_115"></span>[10](#fn_115) Either the judicial assembly
must not be entered at all, or a fair opinion delivered. That man who
either stands mute or delivers an opinion contrary to justice is a
sinner.

11. <span id="fr_116"></span>[11](#fn_116) Those members of a court who,
after having entered it, sit mute and meditative, and do not speak when
the occasion arises, are liars all of them.

\* 12. <span id="fr_117"></span>[12](#fn_117) One quarter of the
iniquity goes to the offender; one quarter goes to the witness; one
quarter goes to all the members of the court; one quarter goes to the
king.

13\. The king is freed from responsibility, the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

members of the court obtain their absolution, and the guilt goes to the
offender, when the guilty person is punished.

14. <span id="fr_118"></span>[14](#fn_118) He who, having entered the
court, delivers a strange opinion, ignoring the true state of the case,
resembles a blind man who regardless swallows fish together with the
bones.

15. <span id="fr_119"></span>[15](#fn_119) Therefore let every assessor
of the court deliver a fair opinion after having entered the court,
discarding love and hatred, in order that he may not go to hell.

\* 16 <span id="fr_120"></span>[16](#fn_120). As an experienced surgeon
extracts a dart by means of surgical instruments, even so the chief

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

judge must extract the dart (of iniquity) from the lawsuit.

\* 17. <span id="fr_121"></span>[17](#fn_121) When the whole aggregate
of the members of a judicial assembly declare, 'This is right,' the
lawsuit loses the dart, otherwise the dart remains in it.

18. <span id="fr_122"></span>[18](#fn_122) That is not a judicial
assembly where there are no elders. They are not elders who do not pass
a just sentence. That is not a just sentence in which there is no truth.
That is not truth which is vitiated by error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[36:1](sbe3307.htm#fr_106) III, 1. Courts of
justice are generally thronged by a large attendance. Some of the
persons present are intelligent, others are not, and others are wise in
their own estimation only. Such persons, if unrestrained, would disturb
the judges by interpreting idle speeches between the legal proceedings,
and by quarrelling amongst themselves. Therefore, the first half of this
paragraph relates to the punishment ordained for those who speak without
authorization. Authorized persons, i.e. the judges who sit on the seat
of judgment, shall strive to be just, i.e. they shall deliver a judgment
in accordance with justice, and shall not show partiality for either of
the parties. A.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[36:2](sbe3307.htm#fr_107) Where all the
assessors of the court pass an unjust sentence, from ignorance of the
law, or from interested motives, there a Brahman versed in the sacred
law and acquainted with legal proceedings, who happens to be present,
shall point out the law to them, and restrain the judges from their
sinful course. He shall speak, though he has not been appointed to
deliver judgment. Law is called the voice of the deity. A.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[36:3](sbe3307.htm#fr_108) That is called 'a
fair opinion' which is not contrary to written law and to custom. A
judge who delivers a sentence of this kind incurs neither enmity nor
sin, i.e. he does not become unhappy either in this world or in the
next. A.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[36:4](sbe3307.htm#fr_109) As young bulls are
able to carry a heavy burden, even so <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>
competent judges are able to discharge the onerous duties of their
responsible office. They must be men of ripe wisdom, acquainted with
sacred law and with the ways of the world, and the king must have tested
their qualifications. A. Vish*n*u III, 74, &c.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[37:5](sbe3307.htm#fr_110) The law-books
contain many utterances of the sages, which are obscure and difficult to
make out. Therefore slow-minded persons, who are unable to understand
them, and to refer their contents to each case in hand, must not be
appointed. Well-descended persons shall be appointed, because they will
avoid partiality from family pride. 'Veracious' persons have a natural
abhorrence against untruthfulness. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 2.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[37:6](sbe3307.htm#fr_111) 'On them,' i.e. on
the judges, whose qualities have been previously described. A. Vish*n*u
III, 72; Manu VIII, 1; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 1, &c.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[37:7](sbe3307.htm#fr_112) If the king decides
lawsuits justly, the assessors obtain their own absolution through the
just decision. A.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[37:8](sbe3307.htm#fr_113) Identical with Manu
VIII, 14.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[38:9](sbe3307.htm#fr_114) Virtue is here
compared to one wounded with a weapon, who goes to a physician in order
to be cured by him. The judges are compared to physicians who, by means
of a careful judicial investigation, deliver justice from the attacks of
iniquity. If they do not extract the dart of iniquity, they are killed
themselves by the dart of iniquity, which has been spared by them. A.
Nearly identical with Manu VIII, 12.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[38:10](sbe3307.htm#fr_115) Either the judicial
assembly must not be entered at all, not even a single time, or an
opinion conformable to justice must be delivered. A judge who remains
silent, or who, when asked to pass a sentence, says what is contrary to
justice, is criminal, i.e. a great sinner. A. Nearly identical with Manu
VIII, 13.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[38:11](sbe3307.htm#fr_116) Those judges who
sit mute in the judicial assembly, being apparently engaged in
meditating over an altogether different affair than that for which the
parties have appeared before the tribunal, and who fail to declare at
the proper time the victory of the one party and the defeat of the
other, all such persons shall be looked upon by the king as equally
criminal with those who pass a false sentence. A.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[38:12](sbe3307.htm#fr_117) 12, 13. These two
paragraphs belong together. If the judges, <span id="page_39">p.
39</span> were to acquit the criminal, and unjustly to condemn the
innocent party, the iniquity or sinful action committed by the unjust
decree would go into four parts, i.e. a quarter of it would go
respectively to the shares of the perpetrator of the deed, of the
witnesses, of all the assessors of the court, and of the king. If,
however, the guilty person alone is condemned, i.e. if the criminal
party loses his cause, the king becomes free from guilt, the judges are
free from responsibility, and the whole guilt falls on the perpetrator
of the iniquitous deed. A. Medhâtithi, in commenting on the identical
rule of Manu (VIII, 18), observes that the guilt goes to the king, in
case the sentence had been passed by him in person. Otherwise it goes to
his chief judge. Identical with Manu VIII, 18, 19, &c.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[39:14](sbe3307.htm#fr_118) One whose eyesight
is unimpaired, does not eat fish without having previously removed the
bones, which would injure his mouth, his tongue, and his palate. A blind
man, on the contrary, eats fish together with the bones, because he is
unable to remove them. The case is similar with the eye of knowledge. A.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[39:15](sbe3307.htm#fr_119) Considering all
this, let a judge, after having entered the court of judicature, reject
every kind of bias, and deliver a fair, i.e. an impartial opinion, in
order that he may not go to hell burdened with the crime of a guilty
person (acquitted by him). A.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[39:16](sbe3307.htm#fr_120) As a skilful
surgeon conversant with the art of extracting a dart, extracts it,
though it may be difficult to get at and invisible, by the application
of surgical instruments, of spells, and other manifold artful practices,
even so a judge shall extract the dart of <span id="page_40">p.
40</span> iniquity which has entered a lawsuit, by employing the artful
expedients of judicial investigation. A.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[40:17](sbe3307.htm#fr_121) 'The members of a
judicial assembly' are those who have come together for the trial of a
cause. A.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[40:18](sbe3307.htm#fr_122) This paragraph, in
the original, is a verse composed in the Trish*t*ubh metre, and has the
look of an old versus memorialis. Though the author of the
Nârada-sm*ri*ti has incorporated it in his work, its contents do not
quite fit in with his own ideas regarding the constitution of a judicial
assembly, and the prominent place which he assigns to the chief judge of
the king.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Payment of a Debt](sbe3308)
