[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rom)  [Next](co2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 1 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, called to be an Apostle of Christ
Jesus through the will of God--and our brother Sosthenes:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To the Church of God in Corinth, men and
women consecrated in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all in
every place who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ-- their Lord
as well as ours.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> May grace and peace be granted to you from
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> I thank my God continually on your behalf
for the grace of God bestowed on you in Christ Jesus--

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> that you have been so richly blessed in
Him, with readiness of speech and fulness of knowledge.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Thus my testimony as to the Christ has been
confirmed in your experience,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> so that there is no gift of God in which
you consciously come short while patiently waiting for the reappearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> who will also keep you stedfast to the very
End, so that you will be free from reproach on the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> God is ever true to His promises, and it
was by Him that you were, one and all, called into fellowship with his
Son Jesus Christ, our Lord.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Now I entreat you, brethren, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to cultivate a spirit of harmony--all of
you--and that there be no divisions among you, but rather a perfect
union through your having one mind and one judgement.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I have been distinctly informed, my
brethren, about you by Chloe's people, that there are dissensions among
you.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> What I mean is that each of you is a
partisan. One man says "I belong to Paul;" another "I belong to
Apollos;" a third "I belong to Peter;" a fourth "I belong to Christ."

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Is the Christ in fragments? Is it Paul
who was crucified on your behalf? Or were you baptized to be Paul's
adherents?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I thank God that I did not baptize any of
you except Crispus and Gaius--

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> for fear people should say that you were
baptized to be my adherents.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> I did, however, baptize Stephanas'
household also: but I do not think that I baptized any one else.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Christ did not send me to baptize, but to
proclaim the Good News; and not in merely wise words--lest the Cross of
Christ should be deprived of its power.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For the Message of the Cross is
foolishness to those who are on the way to perdition, but it is the
power of God to those whom He is saving.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For so it stands written, &lt;"I will
exhibit the nothingness of the wisdom of the wise, and the intelligence
of the intelligent I will bring to nought."&gt;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Where is your wise man? Where your
expounder of the Law? Where your investigator of the questions of this
present age? Has not God shown the world's wisdom to be utter
foolishness?

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For after the world by its wisdom--as God
in His wisdom had ordained--had failed to gain the knowledge of God, God
was pleased, by the apparent foolishness of the Message which we preach,
to save those who accepted it.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Seeing that Jews demand miracles, and
Greeks go in search of wisdom,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> while we proclaim a Christ who has been
crucified--to the Jews a stumbling-block, to Gentiles foolishness,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> but to those who have received the Call,
whether Jews or Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Because that which the world deems
foolish in God is wiser than men's wisdom, and that which it deems
feeble in God is mightier than men's might.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> For consider, brethren, God's call to
you. Not many who are wise with merely human wisdom, not many of
position and influence, not many of noble birth have been called.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> But God has chosen the things which the
world regards as foolish, in order to put its wise men to shame; and God
has chosen the things which the world regards as destitute of influence,
in order to put its powerful things to shame;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> and the things which the world regards as
base, and those which it sets utterly at nought--things that have no
existence--God has chosen in order to reduce to nothing things that do
exist;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> to prevent any mortal man from boasting
in the presence of God.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> But you--and it is all God's doing--are
in Christ Jesus: He has become for us a wisdom which is from God,
consisting of righteousness and sanctification and deliverance;

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> in order that it may be as Scripture
says, &lt;"He who boasts--let his boast be in the Lord."&gt;

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And as for myself, brethren, when I came to
you, it was not with surpassing power of eloquence or earthly wisdom
that I came, announcing to you that which God had commanded me to bear
witness to.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For I determined to be utterly ignorant,
when among you, of everything except of Jesus Christ, and of Him as
having been crucified.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And so far as I myself was concerned, I
came to you in conscious feebleness and in fear and in deep anxiety.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And my language and the Message that I
proclaimed were not adorned with persuasive words of earthly wisdom, but
depended upon truths which the Spirit taught and mightily carried home;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> so that your trust might rest not on the
wisdom of man but on the power of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Yet when we are among mature believers we
do speak words of wisdom; a wisdom not belonging, however, to the
present age nor to the leaders of the present age who are soon to pass
away.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But in dealing with truths hitherto kept
secret we speak of God's wisdom--that hidden wisdom which, before the
world began, God pre-destined, so that it should result in glory to us;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> a wisdom which not one of the leaders of
the present age possesses, for if they had possessed it, they would
never have crucified the Lord of glory.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But--to use the words of Scripture--we
speak of &lt;things which eye has not seen nor ear heard,&gt; and which
have never entered the heart of man: &lt;all that God has in readiness
for them that love Him.&gt;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For us, however, God has drawn aside the
veil through the teaching of the Spirit; for the Spirit searches
everything, including the depths of the divine nature.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For, among human beings, who knows a
man's inner thoughts except the man's own spirit within him? In the same
way, also, only God's Spirit is acquainted with God's inner thoughts.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But we have not received the spirit of
the world, but the Spirit which comes forth from God, that we may know
the blessings that have been so freely given to us by God.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Of these we speak--not in language which
man's wisdom teaches us, but in that which the Spirit teaches--adapting,
as we do, spiritual words to spiritual truths.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The unspiritual man rejects the things of
the Spirit of God, and cannot attain to the knowledge of them, because
they are spiritually judged.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> But the spiritual man judges of
everything, although he is himself judged by no one.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For &lt;who has penetrated the mind of
the Lord, and will instruct Him?&gt; But \*we\* have the mind of Christ.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And as for myself, brethren, I found it
impossible to speak to you as spiritual men. It had to be as to
worldlings--mere babes in Christ.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I fed you with milk and not with solid
food, since for this you were not yet strong enough. And even now you
are not strong enough:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> you are still unspiritual. For so long as
jealousy and strife continue among you, can it be denied that you are
unspiritual and are living and acting like mere men of the world?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For when some one says, "I belong to Paul,"
and another says, "I belong to Apollos," is not this the way men of the
world speak?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> What then is Apollos? And what is Paul?
They are just God's servants, through whose efforts, and as the Lord
granted power to each, you accepted the faith.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I planted and Apollos watered; but it was
God who was, all the time, giving the increase.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> So that neither the planter nor the waterer
is of any importance. God who gives the increase is all in all.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Now in aim and purpose the planter and the
waterer are one; and yet each will receive his own special reward,
answering to his own special work.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Apollos and I are simply fellow workers for
and with God, and you are \*God's\* field-- \*God's\* building.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In discharge of the task which God
graciously entrusted to me, I--like a competent master-builder--have
laid a foundation, and others are building upon it. But let every one be
careful how and what he builds.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For no one can lay any other foundation
in addition to that which is already laid, namely Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And whether the building which any one is
erecting on that foundation be of gold or silver or costly stones, of
timber or hay or straw--

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> the true character of each individual's
work will become manifest. For the day of Christ will disclose it,
because that day is soon to come upon us clothed in fire, and as for the
quality of every one's work-- the fire is the thing which will test it.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> If any one's work--the building which he
has erected--stands the test, he will be rewarded.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> If any one's work is burnt up, he will
suffer the loss of it; yet he will himself be rescued, but only, as it
were, by passing through the fire.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Do you not know that you are God's
Sanctuary, and that the Spirit of God has His home within you?

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> If any one is marring the Sanctuary of
God, him will God mar; for the Sanctuary of God is holy, which you all
are.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Let no one deceive himself. If any man
imagines that he is wise, compared with the rest of you, with the wisdom
of the present age, let him become "foolish" so that he may be wise.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> This world's wisdom is "foolishness" in
God's sight; for it is written, &lt;"He snares the wise with their own
cunning."&gt;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And again, &lt;"The Lord takes knowledge
of the reasonings of the wise--how useless they are."&gt;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Therefore let no one boast about his
human teachers.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> For everything belongs to you--be it Paul
or Apollos or Peter, the world or life or death, things present or
future--everything belongs to you;

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> and you belong to Christ, and Christ
belongs to God.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> As for us Apostles, let any one take this
view of us--we are Christ's officers, and stewards of God's secret
truths.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> This being so, it follows that fidelity is
what is required in stewards.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> I however am very little concerned at
undergoing your scrutiny, or that of other men; in fact I do not even
scrutinize myself.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Though I am not conscious of having been in
any way unfaithful, yet I do not for that reason stand acquitted; but He
whose scrutiny I must undergo is the Lord.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Therefore form no premature judgements, but
wait until the Lord returns. He will both bring to light the secrets of
darkness and will openly disclose the motives that have been in people's
hearts; and then the praise which each man deserves will come to him
from God.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> In writing this much, brethren, with
special reference to Apollos and myself, I have done so for your sakes,
in order to teach you by our example what those words mean, which say,
"Nothing beyond what is written!" --so that you may cease to take sides
in boastful rivalry, for one teacher against another.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Why, who gives you your superiority, my
brother? Or what have you that you did not receive? And if you really
did receive it, why boast as if this were not so?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Every one of you already has all that heart
can desire; already you have grown rich; without waiting for us, you
have ascended your thrones! Yes indeed, would to God that you had
ascended your thrones, that we also might reign with you!

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> God, it seems to me, has exhibited us
Apostles last of all, as men condemned to death; for we have come to be
a spectacle to all creation--alike to angels and to men.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> We, for Christ's sake, are labeled as
"foolish"; you, as Christians, are men of shrewd intelligence. We are
mere weaklings: you are strong. You are in high repute: we are outcasts.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> To this very moment we endure both hunger
and thirst, with scanty clothing and many a blow.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Homes we have none. Wearily we toil,
working with our own hands. When reviled, we bless; when persecuted, we
bear it patiently;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> when slandered, we try to conciliate. We
have come to be regarded as the mere dirt and filth of the world--the
refuse of the universe, even to this hour.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I am not writing all this to shame you,
but I am offering you advice as my dearly-loved children.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For even if you were to have ten thousand
spiritual instructors--for all that you could not have several fathers.
It is I who in Christ Jesus became your father through the Good News.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> I entreat you therefore to become like
me.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For this reason I have sent Timothy to
you. Spiritually he is my dearly-loved and faithful child. He will
remind you of my habits as a Christian teacher--the manner in which I
teach everywhere in every Church.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But some of you have been puffed up
through getting the idea that I am not coming to Corinth.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But, if the Lord is willing, I shall come
to you without delay; and then I shall know not the fine speeches of
these conceited people, but their power.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> For Apostolic authority is not a thing of
words, but of power.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Which shall it be? Shall I come to you
with a rod, or in a loving and tender spirit?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> It is actually reported that there is
fornication among you, and of a kind unheard of even among the
Gentiles--a man has his father's wife!

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And you, instead of mourning and removing
from among you the man who has done this deed of shame, are filled with
self-complacency!

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I for my part, present with you in spirit
although absent in body, have already, as though I were present, judged
him who has so acted.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> In the name of our Lord Jesus, when you are
all assembled and my spirit is with you, together with the power of our
Lord Jesus,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I have handed over such a man to Satan for
the destruction of his body, that his spirit may be saved on the day of
the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> It is no good thing--this which you make
the ground of your boasting. Do you not know that a little yeast
corrupts the whole of the dough?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Get rid of the old yeast so that you may be
dough of a new kind; for in fact you \*are\* free from corruption. For
our Passover Lamb has already been offered in sacrifice--even Christ.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Therefore let us keep our festival not with
old yeast nor with the yeast of what is evil and mischievous, but with
bread free from yeast--the bread of transparent sincerity and of truth.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> I wrote to you in that letter that you were
not to associate with fornicators;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> not that in this world you are to keep
wholly aloof from such as they, any more than from people who are
avaricious and greedy of gain, or from worshippers of idols. For that
would mean that you would be compelled to go out of the world
altogether.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But what I meant was that you were not to
associate with any one bearing the name of "brother," if he was addicted
to fornication or avarice or idol-worship or abusive language or
hard-drinking or greed of gain. With such a man you ought not even to
eat.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For what business of mine is it to judge
outsiders? Is it not for you to judge those who are within the Church

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> while you leave to God's judgement those
who are outside? Remove the wicked man from among you.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> If one of you has a grievance against an
opponent, does he dare to go to law before irreligious men and not
before God's people?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Do you not know that God's people will sit
in judgement upon the world? And if you are the court before which the
world is to be judged, are you unfit to deal with these petty matters?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Do you not know that we are to sit in
judgement upon angels--to say nothing of things belonging to this life?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> If therefore you have things belonging to
this life which need to be decided, is it men who are absolutely nothing
in the Church--is it \*they\* whom you make your judges?

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> I say this to put you to shame. Has it come
to this, that there does not exist among you a single wise man competent
to decide between a man and his brother,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> but brother goes to law with brother, and
that before unbelievers?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> To say no more, then, it is altogether a
defect in you that you have law-suits with one another. Why not rather
endure injustice? Why not rather submit to being defrauded?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> On the contrary you yourselves inflict
injustice and fraud, and upon brethren too.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Do you not know that unrighteous men will
not inherit God's Kingdom? Cherish no delusion here. Neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor any who are guilty of
unnatural crime,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> nor theives, nor avaricious people, nor
any who are addicted to hard drinking, to abusive language or to greed
of gain, will inherit God's Kingdom.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And all this describes what some of you
were. But now you have had every stain washed off: now you have been set
apart as holy: now you have been pronounced free from guilt; in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ and through the Spirit of our God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Everything is allowable to me, but not
everything is profitable. Everything is allowable to me, but to nothing
will I become a slave.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Food of all kinds is meant for the
stomach, and the stomach is meant for food, and God will cause both of
them to perish. Yet the body does not exist for the purpose of
fornication, but for the Master's service, and the Master exists for the
body;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> and as God by His power raised the Master
to life, so He will also raise us up.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Do you not know that your bodies are
members of Christ? Shall I then take away the members of Christ and make
them the members of a prostitute? No, indeed.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Or do you not know that a man who has to
do with a prostitute is one with her in body? For God says, &lt;"The two
shall become one."&gt;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But he who is in union with the Master is
one with Him in spirit.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Flee from fornication. Any other sin that
a human being commits lies outside the body; but he who commits
fornication sins against his own body.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Or do you not know that your bodies are a
sanctuary of the Holy Spirit who is within you--the Spirit whom you have
from God?

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And you are not your own, for you have
been redeemed at infinite cost. Therefore glorify God in your bodies.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> I now deal with the subjects mentioned in
your letter. It is well for a man to abstain altogether from marriage.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> But because there is so much fornication
every man should have a wife of his own, and every woman should have a
husband.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Let a man pay his wife her due, and let a
woman also pay her husband his.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> A married woman is not mistress of her own
person: her husband has certain rights. In the same way a married man is
not master of his own person: his wife has certain rights.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Do not refuse one another, unless perhaps
it is just for a time and by mutual consent, so that you may devote
yourselves to prayer and may then associate again; lest the Adversary
begin to tempt you because of your deficiency in self-control.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Thus much in the way of concession, not of
command.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Yet I would that everybody lived as I do;
but each of us has his own special gift from God--one in one direction
and one in another.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But I tell the unmarried, and women who are
widows, that it is well for them to remain as I am.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> If, however, they cannot maintain
self-control, by all means let them marry; for marriage is better than
the fever of passion.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> But to those already married my
instructions are--yet not mine, but the Lord's--that a wife is not to
leave her husband;

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> or if she has already left him, let her
either remain as she is or be reconciled to him; and that a husband is
not to send away his wife.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> To the rest it is I who speak--not the
Lord. If a brother has a wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents to
live with him, let him not send her away.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And a woman who has an unbelieving
husband--if he consents to live with her, let her not separate from him.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For, in such cases, the unbelieving
husband has become--and is--holy through union with a Christian woman,
and the unbelieving wife is holy through union with a Christian brother.
Otherwise your children would be unholy, but in reality they have a
place among God's people.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> If, however, the unbeliever is determined
to leave, let him or her do so. Under such circumstances the Christian
man or woman is no slave; God has called us to live lives of peace.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For what assurance have you, O woman, as
to whether you will save your husband? Or what assurance have you, O
man, as to whether you will save your wife?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Only, whatever be the condition in life
which the Lord has assigned to each individual--and whatever the
condition in which he was living when God called him--in that let him
continue.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> This is what I command in all the
Churches. Was any one already circumcised when called? Let him not have
recourse to the surgeons. Was any one uncircumcised when called? Let him
remain uncircumcised.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcision is nothing: obedience to God's commandments is
everything.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Whatever be the condition in life in
which a man was, when he was called, in that let him continue.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Were you a slave when God called you? Let
not that weigh on your mind. And yet if you can get your freedom, take
advantage of the opportunity.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For a Christian, if he was a slave when
called, is the Lord's freed man, and in the same way a free man, if
called, becomes the slave of Christ.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> You have all been redeemed at infinite
cost: do not become slaves to men.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Where each one stood when he was called,
there, brethren, let him still stand--close to God.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Concerning unmarried women I have no
command to give you from the Lord; but I offer you my opinion, which is
that of a man who, through the Lord's mercy, is deserving of your
confidence.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> I think then that, taking into
consideration the distress which is now upon us, it is well for a man to
remain as he is.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Are you bound to a wife? Do not seek to
get free. Are you free from the marriage bond? Do not seek for a wife.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Yet if you marry, you have not sinned;
and if a maiden marries, she has not sinned. Such people, however, will
have outward trouble. But I am for sparing you.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Yet of this I warn you, brethren: the
time has been shortened--so that henceforth those who have wives should
be as though they had none,

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> those who weep as though they did not
weep, those who rejoice as though they did not rejoice, those who buy as
though they did not possess,

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> and those who use the world as not using
it to the full. For the world as it now exists is passing away.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And I would have you free from worldly
anxiety. An unmarried man concerns himself with the Lord's business--how
he shall please the Lord;

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> but a married man concerns himself with
the business of the world--how he shall please his wife.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> There is a difference too between a
married and an unmarried woman. She who is unmarried concerns herself
with the Lord's business--that she may be holy both in body and spirit;
but the married woman concerns herself with the business of the
world--how she shall please her husband.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> Thus much I say in your own interest; not
to lay a trap for you, but to help towards what is becoming, and enable
you to wait on the Lord without distraction.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> If, however, a father thinks he is acting
unbecomingly towards his still unmarried daughter if she be past the
bloom of her youth, and so the matter is urgent, let him do what she
desires; he commits no sin; she and her suitor should be allowed to
marry.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> But if a father stands firm in his
resolve, being free from all external constraint and having a legal
right to act as he pleases, and in his own mind has come to the decision
to keep his daughter unmarried, he will do well.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> So that he who gives his daughter in
marriage does well, and yet he who does not give her in marriage will do
better.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> A woman is bound to her husband during
the whole period that he lives; but if her husband dies, she is at
liberty to marry whom she will, provided that he is a Christian.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> But in my judgement, her state is a more
enviable one if she remains as she is; and I also think that I have the
Spirit of God.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now as to things which have been sacrificed
to idols. This is a subject which we already understand--because we all
have knowledge of it. Knowledge, however, tends to make people
conceited; it is love that builds us up.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> If any one imagines that he already
possesses any true knowledge, he has as yet attained to no knowledge of
the kind to which he ought to have attained;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> but if any one loves God, that man is known
by God.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> As to eating things which have been
sacrificed to idols, we are fully aware that an idol is nothing in the
world, and that there is no God but One.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For if so-called gods do exist, either in
Heaven or on earth--and in fact there are many such gods and many such
lords--

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> yet \*we\* have but one God, the Father,
who is the source of all things and for whose service we exist, and but
one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom we and all things exist.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> But all believers do not recognize these
facts. Some, from force of habit in relation to the idol, even now eat
idol sacrifices as such, and their consciences, being but weak, are
polluted.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> It is true that a particular kind of food
will not bring us into God's presence; we are neither inferior to others
if we abstain from it, nor superior to them if we eat it.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But take care lest this liberty of yours
should prove a hindrance to the progress of weak believers.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For if any one were to see you, who know
the real truth of this matter, reclining at table in an idol's temple,
would not his conscience (supposing him to be a weak believer) be
emboldened to eat the food which has been sacrificed to the idol?

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Why, your knowledge becomes the ruin of
the weak believer--your brother, for whom Christ died!

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Moreover when you thus sin against the
brethren and wound their weak consciences, you are, in reality, sinning
against Christ.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Therefore if what I eat causes my brother
to fall, never again to the end of my days will I touch any kind of
animal food, for fear I should cause my brother to fall.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Am I not free? Am I not an Apostle? Can it
be denied that I have seen Jesus, our Lord? Are not you yourselves my
work in the Lord?

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> If to other men I am not an Apostle, yet at
any rate I am one to you; for your very existence as a Christian Church
is the seal of my Apostleship.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> That is how I vindicate myself to those who
criticize me.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Have we not a right to claim food and
drink?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Have we not a right to take with us on our
journeys a Christian sister as our wife, as the rest of the Apostles
do--and the Lord's brothers and Peter?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Or again, is it only Barnabas and myself
who are not at liberty to give up working with our hands?

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> What soldier ever serves at his own cost?
Who plants a vineyard and yet does not eat any of the grapes? Or who
tends a herd of cattle and yet does not taste their milk?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Am I making use of merely worldly
illustrations? Does not the Law speak in the same tone?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For in the Law of Moses it is written,
&lt;"Thou shalt not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the
grain."&gt;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Is God simply thinking about the oxen? Or
is it really in our interest that He speaks? Of course, it was written
in our interest, because it is His will that when a plough-man ploughs,
and a thresher threshes, it should be in the hope of sharing that which
comes as the result.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> If it is we who sowed the spiritual grain
in you, is it a great thing that we should reap a temporal harvest from
you?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If other teachers possess that right over
you, do not we possess it much more? Yet we have not availed ourselves
of the right, but we patiently endure all things rather than hinder in
the least degree the progress of the Good News of the Christ.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Do you not know that those who perform
the sacred rites have their food from the sacred place, and that those
who serve at the altar all alike share with the altar?

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> In the same way the Lord also directed
those who proclaim the Good News to maintain themselves by the Good
News.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> But I, for my part, have not used, and do
not use, my full rights in any of these things. Nor do I now write with
that object so far as I myself am concerned, for I would rather die than
have anybody make this boast of mine an empty one.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> If I go on preaching the Good News, that
is nothing for me to boast of; for the necessity is imposed upon me; and
alas for me, if I fail to preach it!

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And if I preach willingly, I receive my
wages; but if against my will, a stewardship has nevertheless been
entrusted to me.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> What are my wages then? The very fact
that the Good News which I preach will cost my hearers nothing, so that
I cannot be charged with abuse of my privileges as a Christian preacher.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Though free from all human control, I
have made myself the slave of all in the hope of winning as many
converts as possible.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> To the Jews I have become like a Jew in
order to win Jews; to men under the Law as if I were under the
Law--although I am not--in order to win those who are under the Law;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> to men without Law as if I were without
Law--although I am not without Law in relation to God but am abiding in
Christ's Law--in order to win those who are without Law.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> To the weak I have become weak, so as to
gain the weak. To all men I have become all things, in the hope that in
every one of these ways I may save some.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And I do everything for the sake of the
Good News, that I may share with my hearers in its benefits.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Do you not know that in the foot-race the
runners all run, but that only one gets the prize? You must run like
him, in order to win with certainty.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> But every competitor in an athletic
contest practices abstemiousness in all directions. They indeed do this
for the sake of securing a perishable wreath, but we for the sake of
securing one that will not perish.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> That is how I run, not being in any doubt
as to my goal. I am a boxer who does not inflict blows on the air,

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> but I hit hard and straight at my own
body and lead it off into slavery, lest possibly, after I have been a
herald to others, I should myself be rejected.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> For I would have you remember, brethren,
how our forefathers were all of them sheltered by the cloud, and all got
safely through the Red Sea.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> All were baptized in the cloud and in the
sea to be followers of Moses.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> All ate the same spiritual food,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> and all drank the same spiritual drink;
for they long drank the water that flowed from the spiritual rock that
went with them--and that rock was the Christ.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> But with most of them God was not well
pleased; for they were laid low in the Desert.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And in this they became a warning to us,
to teach us not to be eager, as they were eager, in pursuit of what is
evil.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And you must not be worshippers of idols,
as some of them were. For it is written, &lt;"The People sat down to eat
and drink, and stood up to dance."&gt;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Nor may we be fornicators, like some of
them who committed fornication and on a single day 23,000 of them fell
dead.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And do not let us test the Lord too far,
as some of them tested Him and were destroyed by the serpents.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And do not be discontented, as some of
them were, and they were destroyed by the Destroyer.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> All this kept happening to them with a
figurative meaning; but it was put on record by way of admonition to us
upon whom the ends of the Ages have come.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> So then let him who thinks he is
standing securely beware of falling.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> No temptation has you in its power but
such as is common to human nature; and God is faithful and will not
allow you to be tempted beyond your strength. But, when the temptation
comes, He will also provide the way of escape; so that you may be able
to bear it.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Therefore, my dear friends, avoid all
connection with the worship of idols.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> I speak as to men of sense: judge for
yourselves of what I say.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The cup of blessing, which we bless,
does it not mean a joint-participation in the blood of Christ? The loaf
of bread which we break, does it not mean a joint-participation in the
body of Christ?

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Since there is one loaf, we who are
many are one body; we, all of us, share in that one loaf.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Look at the Israelites--the nation and
their ritual. Are not those who eat the sacrifices joint-partakers in
the altar?

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Do I mean that a thing sacrificed to an
idol is what it claims to be, or that an idol is a real thing?

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> No, but that which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons, not to God; and I would not have
you have fellowship with one another through the demons.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> You cannot drink the Lord's cup and the
cup of demons: you cannot be joint-partakers both in the table of the
Lord and in the table of demons.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Or are we actually arousing the Lord to
jealousy. Are we stronger than He is?

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Everything is allowable, but not
everything is profitable. Everything is allowable, but everything does
not build others up.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Let no one be for ever seeking his own
good, but let each seek that of his fellow man.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Anything that is for sale in the meat
market, eat, and ask no questions for conscience' sake;

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> for &lt;the earth is the Lord's, and
all that it contains.&gt;

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> If an unbeliever gives you an
invitation and you are disposed to accept it, eat whatever is put before
you, and ask no questions for conscience' sake.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> But if any one tells you, "This food
has been offered in sacrifice;" abstain from eating it--out of respect
for him who warned you, and, as before, for conscience' sake.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> But now I mean his conscience, not your
own. "Why, on what ground," you may object, "is the question of my
liberty of action to be decided by a conscience not my own?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> If, so far as I am concerned, I partake
with a grateful heart, why am I to be found fault with in regard to a
thing for which I give thanks?"

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Whether, then, you are eating or
drinking, or whatever you are doing, let everything be done to the glory
of God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Do not be causes of stumbling either to
Jews or to Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> That is the way that I also seek in
everything the approval of all men, not aiming at my own profit, but at
that of the many, in the hope that they may be saved.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Be imitators of me, in so far as I in
turn am an imitator of Christ.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now I commend you for remembering me in
everything, and because you hold fast truths and practices precisely as
I have taught them to you.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> I would have you know, however, that of
every man, Christ is the Head, that of a woman her husband is the Head,
and that God is Christ's Head.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> A man who wears a veil when praying or
prophesying dishonors his Head;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> but a woman who prays or prophesies with
her head uncovered dishonors her Head, for it is exactly the same as if
she had her hair cut short.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> If a woman will not wear a veil, let her
also cut off her hair. But since it is a dishonor to a woman to have her
hair cut off or her head shaved, let her wear a veil.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For a man ought not to have a veil on his
head, since he is the image and glory of God; while woman is the glory
of man.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Man does not take his origin from woman,
but woman takes hers from man.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> For man was not created for woman's sake,
but woman for man's.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> That is why a woman ought to have on
her head a symbol of subjection, because of the angels.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Yet, in the Lord, woman is not
independent of man nor man independent of woman.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> For just as woman originates from man,
so also man comes into existence through woman, but everything springs
originally from God.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Judge of this for your own selves: is
it seemly for a woman to pray to God when she is unveiled?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Does not Nature itself teach you that
if a man has long hair it is a dishonor to him,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> but that if a woman has long hair it is
her glory, because her hair was given her for a covering?

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But if any one is inclined to be
contentious on the point, we have no such custom, nor have the Churches
of God.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> But while giving you these
instructions, there is one thing I cannot praise--your meeting together,
with bad rather than good results.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> for, in the first place, when you meet
as a Church, there are divisions among you. This is what I am told, and
I believe that there is some truth in it.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For there must of necessity be
differences of opinion among you, in order that it may be plainly seen
who are the men of sterling worth among you.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> When, however, you meet in one place,
there is no eating the Supper of the Lord;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> for it is his own supper of which each
of you is in a hurry to partake, and one eats like a hungry man, while
another has already drunk to excess.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Why, have you no homes in which to eat
and drink? Or do you wish to show your contempt for the Church of God
and make those who have no homes feel ashamed? What shall I say to you?
Shall I praise you? In this matter I certainly do not praise you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> For it was from the Lord that I
received the facts which, in turn, I handed on to you; how that the Lord
Jesus, on the night He was to be betrayed, took some bread,

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> and after giving thanks He broke it and
said, "This is my body which is about to be broken for you. Do this in
memory of me."

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> In the same way, when the meal was
over, He also took the cup. "This cup," He said, "is the new Covenant of
which my blood is the pledge. Do this, every time that you drink it, in
memory of me."

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> For every time that you eat this bread
and drink from the cup, you are proclaiming the Lord's death--until He
returns.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Whoever, therefore, in an unworthy
manner, eats the bread or drinks from the cup of the Lord sins against
the body and blood of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> But let a man examine himself, and,
having done that, then let him eat the bread and drink from the cup.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For any one who eats and drinks, eats
and drinks judgement to himself, if he fails to estimate the body
aright.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> That is why many among you are sickly
and out of health, and why not a few die.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> If, however, we estimated ourselves
aright, we should not be judged.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> But when we are judged by the Lord,
chastisement follows, to save us from being condemned along with the
world.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Therefore, brethren, when you come
together for this meal, wait for one another.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> If any one is hungry, let him eat at
home; so that your coming together may not lead to judgement. The other
matters I will deal with whenever I come.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> It is important, brethren, that you
should have clear knowledge on the subject of spiritual gifts.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> You know that when you were heathens you
went astray after dumb idols, wherever you happened to be led.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For this reason I would have you
understand that no one speaking under the influence of The Spirit of God
ever says, "Jesus is accursed," and that no one is able to say, "Jesus
is Lord," except under the influence of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Now there are various kinds of gifts, but
there is one and the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> various forms of official service, and
yet one and the same Lord;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> diversities in work, and yet one and the
same God--He who in each person brings about the whole result.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But to each of us a manifestation of the
Spirit has been granted for the common good.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> To one the utterance of wisdom has been
granted through the Spirit; to another the utterance of knowledge in
accordance with the will of the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> to a third man, by means of the same
Spirit, special faith; to another various gifts of healing, by means of
the one Spirit;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> to another the exercise of miraculous
powers; to another the gift of prophecy; to another the power of
discriminating between prophetic utterances; to another varieties of the
gift of \`tongues;' to another the interpretation of tongues.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> But these results are all brought about
by one and the same Spirit, who bestows His gifts upon each of us in
accordance with His own will.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For just as the human body is one and
yet has many parts, and all its parts, many as they are, constitute but
one body, so it is with the Church of Christ.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For, in fact, in one Spirit all of
us--whether we are Jews or Gentiles, slaves or free men--were baptized
to form but one body; and we were all nourished by that one Spirit.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> For the human body does not consist of
one part, but of many.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Were the foot to say, "Because I am not
a hand I am not a part of the body," that would not make it any the less
a part of the body.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Or were the ear to say, "Because I am
not an eye, I am not a part of the body," that would not make it any the
less a part of the body.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> If the whole body were an eye, where
would the hearing be? If the whole body were an ear, where would the
nostrils be?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> But, as a matter of fact, God has
arranged the parts in the body--every one of them--as He has seen fit.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> If they were all one part, where would
the body be?

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> But, as a matter of fact, there are
many parts and but one body.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> It is also impossible for the eye to
say to the hand, "I do not need you;" or again for the head to say to
the feet, "I do not need you."

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> No, it is quite otherwise. Even those
parts of the body which are apparently somewhat feeble are yet
indispensable;

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> and those which we deem less honorable
we clothe with more abundant honor; and so our ungraceful parts come to
have a more abundant grace, while our graceful parts have everything
they need.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But it was God who built up the body,
and bestowed more abundant honor on the part that felt the need,

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> that there might be no disunion in the
body, but that all the members might entertain the same anxious care for
one another's welfare.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And if one part is suffering, every
other part suffers with it; or if one part is receiving special honor,
every other part shares in the joy.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> As for you, you are the body of Christ,
and individually you are members of it.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And by God's appointment there are in
the Church--first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers. Then
come miraculous powers, and then ability to cure diseases or render
loving service, or powers of organization, or varieties of the gift of
\`tongues.'

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are
all teachers?

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Have all miraculous powers? Have all
ability to cure diseases? Do all speak in \`tongues'? Do all interpret?

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> But always seek to excel in the greater
gifts. And now I will point out to you a way of life which transcends
all others.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> If I can speak with the tongues of men
and of angels, but am destitute of Love, I have but become a
loud-sounding trumpet or a clanging cymbal.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> If I possess the gift of prophecy and am
versed in all mysteries and all knowledge, and have such absolute faith
that I can remove mountains, but am destitute of Love, I am nothing.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And if I distribute all my possessions to
the poor, and give up my body to be burned, but am destitute of Love, it
profits me nothing.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Love is patient and kind. Love knows
neither envy nor jealousy. Love is not forward and self-assertive, nor
boastful and conceited.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> She does not behave unbecomingly, nor
seek to aggrandize herself, nor blaze out in passionate anger, nor brood
over wrongs.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> She finds no pleasure in injustice done
to others, but joyfully sides with the truth.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> She knows how to be silent. She is full
of trust, full of hope, full of patient endurance.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Love never fails. But if there are
prophecies, they will be done away with; if there are languages, they
will cease; if there is knowledge, it will be brought to an end.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For our knowledge is imperfect, and so is
our prophesying;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> but when the perfect state of things is
come, all that is imperfect will be brought to an end.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> When I was a child, I talked like a
child, felt like a child, reasoned like a child: when I became a man, I
put from me childish ways.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> For the present we see things as if in
a mirror, and are puzzled; but then we shall see them face to face. For
the present the knowledge I gain is imperfect; but then I shall know
fully, even as I am fully known.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And so there remain Faith, Hope,
Love--these three; and of these the greatest is Love.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Be eager in your pursuit of this Love,
and be earnestly ambitious for spiritual gifts, but let it be chiefly so
in order that you may prophesy.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For he who speaks in an unknown tongue is
not speaking to men, but to God; for no one understands him. Yet in the
Spirit he is speaking secret truths.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> But he who prophesies speaks to men words
of edification, encouragement and comfort.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> He who speaks in an unknown tongue does
good to himself, but he who prophesies does good to the Church.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> I should be right glad were you all to
speak in \`tongues,' but yet more glad were you all to prophesy. And, in
fact, the man who prophesies is superior to him who speaks in
\`tongues,' except when the latter can interpret in order that the
Church may get a blessing.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But, brethren, as things are, if I come
to you speaking in \`tongues,' what benefit shall I confer on you, if
the utterance is neither in the form of a revelation nor of additional
knowledge nor of prophecy nor of teaching?

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Even inanimate things--flutes or harps,
for instance--when yielding a sound, if they make no distinction in the
notes, how shall the tune which is played on the flute or the harp be
known?

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> If the bugle--to take another
example--gives an uncertain sound, who will prepare for battle?

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And so with you; if with the living voice
you fail to utter intelligible words, how will people know what you are
saying? You will be talking to the winds.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> There are, we will suppose, a great
number of languages in the world, and no creature is without a language.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> If, however, I do not know the meaning
of the particular language, I shall seem to the speaker of it, and he to
me, to be merely talking some foreign tongue.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Therefore, seeing that you are
ambitious for spiritual gifts, seek to excel in them so as to benefit
the Church.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Therefore let a man who has the gift of
tongues pray for the power of interpreting them.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my
spirit prays, but my understanding is barren.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> How then does the matter stand? I will
pray in spirit, and I will pray with my understanding also. I will
praise God in spirit, and I will praise Him with my understanding also.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Otherwise, if you bless God in spirit
only, how shall he who is in the position of an ungifted man say the
\`Amen' to your giving of thanks, when he does not know what your words
mean?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Rightly enough you are giving thanks,
and yet your neighbor is not benefited.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> I speak in a tongue, thank God, more
than all of you;

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> but in the Church I would rather speak
five words with my understanding--so as to instruct others also--than
ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Brethren, do not prove yourselves to be
children in your minds. As regards evil, indeed, be utter babes, but as
regards your minds prove yourselves to be men of ripe years.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> In the Law it stands written, &lt;"\`By
men of unknown tongues and by the lips of an unknown nation will I speak
to this People, but even then they will not listen to Me',&gt; says the
Lord."

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> This shows that the gift of tongues is
intended as a sign not to those who believe but to unbelievers, but
prophecy is intended not for unbelievers but for those who believe.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> Accordingly if the whole Church has
assembled and all are speaking in \`tongues,' and there come in ungifted
men, or unbelievers, will they not say that you are all mad?

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> If, on the other hand, every one is
prophesying and an unbeliever or an ungifted man comes in, he is
convicted by all and closely examined by all,

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> and the hidden evils of his heart are
brought to light. And, as the result, he will fall on his face and
worship God, and will report to others that of a truth God is among you.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> What then, brethren? Whenever you
assemble, there is not one of you who is not ready either with a song of
praise, a sermon, a revelation, a \`tongue,' or an interpretation. Let
everything be done with a view to the building up of faith and
character.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> If there is speaking in an unknown
tongue, only two or at the most three should speak, and they should do
so one at a time, and one should interpret;

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> or if there is no interpreter, let the
man with the gift be silent in the Church, speaking to himself and to
God.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But if there are Prophets, let two or
three speak and let the rest judge.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And if anything is revealed to some one
else who is seated there, let the first be silent.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> For you can all prophesy one by one, so
that all may learn and all be encouraged:

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> and the spirits of Prophets yield
submission to Prophets.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> For God is not a God of disorder, but
of peace, as He is in all the Churches of His people.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Let married women be silent in the
Churches, for they are not permitted to speak. They must be content with
a subordinate place, as the Law also says;

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> and if they wish to ask questions, they
should ask their own husbands at home. For it is disgraceful for a
married woman to speak at a Church assembly.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> Was it from you that God's Message
first went forth, or is it to you only that it has come?

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> If any one deems himself to be a
Prophet or a man with spiritual gifts, let him recognize as the Lord's
command all that I am now writing to you.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> But if any one is ignorant, let him be
ignorant.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> The conclusion, my brethren, is this.
Be earnestly ambitious to prophesy, and do not check speaking with
tongues;

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> only let everything be done in a
becoming and orderly manner.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> But let me recall to you, brethren, the
Good News which I brought you, which you accepted, and on which you are
standing,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> through which also you are obtaining
salvation, if you bear in mind the words in which I proclaimed
it--unless indeed your faith has been unreal from the very first.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For I repeated to you the all-important
fact which also I had been taught, that Christ died for our sins in
accordance with the Scriptures;

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> that He was buried; that He rose to life
again on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures,

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> and was seen by Peter, and then by the
Twelve.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Afterwards He was seen by more than five
hundred brethren at once, most of whom are still alive, although some of
them have now fallen asleep.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Afterwards He was seen by James, and then
by all the Apostles.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And last of all, as to one of untimely
birth, He appeared to me also.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> For I am the least of the Apostles, and
am not fit to be called an Apostle--because I persecuted the Church of
God.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> But what I am I am by the grace of God,
and His grace bestowed upon me did not prove ineffectual. But I labored
more strenuously than all the rest--yet it was not I, but God's grace
working with me.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But whether it is I or they, this is
the way we preach and the way that you came to believe.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> But if Christ is preached as having
risen from the dead, how is it that some of you say that there is no
such thing as a resurrection of the dead?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> If there is no such thing as a
resurrection of the dead, then Christ Himself has not risen to life.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And if Christ has not risen, it follows
that what we preach is a delusion, and that your faith also is a
delusion.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Nay more, we are actually being
discovered to be bearing false witness about God, because we have
testified that God raised Christ to life, whom He did not raise, if in
reality none of the dead are raised.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> For if none of the dead are raised to
life, then Christ has not risen;

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> and if Christ has not risen, your faith
is a vain thing--you are still in your sins.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> It follows also that those who have
fallen asleep in Christ have perished.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> If in this present life we have a
\*hope\* resting on Christ, and nothing more, we are more to be pitied
than all the rest of the world.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> But, in reality, Christ \*has\* risen
from among the dead, being the first to do so of those who are asleep.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For seeing that death came through man,
through man comes also the resurrection of the dead.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> For just as through Adam all die, so
also through Christ all will be made alive again.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But this will happen to each in the
right order--Christ having been the first to rise, and afterwards
Christ's people rising at His return.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Later on, comes the End, when He is to
surrender the Kingship to God, the Father, when He shall have overthrown
all other government and all other authority and power.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> For He must continue King until He
shall have put all His enemies under His feet.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> The last enemy that is to be overthrown
is Death;

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> for He will have put all things in
subjection under His feet. And when He shall have declared that "All
things are in subjection," it will be with the manifest exception of Him
who has reduced them all to subjection to Him.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> But when the whole universe has been
made subject to Him, then the Son Himself will also become subject to
Him who has made the universe subject to Him, in order that GOD may be
all in all.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Otherwise what will become of those who
got themselves baptized for the dead? If the dead do not rise at all,
why are these baptized for them?

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Why also do we Apostles expose
ourselves to danger every hour?

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> I protest, brethren, as surely as I
glory over you--which I may justly do in Christ Jesus our Lord--that I
die day by day.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> If from merely human motives I have
fought with wild beasts in Ephesus, what profit is it to me? If the dead
do not rise, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we are to die.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Do not deceive yourselves: "Evil
companionships corrupt good morals."

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> Wake from this drunken fit; live
righteous lives, and cease to sin; for some have no knowledge of God: I
speak thus in order to move you to shame.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> But some one will say, "How can the
dead rise? And with what kind of body do they come back?"

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> Foolish man! the seed you yourself sow
has no life given to it unless it first dies;

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> and as for what you sow, it is not the
plant which is to be that you are sowing, but a bare grain, of wheat (it
may be) or of something else, and God gives it a body as He has seen
fit,

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> and to each kind of seed a body of its
own.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> All flesh is not the same: there is
human flesh, and flesh of cattle, of birds, and of fishes.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> There are bodies which are celestial
and there are bodies which are earthly, but the glory of the celestial
ones is one thing, and that of the earthly ones is another.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> There is one glory of the sun, another
of the moon, and another of the stars; for star differs from star in
glory.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> It is the same with the resurrection of
the dead. The body is sown in a state of decay, it is raised free from
decay;

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in
glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> an animal body is sown, a spiritual
body is raised. As surely as there is an animal body, so there is also a
spiritual body.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> In the same way also it is written,
&lt;"The first man Adam became a living animal";&gt; the last Adam is a
life-giving Spirit.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> Nevertheless, it is not what is
spiritual that came first, but what is animal; what is spiritual came
afterwards.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> The first man is a man of earth,
earthy; the second man is from Heaven.

<span id="an_15:48">15:48</span> What the earthy one is, that also are
those who are earthy; and what the heavenly One is, that also are those
who are heavenly.

<span id="an_15:49">15:49</span> And as we have borne a resemblance to
the earthy one, let us see to it that we also bear a resemblance to the
heavenly One.

<span id="an_15:50">15:50</span> But this I tell you, brethren: our
mortal bodies cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, nor will what is
perishable inherit what is imperishable.

<span id="an_15:51">15:51</span> I tell you a truth hitherto kept
secret: we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,

<span id="an_15:52">15:52</span> in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, at the sounding of the last trumpet; for the trumpet will sound,
and the dead will be raised incapable of decay, and \*we\* shall be
changed.

<span id="an_15:53">15:53</span> For so it must be: this perishable
nature must clothe itself with what is imperishable, and this mortality
must clothe itself with immortality.

<span id="an_15:54">15:54</span> But when this perishable nature has put
on what is imperishable, and this mortality has put on immortality, then
will the words of Scripture be fulfilled, &lt;"Death has been swallowed
up in victory."&gt;

<span id="an_15:55">15:55</span> &lt;"Where, O death, is thy victory?
Where, O death, is thy sting?"&gt;

<span id="an_15:56">15:56</span> Now sin is the sting of death, and sin
derives its power from the Law;

<span id="an_15:57">15:57</span> but God be thanked who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!

<span id="an_15:58">15:58</span> Therefore, my dear brethren, be firm,
unmovable, busily occupied at all times in the Lord's work, knowing that
your toil is not fruitless in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> As to the collection for God's people,
what I have directed the Churches of Galatia to do, you must do also.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> On the first day of every week let each
of you put on one side and store up at his home whatever gain has been
granted to him; so that whenever I come, there may then be no
collections going on.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And when I am with you, whatever brethren
you accredit by letter I will send to carry your kind gift to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And if it is worth while for me also to
make the journey, they shall go as my companions.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> I shall come to you after passing through
Macedonia; for my plan will be to pass through Macedonia;

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> and I shall make some stay with you
perhaps, or even spend the winter with you, in order that you may help
me forward, whichever way I travel.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> For I do not wish to see you on this
occasion merely in passing; but if the Lord permits, I hope to remain
some time with you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> I shall remain in Ephesus, however, until
the time of the Harvest Festival,

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> for a wide door stands open before me
which demands great efforts, and we have many opponents.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> If Timothy pays you a visit, see that
he is free from fear in his relations with you; for he is engaged in the
Master's work just as I am.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Therefore let no one slight him, but
all of you should help him forward in peace to join me; for I am waiting
for him and others of the brethren.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> As for our brother Apollos, I have
repeatedly urged him to accompany the brethren who are coming to you:
but he is quite resolved not to do so at present. He will come, however,
when he has a good opportunity.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Be on the alert; stand firm in the
faith; acquit yourselves like men; be strong.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Let all that you do be done from
motives of love.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And I beseech you, brethren--you know
the household of Stephanas, how they were the earliest Greek converts to
Christ, and have devoted themselves to the service of God's people--

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> I beseech you, on your part, to show
deference to such men, and to every one who participates in their work
and toils hard.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> It is a joy to me that Stephanas,
Fortunatus and Achaicus have now arrived, because what was wanting so
far as you are concerned they have supplied.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> They have refreshed my spirit, and
yours. Acknowledge such men as these.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> The Churches in the province of Asia
send you greetings; and Aquila and Prisca, in hearty Christian love, do
the same, together with the Church which meets at their house.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> The brethren all send greetings to you.
Greet one another with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The final greeting of me--Paul--with my
own hand.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> If any one is destitute of love to the
Lord, let him be accursed. OUR LORD IS COMING.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus be with
you.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> My love in Christ Jesus be with you
all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians](co2)
