[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gal)  [Next](phi) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Ephesians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus by the
will of God: To God's people who are in Ephesus--believers in Christ
Jesus.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May grace and peace be granted to you from
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has crowned us with every spiritual blessing in the
heavenly realms in Christ;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> even as, in His love, He chose us as His
own in Christ before the creation of the world, that we might be holy
and without blemish in His presence.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For He pre-destined us to be adopted by
Himself as sons through Jesus Christ--such being His gracious will and
pleasure--

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> to the praise of the splendour of His grace
with which He has enriched us in the beloved One.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> It is in Him, and through the shedding of
His blood, that we have our deliverance--the forgiveness of our
offences--so abundant was God's grace,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> the grace which He, the possessor of all
wisdom and understanding, lavished upon us,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> when He made known to us the secret of His
will. And this is in harmony with God's merciful purpose

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> for the government of the world when the
times are ripe for it--the purpose which He has cherished in His own
mind of restoring the whole creation to find its one Head in Christ;
yes, things in Heaven and things on earth, to find their one Head in
Him.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> In Him we Jews have been made heirs,
having been chosen beforehand in accordance with the intention of Him
whose might carries out in everything the design of His own will,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> so that we should be devoted to the
extolling of His glorious attributes--we who were the first to fix our
hopes on Christ.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And in Him you Gentiles also, after
listening to the Message of the truth, the Good News of your
salvation--having believed in Him--were sealed with the promised Holy
Spirit;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> that Spirit being a pledge and foretaste
of our inheritance, in anticipation of its full redemption--the
inheritance which He has purchased to be specially His for the extolling
of His glory.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For this reason I too, having heard of
the faith in the Lord Jesus which prevails among you, and of your love
for all God's people,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> offer never ceasing thanks on your behalf
while I make mention of you in my prayers.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For I always beseech the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ--the Father most glorious--to give you a spirit of wisdom
and penetration through an intimate knowledge of Him,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> the eyes of your understanding being
enlightened so that you may know what is the hope which His call to you
inspires, what the wealth of the glory of His inheritance in God's
people,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and what the transcendent greatness of
His power in us believers as seen in the working of His infinite might

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> when He displayed it in Christ by raising
Him from the dead and seating Him at His own right hand in the heavenly
realms,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> high above all other government and
authority and power and dominion, and every title of sovereignty used
either in this Age or in the Age to come.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> God has put all things under His feet,
and has appointed Him universal and supreme Head of the Church, which is
His Body,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> the completeness of Him who everywhere
fills the universe with Himself.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> To you Gentiles also, who were dead through
your offences and sins,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> which were once habitual to you while you
walked in the ways of this world and obeyed the Prince of the powers of
the air, the spirits that are now at work in the hearts of the sons of
disobedience--to you God has given Life.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Among them all of us also formerly passed
our lives, governed by the inclinations of our lower natures, indulging
the cravings of those natures and of our own thoughts, and were in our
original state deserving of anger like all others.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But God, being rich in mercy, because of
the intense love which He bestowed on us,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> caused us, dead though we were through our
offences, to live with Christ--it is by grace that you have been saved--

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> raised us with Him from the dead, and
enthroned us with Him in the heavenly realms as being in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> in order that, by His goodness to us in
Christ Jesus, He might display in the Ages to come the transcendent
riches of His grace.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For it is by grace that you have been saved
through faith; and that not of yourselves. It is God's gift, and is not
on the ground of merit--

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> so that it may be impossible for any one to
boast.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For we are God's own handiwork, created
in Christ Jesus for good works which He has pre-destined us to practise.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Therefore, do not forget that formerly
you were Gentiles as to your bodily condition. You were called the
Uncircumcision by those who style themselves the Circumcised--their
circumcision being one which the knife has effected.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> At that time you were living apart from
Christ, estranged from the Commonwealth of Israel, with no share by
birth in the Covenants which are based on the Promises, and you had no
hope and no God, in all the world.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But now in Christ Jesus you who once were
so far away have been brought near through the death of Christ.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For He is our peace--He who has made Jews
and Gentiles one, and in His own human nature has broken down the
hostile dividing wall,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> by setting aside the Law with its
commandments, expressed, as they were, in definite decrees. His design
was to unite the two sections of humanity in Himself so as to form one
new man,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> thus effecting peace, and to reconcile
Jews and Gentiles in one body to God, by means of His cross--slaying by
it their mutual enmity.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> So He came and proclaimed good news of
peace to you who were so far away, and peace to those who were near;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> because it is through Him that Jews and
Gentiles alike have access through one Spirit to the Father.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> You are therefore no longer mere
foreigners or persons excluded from civil rights. On the contrary you
share citizenship with God's people and are members of His family.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> You are a building which has been reared
on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, the cornerstone being
Christ Jesus Himself,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> in union with whom the whole fabric,
fitted and closely joined together, is growing so as to form a holy
sanctuary in the Lord;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> in whom you also are being built up
together to become a fixed abode for God through the Spirit.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For this reason I Paul, the prisoner of
Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles--

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> if, that is, you have heard of the work
which God has graciously entrusted to me for your benefit,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and that by a revelation the truth hitherto
kept secret was made known to me as I have already briefly explained it
to you.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> By means of that explanation, as you read
it, you can judge of my insight into the truth of Christ

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> which in earlier ages was not made known to
the human race, as it has now been revealed to His holy Apostles and
Prophets through the Spirit--

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I mean the truth that the Gentiles are
joint heirs with us Jews, and that they form one body with us, and have
the same interest as we have in the promise which has been made good in
Christ Jesus through the Good News,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> in which I have been appointed to serve, in
virtue of the work which God, in the exercise of His power within me,
has graciously entrusted to me.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> To me who am less than the least of all
God's people has this work been graciously entrusted--to proclaim to the
Gentiles the Good News of the exhaustless wealth of Christ,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and to show all men in a clear light what
my stewardship is. It is the stewardship of the truth which from all the
Ages lay concealed in the mind of God, the Creator of all things--

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> concealed in order that the Church might
now be used to display to the powers and authorities in the heavenly
realms the innumerable aspects of God's wisdom.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Such was the eternal purpose which He had
formed in Christ Jesus our Lord,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> in whom we have this bold and confident
access through our faith in Him.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Therefore I entreat you not to lose heart
in the midst of my sufferings on your behalf, for they bring you honour.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For this reason, on bended knee I beseech
the Father,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> from whom the whole family in Heaven and
on earth derives its name,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> to grant you--in accordance with the
wealth of His glorious perfections--to be strengthened by His Spirit
with power penetrating to your inmost being.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> I pray that Christ may make His home in
your hearts through your faith; so that having your roots deep and your
foundations strong, in love, you may become mighty to grasp the idea,

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> as it is grasped by all God's people, of
the breadth and length, the height and depth--

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> yes, to attain to a knowledge of the
knowledge-surpassing love of Christ, so that you may be made complete in
accordance with God's own standard of completeness.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Now to Him who, in exercise of His power
that is at work within us, is able to do infinitely beyond all our
highest prayers or thoughts--

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> to Him be the glory in the Church and in
Christ Jesus to all generations, world without end! Amen.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I, then, the prisoner for the Master's
sake, entreat you to live and act as becomes those who have received the
call that you have received--

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> with all lowliness of mind and
unselfishness, and with patience, bearing with one another lovingly, and
earnestly striving to maintain,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> in the uniting bond of peace, the unity
given by the Spirit.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> There is but one body and but one Spirit,
as also when you were called you had one and the same hope held out to
you.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> There is but one Lord, one faith, one
baptism,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and one God and Father of all, who rules
over all, acts through all, and dwells in all.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Yet to each of us individually grace was
given, measured out with the munificence of Christ.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For this reason Scripture says: &lt;"He
re-ascended on high, He led captive a host of captives, and gave gifts
to men."&gt;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> (Now this "re-ascended" --what does it mean
but that He had first descended into the lower regions of the earth?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> He who descended is the same as He who
ascended again far above all the Heavens in order to fill the universe.)

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And He Himself appointed some to be
Apostles, some to be Prophets, some to be evangelists, some to be
pastors and teachers,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> in order fully to equip His people for
the work of serving--for the building up of Christ's body--

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> till we all of us arrive at oneness in
faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God, and at mature manhood and
the stature of full-grown men in Christ.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> So we shall no longer be babes nor shall
we resemble mariners tossed on the waves and carried about with every
changing wind of doctrine according to men's cleverness and unscrupulous
cunning, making use of every shifting device to mislead.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But we shall lovingly hold to the truth,
and shall in all respects grow up into union with Him who is our Head,
even Christ.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Dependent on Him, the whole body--its
various parts closely fitting and firmly adhering to one another-- grows
by the aid of every contributory link, with power proportioned to the
need of each individual part, so as to build itself up in a spirit of
love.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Therefore I warn you, and I implore you
in the name of the Master, no longer to live as the Gentiles in their
perverseness live,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> with darkened understandings, having by
reason of the ignorance which is deep-seated in them and the
insensibility of their moral nature, no share in the Life which God
gives.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Such men being past feeling have
abandoned themselves to impurity, greedily indulging in every kind of
profligacy.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But these are not the lessons which you
have learned from Christ;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> if at least you have heard His voice and
in Him have been taught--and this is true Christian teaching--

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> to put away, in regard to your former
mode of life, your original evil nature which is doomed to perish as
befits its misleading impulses,

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> and to get yourselves renewed in the
temper of your minds and clothe yourselves

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> with that new and better self which has
been created to resemble God in the righteousness and holiness which
come from the truth.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> For this reason, laying aside falsehood,
every one of you should speak the truth to his fellow man; for we are,
as it were, parts of one another.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> If angry, beware of sinning. Let not your
irritation last until the sun goes down;

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> and do not leave room for the Devil.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> He who has been a thief must steal no
more, but, instead of that, should work with his own hands in honest
industry, so that he may have something of which he can give the needy a
share.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Let no unwholesome words ever pass your
lips, but let all your words be good for benefiting others according to
the need of the moment, so that they may be a means of blessing to the
hearers.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And beware of grieving the Holy Spirit of
God, in whom you have been sealed in preparation for the day of
Redemption.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Let all bitterness and all passionate
feeling, all anger and loud insulting language, be unknown among
you--and also every kind of malice.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> On the contrary learn to be kind to one
another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, just as God in Christ
has also forgiven you.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Therefore be imitators of God, as His dear
children.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And live and act lovingly, as Christ also
loved you and gave Himself up to death on our behalf as an offering and
sacrifice to God, yielding a fragrant odor.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But fornication and every kind of impurity,
or covetousness, let them not even be mentioned among you, for they
ought not to be named among God's people.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Avoid shameful and foolish talk and low
jesting--they are all alike discreditable--and in place of these give
thanks.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> For be well assured that no fornicator or
immoral person and no money-grubber--or in other words
idol-worshipper--has any share awaiting him in the Kingdom of Christ and
of God.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Let no one deceive you with empty words,
for it is on account of these very sins that God's anger is coming upon
the disobedient.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Therefore do not become sharers with them.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> There was a time when you were nothing but
darkness. Now, as Christians, you are Light itself.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Live and act as sons of Light--for the
effect of the Light is seen in every kind of goodness, uprightness and
truth--

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and learn in your own experiences what is
fully pleasing to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Have nothing to do with the barren
unprofitable deeds of darkness, but, instead of that, set your faces
against them;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> for the things which are done by these
people in secret it is disgraceful even to speak of.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But everything can be tested by the light
and thus be shown in its true colors; for whatever shines of itself is
light.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For this reason it is said, "Rise,
sleeper; rise from among the dead, and Christ will shed light upon you."

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Therefore be very careful how you live
and act. Let it not be as unwise men, but as wise.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Buy up your opportunities, for these are
evil times.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> On this account do not prove yourselves
wanting in sense, but try to understand what the Lord's will is.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Do not over-indulge in wine--a thing in
which excess is so easy--

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> but drink deeply of God's Spirit. Speak
to one another with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs. Sing and offer
praise in your hearts to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Always and for everything let your thanks
to God the Father be presented in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> and submit to one another out of
reverence for Christ.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Married women, submit to your own
husbands as if to the Lord;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> because a husband is the Head of his wife
as Christ also is the Head of the Church, being indeed the Saviour of
this His Body.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And just as the Church submits to Christ,
so also married women should be entirely submissive to their husbands.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Married men, love your wives, as Christ
also loved the Church and gave Himself up to death for her;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> in order to make her holy, cleansing her
with the baptismal water by the word,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> that He might present the Church to
Himself a glorious bride, without spot or wrinkle or any other defect,
but to be holy and unblemished.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> So too married men ought to love their
wives as much as they love themselves. He who loves his wife loves
himself.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> For never yet has a man hated his own
body. On the contrary he feeds and cherishes it, just as Christ feeds
and cherishes the Church;

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> because we are, as it were, parts of His
Body.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> &lt;"For this reason a man is to leave
his father and his mother and be united to his wife, and the two shall
be as one."&gt;

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> That is a great truth hitherto kept
secret: I mean the truth concerning Christ and the Church.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Yet I insist that among you also, each
man is to love his own wife as much as he loves himself, and let a
married woman see to it that she treats her husband with respect.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Children, be obedient to your parents as a
Christian duty, for it is a duty.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> &lt;"Honour your father and your
mother"&gt; --this is the first Commandment which has a promise added to
it--

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> &lt;"so that it may be well with you, and
that you may live long on the earth."&gt;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And you, fathers, do not irritate your
children, but bring them up tenderly with true Christian training and
advice.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Slaves, be obedient to your earthly
masters, with respect and eager anxiety to please and with simplicity of
motive as if you were obeying Christ.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Let it not be in acts of eye-service as if
you had but to please men, but as Christ's bondservants who are doing
God's will from the heart.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> With right good will, be faithful to your
duty as service rendered to the Lord and not to man.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> You well know that whatever right thing any
one does, he will receive a requital for it from the Lord, whether he is
a slave or a free man.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And you masters, act towards your slaves on
the same principles, and refrain from threats. For you know that in
Heaven there is One who is your Master as well as theirs, and that
merely earthly distinctions there are none with Him.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> In conclusion, strengthen yourselves in
the Lord and in the power which His supreme might imparts.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Put on the complete armour of God, so as
to be able to stand firm against all the stratagems of the Devil.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For ours is not a conflict with mere
flesh and blood, but with the despotisms, the empires, the forces that
control and govern this dark world--the spiritual hosts of evil arrayed
against us in the heavenly warfare.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Therefore put on the complete armour of
God, so that you may be able to stand your ground on the day of battle,
and, having fought to the end, to remain victors on the field.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Stand therefore, first fastening round
you the girdle of truth and putting on the breastplate of uprightness

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> as well as the shoes of the Good News of
peace-- a firm foundation for your feet.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And besides all these take the great
shield of faith, on which you will be able to quench all the flaming
darts of the Wicked one;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and take the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit which is the word of God.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Pray with unceasing prayer and entreaty
on every fitting occasion in the Spirit, and be always on the alert to
seize opportunities for doing so, with unwearied persistence and
entreaty on behalf of all God's people,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> and ask on my behalf that words may be
given to me so that, outspoken and fearless, I may make known the truths
(hitherto kept secret) of the Good News--

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> to spread which I am an ambassador in
chains--so that when telling them I may speak out boldly as I ought.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> But in order that you also may know how I
am doing, Tychicus our dearly-loved brother and faithful helper in the
Lord's service will tell you everything.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> I have sent him to you for the very
purpose--that you may know about us and that he may encourage you.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Peace be to the brethren, and love
combined with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> May grace be with all who love our Lord
Jesus Christ with perfect sincerity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians](phi)
