[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](plm)  [Next](jam) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Hebrews

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> God, who in ancient days spoke to our
forefathers in many distinct messages and by various methods through the
Prophets,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> has at the end of these days spoken to us
through a Son, who is the pre-destined Lord of the universe, and through
whom He made the Ages.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> He brightly reflects God's glory and is the
exact representation of His being, and upholds the universe by His
all-powerful word. After securing man's purification from sin He took
His seat at the right hand of the Majesty on high,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> having become as far superior to the angels
as the Name He possesses by inheritance is more excellent than theirs.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For to which of the angels did God ever
say, &lt;"My Son art Thou: I have this day become Thy Father;"&gt; and
again, &lt;"I will be a Father to Him, and He shall be My Son"?&gt;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But speaking of the time when He once more
brings His Firstborn into the world, He says, &lt;"And let all God's
angels worship Him."&gt;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Moreover of the angels He says, &lt;"He
changes His angels into winds, and His ministering servants into a flame
of fire."&gt;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But of His Son, He says, &lt;"Thy throne, O
God, is for ever and for ever, and the sceptre of Thy Kingdom is a
sceptre of absolute justice.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Thou hast loved righteousness and hated
lawlessness; therefore God, Thy God, has anointed Thee with the oil of
gladness beyond Thy companions."&gt;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> It is also of His Son that God says,
&lt;"Thou, O Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundations of the
earth, and the heavens are the work of Thy hands.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> The heavens will perish, but Thou
remainest; and they will all grow old like a garment,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> and, as though they were a mantle Thou
wilt roll them up; yes, like a garment, and they will undergo change.
But Thou art the same, and Thy years will never come to an end."&gt;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> To which of the angels has He ever said,
&lt;"Sit at My right hand till I make Thy foes a footstool for Thy
feet"?&gt;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Are not all angels spirits that serve
Him--whom He sends out to render service for the benefit of those who,
before long, will inherit salvation?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For this reason we ought to pay the more
earnest heed to the things which we have heard, for fear we should drift
away from them.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if the message delivered through angels
proved to be true, and every transgression and act of disobedience met
with just retribution,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> how shall \*we\* escape if we are
indifferent to a salvation as great as that now offered to us? This,
after having first of all been announced by the Lord Himself, had its
truth made sure to us by those who heard Him,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> while God corroborated their testimony by
signs and marvels and various miracles, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit
distributed in accordance with His own will.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> It is not to angels that God has assigned
the sovereignty of that coming world, of which we speak.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But, as we know, a writer has solemnly
said, &lt;"How poor a creature is man, and yet Thou dost remember him,
and a son of man, and yet Thou dost come to him!

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Thou hast made him only a little inferior
to the angels; with glory and honour Thou hast crowned him, and hast set
him to govern the works of Thy hands.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Thou hast put everything in subjection
under his feet."&gt; For this subjecting of the universe to man implies
the leaving nothing not subject to him. But we do not as yet see the
universe subject to him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But Jesus--who was made a little inferior
to the angels in order that through God's grace He might taste death for
every human being--we already see wearing a crown of glory and honour
because of His having suffered death.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For it was fitting that He for whom, and
through whom, all things exist, after He had brought many sons to glory,
should perfect by suffering the Prince Leader who had saved them.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For both He who sanctifies and those whom
He is sanctifying have all one Father; and for this reason He is not
ashamed to speak of them as His brothers;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> as when He says: &lt;"I will proclaim Thy
name to My brothers: in the midst of the congregation I will hymn Thy
praises;"&gt;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> and again, &lt;"As for Me, I will be one
whose trust reposes in God;"&gt; and again, &lt;"Here am I, and here are
the children God has given Me."&gt;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Since then the children referred to are
all alike sharers in perishable human nature, He Himself also, in the
same way, took on Him a share of it, in order that through death He
might render powerless him who had authority over death, that is, the
Devil,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and might set at liberty all those who
through fear of death had been subject to lifelong slavery.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For assuredly it is not to angels that He
is continually reaching a helping hand, but it is to the descendants of
Abraham.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And for this purpose it was necessary
that in all respects He should be made to resemble His brothers, so that
He might become a compassionate and faithful High Priest in things
relating to God, in order to atone for the sins of the people.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For inasmuch as He has Himself felt the
pain of temptation and trial, He is also able instantly to help those
who are tempted and tried.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Therefore, holy brethren, sharers with
others in a heavenly invitation, fix your thoughts on Jesus, the Apostle
and High Priest whose followers we profess to be.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> How faithful He was to Him who appointed
Him, just as Moses also was faithful in all God's house!

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For Jesus has been counted worthy of
greater glory than Moses, in so far as he who has built a house has
higher honour than the house itself.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For every house has had a builder, and the
builder of all things is God.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Moreover, Moses was faithful in all God's
house as a servant in delivering the message given him to speak;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> but Christ was faithful as a Son having
authority over God's house, and we are that house, if we hold firm to
the End the boldness and the hope which we boast of as ours.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For this reason--as the Holy Spirit warns
us, &lt;"To-day, if you hear His voice,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> do not harden your hearts as your
forefathers did in the time of the provocation on the day of the
temptation in the Desert,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> where your forefathers so sorely tried My
patience and saw all that I did during forty years.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Therefore I was greatly grieved with that
generation, and I said, \`They are ever going astray in heart, and have
not learnt to know My paths.'

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> As I swore in My anger, they shall not be
admitted to My rest" --&gt;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> see to it, brethren, that there is never
in any one of you--as perhaps there may be--a sinful and unbelieving
heart, manifesting itself in revolt from the ever-living God.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> On the contrary encourage one another,
day after day, so long as To-day lasts, so that not one of you may be
hardened through the deceitful character of sin.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For we have, all alike, become sharers
with Christ, if we really hold our first confidence firm to the End;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> seeing that the warning still comes to
us, &lt;"To-day, if you hear His voice, do not harden your hearts as
your forefathers did in the time of the provocation."&gt;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For who were they that heard, and yet
provoked God? Was it not the whole of the people who had come out of
Egypt under the leadership of Moses?

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And with whom was God so greatly grieved
for forty years? Was it not with those who had sinned, and whose dead
bodies fell in the Desert?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And to whom did He swear that they should
not be admitted to His rest, if it was not to those who were
disobedient?

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And so we see that it was owing to lack
of faith that they could not be admitted.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore let us be on our guard lest
perhaps, while He still leaves us a promise of being admitted to His
rest, some one of you should be found to have fallen short of it.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For Good News has been brought to us as
truly as to them; but the message they heard failed to benefit them,
because they were not one in faith with those who gave heed to it.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> We who have believed are soon to be
admitted to the true rest; as He has said, &lt;"As I swore in My anger,
they shall not be admitted to My rest,"&gt; although God's works had
been going on ever since the creation of the world.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For, as we know, when speaking of the
seventh day He has used the words, &lt;"And God rested on the seventh
day from all His works;"&gt;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and He has also declared, &lt;"They shall
not be admitted to My rest."&gt;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Since, then, it is still true that some
will be admitted to that rest, and that because of disobedience those
who formerly had Good News proclaimed to them were not admitted,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> He again definitely mentions a certain day,
"To-day," saying long afterwards, by David's lips, in the words already
quoted, &lt;"To-day, if you hear His voice, do not harden your
hearts."&gt;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For if Joshua had given them the true rest,
we should not afterwards hear God speaking of another still future day.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> It follows that there still remains a
sabbath rest for the people of God.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For He who has been admitted to His rest,
has rested from His works as God did from His.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Let it then be our earnest endeavour to
be admitted to that rest, so that no one may perish through following
the same example of unbelief.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> For God's Message is full of life and
power, and is keener than the sharpest two-edged sword. It pierces even
to the severance of soul from spirit, and penetrates between the joints
and the marrow, and it can discern the secret thoughts and purposes of
the heart.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And no created thing is able to escape
its scrutiny; but everything lies bare and completely exposed before the
eyes of Him with whom we have to do.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Inasmuch, then, as we have in Jesus, the
Son of God, a great High Priest who has passed into Heaven itself, let
us hold firmly to our profession of faith.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For we have not a High Priest who is
unable to feel for us in our weaknesses, but one who was tempted in
every respect just as we are tempted, and yet did not sin.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Therefore let us come boldly to the
throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in
our times of need.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For every High Priest is chosen from among
men, and is appointed to act on behalf of men in matters relating to
God, in order to offer both gifts and sin-offerings,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and must be one who is able to bear
patiently with the ignorant and erring, because he himself also is beset
with infirmity.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And for this reason he is required to offer
sin-offerings not only for the people but also for himself.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And no one takes this honourable office
upon himself, but only accepts it when called to it by God, as Aaron
was.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> So Christ also did not claim for Himself
the honour of being made High Priest, but was appointed to it by Him who
said to Him, &lt;"My Son art Thou: I have to-day become Thy Father;"&gt;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> as also in another passage He says,
&lt;"Thou art a priest for ever, belonging to the order of
Melchizedek."&gt;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For Jesus during his earthly life offered
up prayers and entreaties, crying aloud and weeping as He pleaded with
Him who was able to bring Him in safety out of death, and He was
delivered from the terror from which He shrank.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Although He was God's Son, yet He learned
obedience from the sufferings which He endured;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> and so, having been made perfect, He became
to all who obey Him the source and giver of eternal salvation.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For God Himself addresses Him as a High
Priest for ever, belonging to the order of Melchizedek.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Concerning Him we have much to say, and
much that it would be difficult to make clear to you, since you have
become so dull of apprehension.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For although, considering the long time
you have been believers, you ought now to be teachers of others, you
really need some one to teach you over again the very rudiments of the
truths of God, and you have come to require milk instead of solid food.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> By people who live on milk I mean those
who are imperfectly acquainted with the teaching concerning
righteousness.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Such persons are mere babes. But solid
food is for adults--that is, for those who through constant practice
have their spiritual faculties carefully trained to distinguish good
from evil.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Therefore leaving elementary instruction
about the Christ, let us advance to mature manhood and not be
continually re-laying a foundation of repentance from lifeless works and
of faith in God,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> or of teaching about ceremonial washings,
the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead, and the last
judgement.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And advance we will, if God permits us to
do so.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For it is impossible, in the case of those
who have once for all been enlightened, and have tasted the sweetness of
the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and have realized how good the word of God
is and how mighty are the powers of the coming Age, and then fell away--

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> it is impossible, I say, to keep bringing
them back to a new repentance, for, to their own undoing, they are
repeatedly crucifying the Son of God afresh and exposing Him to open
shame.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For land which has drunk in the rain that
often falls upon it, and brings forth vegetation useful to those for
whose sakes, indeed, it is tilled, has a share in God's blessing.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But if it only yields a mass of thorns and
briers, it is considered worthless, and is in danger of being cursed,
and in the end will be destroyed by fire.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But we, even while we speak in this tone,
have a happier conviction concerning you, my dearly-loved friends--a
conviction of things which point towards salvation.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For God is not unjust so that He is
unmindful of your labour and of the love which you have manifested
towards Himself in having rendered services to His people and in still
rendering them.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But we long for each of you to continue
to manifest the same earnestness, with a view to your enjoying fulness
of hope to the very End;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> so that you may not become half-hearted,
but be imitators of those who through faith and patient endurance are
now heirs to the promises.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For when God gave the promise to Abraham,
since He had no one greater to swear by, He swore by Himself,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> saying, &lt;"Assuredly I will bless you
and bless you, I will increase you and increase you."&gt;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And so, as the result of patient waiting,
our forefather obtained what God had promised.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> For men swear by what is greater than
themselves; and with them an oath in confirmation of a statement always
puts an end to a dispute.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> In the same way, since it was God's
desire to display more convincingly to the heirs of the promise how
unchangeable His purpose was,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> He added an oath, in order that, through
two unchangeable things, in which it is impossible for Him to prove
false, we may possess mighty encouragement--we who, for safety, have
hastened to lay hold of the hope set before us.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> That hope we have as an anchor of the
soul--an anchor that can neither break nor drag. It passes in behind the
veil,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> where Jesus has entered as a forerunner
on our behalf, having become, like Melchizedek, a High Priest for ever.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> For this man, Melchizedek, King of Salem
and priest of the Most High God--he who when Abraham was returning after
defeating the kings met him and pronounced a blessing on him--

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> to whom also Abraham presented a tenth part
of all--being first, as his name signifies, King of righteousness, and
secondly King of Salem, that is, King of peace:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> with no father or mother, and no record of
ancestry: having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made a
type of the Son of God--this man Melchizedek remains a priest for ever.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Now think how great this priest-king must
have been to whom Abraham the patriarch gave a tenth part of the best of
the spoil.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And those of the descendants of Levi who
receive the priesthood are authorized by the Law to take tithes from the
people, that is, from their brethren, though these have sprung from
Abraham.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But, in this instance, one who does not
trace his origin from them takes tithes from Abraham, and pronounces a
blessing on him to whom the promises belong.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And beyond all dispute it is always the
inferior who is blessed by the superior.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Moreover here frail mortal men receive
tithes: there one receives them about whom there is evidence that he is
alive.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And Levi too--if I may so speak--pays
tithes through Abraham:

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> for Levi was yet in the loins of his
forefather when Melchizedek met Abraham.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now if the crowning blessing was
attainable by means of the Levitical priesthood--for as resting on this
foundation the people received the Law, to which they are still
subject-- what further need was there for a Priest of a different kind
to be raised up belonging to the order of Melchizedek instead of being
said to belong to the order of Aaron?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For when the priesthood changes, a change
of Law also of necessity takes place.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> He, however, to whom that prophecy refers
is associated with a different tribe, not one member of which has
anything to do with the altar.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For it is undeniable that our Lord sprang
from Judah, a tribe of which Moses said nothing in connection with
priests.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And this is still more abundantly clear
when we read that it is as belonging to the order of Melchizedek that a
priest of a different kind is to arise,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> and hold His office not in obedience to
any temporary Law, but by virtue of an indestructible Life.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> For the words are in evidence, &lt;"Thou
art a priest for ever, belonging to the order of Melchizedek."&gt;

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> On the one hand we have here the
abrogation of an earlier code because it was weak and ineffective--

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> for the Law brought no perfect
blessing--but on the other hand we have the bringing in of a new and
better hope by means of which we draw near to God.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And since it was not without an oath
being taken--

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> for these men hold office without any
oath having been taken, but He holds it attested by an oath from Him who
said to Him, &lt;"The Lord has sworn and will not recall His words, Thou
art a Priest for ever" --&gt;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> so much the more also is the Covenant of
which Jesus has become the guarantor, a better covenant.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And they have been appointed priests many
in number, because death prevents their continuance in office:

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> but He, because He continues for ever,
has a priesthood which does not pass to any successor.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Hence too He is able to save to the
uttermost those who come to God through Him, seeing that He ever lives
to plead for them.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Moreover we needed just such a High
Priest as this--holy, guileless, undefiled, far removed from sinful men
and exalted above the heavens;

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> who, unlike other High Priests, is not
under the necessity of offering up sacrifices day after day, first for
His own sins, and afterwards for those of the people; for this latter
thing He did once for all when He offered up Himself.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> For the Law constitutes men High
Priests--men with all their infirmity--but the utterance of the oath,
which came later than the Law, constitutes High Priest a Son who has
been made for ever perfect.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now in connexion with what we have been
saying the chief point is that we have a High Priest who has taken His
seat at the right hand of the throne of God's Majesty in the heavens,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and ministers in the Holy place and in the
true tabernacle which not man, but the Lord pitched.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Every High Priest, however, is appointed to
offer both bloodless gifts and sacrifices. Therefore this High Priest
also must have some offering to present.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> If then He were still on earth, He would
not be a priest at all, since here there are already those who present
the offerings in obedience to the Law,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> and serve a copy and type of the heavenly
things, just as Moses was divinely instructed when about to build the
tabernacle. For God said, &lt;"See that you make everything in imitation
of the pattern shown you on the mountain."&gt;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> But, as a matter of fact, the ministry
which Christ has obtained is all the nobler a ministry, in that He is at
the same time the negotiator of a sublimer covenant, based upon sublimer
promises.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For if that first Covenant had been free
from imperfection, there would have been no attempt to introduce
another.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For, being dissatisfied with His people,
God says, &lt;"\`There are days coming,' says the Lord, \`When I will
establish with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new
Covenant--

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> a Covenant unlike the one which I made with
their forefathers on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them
out from the land of Egypt; for they would not remain faithful to that.'
\`So I turned from them,' says the Lord.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> \`But this is the Covenant that I will
covenant with the house of Israel after those days,' says the Lord: I
will put My laws into their minds and will write them upon their hearts.
And I will indeed be their God and they shall be My People.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And there shall be no need for them to
teach each one his fellow citizen and each one his brother, saying, Know
the Lord. For all will know Me from the least of them to the greatest;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Because I will be merciful to their
wrongdoings, and their sins I will remember no longer.'"&gt;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> By using the words, "a new Covenant," He
has made the first one obsolete; but whatever is decaying and showing
signs of old age is not far from disappearing altogether.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now even the first Covenant had regulations
for divine worship, and had also its sanctuary--a sanctuary belonging to
this world.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For a sacred tent was constructed--the
outer one, in which were the lamp and the table and the presented
loaves; and this is called the Holy place.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And behind the second veil was a sacred
tent called the Holy of holies.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> This had a censer of gold, and the ark of
the Covenant lined with gold and completely covered with gold, and in it
were a gold vase which held the manna, and Aaron's rod which budded and
the tables of the Covenant.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And above the ark were the Cherubim
denoting God's glorious presence and overshadowing the Mercy-seat. But I
cannot now speak about all these in detail.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> These arrangements having long been
completed, the priests, when conducting the divine services, continually
enter the outer tent.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> But into the second, the High Priest goes
only on one day of the year, and goes alone, taking with him blood,
which he offers on his own behalf and on account of the sins which the
people have ignorantly committed.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And the lesson which the Holy Spirit
teaches is this--that the way into the true Holy place is not yet open
so long as the outer tent still remains in existence.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And this is a figure--for the time now
present--answering to which both gifts and sacrifices are offered,
unable though they are to give complete freedom from sin to him who
ministers.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> For their efficacy depends only on meats
and drinks and various washings, ceremonies pertaining to the body and
imposed until a time of reformation.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> But Christ appeared as a High Priest of
the blessings that are soon to come by means of the greater and more
perfect Tent of worship, a tent which has not been built with
hands--that is to say does not belong to this material creation--

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> and once for all entered the Holy place,
taking with Him not the blood of goats and calves, but His own blood,
and thus procuring eternal redemption for us.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For if the blood of goats and bulls and
the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those who have contracted defilement
make them holy so as to bring about ceremonial purity,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> how much more certainly shall the blood
of Christ, who strengthened by the eternal Spirit offered Himself to
God, free from blemish, purify your consciences from lifeless works for
you to serve the ever-living God?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And because of this He is the negotiator
of a new Covenant, in order that, since a life has been given in
atonement for the offences committed under the first Covenant, those who
have been called may receive the eternal inheritance which has been
promised to them.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For where there is a legal \`will,' there
must also be a death brought forward in evidence--the death of him who
made it.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And a will is only of force in the case
of a deceased person, being never of any avail so long as he who made it
lives.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Accordingly we find that the first
Covenant was not inaugurated without blood.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For when Moses had proclaimed to all the
people every commandment contained in the Law, he took the blood of the
calves and of the goats and with them water, scarlet wool and hyssop,
and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> saying, &lt;"This is the blood which
confirms the Covenant that God has made binding upon you."&gt;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And in the same way he also sprinkled
blood upon the Tent of worship and upon all the vessels used in the
ministry.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Indeed we may almost say that in
obedience to the Law everything is sprinkled with blood, and that apart
from the outpouring of blood there is no remission of sins.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> It was needful therefore that the copies
of the things in Heaven should be cleansed in this way, but that the
heavenly things themselves should be cleansed with more costly
sacrifices.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> For not into a Holy place built by men's
hands--a mere copy of the reality--did Christ enter, but He entered
Heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God on our behalf.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Nor did He enter for the purpose of many
times offering Himself in sacrifice, just as the High Priest enters the
Holy place, year after year, taking with him blood not his own.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> In that case Christ would have needed to
suffer many times, from the creation of the world onwards; but as a
matter of fact He has appeared once for all, at the Close of the Ages,
in order to do away with sin by the sacrifice of Himself.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And since it is reserved for all mankind
once to die, and afterwards to be judged;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> so the Christ also, having been once
offered in sacrifice in order that He might bear the sins of many, will
appear a second time, separated from sin, to those who are eagerly
expecting Him, to make their salvation complete.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> For, since the Law exhibits only an
outline of the blessings to come and not a perfect representation of the
things themselves, the priests can never, by repeating the same
sacrifices which they continually offer year after year, give complete
freedom from sin to those who draw near.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For then would not the sacrifices have
ceased to be offered, because the consciences of the worshippers--who in
that case would now have been cleansed once for all--would no longer be
burdened with sins?

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> But in those sacrifices sins are recalled
to memory year after year.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For it is impossible for the blood of
bulls and goats to take away sins.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> That is why, when He comes into the
world, He says, &lt;"Sacrifice and offering Thou has not desired, but a
body Thou hast prepared for Me.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> In whole burnt-offerings and in
sin-offerings Thou hast taken no pleasure.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Then I said, \`I have come--in the roll
of the book it is written concerning Me--to do Thy will, O God.'"&gt;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> After saying the words I have just
quoted, &lt;"Sacrifices and offerings or whole burnt-offerings and
sin-offerings Thou hast not desired or taken pleasure in"&gt; --all such
being offered in obedience to the Law--

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He then adds, &lt;"I have come to do Thy
will."&gt; He does away with the first in order to establish the second.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> It is through that divine will that we
have been set free from sin, through the offering of Jesus Christ as our
sacrifice once for all.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And while every priest stands
ministering, day after day, and constantly offering the same
sacrifices--though such can never rid us of our sins--

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> this Priest, on the contrary, after
offering for sins a single sacrifice of perpetual efficacy, took His
seat at God's right hand,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> waiting from that time onward until His
enemies be put as a footstool under His feet.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> For by a single offering He has for
ever completed the blessing for those whom He is setting free from sin.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the Holy Spirit also gives us His
testimony; for when He had said,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> &lt;"\`This is the Covenant that I will
make with them after those days,' says the Lord: \`I will put My laws
upon their hearts and will write them on their minds;'"&gt;

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> He adds, &lt;"And their sins and
offences I will remember no longer."&gt;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> But where these have been forgiven no
further offering for sin is required.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Since then, brethren, we have free
access to the Holy place through the blood of Jesus,

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> by the new and ever-living way which He
opened up for us through the rending of the veil--that is to say, of His
earthly nature--

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> and since we have a great Priest who
has authority over the house of God,

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> let us draw near with sincerity and
unfaltering faith, having had our hearts sprinkled, once for all, from
consciences oppressed with sin, and our bodies bathed in pure water.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Let us hold firmly to an unflinching
avowal of our hope, for He is faithful who gave us the promises.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And let us bestow thought on one
another with a view to arousing one another to brotherly love and right
conduct;

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> not neglecting--as some habitually
do--to meet together, but encouraging one another, and doing this all
the more since you can see the day of Christ approaching.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> For if we wilfully persist in sin after
having received the full knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains
in reserve any other sacrifice for sins.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> There remains nothing but a certain
awful expectation of judgement, and the fury of a fire which before long
will devour the enemies of the truth.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> Any one who bids defiance to the Law of
Moses is put to death without mercy on the testimony of two or three
witnesses.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> How much severer punishment, think you,
will he be held to deserve who has trampled under foot the Son of God,
has not regarded as holy that Covenant-blood with which he was set free
from sin, and has insulted the Spirit from whom comes grace?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> For we know who it is that has said,
&lt;"Vengeance belongs to Me: I will pay back;"&gt; and again, &lt;"The
Lord will be His people's judge."&gt;

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> It is an awful thing to fall into the
hands of the ever-living God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> But continually recall to mind the days
now past, when on being first enlightened you went through a great
conflict and many sufferings.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> This was partly through allowing
yourselves to be made a public spectacle amid reproaches and
persecutions, and partly through coming forward to share the sufferings
of those who were thus treated.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> For you not only showed sympathy with
those who were imprisoned, but you even submitted with joy when your
property was taken from you, being well aware that you have in your own
selves a more valuable possession and one which will remain.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> Therefore do not cast from you your
confident hope, for it will receive a vast reward.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> For you stand in need of patient
endurance, so that, as the result of having done the will of God, you
may receive the promised blessing.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> For there is still but a short time and
then &lt;"The coming One will come and will not delay.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> But it is by faith that My righteous
servant shall live; and if he shrinks back, My soul takes no pleasure in
him."&gt;

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> But we are not people who shrink back
and perish, but are among those who believe and gain possession of their
souls.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now faith is a well-grounded assurance of
that for which we hope, and a conviction of the reality of things which
we do not see.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> For by it the saints of old won God's
approval.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Through faith we understand that the
worlds came into being, and still exist, at the command of God, so that
what is seen does not owe its existence to that which is visible.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Through faith Abel offered to God a more
acceptable sacrifice than Cain did, and through this faith he obtained
testimony that he was righteous, God giving the testimony by accepting
his gifts; and through it, though he is dead, he still speaks.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Through faith Enoch was taken from the
earth so that he did not see death, and he could not be found, because
God had taken him; for before he was taken we have evidence that he
truly pleased God.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But where there is no faith it is
impossible truly to please Him; for the man who draws near to God must
believe that there is a God and that He proves Himself a rewarder of
those who earnestly try to find Him.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Through faith Noah, being divinely taught
about things as yet unseen, reverently gave heed and built an ark for
the safety of his family, and by this act he condemned the world, and
became an heir of the righteousness which depends on faith.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Through faith Abraham, upon being called
to leave home and go into a land which he was soon to receive for an
inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing where he was going to.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Through faith he came and made his home
for a time in a land which had been promised to him, as if in a foreign
country, living in tents together with Isaac and Jacob, sharers with him
in the same promise;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> for he continually looked forward to
the city which has the foundations, whose architect and builder is God.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Through faith even Sarah herself
received strength to become a mother--although she was past the time of
life for this--because she judged Him faithful who had given the
promise.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And thus there sprang from one man, and
him practically dead, a nation like the stars of the sky in number, and
like the sands on the sea shore which cannot be counted.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> All these died in the possession of
faith. They had not received the promised blessings, but had seen them
from a distance and had greeted them, and had acknowledged themselves to
be foreigners and strangers here on earth;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> for men who acknowledge this make it
manifest that they are seeking elsewhere a country of their own.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And if they had cherished the
remembrance of the country they had left, they would have found an
opportunity to return;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> but, as it is, we see them eager for a
better land, that is to say, a heavenly one. For this reason God is not
ashamed to be called their God, for He has now prepared a city for them.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Through faith Abraham, as soon as God
put him to the test, offered up Isaac. Yes, he who had joyfully welcomed
the promises was on the point of sacrificing his only son

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> with regard to whom he had been told,
&lt;"It is through Isaac that your posterity shall be traced."&gt;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For he reckoned that God is even able
to raise a man up from among the dead, and, figuratively speaking, it
was from among the dead that he received Isaac again.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Through faith Isaac blessed Jacob and
Esau, even in connexion with things soon to come.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Through faith Jacob, when dying,
blessed each of Joseph's sons, and, leaning on the top of his staff,
worshipped God.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Through faith Joseph, when he was near
his end, made mention of the departure of the descendants of Israel, and
gave orders about his own body.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Through faith the child Moses was hid
for three months by his parents, because they saw his rare beauty; and
the king's edict had no terror for them.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Through faith Moses, when he grew to
manhood, refused to be known as Pharaoh's daughter's son,

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> having determined to endure
ill-treatment along with the people of God rather than enjoy the
short-lived pleasures of sin;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> because he deemed the reproaches which
he might meet with in the service of the Christ to be greater riches
than all the treasures of Egypt; for he fixed his gaze on the coming
reward.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Through faith he left Egypt, not being
frightened by the king's anger; for he held on his course as seeing the
unseen One.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Through faith he instituted the
Passover, and the sprinkling with blood so that the destroyer of the
firstborn might not touch the Israelites.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Through faith they passed through the
Red Sea as though they were passing over dry land, but the Egyptians,
when they tried to do the same, were swallowed up.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Through faith the walls of Jericho fell
to the ground after being surrounded for seven days.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Through faith the notorious sinner
Rahab did not perish along with the disobedient, for she had welcomed
the spies and had sheltered them.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And why need I say more? For time will
fail me if I tell the story of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, and of
David and Samuel and the Prophets;

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> men who, as the result of faith,
conquered whole kingdoms, brought about true justice, obtained promises
from God, stopped lions' mouths,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> deprived fire of its power, escaped
being killed by the sword, out of weakness were made strong, became
mighty in war, put to flight foreign armies.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Women received back their dear ones
alive from the dead; and others were put to death with torture, refusing
the deliverance offered to them--that they might secure a better
resurrection.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> Others again were tested by cruel
mockery and by scourging; yes, and by chains and imprisonment.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> They were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, they were tried by temptation, they were killed with the sword.
They went from place to place in sheepskins or goatskins, enduring want,
oppression and cruelty.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> (They were men of whom the world was
not worthy.) They wandered across deserts and mountains, or hid
themselves in caves and in holes in the ground.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And although by their faith all these
people won God's approval, none of them received the fulfilment of His
great promise;

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> for God had provided for them and us
something better, so that apart from us they were not to attain to full
blessedness.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Therefore, surrounded as we are by such a
vast cloud of witnesses, let us fling aside every encumbrance and the
sin that so readily entangles our feet. And let us run with patient
endurance the race that lies before us,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> simply fixing our gaze upon Jesus, our
Prince Leader in the faith, who will also award us the prize. He, for
the sake of the joy which lay before Him, patiently endured the cross,
looking with contempt upon its shame, and afterwards seated Himself--
where He still sits--at the right hand of the throne of God.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Therefore, if you would escape becoming
weary and faint-hearted, compare your own sufferings with those of Him
who endured such hostility directed against Him by sinners.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> In your struggle against sin you have not
yet resisted so as to endanger your lives;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> and you have quite forgotten the
encouraging words which are addressed to you as sons, and which say,
&lt;"My son, do not think lightly of the Lord's discipline, and do not
faint when He corrects you;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> for those whom the Lord loves He
disciplines: and He scourges every son whom He acknowledges."&gt;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> The sufferings that you are enduring are
for your discipline. God is dealing with you as sons; for what son is
there whom his father does not discipline?

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And if you are left without discipline,
of which every true son has had a share, that shows that you are
bastards, and not true sons.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Besides this, our earthly fathers used to
discipline us and we treated them with respect, and shall we not be
still more submissive to the Father of our spirits, and live?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> It is true that they disciplined us for
a few years according as they thought fit; but He does it for our
certain good, in order that we may become sharers in His own holy
character.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Now, at the time, discipline seems to
be a matter not for joy, but for grief; yet it afterwards yields to
those who have passed through its training a result full of
peace--namely, righteousness.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Therefore strengthen the drooping hands
and paralysed knees,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> and make straight paths for your feet,
so that what is lame may not be put entirely out of joint

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> but may rather be restored.
Persistently strive for peace with all men, and for that growth in
holiness apart from which no one will see the Lord.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Be carefully on your guard lest there
be any one who falls back from the grace of God; lest any root bearing
bitter fruit spring up and cause trouble among you, and through it the
whole brotherhood be defiled;

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> lest there be a fornicator, or an
ungodly person like Esau, who, in return for a single meal, parted with
the birthright which belonged to him.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> For you know that even afterwards, when
he wished to secure the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no
opportunity for undoing what he had done, though he sought the blessing
earnestly with tears.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> For you have not come to a material
object all ablaze with fire, and to gloom and darkness and storm and
trumpet-blast and the sound of words--

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> a sound of such a kind that those who
heard it entreated that no more should be added.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For they could not endure the order
which had been given, &lt;"Even a wild beast, if it touches the
mountain, shall be stoned to death;"&gt;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and so terrible was the scene that
Moses said, &lt;"I tremble with fear."&gt;

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> On the contrary you have come to Mount
Zion, and to the city of the ever-living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to
countless hosts of angels,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> to the great festal gathering and
Church of the first-born, whose names are recorded in Heaven, and to a
Judge who is God of all, and to the spirits of righteous men made
perfect,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> and to Jesus the negotiator of a new
Covenant, and to the sprinkled blood which speaks in more gracious tones
than that of Abel.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Be careful not to refuse to listen to
Him who is speaking to you. For if they of old did not escape unpunished
when they refused to listen to him who spoke on earth, much less shall
we escape who turn a deaf ear to Him who now speaks from Heaven.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> His voice then shook the earth, but now
we have His promise, &lt;"Yet again I will, once for all, cause not only
the earth to tremble, but Heaven also."&gt;

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Here the words "Yet again, once for
all" denote the removal of the things which can be shaken--created
things--in order that the things which cannot be shaken may remain.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Therefore, receiving, as we now do, a
kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us cherish thankfulness so that we
may ever offer to God an acceptable service, with godly reverence and
awe.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> For our God is also a consuming fire.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let brotherly love always continue.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Do not neglect to show kindness to
strangers; for, in this way, some, without knowing it, have had angels
as their guests.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Remember prisoners, as if you were in
prison with them; and remember those suffering ill-treatment, for you
yourselves also are still in the body.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Let marriage be held in honour among all,
and let the marriage bed be unpolluted; for fornicators and adulterers
God will judge.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Your lives should be untainted by love
for money. Be content with what you have; for God Himself has said,
&lt;"I will never, never let go your hand: I will never never forsake
you."&gt;

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> So that we fearlessly say, &lt;"The Lord
is my helper; I will not be afraid: what can man do to me?"&gt;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Remember your former leaders--it was they
who brought you God's Message. Bear in mind how they ended their lives,
and imitate their faith.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and
to-day--yes, and to the ages to come.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Do not be drawn aside by all sorts of
strange teaching; for it is well to have the heart made stedfast through
God's grace, and not by special kinds of food, from which those who
scrupulously attend to them have derived no benefit.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> We Christians have an altar from which
the ministers of the Jewish Tent have no right to eat.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For the bodies of those animals of
which the blood is carried by the High Priest into the Holy place as an
offering for sin, are burned outside the camp.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And for this reason Jesus also, in
order, by His own blood, to set the people free from sin, suffered
outside the gate.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore let us go to Him outside the
camp, sharing the insults directed against Him.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> For we have no permanent city here, but
we are longing for the city which is soon to be ours.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Through Him, then, let us continually
lay on the altar a sacrifice of praise to God, namely, the utterance of
lips that give thanks to His Name.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And do not forget to be kind and
liberal; for with sacrifices of that sort God is greatly pleased.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Obey your leaders and be submissive to
them. For they are keeping watch over your souls as those who will have
to give account; that they may do this with joy and not with
lamentation. For that would be of no advantage to you.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Keep on praying for us; for we are sure
that we have clear consciences, and we desire to live nobly in every
respect.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> I specially urge this upon you in order
that I may be the more speedily restored to you.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Now may God who gives peace, and
brought Jesus, our Lord, up again from among the dead--even Him who, by
virtue of the blood of the eternal Covenant, is the great Shepherd of
the sheep--

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> fully equip you with every grace that
you may need for the doing of His will, producing in us that which will
truly please Him through Jesus Christ. To Him be the glory to the Ages
of the Ages! Amen.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Bear with me, brethren, when I thus
exhort you; for, in fact, it is but a short letter that I have written
to you.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> You will rejoice to hear that our
brother Timothy has been set at liberty. If he comes soon, I will see
you with him.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Greet all your leaders and all God's
people. The brethren from Italy send you greetings.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> Grace be with you all! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James](jam)
