[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe2)  [Next](jo2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 1 John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> That which was from the beginning, which we
have listened to, which we have seen with our own eyes, and our own
hands have handled concerning the Word of Life--

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> the Life was manifested, and we have seen
and bear witness, and we declare unto you the Life of the Ages which was
with the Father and was manifested to us--

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> that which we have seen and listened to we
now announce to you also, in order that you also may have fellowship in
it with us, and this fellowship with us is fellowship with the Father
and with His Son Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And we write these things in order that our
joy may be made complete.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> This is the Message which we have heard
from the Lord Jesus and now deliver to you--God is Light, and in Him
there is no darkness.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> If, while we are living in darkness, we
profess to have fellowship with Him, we speak falsely and are not
adhering to the truth.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But if we live in the light as He is in the
light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus, His
Son, cleanses us from all sin.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If we claim to be already free from sin, we
lead ourselves astray and the truth has no place in our hearts.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> If we confess our sins, He is so faithful
and just that He forgives us our sins and cleanses us from all
unrighteousness.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> If we deny that we have sinned, we make
Him a liar, and His Message has no place in our hearts.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Dear children, I write thus to you in order
that you may not sin. If any one sins, we have an Advocate with the
Father--Jesus Christ the righteous;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and He is an atoning sacrifice for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And by this we may know that we know
Him--if we obey His commands.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He who professes to know Him, and yet does
not obey His commands, is a liar, and the truth has no place in his
heart.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But whoever obeys His Message, in him love
for God has in very deed reached perfection. By this we can know that we
are in Him.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The man who professes to be continuing in
Him is himself also bound to live as He lived.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> My dearly-loved friends, it is no new
command that I am now giving you, but an old command which you have had
from the very beginning. By the old command I mean the teaching which
you have already received.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And yet I \*am\* giving you a new command,
for such it really is, so far as both He and you are concerned: because
the darkness is now passing away and the light, the true light, is
already beginning to shine.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Any one who professes to be in the light
and yet hates his brother man is still in darkness.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> He who loves his brother man continues in
the light, and his life puts no stumbling-block in the way of others.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But he who hates his brother man is in
darkness and is walking in darkness; and he does not know where he is
going--because the darkness has blinded his eyes.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I am writing to you, dear children,
because for His sake your sins are forgiven you.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I am writing to you, fathers, because you
know Him who has existed from the very beginning. I am writing to you,
young men, because you have overcome the Evil one. I have written to
you, children, because you know the Father.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> I have written to you, fathers, because
you know Him who has existed from the very beginning. I have written to
you, young men, because you are strong and God's Message still has a
place in your hearts, and you have overcome the Evil one.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Do not love the world, nor the things in
the world. If any one loves the world, there is no love in his heart for
the Father.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For the things in the world--the cravings
of the earthly nature, the cravings of the eyes, the show and pride of
life--they all come, not from the Father, but from the world.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the world, with its cravings, is
passing away, but he who does God's will continues for ever.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Dear children, the last hour has come;
and as you once heard that there was to be an anti-Christ, so even now
many anti-Christs have appeared. By this we may know that the last hour
has come.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> They have gone forth from our midst, but
they did not really belong to us; for had they belonged to us, they
would have remained with us. But they left us that it might be manifest
that professed believers do not all belong to us.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> As for you, you have an anointing from
the holy One and have perfect knowledge.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I have written to you, not because you
are ignorant of the truth, but because you know it, and you know that
nothing false comes from the truth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who is a liar compared with him who
denies that Jesus is the Christ? He who disowns the Father and the Son
is the anti-Christ.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> No one who disowns the Son has the
Father. He who acknowledges the Son has also the Father.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> As for you, let the teaching which you
have received from the very beginning continue in your hearts. If that
teaching does continue in your hearts, you also will continue to be in
union with the Son and with the Father.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And this is the promise which He Himself
has given us--the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> I have thus written to you concerning
those who are leading you astray.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And as for you, the anointing which you
received from Him remains within you, and there is no need for any one
to teach you. But since His anointing gives you instruction in all
things--and is true and is no falsehood--you are continuing in union
with Him even as it has taught you to do.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And now, dear children, continue in union
with Him; so that, if He re-appears, we may have perfect confidence, and
may not shrink away in shame from His presence at His Coming.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Since you know that He is righteous, be
assured also that the man who habitually acts righteously is a child of
His.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> See what marvellous love the Father has
bestowed upon us--that we should be called God's children: and that is
what we are. For this reason the world does not recognize us--because it
has not known Him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Dear friends, we are now God's children,
but what we are to be in the future has not yet been fully revealed. We
know that if Christ reappears we shall be like Him, because we shall see
Him as He is.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And every man who has this hope fixed on
Him, purifies himself so as to be as pure as He is.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Every one who is guilty of sin is also
guilty of violating Law; for sin is the violation of Law.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And you know that He appeared in order to
take away sins; and in Him there is no sin.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> No one who continues in union with Him
lives in sin: no one who lives in sin has seen Him or knows Him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Dear children, let no one lead you astray.
The man who acts righteously is righteous, just as He is righteous.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> He who is habitually guilty of sin is a
child of the Devil, because the Devil has been a sinner from the very
beginning. The Son of God appeared for the purpose of undoing the work
of the Devil.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> No one who is a child of God is habitually
guilty of sin. A God-given germ of life remains in him, and he cannot
habitually sin--because he is a child of God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> By this we can distinguish God's children
and the Devil's children: no one who fails to act righteously is a child
of God, nor he who does not love his brother man.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For this is the Message you have heard
from the beginning--that we are to love one another.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> We are not to resemble Cain, who was a
child of the Evil one and killed his own brother. And why did he kill
him? Because his own actions were wicked and his brother's actions
righteous.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Do not be surprised, brethren, if the
world hates you.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> As for us, we know that we have already
passed out of death into Life--because we love our brother men. He who
is destitute of love continues dead.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Every one who hates his brother man is a
murderer; and you know that no murderer has the Life of the Ages
continuing in him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> We know what love is--through Christ's
having laid down His life on our behalf; and in the same way we ought to
lay down our lives for our brother men.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> But if any one has this world's wealth
and sees that his brother man is in need, and yet hardens his heart
against him--how can such a one continue to love God?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Dear children, let us not love in words
only nor with the lips, but in deed and in truth.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And in this way we shall come to know
that we are loyal to the truth, and shall satisfy our consciences in His
presence

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> in whatever matters our hearts condemn
us--because God is greater than our hearts and knows everything.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Dear friends, if our hearts do not
condemn us, we have perfect confidence towards God;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and whatever we ask for we obtain from
Him, because we obey His commands and do the things which are pleasing
in His sight.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And this is His command--that we are to
believe in His Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as He has
commanded us to do.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> The man who obeys His commands continues
in union with God, and God continues in union with him; and through His
Spirit whom He has given us we can know that He continues in union with
us.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Dear friends, do not believe every spirit,
but put the spirits to the test to see whether they are from God; for
many false teachers have gone out into the world.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> The test by which you may recognize the
Spirit of God is that every spirit which acknowledges that Jesus Christ
has come as man is from God,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and that no spirit is from God which does
not acknowledge this about Jesus. Such is the spirit of the anti-Christ;
of whose coming you have heard, and it is already in the world.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> As for you, dear children, you are God's
children, and have successfully resisted them; for greater is He who is
in you than he who is in the world.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> They are the world's children, and so their
language is that of the world, and the world listens to them. We are
God's children.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> The man who is beginning to know God
listens to us, but he who is not a child of God does not listen to us.
By this test we can distinguish the Spirit of truth from the spirit of
error.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Dear friends, let us love one another; for
love has its origin in God, and every one who loves has become a child
of God and is beginning to know God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He who is destitute of love has never had
any knowledge of God; because God is love.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> God's love for us has been manifested in
that He has sent His only Son into the world so that we may have Life
through Him.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> This is love indeed--we did not love God,
but He loved us and sent His Son to be an atoning sacrifice for our
sins.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Dear friends, if God has so loved us, we
also ought to love one another.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> No one has ever yet seen God. If we love
one another, God continues in union with us, and His love in all its
perfection is in our hearts.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> We can know that we are continuing in
union with Him and that He is continuing in union with us, by the fact
that He has given us a portion of His Spirit.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And we have seen and bear witness that
the Father has sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is the
Son of God--God continues in union with him, and he continues in union
with God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And, as for us, we know the love which
God has for us, and we confide in it. God is love, and he who continues
to love continues in union with God, and God continues in union with
him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Our love will be manifested in all its
perfection by our having complete confidence on the day of the
Judgement; because just what He is, we also are in the world.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Love has in it no element of fear; but
perfect love drives away fear, because fear involves pain, and if a man
gives way to fear, there is something imperfect in his love.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> We love because God first loved us.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> If any one says that he loves God, while
he hates his brother man, he is a liar; for he who does not love his
brother man whom he has seen, cannot love God whom he has not seen.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And the command which we have from Him is
that he who loves God must love his brother man also.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Every one who believes that Jesus is the
Christ is a child of God; and every one who loves the Father loves also
Him who is the Father's Child.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> The fact that we love God Himself, and obey
His commands, is a proof that we love God's children.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Love for God means obedience to His
commands; and His commands are not irksome.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For every child of God overcomes the world;
and the victorious principle which has overcome the world is our faith.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Who but the man that believes that Jesus is
the Son of God overcomes the world?

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Jesus Christ is He who came with water and
blood; not with the water only, but with the water and with the blood.
And it is the Spirit who gives testimony-- because the Spirit is the
Truth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For there are three that give testimony--
the Spirit, the water, and the blood;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> and there is complete agreement between
these three.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If we accept the testimony of men, God's
testimony is greater: for God's testimony consists of the things which
He has testified about His Son.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He who believes in the Son of God has the
testimony in his own heart: he who does not believe God has made Him a
liar, in that he has refused to accept the testimony which God has given
about His Son.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And that testimony is to the effect that
God has given us the Life of the Ages, and that this Life is in His Son.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> He who has the Son has the Life: he who
has not the Son of God has not the Life.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> I write all this to you in order that you
who believe in the Son of God may know for certain that you already have
the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And we have an assured confidence that
whenever we ask anything in accordance with His will, He listens to us.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And since we know that He listens to us,
then whatever we ask, we know that we have the things which we have
asked from Him.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any one sees a brother man committing
a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask and God shall give him
life--for those who do not sin unto death. There is such a thing as sin
unto death; for that I do not bid him make request.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Any kind of wrongdoing is sin; but there
is sin which is not unto death.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> We know that no one who is a child of God
lives in sin, but He who is God's Child keeps him, and the Evil one
cannot touch him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> We know that we are children of God, and
that the whole world lies in the power of the Evil one.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And we know that the Son of God has come,
and has given us understanding so that we know the true One, and are in
union with the true One--that is, we are in union with His Son Jesus
Christ. He is the true God and the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Dear children, guard yourselves from
idols.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John](jo2)
