[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jo2)  [Next](jde) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 3 John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The Elder to his dear friend Gaius. Truly I
love you.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> My dear friend, I pray that you may in all
respects prosper and enjoy good health, just as your soul already
prospers.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> For it is an intense joy to me when
brethren come and bear witness to your fidelity to the truth--that you
live in obedience to the truth.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> I have no greater joy than to hear that my
children are living in obedience to the truth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> My dear friend, you are acting faithfully
in all your behaviour towards the brethren, even when they are strangers
to you.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> They have testified, in the presence of the
Church, to your love; and you will do well to help them on their journey
in a manner worthy of your fellowship with God.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For it is for Christ that they have gone
forth, accepting nothing from the Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> It is therefore our duty to show
hospitality to such men, so that we may be fellow workers in promoting
the truth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> I wrote to the Church, but Diotrephes, who
loves to have the first place among them, refuses to listen to us.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For this reason, if I come, I shall not
forget his conduct, nor his idle and mischievous talk against us. And he
does not stop there: he not only will not receive the brethren, but
those who desire to do this he hinders, and excludes them from the
Church.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> My dear friend, do not follow wrong
examples, but right ones. He who habitually does what is right is a
child of God: he who habitually does what is wrong has not seen God.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> The character of Demetrius has the
approval of all men, and of the truth itself. We also express our
approval of it, and you know that we only give our approval to that
which is true.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> I have a great deal to say to you, but I
do not wish to go on writing it with ink and pen.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> But I hope to see you very soon, and then
we will speak face to face.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Peace be with you. Our friends send
greetings to you. Greet our friends individually.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jude](jde)
