[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jde) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Revelation

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The revelation given by Jesus Christ, which
God granted Him, that He might make known to His servants certain events
which must shortly come to pass: and He sent His angel and communicated
it to His servant John.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> This is the John who taught the truth
concerning the Word of God and the truth told us by Jesus Christ-- a
faithful account of what he had seen.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed is he who reads and blessed are
those who listen to the words of this prophecy and lay to heart what is
written in it; for the time for its fulfillment is now close at hand.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> John sends greetings to the seven Churches
in the province of Asia. May grace be granted to you, and peace, from
Him who is and was and evermore will be; and from the seven Spirits
which are before His throne;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and from Jesus Christ, the truthful
witness, the first of the dead to be born to Life, and the Ruler of the
kings of the earth. To Him who loves us and has freed us from our sins
with His own blood,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and has formed us into a Kingdom, to be
priests to God, His Father--to Him be ascribed the glory and the power
until the Ages of the Ages. Amen.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He is coming in the clouds, and every eye
will see Him, and so will those who pierced Him; and all the nations of
the earth will gaze on Him and mourn. Even so. Amen.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> "I am the Alpha and the Omega," says the
Lord God, "He who is and was and evermore will be--the Ruler of all."

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> I John, your brother, and a sharer with you
in the sorrows and Kingship and patient endurance of Jesus, found myself
in the island of Patmos, on account of the Word of God and the truth
told us by Jesus.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> In the Spirit I found myself present on
the day of the Lord, and I heard behind me a loud voice which resembled
the blast of a trumpet.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> It said, "Write forthwith in a roll an
account of what you see, and send it to the seven Churches--to Ephesus,
Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyateira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea."

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I turned to see who it was that was
speaking to me; and then I saw seven golden lampstands,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> and in the center of the lampstands some
One resembling the Son of Man, clothed in a robe which reached to His
feet, and with a girdle of gold across His breast.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> His head and His hair were white, like
white wool--as white as snow; and His eyes resembled a flame of fire.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> His feet were like silver-bronze, when it
is white-hot in a furnace; and His voice resembled the sound of many
waters.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> In His right hand He held seven stars,
and a sharp, two-edged sword was seen coming from His mouth; and His
glance resembled the sun when it is shining with its full strength.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> When I saw Him, I fell at His feet as if
I were dead. But He laid His right hand upon me and said, "Do not be
afraid: I am the First and the Last, and the ever-living One.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> I died; but I am now alive until the Ages
of the Ages, and I have the keys of the gates of Death and of Hades!

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Write down therefore the things you have
just seen, and those which are now taking place, and those which are
soon to follow:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> the secret meaning of the seven stars
which you have seen in My right hand, and of the seven lampstands of
gold. The seven stars are the ministers of the seven Churches, and the
seven lampstands are the seven Churches.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> "To the minister of the Church in Ephesus
write as follows: "\`This is what He who holds the seven stars in the
grasp of His right hand says--He who walks to and fro among the seven
lampstands of gold.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I know your doings and your toil and
patient suffering. And I know that you cannot tolerate wicked men, but
have put to the test those who say that they themselves are Apostles but
are not, and you have found them to be liars.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And you endure patiently and have borne
burdens for My sake and have never grown weary.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Yet I have this against you--that you no
longer love Me as you did at first.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Be mindful, therefore, of the height from
which you have fallen. Repent at once, and act as you did at first, or
else I will surely come and remove your lampstand out of its
place--unless you repent.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Yet this you have in your favor: you hate
the doings of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> "\`Let all who have ears give heed to what
the Spirit is saying to the Churches. To him who overcomes I will give
the privilege of eating the fruit of the Tree of Life, which is in the
Paradise of God.'

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> "To the minister of the Church at Smyrna
write as follows: "\`This is what the First and the Last says--He who
died and has returned to life.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Your sufferings I know, and your
poverty--but you are rich--and the evil name given you by those who say
that they themselves are Jews, and are not, but are Satan's synagogue.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Dismiss your fears concerning all that
you are about to suffer. I tell you that the Devil is about to throw
some of you into prison that you may be put to the test, and for ten
days you will have to endure persecution. Be faithful to the End, even
if you have to die, and then I will give you the victor's Wreath of
Life.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> "\`Let all who have ears give heed to
what the Spirit is saying to the Churches. He who overcomes shall be in
no way hurt by the Second Death.'

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> "To the minister of the Church at
Pergamum write as follows: "\`This is what He who has the sharp,
two-edged sword says. I know where you dwell.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Satan's throne is there; and yet you are
true to Me, and did not deny your faith in Me, even in the days of
Antipas My witness and faithful friend, who was put to death among you,
in the place where Satan dwells.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Yet I have a few things against you,
because you have with you some that cling to the teaching of Balaam, who
taught Balak to put a stumbling-block in the way of the descendants of
Israel--to eat what had been sacrificed to idols, and commit
fornication.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> So even you have some that cling in the
same way to the teaching of the Nicolaitans.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Repent, at once; or else I will come to
you quickly, and will make war upon them with the sword which is in My
mouth.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> "\`Let all who have ears give heed to
what the Spirit is saying to the Churches. He who overcomes--to him I
will give some of the hidden Manna, and a white stone; and--written upon
the stone and known only to him who receives it-- a new name.'

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> "To the minister of the Church at
Thyateira write as follows: "\`This is what the Son of God says--He who
has eyes like a flame of fire, and feet resembling silver-bronze.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> I know your doings, your love, your
faith, your service, and your patient endurance; and that of late you
have toiled harder than you did at first.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Yet I have this against you, that you
tolerate the woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess and by her
teaching leads astray My servants, so that they commit fornication and
eat what has been sacrificed to idols.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I have given her time to repent, but she
is determined not to repent of her fornication.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> I tell you that I am about to cast her
upon a bed of sickness, and I will severely afflict those who commit
adultery with her, unless they repent of conduct such as hers.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Her children too shall surely die; and
all the Churches shall come to know that I am He who searches into men's
inmost thoughts; and to each of you I will give a requital which shall
be in accordance with what your conduct has been.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But to you, the rest of you in Thyateira,
all who do not hold this teaching and are not the people who have learnt
the "deep things," as they call them (the deep things of Satan!) --to
you I say that I lay no other burden on you.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Only that which you already possess,
cling to until I come.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> "\`And to him who overcomes and obeys My
commands to the very end, I will give authority over the nations of the
earth.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And he shall be their shepherd, ruling
them with a rod of iron, just as earthenware jars are broken to pieces;
and his power over them shall be like that which I Myself have received
from My Father;

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> and I will give him the Morning Star.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Let all who have ears give heed to what
the Spirit is saying to the Churches.'

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> "To the minister of the Church at Sardis
write as follows: "\`This is what He who has the seven Spirits of God
and the seven stars says. I know your doings--you are supposed to be
alive, but in reality you are dead.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Rouse yourself and keep awake, and
strengthen those things which remain but have well-nigh perished; for I
have found no doings of yours free from imperfection in the sight of My
God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Be mindful, therefore, of the lessons you
have received and heard. Continually lay them to heart, and repent. If,
however, you fail to rouse yourself and keep awake, I shall come upon
you suddenly like a thief, and you will certainly not know the hour at
which I shall come to judge you.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Yet you have in Sardis a few who have not
soiled their garments; and they shall walk with Me in white; for they
are worthy.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> "\`In this way he who overcomes shall be
clothed in white garments; and I will certainly not blot out his name
from the Book of Life, but will acknowledge him in the presence of My
Father and His angels.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Let all who have ears give heed to what the
Spirit is saying to the Churches.'

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> "To the minister of the Church at
Philadelphia write as follows: "\`This is what the holy One and the true
says--He who has the key of David--He who opens and no one shall shut,
and shuts and no one shall open.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> I know your doings. I have put an opened
door in front of you, which no one can shut; because you have but a
little power, and yet you have guarded My word and have not disowned Me.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> I will cause some belonging to Satan's
synagogue who say that they themselves are Jews, and are not, but are
liars--I will make them come and fall at your feet and know for certain
that I have loved you.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Because in spite of suffering you have
guarded My word, I in turn will guard you from that hour of trial which
is soon coming upon the whole world, to put to the test the inhabitants
of the earth.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> I am coming quickly: cling to that which
you already possess, so that your wreath of victory be not taken away
from you.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> "\`He who overcomes--I will make him a
pillar in the sanctuary of My God, and he shall never go out from it
again. And I will write on him the name of My God, and the name of the
city of My God, the new Jerusalem, which is to come down out of Heaven
from My God, and My own new name.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Let all who have ears give heed to what
the Spirit is saying to the Churches.'

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> "And to the minister of the Church at
Laodicea write as follows: "\`This is what the Amen says--the true and
faithful witness, the Beginning and Lord of God's Creation.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> I know your doings--you are neither cold
nor hot; I would that you were cold or hot!

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Accordingly, because you are lukewarm and
neither hot nor cold, before long I will vomit you out of My mouth.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> You say, I am rich, and have wealth
stored up, and I stand in need of nothing; and you do not know that if
there is a wretched creature it is \*you\* -- pitiable, poor, blind,
naked.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Therefore I counsel you to buy of Me gold
refined in the fire that you may become rich, and white robes to put on,
so as to hide your shameful nakedness, and eye-salve to anoint your eyes
with, so that you may be able to see.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> All whom I hold dear, I reprove and
chastise; therefore be in earnest and repent.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> I am now standing at the door and am
knocking. If any one listens to My voice and opens the door, I will go
in to be with him and will feast with him, and he shall feast with Me.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> "\`To him who overcomes I will give the
privilege of sitting down with Me on My throne, as I also have overcome
and have sat down with My Father on His throne.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Let all who have ears give heed to what
the Spirit is saying to the Churches.'"

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> After all this I looked and saw a door in
Heaven standing open, and the voice that I had previously heard, which
resembled the blast of a trumpet, again spoke to me and said, "Come up
here, and I will show you things which are to happen in the future."

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Immediately I found myself in the Spirit,
and saw a throne in Heaven, and some One sitting on the throne.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> The appearance of Him who sat there was
like jasper or sard; and encircling the throne was a rainbow, in
appearance like an emerald.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Surrounding the throne there were also
twenty-four other thrones, on which sat twenty-four Elders clothed in
white robes, with victors' wreaths of gold upon their heads.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Out from the throne there came flashes of
lightning, and voices, and peals of thunder, while in front of the
throne seven blazing lamps were burning, which are the seven Spirits of
God.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And in front of the throne there seemed to
be a sea of glass, resembling crystal. And midway between the throne and
the Elders, and surrounding the throne, were four living creatures, full
of eyes in front and behind.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> The first living creature resembled a lion,
the second an ox, the third had a face like that of a man, and the
fourth resembled an eagle flying.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And each of the four living creatures had
six wings, and in every direction, and within, are full of eyes; and day
after day, and night after night, they never cease saying, "Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God, the Ruler of all, who wast and art and evermore shalt
be."

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And whenever the living creatures give
glory and honor and thanks to Him who is seated on the throne, and lives
until the Ages of the Ages,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> the twenty-four Elders fall down before
Him who sits on the throne and worship Him who lives until the Ages of
the Ages, and they cast their wreaths down in front of the throne,

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> saying, "It is fitting, O our Lord and
God, That we should ascribe unto Thee the glory and the honor and the
power; For Thou didst create all things, And because it was Thy will
they came into existence, and were created."

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And I saw lying in the right hand of Him
who sat on the throne a book written on both sides and closely sealed
with seven seals.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And I saw a mighty angel who was exclaiming
in a loud voice, "Who is worthy to open the book and break its seals?"

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But no one in Heaven, or on earth, or under
the earth, was able to open the book or look into it.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And while I was weeping bitterly, because
no one was found worthy to open the book or look into it,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> one of the Elders said to me, "Do not weep.
The Lion which belongs to the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has
triumphed, and will open the book and break its seven seals."

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Then, midway between the throne and the
four living creatures, I saw a Lamb standing among the Elders. He looked
as if He had been offered in sacrifice, and He had seven horns and seven
eyes. The last-named are the seven Spirits of God, and have been sent
far and wide into all the earth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> So He comes, and now He has taken the book
out of the right hand of Him who is seated on the throne.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And when He had taken the book, the four
living creatures and the twenty-four Elders fell down before the Lamb,
having each of them a harp and bringing golden bowls full of incense,
which represent the prayers of God's people.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And now they sing a new song. "It is
fitting," they say, "that Thou shouldst be the One to take the book And
break its seals; Because Thou hast been offered in sacrifice, And hast
purchased for God with Thine own blood Some out of every tribe and
language and people and nation,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And hast formed them into a Kingdom to be
priests to our God, And they reign over the earth."

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And I looked, and heard what seemed to be
the voices of countless angels on every side of the throne, and of the
living creatures and the Elders. Their number was myriads of myriads and
thousands of thousands,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> and in loud voices they were singing, "It
is fitting that the Lamb which has been offered in sacrifice should
receive all power and riches and wisdom and might and honor and glory
and blessing."

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And as for every created thing in Heaven
and on earth and under the earth and on the sea, and everything that was
in any of these, I heard them say, "To Him who is seated on the throne,
And to the Lamb, Be ascribed all blessing and honor And glory and might,
Until the Ages of the Ages!"

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Then the four living creatures said
"Amen," and the Elders fell down and worshipped.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And when the Lamb broke one of the seven
seals I saw it, and I heard one of the four living creatures say, as if
in a voice of thunder, "Come."

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And I looked and a white horse appeared,
and its rider carried a bow; and a victor's wreath was given to him; and
he went out conquering and in order to conquer.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And when the Lamb broke the second seal, I
heard the second living creature say, "Come."

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And another horse came out--a fiery-red
one; and power was given to its rider to take peace from the earth, and
to cause men to kill one another; and a great sword was given to him.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> When the Lamb broke the third seal, I heard
the third living creature say, "Come." I looked, and a black horse
appeared, its rider carrying a balance in his hand.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And I heard what seemed to be a voice
speaking in the midst of the four living creatures, and saying, "A quart
of wheat for a shilling, and three quarts of barley for a shilling; but
do not injure either the oil or the wine."

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> When the Lamb broke the fourth seal I heard
the voice of the fourth living creature say, "Come."

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> I looked and a pale-colored horse appeared.
Its rider's name was Death, and Hades came close behind him; and
authority was given to them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill
with the sword or with famine or pestilence or by means of the wild
beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> When the Lamb broke the fifth seal, I saw
at the foot of the altar the souls of those whose lives had been
sacrificed because of the word of God and of the testimony which they
had given.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And now in loud voices they cried out,
saying, "How long, O Sovereign Lord, the holy One and the true, dost
Thou delay judgment and the taking of vengeance upon the inhabitants of
the earth for our blood?"

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And there was given to each of them a
long white robe, and they were bidden to wait patiently for a short time
longer, until the full number of their fellow bondservants should also
complete--namely of their brethren who were soon to be killed just as
they had been.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> When the Lamb broke the sixth seal I
looked, and there was a great earthquake, and the sun became as dark as
sackcloth, and the whole disc of the moon became like blood.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> The stars in the sky also fell to the
earth, as when a fig-tree, upon being shaken by a gale of wind, casts
its unripe figs to the ground.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> The sky too passed away, as if a scroll
were being rolled up, and every mountain and island was removed from its
place.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> The kings of the earth and the great men,
the military chiefs, the wealthy and the powerful--all, whether slaves
or free men--hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the
mountains,

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> while they called to the mountains and
the rocks, saying, "Fall on us and hide us from the presence of Him who
sits on the throne and from the anger of the Lamb;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> for the day of His anger--that great
day--has come, and who is able to stand?"

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> After this I saw four angels standing at
the four corners of the earth, and holding back the four winds of the
earth so that no wind should blow over the earth or the sea or upon any
tree.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And I saw another angel coming from the
east and carrying a seal belonging to the ever-living God. He called in
a loud voice to the four angels whose work it was to injure the earth
and the sea.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> "Injure neither land nor sea nor trees," he
said, "until we have sealed the bondservants of our God upon their
foreheads."

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> When the sealing was finished, I heard how
many were sealed out of the tribes of the descendants of Israel. They
were 144,000.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Of the tribe of Judah, 12,000 were sealed;
Of the tribe of Reuben, 12,000; Of the tribe of Gad, 12,000;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Of the tribe of Asher, 12,000; Of the tribe
of Naphtali, 12,000; Of the tribe of Manasseh, 12,000;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Of the tribe of Symeon, 12,000; Of the
tribe of Levi, 12,000; Of the tribe of Issachar, 12,000;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Of the tribe of Zebulun, 12,000; Of the
tribe of Joseph, 12,000; Of the tribe of Benjamin, 12,000.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> After this I looked, and a vast host
appeared which it was impossible for anyone to count, gathered out of
every nation and from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing
before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in long white robes, and
carrying palm-branches in their hands.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> In loud voices they were exclaiming, "It
is to our God who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb, that we owe
our salvation!"

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> All the angels were standing in a circle
round the throne and round the Elders and the four living creatures, and
they fell on their faces in front of the throne and worshipped God.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> "Even so!" they cried: "The blessing and
the glory and the wisdom and the thanks and the honor and the power and
the might are to be ascribed to our God, until the Ages of the Ages!
Even so!"

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Then, addressing me, one of the Elders
said, "Who are these people clothed in the long white robes? And where
have they come from?"

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> "My lord, you know," I replied. "They are
those," he said, "who have just passed through the great distress, and
have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For this reason they stand before the
very throne of God, and render Him service, day after day and night
after night, in His sanctuary, and He who is sitting upon the throne
will shelter them in His tent.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> They will never again be hungry or
thirsty, and never again will the sun or any scorching heat trouble
them.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> For the Lamb who is in front of the
throne will be their Shepherd, and will guide them to watersprings of
Life, and God will wipe every tear from their eyes."

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> When the Lamb broke the seventh seal, there
was silence in Heaven for about half an hour.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Then I saw the seven angels who are in the
presence of God, and seven trumpets were given to them.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And another angel came and stood close to
the altar, carrying a censer of gold; and abundance of incense was given
to him that he might place it with the prayers of all God's people upon
the golden altar which was in front of the throne.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And the smoke of the incense rose into the
presence of God from the angel's hand, and mingled with the prayers of
His people.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> So the angel took the censer and filled it
with fire from the altar and flung it to the earth; and there followed
peals of thunder, and voices, and flashes of lightning, and an
earthquake.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Then the seven angels who had the seven
trumpets made preparations for blowing them.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> The first blew his trumpet; and there came
hail and fire, mixed with blood, falling upon the earth; and a third
part of the earth was burnt up, and a third part of the trees and all
the green grass.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> The second angel blew his trumpet; and what
seemed to be a great mountain, all ablaze with fire, was hurled into the
sea; and a third part of the sea was turned into blood.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And a third part of the creatures that were
in the sea--those that had life--died; and a third part of the ships
were destroyed.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> The third angel blew his trumpet; and
there fell from Heaven a great star, which was on fire like a torch. It
fell upon a third part of the rivers and upon the springs of water.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> The name of the star is \`Wormwood;' and
a third part of the waters were turned into wormwood, and vast numbers
of the people died from drinking the water, because it had become
bitter.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then the fourth angel blew his trumpet;
and a curse fell upon a third part of the sun, a third part of the moon,
and a third part of the stars, so that a third part of them were
darkened and for a third of the day, and also of the night, there was no
light.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Then I looked, and I heard a solitary
eagle crying in a loud voice, as it flew across the sky, "Alas, alas,
alas, for the inhabitants of the earth, because of the significance of
the remaining trumpets which the three angels are about to blow!"

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> The fifth angel blew his trumpet; and I saw
a Star which had fallen from Heaven to the earth; and to him was given
the key of the depths of the bottomless pit,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and he opened the depths of the bottomless
pit. And smoke came up out of the pit resembling the smoke of a vast
furnace, so that the sun was darkened, and the air also, by reason of
the smoke of the pit.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And from the midst of the smoke there came
locusts on to the earth, and power was given to them resembling the
power which earthly scorpions possess.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And they were forbidden to injure the
herbage of the earth, or any green thing, or any tree. They were only to
injure human beings--those who have not the seal of God on their
foreheads.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Their mission was not to kill, but to cause
awful agony for five months; and this agony was like that which a
scorpion inflicts when it stings a man.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And at that time people will seek death,
but will by no possibility find it, and will long to die, but death
evades them.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> The appearance of the locusts was like that
of horses equipped for war. On their heads they had wreaths which looked
like gold.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Their faces seemed human and they had hair
like women's hair, but their teeth resembled those of lions.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> They had breast-plates which seemed to be
made of steel; and the noise caused by their wings was like that of a
vast number of horses and chariots hurrying into battle.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> They had tails like those of scorpions,
and also stings; and in their tails lay their power of injuring mankind
for five months.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> The locusts had a king over them--the
angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in Hebrew is \`Abaddon,' while
in the Greek he is called \`Apollyon.'

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> The first woe is past; two other woes
have still to come.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> The sixth angel blew his trumpet; and I
heard a single voice speaking from among the horns of the golden incense
altar which is in the presence of God.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> It said to the sixth angel--the angel who
had the trumpet, "Set at liberty the four angels who are prisoners near
the great river Euphrates."

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And the four angels who had been kept in
readiness for that hour, day, month, and year, were set at liberty, so
that they might kill a third part of mankind.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> The number of the cavalry was two hundred
millions; I heard their number.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And this was the appearance of the horses
which I saw in my vision--and of their riders. The body-armour of the
riders was red, blue and yellow; and the horses' heads were shaped like
the heads of lions, while from their mouths there came fire and smoke
and sulphur.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> By these three plagues a third part of
mankind were destroyed--by the fire and the smoke, and by the sulphur
which came from their mouths.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For the power of the horses is in their
mouths and in their tails; their tails being like serpents, and having
heads, and it is with them that they inflict injury.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> But the rest of mankind who were not
killed by these plagues, did not even then repent and leave the things
they had made, so as to cease worshipping the demons, and the idols of
gold and silver, bronze, stone, and wood, which can neither see nor
hear, nor move.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Nor did they repent of their murders,
their practice of magic, their fornication, or their thefts.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Then I saw another strong angel coming
down from Heaven. He was robed in a cloud, and over his head was the
rainbow. His face was like the sun, and his feet resembled pillars of
fire.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> In his hand he held a small scroll
unrolled; and, planting his right foot on the sea and his left foot on
the land,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> he cried out in a loud voice which
resembled the roar of a lion. And when he had cried out, each of the
seven peals of thunder uttered its own message.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And when the seven peals of thunder had
spoken, I was about to write down what they had said; but I heard a
voice from Heaven which told me to keep secret all that the seven peals
of thunder had said, and not write it down.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Then the angel that I saw standing on the
sea and on the land, lifted his right hand toward Heaven.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And in the name of Him who lives until
the Ages of the Ages, the Creator of Heaven and all that is in it, of
the earth and all that is in it, and of the sea and all that is in it,
he solemnly declared,

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> "There shall be no further delay; but in
the days when the seventh angel blows his trumpet--when he begins to do
so--then the secret purposes of God are realized, in accordance with the
good news which He gave to His servants the Prophets."

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Then the voice which I had heard speaking
from Heaven once more addressed me. It said, "Go and take the little
book which lies open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea
and on the land."

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> So I went to the angel and asked him to
give me the little book. "Take it," he said, "and eat the whole of it.
You will find it bitter when you have eaten it, although in your mouth
it will taste as sweet as honey."

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> So I took the roll out of the angel's
hand and ate the whole of it; and in my mouth it was as sweet as honey,
but when I had eaten it I found it very bitter.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And a voice said to me, "You must
prophesy yet further concerning peoples, nations, languages, and many
kings."

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Then a reed was given me to serve as a
measuring rod; and a voice said, "Rise, and measure God's sanctuary--and
the altar--and count the worshipers who are in it.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> But as for the court which is outside the
sanctuary, pass it over. Do not measure it; for it has been given to the
Gentiles, and for forty-two months they will trample the holy city under
foot.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And I will authorize My two witnesses to
prophesy for 1,260 days, clothed in sackcloth.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> "These witnesses are the two olive-trees,
and they are the two lamps which stand in the presence of the Lord of
the earth.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And if any one seeks to injure them--fire
comes from their mouths and devours their enemies; and if any one seeks
to injure them, he will in this way certainly be killed.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> They have power given to them to seal up
the sky, so that no rain may fall so long as they continue to prophesy;
and power over the waters to turn them into blood, and to smite the
earth with various plagues whenever they choose to do so.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> "And when they have fully delivered their
testimony, the Wild Beast which is to rise out of the bottomless pit
will make war upon them and overcome them and kill them.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And their dead bodies are to lie in the
broad street of the great city which spiritually is designated \`Sodom'
and \`Egypt,' where indeed their Lord was crucified.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And men belonging to all peoples, tribes,
languages and nations gaze at their dead bodies for three days and a
half, but they refuse to let them be laid in a tomb.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> The inhabitants of the earth rejoice
over them and are glad and will send gifts to one another; for these two
Prophets had greatly troubled the inhabitants of the earth."

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> But at the end of the three days and a
half the breath of life from God entered into them, and they rose to
their feet; and all who saw them were terrified.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Then they heard a loud voice calling to
them out of Heaven, and bidding them come up; and they went up to Heaven
in the cloud, and their enemies saw them go.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And just as that time there was a great
earthquake, and a tenth part of the city was overthrown. 7,000 people
were killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified and gave
glory to the God of Heaven.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> The second Woe is past; the third Woe
will soon be here.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> The seventh angel blew his trumpet; and
there followed loud voices in Heaven which said, "The sovereignty of the
world now belongs to our Lord and His Christ; and He will be King until
the Ages of the Ages."

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Then the twenty-four Elders, who sit on
thrones in the presence of God, fell on their faces and worshipped God,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> saying, "We give thee thanks, O Lord
God, the Ruler of all, Who art and wast, because Thou hast exerted Thy
power, Thy great power, and hast become King.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> The nations grew angry, and Thine anger
has come, and the time for the dead to be judged, and the time for Thee
to give their reward to Thy servants the Prophets and to Thy people, and
to those who fear Thee, the small and the great, and to destroy those
who destroy the earth."

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Then the doors of God's sanctuary in
Heaven were opened, and the Ark, in which His Covenant was, was seen in
His sanctuary; and there came flashes of lightning, and voices, and
peals of thunder, and an earthquake, and heavy hail.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And a great marvel was seen in Heaven-- a
woman who was robed with the sun and had the moon under her feet, and
had also a wreath of stars round her head, was with child,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> and she was crying out in the pains and
agony of childbirth.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And another marvel was seen in Heaven--a
great fiery-red Dragon, with seven heads and ten horns; and on his heads
were seven kingly crowns.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> His tail was drawing after it a third
part of the stars of Heaven, and it dashed them to the ground. And in
front of the woman who was about to become a mother, the Dragon was
standing in order to devour the child as soon as it was born.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> She gave birth to a son--a male child,
destined before long to rule all nations with an iron scepter. But her
child was caught up to God and His throne,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and the woman fled into the Desert, there
to be cared for, for 1,260 days, in a place which God had prepared for
her.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And war broke out in Heaven, Michael and
his angels engaging in battle with the Dragon.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> The Dragon fought and so did his angels;
but they were defeated, and there was no longer any room found for them
in Heaven.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> The great Dragon, the ancient serpent, he
who is called \`the Devil' and \`the Adversary' and leads the whole
earth astray, was hurled down: he was hurled down to the earth, and his
angels were hurled down with him.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Then I heard a loud voice speaking in
Heaven. It said, "The salvation and the power and the Kingdom of our God
have now come, and the sovereignty of His Christ; for the accuser of our
brethren has been hurled down--he who, day after day and night after
night, was wont to accuse them in the presence of God.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> But they have gained the victory over
him because of the blood of the Lamb and of the testimony which they
have borne, and because they held their lives cheap and did not shrink
even from death.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For this reason be glad, O Heaven, and
you who live in Heaven! Alas for the earth and the sea! For the Devil
has come down to you; full of fierce anger, because he knows that his
appointed time is short."

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And when the Dragon saw that he was
hurled down to the earth, he went in pursuit of the woman who had given
birth to the male child.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Then, the two wings of a great eagle
were given to the woman to enable her to fly away into the Desert to the
place assigned her, there to be cared for, for a period of time, two
periods of time, and half a period of time, beyond the reach of the
serpent.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And the serpent poured water from his
mouth--a very river it seemed--after the woman, in the hope that she
would be carried away by its flood.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But the earth came to the woman's help:
it opened its mouth and drank up the river which the Dragon had poured
from his mouth.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> This made the Dragon furiously angry
with the woman, and he went elsewhere to make war upon her other
children--those who keep God's commandments and hold fast to the
testimony of Jesus.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And he took up a position upon the sands
of the sea-shore. Then I saw a Wild Beast coming up out of the sea, and
he had ten horns and seven heads. On his horns were ten kingly crowns,
and inscribed on his heads were names full of blasphemy.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> The Wild Beast which I saw resembled a
leopard, and had feet like the feet of a bear, and his mouth was like
the mouth of a lion; and it was to the Dragon that he owed his power and
his throne and his wide dominion.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> I saw that one of his heads seemed to
have been mortally wounded; but his mortal wound was healed, and the
whole world was amazed and followed him.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And they offered worship to the Dragon,
because it was to him that the Wild Beast owed his dominion; and they
also offered worship to the Wild Beast, and said, "Who is there like
him? And who is able to engage in battle with him?"

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And there was given him a mouth full of
boastful and blasphemous words; and liberty of action was granted him
for forty-two months.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And he opened his mouth to utter
blasphemies against God, to speak evil of His name and of His
dwelling-place--that is to say, of those who dwell in Heaven.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And permission was given him to make war
upon God's people and conquer them; and power was given him over every
tribe, people, language and nation.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And all the inhabitants of the earth will
be found to be worshipping him: every one whose name is not recorded in
the Book of Life--the Book of the Lamb who has been offered in sacrifice
ever since the creation of the world.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Let all who have ears give heed.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> If any one is eager to lead others into
captivity, he must himself go into captivity. If any one is bent on
killing with the sword, he must himself be killed by the sword. Here is
an opportunity for endurance, and for the exercise of faith, on the part
of God's people.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Then I saw another Wild Beast, coming
up out of the earth. He had two horns like those of a lamb, but he spoke
like a dragon.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And the authority of the first Wild
Beast--the whole of that authority--he exercises in his presence, and he
causes the earth and its inhabitants to worship the first Wild Beast,
whose mortal wound had been healed.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> He also works great miracles, so as
even to make fire come down from Heaven to earth in the presence of
human beings.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And his power of leading astray the
inhabitants of the earth is due to the marvels which he has been
permitted to work in the presence of the Wild Beast. And he told the
inhabitants of the earth to erect a statue to the Wild Beast who had
received the sword-stroke and yet had recovered.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And power was granted him to give
breath to the statue of the Wild Beast, so that the statue of the Wild
Beast could even speak and cause all who refuse to worship it to be put
to death.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And he causes all, small and great,
rich and poor, free men and slaves, to have stamped upon them a mark on
their right hands or on their foreheads,

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> in order that no one should be allowed
to buy or sell unless he had the mark--either the name of the Wild Beast
or the number which his name represents.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Here is scope for ingenuity. Let people
of shrewd intelligence calculate the number of the Wild Beast; for it
indicates a certain man, and his number is 666.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Then I looked, and I saw the Lamb
standing upon Mount Zion, and with Him 144,000 people, having His name
and His Father's name written on their foreheads.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And I heard music from Heaven which
resembled the sound of many waters and the roar of loud thunder; and the
music which I heard was like that of harpists playing upon their harps.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And they were singing what seemed to be a
new song, in front of the throne and in the presence of the four living
creatures and the Elders; and no one was able to learn that song except
the 144,000 people who had been redeemed out of the world.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> These are those who had not defiled
themselves with women: they are as pure as virgins. They follow the Lamb
wherever He goes. They have been redeemed from among men, as firstfruits
to God and to the Lamb.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And no lie has ever been found upon their
lips: they are faultless.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And I saw another angel flying across the
sky, carrying the Good News of the Ages to tell to every nation, tribe,
language and people, among those who live on the earth.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> He said in a loud voice, "Fear God and
give Him glory, because the time of His judgment has come; and worship
Him who made sky and earth, the sea and the water-springs."

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And another, a second angel, followed,
exclaiming, "Great Babylon has fallen, has fallen--she who made all the
nations drink the wine of the anger provoked by her fornication."

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And another, a third angel, followed
them, exclaiming in a loud voice, "If any one worships the Wild Beast
and his statue, and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> he shall drink the wine of God's anger
which stands ready, undiluted, in the cup of His fury, and he shall be
tormented with fire and sulphur in the presence of the holy angels and
of the Lamb.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And the smoke of their torment goes up
until the Ages of the Ages; and the worshipers of the Wild Beast and his
statue have no rest day or night, nor has any one who receives the mark
of his name.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Here is an opportunity for endurance on
the part of God's people, who carefully keep His commandments and the
faith of Jesus!"

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And I heard a voice speaking from
Heaven. It said, "Write as follows: "\`Blessed are the dead who die in
the Lord from this time onward. Yes, says the Spirit, let them rest from
their sorrowful labours; for what they have done goes with them.'"

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Then I looked, and a white cloud
appeared, and sitting on the cloud was some One resembling the Son of
Man, having a wreath of gold upon His head and in His hand a sharp
sickle.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And another, an angel, came out of the
sanctuary, calling in a loud voice to Him who sat on the cloud, and
saying, "Use your sickle and reap the harvest, for the hour for reaping
it has come: the harvest of the earth is over-ripe."

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Then He who sat on the cloud flung His
sickle on the earth, and the earth had its harvest reaped.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And another angel came out from the
sanctuary in Heaven, and he too carried a sharp sickle.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And another angel came out from the
altar--he who had power over fire--and he spoke in a loud voice to him
who had the sharp sickle, saying, "Use your sharp sickle, and gather the
bunches from the vine of the earth, for its grapes are now quite ripe."

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the angel flung his sickle down to
the earth, and reaped the vine of the earth and threw the grapes into
the great winepress of God's anger.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And the winepress was trodden outside
the city, and out of it came blood reaching the horses' bridles for a
distance of 200 miles.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then I saw another marvel in Heaven,
great and wonderful--there were seven angels bringing seven plagues.
These are the last plagues, because in them God's anger has found full
expression.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And I saw what seemed to be a sea of
glass mingled with fire, and those who had gained the victory over the
Wild Beast and over his statue and the number of his name, standing by
the sea of glass and having harps which belonged to God.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And they were singing the song of Moses,
God's servant, and the song of the Lamb. Their words were, "Great and
wonderful are Thy works, O Lord God, the Ruler of all. Righteous and
true are Thy ways, O King of the nations.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Who shall not be afraid, O Lord, and
glorify Thy name? For Thou alone art holy. All nations shall come and
shall worship Thee, because the righteousness of all that Thou hast done
has been made manifest."

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> After this, when the doors of the
sanctuary of the tent of witness in Heaven were opened, I looked;

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> and there came out of the sanctuary the
seven angels who were bringing the seven plagues. The angels were clad
in pure, bright linen, and had girdles of gold across their breasts.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And one of the four living creatures gave
the seven angels seven bowls of gold, full of the anger of God who lives
until the Ages of the Ages.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And the sanctuary was filled with smoke
from the glory of God and from His power; and no one could enter the
sanctuary till the seven plagues brought by the seven angels were at an
end.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Then I heard a loud voice from the
sanctuary say to the seven angels, "Go and pour on to the earth the
seven bowls of the anger of God."

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> So the first angel went away and poured
his bowl on to the earth; and it brought a bad and painful sore upon the
men who had on them the mark of the Wild Beast and worshipped his
statue.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> The second angel poured his bowl into the
sea, and it became blood, like a dead man's blood, and every living
creature in the sea died.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> The third angel poured his bowl into the
rivers and springs of water, and they became blood.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And I heard the angel of the waters say,
"Righteous art Thou, who art and wast, the holy One, because Thou hast
thus taken vengeance.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> For they poured out the blood of Thy
people and of the Prophets, and in return Thou hast given them blood to
drink. And this they deserved."

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And I heard a voice from the altar say,
"Even so, O Lord God, the Ruler of all, true and righteous are Thy
judgments."

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Then the fourth angel poured his bowl on
to the sun, and power was given to it to scorch men with fire.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And the men were severely burned; and yet
they spoke evil of God who had power over the plagues, and they did not
repent so as to give Him glory.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> The fifth angel poured his bowl on to
the throne of the Wild Beast; and his kingdom became darkened. People
gnawed their tongues because of the pain,

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> and they spoke evil of the God in
Heaven because of their pains and their sores, and did not repent of
their misconduct.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> The sixth angel poured his bowl into
that great river, the Euphrates; and its stream was dried up in order to
clear the way for the kings who are to come from the east.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Then I saw three foul spirits,
resembling frogs, issue from the mouth of the Dragon, from the mouth of
the Wild Beast, and from the mouth of the false Prophet.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> For they are the spirits of demons
working marvels--spirits that go out to control the kings of the whole
earth, to assemble them for the battle which is to take place on the
great day of God, the Ruler of all.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> ("I am coming like a thief. Blessed is
the man who keeps awake and guards his raiment for fear he walk about
ill-clad, and his uncomeliness become manifest.")

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And assemble them they did at the place
called in Hebrew \`Har-Magedon.'

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Then the seventh angel poured his bowl
into the air; and a loud voice came out of the sanctuary from the
throne, saying, "Everything is now ready."

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Flashes of lightning followed, and
voices, and peals of thunder, and an earthquake more dreadful than there
had ever been since there was a man upon the earth--so terrible was it,
and so great!

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> The great city was split into three
parts; the cities of the nations fell; and great Babylon came into
remembrance before God, for Him to make her drink from the wine-cup of
His fierce anger.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Every island fled away, and there was
not a mountain anywhere to be seen.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And heavy hail, that seemed to be a
talent in weight, fell from the sky upon the people; and they spoke evil
of God on account of the plague of the hail--because the plague of it
was exceedingly severe.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Then one of the seven angels who were
carrying the seven bowls came and spoke to me. "Come with me," he said,
"and I will show you the doom of the great Harlot who sits upon many
waters.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> The kings of the earth have committed
fornication with her, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made
drunk with the wine of her fornication."

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> So he carried me away in the Spirit into
a desert, and there I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored Wild
Beast which was covered with names of blasphemy and had seven heads and
ten horns.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> The woman was clothed in purple and
scarlet, and was brilliantly attired with gold and jewels and pearls.
She held in her hand a cup of gold, full of abominations, and she gave
filthy indications of her fornication.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And on her forehead was a name written:
"I am a symbol of great Babylon, the mother of the harlots and of the
abominations of the earth."

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And I saw the woman drinking herself
drunk with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the witnesses
of Jesus. And when I saw her I was filled with utter astonishment.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Then the angel said to me, "Why are you
so astonished? I will explain to you the secret meaning of the woman and
of the seven-headed, ten-horned Wild Beast which carries her.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> "The Wild Beast which you have seen was,
and is not, and yet is destined to re-ascend, before long, out of the
bottomless pit and go his way into perdition. And the inhabitants of the
earth will be filled with amazement--all whose names are not in the Book
of Life, having been recorded there ever since the creation of the
world--when they see the Wild Beast: because he was, and is not, and yet
is to come.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Here is scope for the exercise of a mind
that has wisdom! The seven heads are the seven hills on which the woman
sits.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And they are seven kings: five of them
have fallen, and the one is still reigning. The seventh has not yet
come, but when he comes he must continue for a short time.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And the Wild Beast which once existed
but does not now exist--he is an eighth king and yet is one of the seven
and he goes his way into perdition.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> "And the ten horns which you have seen
are ten kings who have not yet come to the throne, but for a single hour
they are to receive authority as kings along with the Wild Beast.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> They have one common policy, and they
are to give their power and authority to the Wild Beast.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> They will make war upon the Lamb, and
the Lamb will triumph over them; for He is Lord of lords and King of
kings. And those who accompany Him--called, as they are, and chosen, and
faithful--shall share in the victory."

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> He also said to me, "The waters which
you have seen, on which the Harlot sits, are peoples and multitudes,
nations and languages.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And the ten horns that you have
seen--and the Wild Beast--these will hate the Harlot, and they will
cause her to be laid waste and will strip her bare. They will eat her
flesh, and burn her up with fire.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> For God has put it into their hearts to
carry out His purpose, and to carry out a common purpose and to give
their kingdom to the Wild Beast until God's words have come to pass.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And the woman whom you have seen is the
great city which has kingly power over the kings of the earth."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> After these things I saw another angel
coming down from Heaven, armed with great power. The earth shone with
his splendor,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> and with a mighty voice he cried out,
saying, "Great Babylon has fallen, has fallen, and has become a home for
demons and a stronghold for every kind of foul spirit and for every kind
of foul and hateful bird.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> For all the nations have drunk the wine
of the anger provoked by her fornication, and the kings of the earth
have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth have
grown rich through her excessive luxury."

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Then I heard another voice from Heaven,
which said, "Come out of her, My people, that you may not become
partakers in her sins, nor receive a share of her plagues.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For her sins are piled up to the sky, and
God has called to mind her unrighteous deeds.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> Give back to her as she has given; repay
her in accordance with her doings, twice as much; in the bowl that she
has mixed, mix twice as much for her.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> She has freely glorified herself and
revelled in luxury; equally freely administer torment to her, and woe.
For in her heart she boasts, saying, \`I sit enthroned as Queen: no
widow am I: I shall never know sorrow.'

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> "For this reason calamities shall come
thick upon her on a single day--death and sorrow and famine--and she
shall be burned to the ground. For strong is the Lord God who has judged
her.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> The kings of the earth who have committed
fornication with her, and have revelled in luxury, shall weep aloud and
lament over her when they see the smoke of her burning,

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> while they stand afar off because of
their terror at her heavy punishment, and say, \`Alas, alas, thou great
city, O Babylon, the mighty city! For in one short hour thy doom has
come!'

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And the merchants of the earth weep
aloud and lament over her, because now there is no sale for their
cargoes--

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> cargoes of gold and silver, of jewels
and pearls, of fine linen, purple and silk, and of scarlet stuff; all
kinds of rare woods, and all kinds of goods in ivory and in very costly
wood, in bronze, steel and marble.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Also cinnamon and amomum; odors to burn
as incense or for perfume; frankincense, wine, oil; fine flour, wheat,
cattle and sheep; horses and carriages and slaves; and the lives of men.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> The dainties that thy soul longed for
are gone from thee, and all thine elegance and splendor have perished,
and never again shall they be found.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Those who traded in these things, who
grew wealthy through her, will stand afar off, struck with terror at her
punishment,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> weeping aloud and sorrowing, and
saying, \`Alas, alas, for this great city, which was brilliantly arrayed
in fine linen, and purple and scarlet stuff, and beautified with gold,
jewels and pearls;

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> because in one short hour all this
great wealth has been laid waste!' And every shipmaster and every
passenger by sea and the crews and all who ply their trade on the sea,

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> stood afar off, and cried aloud when
they saw the smoke of her burning. And they said, \`What city is like
this great city?'

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And they threw dust upon their heads,
and cried out, weeping aloud and sorrowing. \`Alas, alas,' they said,
\`for this great city, in which, through her vast wealth, the owners of
all the ships on the sea have grown rich; because in one short hour she
has been laid waste!'

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Rejoice over her, O Heaven, and you
saints and Apostles and Prophets; for God has taken vengeance upon her
because of you."

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then a single angel of great strength
took a stone which resembled a huge millstone, and hurled it into the
sea, saying, "So shall Babylon, that great city, be violently hurled
down and never again be found.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> No harp or song, no flute or trumpet,
shall ever again be heard in thee; no craftsman of any kind shall ever
again be found in thee; nor shall the grinding of the mill ever again be
heard in thee.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Never again shall the light of a lamp
shine in thee, and never again shall the voice of a bridegroom or of a
bride be heard in thee. For thy merchants were the great men of the
earth, and with the magic which thou didst practise all nations were led
astray.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And in her was found the blood of
Prophets and of God's people and of all who had been put to death on the
earth."

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> After this I seemed to hear the
far-echoing voices of a great multitude in Heaven, who said,
"Hallelujah! The salvation and the glory and the power belong to our
God.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> True and just are His judgments, because
He has judged the great Harlot who was corrupting the whole earth with
her fornication, and He has taken vengeance for the blood of His
bondservants which her hands have shed."

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And a second time they said, "Hallelujah!
For her smoke ascends until the Ages of the Ages."

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And the twenty-four Elders and the four
living creatures fell down and worshipped God who sits upon the throne.
"Even so," they said; "Hallelujah!"

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And from the throne there came a voice
which said, "Praise our God, all you His bondservants--you who fear Him,
both the small and the great."

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And I seemed to hear the voices of a
great multitude and the sound of many waters and of loud peals of
thunder, which said, "Hallelujah! Because the Lord our God, the Ruler of
all, has become King.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Let us rejoice and triumph and give Him
the glory; for the time for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and His
Bride has made herself ready."

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And she was permitted to array herself in
fine linen, shining and spotless; the fine linen being the righteous
actions of God's people.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And he said to me, "Write as follows:
\`Blessed are those who receive an invitation to the Marriage Supper of
the Lamb.'" And he added, still addressing me, "These are truly the
words of God."

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Then I fell at his feet to worship him.
But he exclaimed, "Oh, do not do that. I am a fellow bondservant of
yours and a fellow bondservant of your brethren who have borne testimony
to Jesus. Worship God." Testimony to Jesus is the spirit which underlies
Prophecy.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Then I saw a door open in Heaven, and a
white horse appeared. Its rider was named "Faithful and True" --being
One who in righteousness acts as Judge, and makes war.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> His eyes were like a flame of fire, and
on His head were many kingly crowns; and He has a name written upon Him
which no one but He Himself knows.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> The outer garment in which He is clad
has been dipped in blood and His name is THE WORD OF GOD.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> The armies in Heaven followed
Him--mounted on white horses and clothed in fine linen, white and
spotless.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> From His mouth there comes a sharp
sword with which He will smite the nations; and He will Himself be their
Shepherd, ruling them with a scepter of iron; and it is His work to
tread the winepress of the fierce anger of God, the Ruler of all.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And on His outer garment and on His
thigh He has a name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And I saw a single angel standing in
the full light of the sun, who cried in a loud voice to all the birds
that flew across the sky, "Come and be present at God's great supper,

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> that you may feast on the flesh of
kings and the flesh of generals and the flesh of mighty men, on the
flesh of horses and their riders, and on the flesh of all mankind,
whether they are free men or slaves, great men or small."

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And I saw the Wild Beast, and the kings
of the earth, and their armies, all assembled to make war, once for all,
against the Rider upon the horse and against His army. And the Wild
Beast was captured, and with him the false Prophet

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> who had done the miracles in his
presence with which he had led astray those who had received the mark of
the Wild Beast, and those who worshipped his statue. Both of them were
thrown alive into the Lake of fire that was all ablaze with sulphur.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> But the rest were killed with the sword
that came from the mouth of the Rider on the horse. And the birds all
fed ravenously upon their flesh.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Then I saw an angel coming down from
Heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and upon his arm he
carried a great chain.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> He laid hold of the Dragon--the ancient
serpent--who is the Devil and the Adversary, and bound him for a
thousand years, and hurled him into the bottomless pit.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> He closed the entrance and put a seal
upon him in order that he might be unable to lead the nations astray any
more until the thousand years were at an end. Afterwards he is to be set
at liberty for a short time.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And I saw thrones, and some who were
seated on them, to whom judgment was entrusted. And I saw the souls of
those who had been beheaded on account of the testimony that they had
borne to Jesus and on account of God's Message, and also the souls of
those who had not worshipped the Wild Beast or his statue, nor received
his mark on their foreheads or on their hands; and they came to Life and
were kings with Christ for a thousand years.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> No one else who was dead rose to Life
until the thousand years were at an end. This is the First Resurrection.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Blessed and holy are those who share in
the First Resurrection. The Second Death has no power over them, but
they shall be priests to God and to Christ, and shall be kings with
Christ for the thousand years.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> But when the thousand years are at an
end, the Adversary will be released from his imprisonment,

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> and will go out to lead astray the
nations in all the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, and
assemble them for war, and they are like the sands on the seashore in
number.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And they went up over the whole breadth
of the earth and surrounded the encampment of God's people and the
beloved city. But fire came down from Heaven and consumed them;

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> and the Devil, who had been leading
them astray, was thrown into the Lake of fire and sulphur where the Wild
Beast and the false Prophet were, and day and night they will suffer
torture until the Ages of the Ages.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Then I saw a great white throne and One
who was seated on it, from whose presence earth and sky fled away, and
no place was found for them.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And I saw the dead, the great and the
small, standing in front of the throne. And books were opened; and so
was another book--namely, the Book of Life; and the dead were judged by
the things recorded in the books in accordance with what their conduct
had been.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Then the sea yielded up the dead who
were in it, Death and Hades yielded up the dead who were in them, and
each man was judged in accordance with what his conduct had been.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Then Death and Hades were thrown into
the Lake of fire; this is the Second Death--the Lake of fire.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And if any one's name was not found
recorded in the Book of Life he was thrown into the Lake of fire.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And I saw a new Heaven and a new earth;
for the first Heaven and the first earth were gone, and the sea no
longer exists.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And I saw the holy city, the new
Jerusalem, coming down out of Heaven from God and made ready like a
bride attired to meet her husband.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And I heard a loud voice, which came from
the throne, say, "God's dwelling place is among men and He will dwell
among them and they shall be His peoples. Yes, God Himself will be among
them.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> He will wipe every tear from their eyes.
Death shall be no more; nor sorrow, nor wail of woe, nor pain; for the
first things have passed away."

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Then He who was seated on the throne
said, "I am re-creating all things." And He added, "Write down these
words, for they are trustworthy and true."

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> He also said, "They have now been
fulfilled. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End. To
those who are thirsty I will give the privilege of drinking from the
well of the Water of Life without payment.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> All this shall be the heritage of him who
overcomes, and I will be his God and he shall be one of My sons.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> But as for cowards and the unfaithful,
and the polluted, and murderers, fornicators, and those who practise
magic or worship idols, and all liars--the portion allotted to them
shall be in the Lake which burns with fire and sulphur. This is the
Second Death."

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Then there came one of the seven angels
who were carrying the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues. "Come
with me," he said, "and I will show you the Bride, the Lamb's wife."

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> So in the Spirit he carried me to the
top of a vast, lofty mountain, and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem,
coming down out of Heaven from God,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and bringing with it the glory of God.
It shone with a radiance like that of a very precious stone--such as a
jasper, bright and transparent.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> It has a wall, massive and high, with
twelve large gates, and in charge of the gates were twelve angels. And
overhead, above the gates, names were inscribed which are those of the
twelve tribes of the descendants of Israel.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> There were three gates on the east,
three on the north, three on the south, and three on the west.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> The wall of the city had twelve
foundation stones, and engraved upon them were twelve names--the names
of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> Now he who was speaking to me had a
measuring-rod of gold, with which to measure the city and its gates and
its wall.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> The plan of the city is a square, the
length being the same as the breadth; and he measured the city furlong
by furlong, with his measuring rod--it is twelve hundred miles long, and
the length and the breadth and the height of it are equal.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And he measured the wall of it--a wall
of a hundred and forty-four cubits, according to human measure, which
was also that of the angel.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The solid fabric of the wall was
jasper; and the city itself was made of gold, resembling transparent
glass.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> As for the foundation-stones of the
city wall, which were beautified with various kinds of precious stones,
the first was jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the
fourth emerald, the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius,

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> the seventh chrysolite, the eighth
beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, the
twelfth amethyst.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And the twelve gates were twelve
pearls; each of them consisting of a single pearl. And the main street
of the city was made of pure gold, resembling transparent glass.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> I saw no sanctuary in the city, for the
Lord God, the Ruler of all, is its Sanctuary, and so is the Lamb.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Nor has the city any need of the sun or
of the moon, to give it light; for the glory of God has shone upon it
and its lamp is the Lamb.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> The nations will live their lives by
its light; and the kings of the earth are to bring their glory into it.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And in the daytime (for there will be
no night there) the gates will never be closed;

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> and the glory and honor of the nations
shall be brought into it.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And no unclean thing shall ever enter
it, nor any one who is guilty of base conduct or tells lies, but only
they whose names stand recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Then he showed me the river of the Water
of Life, bright as crystal, issuing from the throne of God and of the
Lamb.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> On either side of the river, midway
between it and the main street of the city, was the Tree of Life. It
produced twelve kinds of fruit, yielding a fresh crop month by month,
and the leaves of the tree served as medicine for the nations.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> "In future there will be no curse," he
said, "but the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in that city. And
His servants will render Him holy service and will see His face,

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> and His name will be on their foreheads.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And there will be no night there; and
they have no need of lamplight or sunlight, for the Lord God will shine
upon them, and they will be kings until the Ages of the Ages."

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And he said to me, "These words are
trustworthy and true; and the Lord, the God of the spirits of the
Prophets, sent His angel to make known to His servants the things which
must soon happen.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> \`I am coming quickly.' Blessed is he who
is mindful of the predictions contained in this book."

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> I John heard and saw these things; and
when I had heard and seen them, I fell at the feet of the angel who was
showing me them--to worship him.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> But he said to me, "Oh, do not do that. I
am a fellow bondservant of yours, and a fellow bondservant of your
brethren the Prophets and of those who are mindful of the teachings of
this book. Worship God."

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> "Make no secret," he added, "of the
meaning of the predictions contained in this book; for the time for
their fulfillment is now close at hand.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Let the dishonest man act dishonestly
still; let the filthy make himself filthy still; let the righteous
practise righteousness still; and let the holy be made holy still."

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> "I am coming quickly; and My reward is
with Me, that I may requite every man in accordance with what his
conduct has been.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First
and the Last, the Beginning and the End.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Blessed are those who wash their robes
clean, that they may have a right to the Tree of Life, and may go
through the gates into the city.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> The unclean are shut out, and so are
all who practise magic, all fornicators, all murderers, and those who
worship idols, and every one who loves falsehood and tells lies.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> "I Jesus have sent My angel for him
solemnly to declare these things to you among the Churches. I am the
Root and the offspring of David, the bright Morning Star.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> The Spirit and the Bride say, \`Come;'
and whoever hears, let him say, \`Come;' and let those who are thirsty
come. Whoever will, let him take the Water of Life, without payment.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> "I solemnly declare to every one who
hears the words of the prophecy contained in this book, that if any one
adds to those words, God will add to him the plagues spoken of in this
book;

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> and that if any one takes away from the
words of the book of this prophecy, God will take from him his share in
the Tree of Life and in the holy city--the things described in this
book.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> "He who solemnly declares all this
says, "\`Yes, I am coming quickly.'" Amen. Come, Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus be with
God's people.
