[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](col)  [Next](th2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 1 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, Silas, and Timothy: To the Church of
the Thessalonians which is in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
May grace and peace be granted to you.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> We continually give thanks to God because
of you all, while we make mention of you in our prayers.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> For we never fail to remember your works of
faith and labours of love and your persistent and unwavering hope in our
Lord Jesus Christ in the presence of our God and Father;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> knowing as we do, brethren, that you are
beloved by God and that He has chosen you.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The Good News that we brought you did not
come to you in words only, but also with power and with the Holy Spirit
and with much certainty, for you know the sort of men we became among
you, as examples for your sakes.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And you followed the pattern set you by us
and by the Master, after you had received the Message amid severe
persecution, and yet with the joy which the Holy Spirit gives,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> so that you became a pattern to all the
believers throughout Macedonia and Greece.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For it was not only from you that the
Master's Message sounded forth throughout Macedonia and Greece; but
everywhere your faith in God has become known, so that it is unnecessary
for us to say anything about it.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For when others speak of us they report the
reception we had from you, and how you turned from your idols to God, to
be bondservants of the true and ever-living God,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and to await the return from Heaven of
His Son, whom He raised from among the dead--even Jesus, our Deliverer
from God's coming anger.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For you yourselves, brethren, know that our
visit to you did not fail of its purpose.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> But, as you will remember, after we had
already met with suffering and outrage at Philippi, we summoned up
boldness, by the help of our God, to tell you God's Good News amid much
opposition.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For our preaching was not grounded on a
delusion, nor prompted by mingled motives, nor was there fraud in it.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But as God tested and approved us before
entrusting us with His Good News, so in what we say we are seeking not
to please men but to please God, who tests and approves our motives.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For, as you are well aware, we have never
used the language of flattery nor have we found pretexts for enriching
ourselves--God is our witness;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> nor did we seek glory either from you or
from any other mere men, although we might have stood on our dignity as
Christ's Apostles.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> On the contrary, in our relations to you we
showed ourselves as gentle as a mother is when she tenderly nurses her
own children.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Seeing that we were thus drawn
affectionately towards you, it would have been a joy to us to have
imparted to you not only God's Good News, but to have given our very
lives also, because you had become very dear to us.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For you remember, brethren, our labour and
toil: how, working night and day so as not to become a burden to any one
of you, we came and proclaimed among you God's Good News.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> You yourselves are witnesses--and God is
witness--how holy and upright and blameless our dealings with you
believers were.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For you know that we acted towards every
one of you as a father does towards his own children, encouraging and
cheering you,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and imploring you to live lives worthy of
fellowship with God who is inviting you to share His own Kingship and
glory.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And for this further reason we render
unceasing thanks to God, that when you received God's Message from our
lips, it was as no mere message from men that you embraced it, but
as--what it really is--God's Message, which also does its work in the
hearts of you who believe.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For you, brethren, followed the example
of the Churches of God in Christ Jesus which are in Judaea; seeing that
you endured the same ill-treatment at the hands of your countrymen, as
they did at the hands of the Jews.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Those Jewish persecutors killed both the
Lord Jesus and the Prophets, and drove us out of their midst. They are
displeasing to God, and are the enemies of all mankind;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> for they still try to prevent our
preaching to the Gentiles so that they may find salvation. They thus
continually fill up the measure of their own sins, and God's anger in
its severest form has overtaken them.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But we, brethren, having been for a short
time separated from you in bodily presence, though not in heart,
endeavoured all the more earnestly, with intense longing, to see you
face to face.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> On this account we wanted to come to
you--at least I Paul wanted again and again to do so--but Satan hindered
us.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For what is our hope or joy, or the crown
of which we boast? Is it not you yourselves in the presence of our Lord
Jesus at His Coming?

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Yes, you are our glory and our joy.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> So when we could endure it no longer, we
decided to remain behind in Athens alone;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and sent Timothy our brother and God's
minister in the service of Christ's Good News, that he might help you
spiritually and encourage you in your faith;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> that none of you might be unnerved by your
present trials: for you yourselves know that they are our appointed lot.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For even when we were with you, we
forewarned you, saying, "We are soon to suffer affliction;" and this
actually happened, as you well know.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this reason I also, when I could no
longer endure the uncertainty, sent to know the condition of your faith,
lest perchance the Tempter might have tempted you and our labour have
been lost.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But now that Timothy has recently come back
to us from you, and has brought us the happy tidings of your faith and
love, and has told us how you still cherish a constant and affectionate
recollection of us, and are longing to see us as we also long to see
you--

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> for this reason in our distress and trouble
we have been comforted about you, brethren, by your faith.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For now life is for us life indeed, since
you are standing fast in the Lord.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For what thanksgiving on your behalf can we
possibly offer to God in return for all the joy which fills our souls
before our God for you,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> while night and day, with intense
earnestness, we pray that we may see your faces, and may bring to
perfection whatever may be still lacking in your faith?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> But may our God and Father Himself--and
our Lord Jesus--guide us on our way to you;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and as for you, may the Lord teach you to
love one another and all men, with a growing and a glowing love,
resembling our love for you.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Thus He will build up your characters, so
that you will be faultlessly holy in the presence of our God and Father
at the Coming of our Lord Jesus with all His holy ones.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Moreover, brethren, as you learnt from our
lips the lives which you ought to live, and do live, so as to please
God, we beg and exhort you in the name of the Lord Jesus to live them
more and more truly.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For you know the commands which we laid
upon you by the authority of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For this is God's will--your purity of
life, that you abstain from fornication;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> that each man among you shall know how to
procure a wife who shall be his own in purity and honour;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> that you be not overmastered by lustful
cravings, like the Gentiles who have no knowledge of God;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and that in this matter there be no
encroaching on the rights of a brother Christian and no overreaching
him. For the Lord is an avenger in all such cases, as we have already
taught you and solemnly warned you.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> God has not called us to an unclean life,
but to one of purity.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Therefore a defiant spirit in such a case
provokes not man but God, who puts His Holy Spirit into your hearts.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> But on the subject of love for the
brotherhood it is unnecessary for me to write to you, for you yourselves
have been taught by God to love one another;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> and indeed you do love all the brethren
throughout Macedonia. And we exhort you to do so more and more,

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and to vie with one another in eagerness
for peace, every one minding his own business and working with his
hands, as we ordered you to do:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> so as to live worthy lives in relation to
outsiders, and not be a burden to any one.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Now, concerning those who from time to
time pass away, we would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, lest you
should mourn as others do who have no hope.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if we believe that Jesus has died and
risen again, we also believe that, through Jesus, God will bring with
Him those who shall have passed away.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For this we declare to you on the Lord's
own authority--that we who are alive and continue on earth until the
Coming of the Lord, shall certainly not forestall those who shall have
previously passed away.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For the Lord Himself will come down from
Heaven with a loud word of command, and with an archangel's voice and
the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Afterwards we who are alive and are still
on earth will be caught up in their company amid clouds to meet the Lord
in the air.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And so we shall be with the Lord for
ever. Therefore encourage one another with these words.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But as to times and dates it is unnecessary
that anything be written to you.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For you yourselves know perfectly well that
the day of the Lord comes like a thief in the night.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> While they are saying "Peace and safety!"
then in a moment destruction falls upon them, like birth-pains on a
woman who is with child; and escape there is none.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But you, brethren, are not in darkness,
that daylight should surprise you like a thief;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> for all of you are sons of Light and sons
of the day. We belong neither to the night nor to darkness.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> So then let us not sleep, like the rest of
the world, but let us keep awake and be sober.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For those who sleep, sleep at night, and
those who drink freely, drink at night.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But let us, belonging--as we do--to the
day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and for a
helmet the hope of salvation.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For God has not pre-destined us to meet His
anger, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> who died on our behalf, so that whether
we are awake or are sleeping we may share His Life.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Therefore encourage one another, and let
each one help to strengthen his friend, as in fact you do.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Now we beg you, brethren, to show respect
for those who labour among you and are your leaders in Christian work,
and are your advisers;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and to esteem them very highly in love
for their work's sake. Be at peace among yourselves.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And we exhort you, brethren, admonish the
unruly, comfort the timid, sustain the weak, and be patient towards all.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> See to it that no one ever repays another
with evil for evil; but always seek opportunities of doing good both to
one another and to all the world.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Be always joyful.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Be unceasing in prayer.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> In every circumstance of life be
thankful; for this is God's will in Christ Jesus respecting you.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Do not quench the Spirit.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Do not think meanly of utterances of
prophecy;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> but test all such, and retain hold of the
good.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Hold yourselves aloof from every form of
evil.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And may God Himself who gives peace, make
you entirely holy; and may your spirits, souls and bodies be preserved
complete and be found blameless at the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Faithful is He who calls you, and He will
also perfect His work.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Brethren, pray for us.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> I solemnly charge you in the Lord's name
to have this Letter read to all the brethren.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians](th2)
