[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th2)  [Next](ti2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 1 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus by the
will of God our Saviour and Christ Jesus our hope:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To Timothy, my own true son in the faith.
May grace, mercy and peace be granted to you from God the Father and
Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> When I was on my journey to Macedonia I
begged you to remain on in Ephesus that you might remonstrate with
certain persons because of their erroneous teaching

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and the attention they bestow on mere
fables and endless pedigrees, such as lead to controversy rather than to
a true stewardship for God, which only exists where there is faith. And
I make the same request now.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> But the end sought to be secured by
exhortation is the love which springs from a pure heart, a clear
conscience and a sincere faith.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From these some have drifted away, and have
wandered into empty words.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> They are ambitious to be teachers of the
Law, although they do not understand either their own words or what the
things are about which they make such confident assertions.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now we know that the Law is good, if a man
uses it in the way it should be used,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> and remembers that a law is not enacted to
control a righteous man, but for the lawless and rebellious, the
irreligious and sinful, the godless and profane--for those who strike
their fathers or their mothers, for murderers,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> fornicators, sodomites, slave-dealers,
liars and false witnesses; and for whatever else is opposed to wholesome
teaching

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> and is not in accordance with the Good
News of the blessed God with which I have been entrusted.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I am thankful to Him who made me
strong--even Christ Jesus our Lord--because He has judged me to be
faithful and has put me into His service,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> though I was previously a blasphemer and
a persecutor and had been insolent in outrage. Yet mercy was shown me,
because I had acted ignorantly, not having as yet believed;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and the grace of our Lord came to me in
overflowing fulness, conferring faith on me and the love which is in
Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Faithful is the saying, and deserving of
universal acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners; among whom I stand foremost.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> But mercy was shown me in order that in
me as the foremost of sinners Christ Jesus might display the fulness of
His long-suffering patience as an example to encourage those who would
afterwards be resting their faith on Him with a view to the Life of the
Ages.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Now to the immortal and invisible King of
the Ages, who alone is God, be honour and glory to the Ages of the Ages!
Amen.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> This is the charge which I entrust to
you, my son Timothy, in accordance with the inspired instructions
concerning you which were given me long ago, that being equipped with
them as your armour you may be continually fighting the good fight,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> holding fast to faith and a clear
conscience, which some have cast aside and have made shipwreck of their
faith.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Among these are Hymenaeus and Alexander,
whom I have delivered to Satan so that they may be taught not to
blaspheme.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I exhort then, first of all, that
supplications, prayers, intercessions and thanksgivings be offered on
behalf of all men;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> including kings and all who are in high
station, in order that we may live peaceful and tranquil lives with all
godliness and gravity.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> This is right, and is pleasing in the sight
of God our Saviour,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> who is willing for all mankind to be saved
and come to a full knowledge of the truth.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For there is but one God and but one
Mediator between God and men--Christ Jesus, Himself man;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who gave Himself as the redemption price
for all--a fact testified to at its own appointed time,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> and of which I have been appointed a herald
and an Apostle (I am speaking the truth: it is not a fiction), a teacher
of the Gentiles in faith and truth.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> So then I would have the men everywhere
pray, lifting to God holy hands which are unstained with anger or
strife;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and I would have the women dress
becomingly, with modesty and self-control, not with plaited hair or gold
or pearls or costly clothes,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> but--as befits women making a claim to
godliness--with the ornament of good works.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> A woman should quietly learn from others
with entire submissiveness.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I do not permit a woman to teach, nor
have authority over a man, but she must remain silent.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For Adam was formed first, and then Eve;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and Adam was not deceived, but his wife
was thoroughly deceived, and so became involved in transgression.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Yet a woman will be brought safely
through childbirth if she and her husband continue to live in faith and
love and growing holiness, with habitual self-restraint.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Faithful is the saying, "If any one is
eager to have the oversight of a Church, he desires a noble work."

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> A minister then must be a man of
irreproachable character, true to his one wife, temperate, sober-minded,
well-behaved, hospitable to strangers, and with a gift for teaching;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> not a hard drinker nor given to blows; not
selfish or quarrelsome or covetous;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> but ruling his own household wisely and
well, with children kept under control with true dignity.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> (If a man does not know how to rule his own
household, how shall he have the Church of God given into his care?)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He ought not to be a new convert, for fear
he should be blinded with pride and come under the same condemnation as
the Devil.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> It is needful also that he bear a good
character with people outside the Church, lest he fall into reproach or
a snare of the Devil.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Deacons, in the same way, must be men of
serious demeanour, not double-tongued, nor addicted to much wine, nor
greedy of base gain,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> but holding the secret truths of the faith
with a clear conscience.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And they must also be well-tried men, and
when found to be of unblemished character then let them serve as
deacons.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Deaconesses, in the same way, must be
sober-minded women, not slanderers, but in every way temperate and
trustworthy.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> A deacon must be true to his one wife,
and rule his children and his own household wisely and well.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For those who have filled the deacon's
office wisely and well, are already gaining for themselves an honourable
standing, and are acquiring great freedom of speech in proclaiming the
faith which rests on Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> All this I write to you, though I am
hoping before long to come to see you.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But, for fear I may be hindered, I now
write, so that you may have rules to guide you in dealing with God's
household. For this is what the Church of the ever-living God is, and it
is the pillar and foundation-stone of the truth.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And, beyond controversy, great is the
mystery of our religion-- that Christ appeared in human form, and His
claims justified by the Spirit, was seen by angels and proclaimed among
Gentile nations, was believed on in the world, and received up again
into glory.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now the Spirit expressly declares that in
later times some will fall away from the faith, giving heed to deceiving
spirits and the teachings of demons;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> through the hypocrisy of men who teach
falsely and have their own consciences seared as with a hot iron;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> forbidding people to marry, and insisting
on abstinence from foods which God has created to be partaken of, with
thankfulness, by those who believe and have a clear knowledge of the
truth.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For everything that God has created is
good, and nothing is to be cast aside, if only it is received with
thanksgiving.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For it is made holy by the word of God and
by prayer.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> If you warn the brethren of these dangers
you will be a good and faithful servant of Christ Jesus, inwardly
feeding on the lessons of the faith and of the sound teaching of which
you have been, and are, so close a follower.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But worldly stories, fit only for credulous
old women, have nothing to do with.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Train yourself in godliness. Exercise for
the body is not useless, but godliness is useful in every respect,
possessing, as it does, the promise of Life now and of the Life which is
soon coming.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Faithful is this saying and deserving of
universal acceptance:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> and here is the motive of our toiling and
wrestling, because we have our hopes fixed on the ever-living God, who
is the Saviour of all mankind, and especially of believers.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Command this and teach this.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let no one think slightingly of you
because you are a young man; but in speech, conduct, love, faith and
purity, be an example for your fellow Christians to imitate.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Till I come, bestow your attention on
reading, exhortation and teaching.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Do not be careless about the gifts with
which you are endowed, which were conferred on you through a divine
revelation when the hands of the elders were placed upon you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Habitually practise these duties, and be
absorbed in them; so that your growing proficiency in them may be
evident to all.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Be on your guard as to yourself and your
teaching. Persevere in these things; for by doing this you will make
certain your own salvation and that of your hearers.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Never administer a sharp reprimand to a man
older than yourself; but entreat him as if he were your father, and the
younger men as brothers;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> the elder women too as mothers, and the
younger women as sisters, with perfect modesty.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Honour widows who are really in need.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But if a widow has children or
grandchildren, let these learn first to show piety towards their own
homes and to prove their gratitude to their parents; for this is well
pleasing in the sight of God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> A widow who is really in need, friendless
and desolate, has her hopes fixed on God, and continues at her
supplications and prayers, night and day;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> but a pleasure-loving widow is dead even
while still alive.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Press these facts upon them, so that they
may live lives free from reproach.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But if a man makes no provision for those
dependent on him, and especially for his own family, he has disowned the
faith and is behaving worse than an unbeliever.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> No widow is to be put on the roll who is
under sixty years of age.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> She must have been true to her one
husband, and well reported of for good deeds, as having brought up
children, received strangers hospitably, washed the feet of God's
people, given relief to the distressed, and devoted herself to good
works of every kind.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But the younger widows you must not
enrol; for as soon as they begin to chafe against the yoke of Christ,
they want to marry,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> and they incur disapproval for having
broken their original vow.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And at the same time they also learn to
be idle as they go round from house to house; and they are not only
idle, but are gossips also and busybodies, speaking of things that ought
not to be spoken of.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I would therefore have the younger women
marry, bear children, rule in domestic matters, and furnish the
Adversary with no excuse for slander.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> For already some of them have gone
astray, following Satan.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If a believing woman has widows dependent
on her, she should relieve their wants, and save the Church from being
burdened--so that the Church may relieve the widows who are really in
need.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let the Elders who perform their duties
wisely and well be held worthy of double honour, especially those who
labour in preaching and teaching.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For the Scripture says, &lt;"You are not
to muzzle the ox while it is treading out the grain;"&gt; and the
workman deserves his pay.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Never entertain an accusation against an
Elder except on the evidence of two of three witnesses.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Those who persist in sin reprove in the
presence of all, so that it may also be a warning to the rest.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> I solemnly call upon you, in the presence
of God and of Christ Jesus and of the elect angels, to carry out these
instructions of mine without prejudice, and to do nothing from
partiality.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Do not ordain any one hastily; and do not
be a partaker in the sins of others; keep \*yourself\* pure.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> (No longer be a water-drinker; but take a
little wine for the sake of your digestion and your frequent ailments.)

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> The sins of some men are evident to the
world, leading the way to your estimate of their characters, but the
sins of others lag behind.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> So also the right actions of some are
evident to the world, and those that are not cannot remain for ever out
of sight.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Let all who are under the yoke of slavery
hold their own masters to be deserving of honour, so that the name of
God and the Christian teaching may not be spoken against.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And those who have believing masters should
not be wanting in respect towards them because they are their brethren,
but should serve them all the more willingly because those who profit by
the faithful service rendered are believers and are friends.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> So teach and exhort. If any one is a
teacher of any other kind of doctrine, and refuses assent to wholesome
instructions--those of our Lord Jesus Christ--and the teaching that
harmonizes with true godliness,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> he is puffed up with pride and has no true
knowledge, but is crazy over discussions and controversies about words
which give rise to envy, quarrelling, revilings, ill-natured suspicions,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and persistent wranglings on the part of
people whose intellects are disordered and they themselves blinded to
all knowledge of the truth; who imagine that godliness means gain.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And godliness \*is\* gain, when associated
with contentment;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> for we brought nothing into the world, nor
can we carry anything out of it;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and if we have food and clothing, with
these we will be satisfied.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But people who are determined to be rich
fall into temptation and a snare, and into many unwise and pernicious
ways which sink mankind in destruction and ruin.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For from love of money all sorts of evils
arise; and some have so hankered after money as to be led astray from
the faith and be pierced through with countless sorrows.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But you, O man of God, must flee from
these things; and strive for uprightness, godliness, good faith, love,
fortitude, and a forgiving temper.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Exert all your strength in the honourable
struggle for the faith; lay hold of the Life of the Ages, to which you
were called, when you made your noble profession of faith before many
witnesses.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I charge you--as in the presence of God
who gives life to all creatures, and of Christ Jesus who at the bar of
Pontius Pilate made a noble profession of faith--

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> that you keep God's commandments
stainlessly and without reproach till the Appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> For, as its appointed time, this will be
brought about by the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of kings and
Lord of lords,

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> who alone possesses immortality, dwelling
in unapproachable light, and whom no man has seen or can see. To Him be
eternal honour and power! Amen.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Impress on those who are rich in the
present age that they must not be haughty nor set their hopes on
riches--that unstable foundation--but on God who provides us richly with
all things for our enjoyment.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> They must be beneficent, rich in noble
deeds, open-handed and liberal;

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> storing up for themselves that which
shall be a solid foundation for the future, that they may lay hold of
the Life which is life indeed.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> O Timothy, guard the truths entrusted to
you, shunning irreligious and frivolous talk, and controversy with what
is falsely called \`knowledge';

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> of which some have spoken boastfully in
connexion with the true faith, and have erred. Grace be with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy](ti2)
