[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti1)  [Next](tit) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 2 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus, by the
will of God, for proclaiming the promise of the Life which is in Christ
Jesus:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To Timothy my dearly-loved child. May
grace, mercy and peace be granted to you from God the Father and Christ
Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I thank God, whom I serve with a pure
conscience--as my forefathers did--that night and day I unceasingly
remember you in my prayers,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> being always mindful of your tears, and
longing to see you that I may be filled with joy.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For I recall the sincere faith which is in
your heart--a faith which dwelt first in your grandmother Lois and then
in your mother Eunice, and, I am fully convinced, now dwells in you
also.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For this reason let me remind you to
rekindle God's gift which is yours through the laying on of my hands.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For the Spirit which God has given us is
not a spirit of cowardice, but one of power and of love and of sound
judgement.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Do not be ashamed then to bear witness for
our Lord and for me His prisoner; but rather share suffering with me in
the service of the Good News, strengthened by the power of God.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For He saved us and called us with a holy
call, not in accordance with our desserts, but in accordance with His
own purpose and the free grace which He bestowed on us in Christ Jesus
before the commencement of the Ages,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> but which has now been plainly revealed
through the Appearing of our Saviour, Christ Jesus. He has put an end to
death and has brought Life and Immortality to light through the Good
News,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> of which I have been appointed a
preacher, Apostle and teacher, to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> That indeed is the reason why I suffer as
I do. But I am not ashamed, for I know in whom my trust reposes, and I
am confident that He has it in His power to keep what I have entrusted
to Him safe until that day.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Provide yourself with an outline of the
sound teaching which you have heard from my lips, and be true to the
faith and love which are in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> That precious treasure which is in your
charge, guard through the Holy Spirit who has His home in our hearts.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Of this you are aware, that all the
Christians in Roman Asia have deserted me: and among them Phygelus and
Hermogenes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> May the Lord show mercy to the household
of Onesiphorus; for many a time he cheered me and he was not ashamed of
my chain.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Nay, when he was here in Rome, he took
great pains to inquire where I was living, and at last he found me.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> (The Lord grant that he may obtain mercy
at His hands on that day!) And you yourself well know all the services
which he rendered me in Ephesus.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> You then, my child, must be strong in the
grace that is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> All that you have been taught by me in the
hearing of many witnesses, you must hand on to trusty men who shall
themselves, in turn, be competent to instruct others also.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> As a good soldier of Christ Jesus accept
your share of suffering.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Every one who serves as a soldier keeps
himself from becoming entangled in the world's business--so that he may
satisfy the officer who enlisted him.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And if any one takes part in an athletic
contest, he gets no prize unless he obeys the rules.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The harvestman who labours in the field
must be the first to get a share of the crop.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Mark well what I am saying: the Lord will
give you discernment in everything.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Never forget that Jesus Christ has risen
from among the dead and is a descendant of David, as is declared in the
Good News which I preach.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For preaching the Good News I suffer, and
am even put in chains, as if I were a criminal: yet the word of God is
not imprisoned.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For this reason I endure all things for
the sake of God's own people; so that they also may obtain
salvation--even the salvation which is in Christ Jesus--and with it
eternal glory.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Faithful is the saying: "If we died with
Him, we shall also live with Him;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> "If we patiently endure pain, we shall
also share His Kingship; "If we disown Him, He will also disown us;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> "And even if \*our\* faith fails, He
remains true--He cannot prove false to Himself."

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Bring all this to men's remembrances,
solemnly charging them in the presence of God not to waste time in
wrangling about mere words, a course which is altogether unprofitable
and tends only to the ruin of the hearers.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Earnestly seek to commend yourself to God
as a servant who, because of his straightforward dealing with the word
of truth, has no reason to feel any shame.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But from irreligious and frivolous talk
hold aloof, for those who indulge in it will proceed from bad to worse
in impiety,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> and their teaching will spread like a
running sore. Hymenaeus and Philetus are men of that stamp.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> In the matter of the truth they have gone
astray, saying that the Resurrection is already past, and so they are
overthrowing the faith of some.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Yet God's solid foundation stands
unmoved, bearing this inscription, &lt;"The Lord knows those who really
belong to Him."&gt; And this also, &lt;"Let every one who names the Name
of the Lord renounce all wickedness."&gt;

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Now in a great house there are not only
articles of gold and silver, but also others of wood and of earthenware;
and some are for specially honourable, and others for common use.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> If therefore a man keeps himself clear of
these latter, he himself will be for specially honourable use,
consecrated, fit for the Master's service, and fully equipped for every
good work.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Keep a strong curb, however, on your
youthful cravings; and strive for integrity, good faith, love, peace, in
company with all who pray to the Lord with pure hearts.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> But avoid foolish discussions with
ignorant men, knowing--as you do--that these lead to quarrels;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> and a bondservant of the Lord must not
quarrel, but must be inoffensive towards all men, a skilful teacher, and
patient under wrongs.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> He must speak in a gentle tone when
correcting the errors of opponents, in the hope that God will at last
give them repentance, for them to come to a full knowledge of the truth

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> and recover sober-mindedness and freedom
from the Devil's snare, though they are now entrapped by him to do his
will.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> But of this be assured: in the last days
grievous times will set in.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For men will be lovers of self, lovers of
money, boastful, haughty, profane. They will be disobedient to parents,
thankless, irreligious,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> destitute of natural affection,
unforgiving, slanderers. They will have no self-control, but will be
brutal, opposed to goodness,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> treacherous, headstrong, self-important.
They will love pleasure instead of loving God,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> and will keep up a make-believe of piety
and yet live in defiance of its power. Turn away from people of this
sort.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Among them are included the men who make
their way into private houses and carry off weak women as their
prisoners--women who, weighed down by the burden of their sins, are led
by ever-changing caprice,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> and are always learning something new, and
yet are never able to arrive at real knowledge of the truth.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And just as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so also these false teachers withstand the truth--being, as they
are, men of debased intellects, and of no real worth so far as faith is
concerned.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> But they will have no further success; for
their folly will be as clearly manifest to all men, as that of the
opponents of Moses came to be.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But you have intimately known my
teaching, life, aims, faith, patience, love, resignation,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> and the persecutions and sufferings which
I have endured; the things which happened to me in Antioch, Iconium and
Lystra. You know the persecutions I endured, and how the Lord delivered
me out of them all.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And indeed every one who is determined to
live a godly life as a follower of Christ Jesus will be persecuted.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But bad men and impostors will go on from
bad to worse, misleading and being misled.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But you must cling to the things which
you have learnt and have been taught to believe, knowing who your
teachers were,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and that from infancy you have known the
sacred writings which are able to make you wise to obtain salvation
through faith in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Every Scripture is inspired by God and is
useful for teaching, for convincing, for correction of error, and for
instruction in right doing;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> so that the man of God may himself be
complete and may be perfectly equipped for every good work.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I solemnly implore you, in the presence of
God and of Christ Jesus who is about to judge the living and the dead,
and by His Appearing and His Kingship:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> proclaim God's message, be zealous in
season and out of season; convince, rebuke, encourage, with the utmost
patience as a teacher.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For a time is coming when they will not
tolerate wholesome instruction, but, wanting to have their ears tickled,
they will find a multitude of teachers to satisfy their own fancies;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and will turn away from listening to the
truth and will turn aside to fables.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But as for you, you must exercise habitual
self-control, and not live a self-indulgent life, but do the duty of an
evangelist and fully discharge the obligations of your office.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> I for my part am like a drink-offering
which is already being poured out; and the time for my departure is now
close at hand.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> I have gone through the glorious contest; I
have run the race; I have guarded the faith.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> From this time onward there is reserved for
me the crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will
award to me on that day, and not only to me, but also to all who love
the thought of His Appearing.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Make an effort to come to me speedily.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For Demas has deserted me--loving, as he
does, the present age--and has gone to Thessalonica; Crescens has gone
to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Luke is the only friend I now have with
me. Call for Mark on your way and bring him with you, for he is a great
help to me in my ministry.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> When you come, bring with you the cloak
which I left behind at Troas at the house of Carpus, and the books, but
especially the parchments.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Alexander the metal-worker showed bitter
hostility towards me: the Lord will requite him according to his doings.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> You also should beware of him; for he has
violently opposed our preaching.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> At my first defence I had no one at my
side, but all deserted me. May it not be laid to their charge.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The Lord, however, stood by me and filled
me with inward strength, that through me the Message might be fully
proclaimed and that all the Gentiles might hear it; and I was rescued
from the lion's jaws.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The Lord will deliver me from every cruel
attack and will keep me safe in preparation for His heavenly Kingdom. To
Him be the glory until the Ages of the Ages! Amen.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Greet Prisca and Aquila, and the
household of Onesiphorus.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Erastus stayed in Corinth; Trophimus I
left behind me at Miletus, ill.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Make an effort to come before winter.
Eubulus greets you, and so do Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the
brethren.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be
with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus](tit)
