<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act014)  [Next](act016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

[Acts 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 15:1</span></span>

And (1) (a) certain men which came down from Judaea taught the brethren,
\[and said\], Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
cannot be saved.

\(1\) The Church is at length troubled with dissension within itself,
and the trouble rises from the proud and stubborn intellects of certain
evil men. The first strife was concerning the office of Christ, whether
we are saved only by his righteousness apprehended by faith, or if we
also have need to observe the Law.

\(a\) Epiphanius is of the opinion that this was Cerinthus.

[Acts 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 15:2</span></span>

\(2\) When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and
disputation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and
certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and
elders about this question.

\(2\) Meetings of congregations were instituted to suppress heresies, to
which certain were sent by common consent on behalf of all.

[Acts 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 15:3</span></span>

And (b) being brought on their way by the church, they passed through
Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles: and they
caused great joy unto all the brethren.

\(b\) Courteously and lovingly brought on their way by the Church, that
is, by certain ones appointed by the Church.

[Acts 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 15:6</span></span>

\(3\) And the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this
matter.

\(3\) The matter is first handled, both parts being heard, in the
assembly of the apostles and elders, and after is communicated to the
people.

[Acts 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 15:7</span></span>

And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto
them, (4) Men \[and\] brethren, ye know how that a (c) good while ago
God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the
word of the gospel, and believe.

\(4\) God himself, in the calling of the Gentiles who are uncircumcised,
taught that our salvation consists in faith, without the worship
appointed by the Law.

\(c\) Literally, "of old time", that is, even from the first time that
we were commanded to preach the Gospel, and immediately after that the
Holy Spirit came down upon us.

[Acts 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 15:9</span></span>

And put no (d) difference between us and them, purifying their hearts
(e) by faith.

\(d\) He put no difference between us and them, with regard to the
benefit of his free favour.

\(e\) Christ proclaims those blessed who are pure of heart: and here we
are plainly taught that men are made pure of heart by faith.

[Acts 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 15:10</span></span>

\(5\) Now therefore why (f) tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?

\(5\) Peter, passing from the ceremonies to the Law itself in general,
shows that no one could be saved, if salvation were to be sought for by
the Law, and not by grace alone in Jesus Christ; and this is because no
man could ever fulfil the Law, neither the patriarch nor the apostle.

\(f\) Why do you tempt God, as though he could not save by faith?

[Acts 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 15:12</span></span>

\(6\) Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas
and Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the
Gentiles by them.

\(6\) A true pattern of a lawful council, where God's truth alone
reigns.

[Acts 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 15:13</span></span>

And after they had held their peace, (g) James answered, saying, Men
\[and\] brethren, hearken unto me:

\(g\) The son of Alphaeus, who is also called the Lord's brother.

[Acts 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 15:14</span></span>

\(7\) Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles,
to take out of them a people for his name.

\(7\) James confirms the calling of the Gentiles out of the word of God,
in this agreeing with Peter.

[Acts 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 15:18</span></span>

\(h\) Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.

\(h\) And therefore nothing comes to pass by chance, but only by God's
appointment.

[Acts 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 15:19</span></span>

\(8\) Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from
among the Gentiles are turned to God:

\(8\) In indifferent matters, we may be patient with the weakness of our
brethren with the end in view that they may have time to be instructed.

[Acts 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 15:20</span></span>

But that we write unto them, that they abstain from (i) pollutions of
idols, and \[from\] fornication, and \[from\] things strangled, and
\[from\] blood.

\(i\) From sacrifices, or from feasts which were kept in idol's temples.

[Acts 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 15:22</span></span>

\(9\) Then pleased it the apostles and elders, with the whole church, to
send chosen men of their own company to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas;
\[namely\], Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the
brethren:

\(9\) In a lawful synod, neither those who are appointed and chosen
judges, appoint and determine anything tyrannously or upon a lordly
superiority, neither do the common multitude stir up disorder against
those who sit as judges by the word of God: and the like manner of doing
things is also used in proclaiming and ratifying those things which have
been so determined and agreed upon.

[Acts 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 15:24</span></span>

\(10\) Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which (k) went out from
us have troubled you with words, (l) subverting your souls, saying, \[Ye
must\] be circumcised, and keep the law: to whom we gave no \[such\]
commandment:

\(10\) The council of Jerusalem concludes that the ones who trouble
men's consciences are they who teach us to seek salvation in any other
means than in Christ alone, apprehended by faith, no matter where they
come from, and whoever they pretend to be the author of their calling.

\(k\) From our congregation.

\(l\) A borrowed type of speech taken of those who pull down that which
was built up: and it is a very common metaphor in the scriptures, to say
"the Church is built", for "the Church is planted and established".

[Acts 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 15:28</span></span>

\(11\) For it seemed good to the (n) Holy Ghost, and (o) to us, to lay
upon you no greater burden than these (p) necessary things;

\(11\) That is a lawful council, which the Holy Spirit rules.

\(n\) First they made mention of the Holy Spirit, so that it may not
seem to be any man's work.

\(o\) Not that men have any authority of themselves, but to show the
faithfulness that they used in their ministry and labour.

\(p\) This was no absolute necessity, but in respect of the state of
that time, so that the Gentiles and the Jews might live together more
peaceably, with less occasion to quarrel.

[Acts 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 15:29</span></span>

\(12\) That ye abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and
from things strangled, and from fornication: from which if ye keep
yourselves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well.

\(12\) Charity is required even in indifferent matters.

[Acts 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 15:30</span></span>

\(13\) So when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: and when they
had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle:

\(13\) It is required for all people to know certainly what to hold in
matters of faith and religion, and not that the Church by ignorance and
knowing nothing, should depend upon the pleasure of a few.

[Acts 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 15:33</span></span>

And after they had tarried \[there\] a space, they were let go in (q)
peace from the brethren unto the apostles.

\(q\) This is a Hebrew idiom, which is the same as saying, "as the
brethren wished them all prosperous success, and the church dismissed
them with good leave."

[Acts 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 15:36</span></span>

\(14\) And some days after Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and
visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the
Lord, \[and see\] how they do.

\(14\) Congregations or churches easily degenerate unless they are
diligently watched over, and therefore these apostles went to oversee
the churches they had planted, and for this reason also synods were
instituted and appointed.

[Acts 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 15:37</span></span>

\(15\) And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was
Mark.

\(15\) A lamentable example of discord between excellent men and very
great friends, yet not because of profane matters or their own private
affairs, neither yet because of doctrine.

[Acts 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 15:39</span></span>

\(16\) And (r) the contention was so sharp between them, that they
departed asunder one from the other: and so Barnabas took Mark, and
sailed unto Cyprus;

\(16\) God uses the faults of his servants to the profit and building of
the Church: yet we have to take heed, even in the best matters, that we
do not let our anger overflow.

\(r\) They were in great heat: but in this we have to consider the power
of God's counsel, for by this means it came to pass that the doctrine of
the Gospel was spread into many places.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 16](act016)

</div>
