<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act003)  [Next](act005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001)

[Acts 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 4:1</span></span>

And (1) as they spake unto the people, the priests, and the (a) captain
of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon them,

\(1\) There are none more commonly diligent or bold enemies of the
Church than those who profess themselves to be the chief builders of it,
but the more they rage, the more steadfastly the faithful servants of
God continue.

\(a\) The Jews had certain troops for the guard and safety of the temple
and holy things (see ([Mat 26:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#047))).
These garrisons had a captain, such as Eleazarus Ananias, the high
Priest's son in the time of the war that was in Judea, being a very
impudent and proud young man; Josephus, lib. 2, of the taking of Judea.

[Acts 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 4:4</span></span>

Howbeit many of them which heard the word believed; and the (b) number
of the men was about five thousand.

\(b\) While they thought to diminish the number, they actually increased
it.

[Acts 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 4:5</span></span>

And it came to pass on the morrow, that their (c) rulers, and elders,
and scribes,

\(c\) These were those who were members of the Sanhedrin, who were all
from the tribe of Judah, until Herod came to power.

[Acts 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 4:6</span></span>

And Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as
many as were of the (d) kindred of the high priest, were gathered
together at Jerusalem.

\(d\) From whom the high Priests were usually chosen and made. At this
time the former high Priest was stepping down, and a new high Priest was
being appointed.

[Acts 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 4:7</span></span>

\(2\) And when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what
power, or by what (e) name, have ye done this?

\(2\) Against those who brag of a succession of persons, without a
succession of doctrine, and by that means beat down the true ministers
of the word, as much as they are able.

\(e\) By what authority.

[Acts 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 4:9</span></span>

\(3\) If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent
man, by what means he is made whole;

\(3\) The wolves who come after true pastors plead their own cause and
not God's, neither the cause of the Church.

[Acts 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 4:10</span></span>

\(4\) Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by
the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised
from the dead, \[even\] by him doth this man stand here before you
whole.

\(4\) He is indeed a true shepherd that teaches his sheep to rest upon
Christ alone as upon one that is not dead, but has conquered death, and
has all rule in his own hands.

[Acts 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 4:12</span></span>

Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other (f)
name (g) under heaven (h) given among men, whereby we must be saved.

\(f\) There is no other man, or no other power and authority at all; and
this kind of speech was common among the Jews, and arose from this, that
when we are in danger we call upon those at whose hands we look for
help.

\(g\) Anywhere: and this shows us the largeness of Christ's kingdom.

\(h\) Of God.

[Acts 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 4:13</span></span>

\(5\) Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived
that they were unlearned and (i) ignorant men, they marvelled; and they
took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus.

\(5\) The good liberty and boldness of the servants of God does yet this
much good, that those who lay hidden under a mask of zeal at length
betray themselves to indeed be wicked men.

\(i\) The word used here is "idiot", which signifies a private man when
it is used in reference to a magistrate: but with reference to sciences
and studies, it signifies one that is unlearned, and with regard to
honour and estimation, it implies one of base degree, and of no
estimation.

[Acts 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 4:15</span></span>

But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they
(k) conferred among themselves,

\(k\) Laid their heads together.

[Acts 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 4:16</span></span>

\(6\) Saying, What shall we do to these men? for that indeed a notable
miracle hath been done by them \[is\] manifest to all them that dwell in
Jerusalem; and we cannot deny \[it\].

\(6\) He that flatters himself in ignorance, at length comes to do open
wickedness, and that against his own conscience.

[Acts 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 4:19</span></span>

\(7\) But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be
right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge
ye.

\(7\) We must obey men to whom we are subject, but especially and before
all things we must obey God.

[Acts 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 4:21</span></span>

\(8\) So when they had further threatened them, they let them go,
finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people: for
all \[men\] glorified God for that which was done.

\(8\) The wicked are so far off from doing what they wish, that God uses
them contrary to their desires to set forth his glory, which he gives
them permission to do.

[Acts 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 4:23</span></span>

\(9\) And being let go, they went to their own company, and reported all
that the chief priests and elders had said unto them.

\(9\) The apostles share their troubles with the congregation.

[Acts 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 4:24</span></span>

\(10\) And when they heard that, they lifted up their voice to God with
one accord, and said, Lord, thou \[art\] God, which hast made heaven,
and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is:

\(10\) We should neither be afraid of the threats of our enemies,
neither yet foolishly condemn their rage and madness against us: but we
have to set against their force and malice an earnest thinking upon the
power and good will of God (both which we manifestly behold in Christ)
and so flee to the aid and assistance of our Father.

[Acts 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 4:27</span></span>

For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed,
both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the (l) people of
Israel, were gathered together,

\(l\) Although the people of Israel were but one people, yet the plural
number is used here, not so much for the twelve tribes, every one of
which counted as a people, but because of the great multitude of them,
as though many nations had assembled themselves together, as in ([Jdg
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014)).

[Acts 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 4:28</span></span>

For to (m) do whatsoever (n) thy hand and thy counsel determined before
to be done.

\(m\) The wicked execute God's counsel, even though they think nothing
of it, but they are not therefore without fault.

\(n\) You had determined by your absolute authority and power.

[Acts 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 4:31</span></span>

\(11\) And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
assembled together; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and
they spake the word of God with boldness.

\(11\) God witnesses to his Church by a visible sign that it is he that
will establish it, by shaking the powers both of heaven and of earth.

[Acts 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 4:32</span></span>

\(12\) And the multitude of them that believed were of (o) one heart and
of one soul: neither said any \[of them\] that ought of the things which
he possessed was his own; but they had all things common.

\(12\) An example of the true Church, in which there is equal consent
both in doctrine and in charity toward one another: and the pastors
deliver true doctrine both sincerely and constantly.

\(o\) They agreed in counsel, will, and all plans.

[Acts 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 4:34</span></span>

\(13\) Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were
possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the
things that were sold,

\(13\) True charity helps the need of the poor with its own loss, but in
such a way that all things are done well and orderly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 5](act005)

</div>
