<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1008)  [Next](co1010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 9:1</span></span>

Am (1) I not an apostle? am I not free? (2) have I not seen Jesus Christ
our Lord? are not ye (a) my work in the Lord?

\(1\) Before he proceeds any further in his purposed matter of things
offered to idols, he would show the cause of all this evil, and also
take it away. That is, that the Corinthians thought that they did not
have to depart from the least amount of their liberty for any man's
pleasure. Therefore he propounds himself for an example, and that in a
matter almost necessary. And yet he speaks of both, but first of his own
person. If (he says) you allege for yourselves that you are free, and
therefore will use your liberty, am I not also free, seeing I am an
apostle? (2) He proves his apostleship by the effects, in that he was
appointed by Christ himself, and the authority of his function was
sufficiently confirmed to him among them by their conversion. And all
these things he sets before their eyes, to make them ashamed because
they would not in the least way that might be, debase themselves for the
sake of the weak, whereas the apostle himself did all the he could to
win them to God, when they were utterly reprobate and without God.

\(a\) By the Lord.

[1 Corinthians 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 9:2</span></span>

If I be not an apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you: for the
(b) seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord.

\(b\) As a seal by which it sufficiently appears that God is the author
of my apostleship.

[1 Corinthians 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 9:3</span></span>

\(3\) Mine answer to them that do (c) examine me is this,

\(3\) He adds this by the way, as if he should say, "So far it is off,
that you may doubt of my apostleship, that I use it to refute those who
call it into controversy, by opposing those things which the Lord has
done by me among you."

\(c\) Which like judges examine me and my doings.

[1 Corinthians 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 9:4</span></span>

\(4\) Have we not power to (d) eat and to drink?

\(4\) "Now concerning the matter itself", he says, "seeing that I am
free, and truly an apostle, why may not I (I say not, eat of all things
offered to idols) be maintained by my labours, indeed and keep my wife
also, as the rest of the apostles lawfully do, as by name, John and
James, the Lord's cousins, and Peter himself?"

\(d\) Upon the expense of the Church?

[1 Corinthians 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 9:5</span></span>

Have we not power to lead about a (e) sister, a wife, as well as other
apostles, and \[as\] the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?

\(e\) One that is a Christian and a true believer.

[1 Corinthians 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 9:6</span></span>

Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to (f) forbear working?

\(f\) Not live by the works of our hands.

[1 Corinthians 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 9:7</span></span>

\(5\) Who (g) goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth
a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock,
and eateth not of the milk of the flock?

\(5\) That he may not seem to burden the apostles, he shows that it is
just that they do, by an argument of comparison, seeing that soldiers
live by their wages, and husbandmen by the fruits of their labours, and
shepherds by that which comes of their flocks.

\(g\) Goes to warfare?

[1 Corinthians 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 9:8</span></span>

\(6\) Say I these things (h) as a man? or saith not the law the same
also?

\(6\) Secondly, he brings forth the authority of God's institution by an
argument of comparison.

\(h\) Have I not better ground than the common custom of men?

[1 Corinthians 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 9:9</span></span>

For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth
of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for (i) oxen?

\(i\) Was it God's proper intention to provide for oxen, when he made
this law? For there is not the smallest thing in the world, but that God
has a concern for.

[1 Corinthians 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 9:11</span></span>

\(7\) If we have sown unto you spiritual things, \[is it\] a great thing
if we shall reap your carnal things?

\(7\) An assumption of the arguments with an amplification, for neither
in so doing do we require a reward appropriate for our work.

[1 Corinthians 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 9:12</span></span>

\(8\) If others be partakers of \[this\] (k) power over you, \[are\] not
we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power; but suffer all
things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ.

\(8\) Another argument of great force: others are nourished among you,
therefore it was lawful for me, indeed rather for me than any other. And
yet I refused it, and had rather still suffer any inconvenience, than
the Gospel of Christ should be hindered.

\(k\) The word signifies right and interest, by which he shows us that
the ministers of the word must by right and duty be supported by the
Church.

[1 Corinthians 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 9:13</span></span>

\(9\) Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live
\[of the (l) things\] of the temple? and they which wait at the altar
are (m) partakers with the altar?

\(9\) Last of all he brings forth the express law concerning the
nourishing of the Levites, which privilege nonetheless he will not use.

\(l\) This is spoken by the figure of speech metonymy, for those things
that are offered in the temple.

\(m\) Are partakers with the altar in dividing the sacrifice.

[1 Corinthians 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 9:14</span></span>

Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should
live (n) of the gospel.

\(n\) Because they preach the Gospel. It follows by this place, that
Paul received no living, neither would have any other man receive, by a
commodity of masses, or any other such superstitious nonsense.

[1 Corinthians 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 9:15</span></span>

But I have used none of these things: (10) neither have I written these
things, that it should be so done unto me: for \[it were\] better for me
to die, than that any man should make my glorying void.

\(10\) He takes away occasion of suspicion by the way, that it might not
be thought that he wrote this as though he was demanding his wages that
were not payed him. On the contrary, he says, I had rather die, than not
to continue in this purpose to preach the Gospel freely. For I am bound
to preach the Gospel, seeing that the Lord has given and commanded me
this office: but unless I do it willingly and for the love of God,
nothing that I do is to be considered worthwhile. If I had rather that
the Gospel should be evil spoken of, than that I should not require my
wages, then would it appear that I took these pains not so much for the
Gospel's sake, as for my gains and advantages. But I say, this would not
be to use, but rather to abuse my right and liberty: therefore not only
in this thing, but also in all others (as much as I could) I am made all
things to all men, that I might win them to Christ, and might together
with them be won to Christ.

[1 Corinthians 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 9:18</span></span>

What is my reward then? \[Verily\] that, when I preach the gospel, I may
make the gospel of Christ (o) without charge, that I abuse not my power
in the gospel.

\(o\) By taking nothing from those to whom I preach it.

[1 Corinthians 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 9:20</span></span>

And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them
that are under the (p) law, as under the law, that I might gain them
that are under the law;

\(p\) The word "law" in this place must be limited to the ceremonial
Law.

[1 Corinthians 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 9:22</span></span>

To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all
things to (q) all \[men\], that I might by all means save some.

\(q\) In matters that are indifferent, which may be done or not done
with a good conscience. It is as if he said, "I accommodated all customs
and manners, that by all means I might save some."

[1 Corinthians 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 9:23</span></span>

And this I do for the gospel's sake, that I might be partaker thereof
with (r) \[you\].

\(r\) That both I and those to whom I preach the Gospel, may receive
fruit by the Gospel.

[1 Corinthians 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 9:24</span></span>

\(11\) Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one
receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain.

\(11\) He brings in another reason for this wrong, that is, that they
were given to gluttony, for there were solemn banquets of sacrifices,
and the loose living of the priests was always too much celebrated and
kept. Therefore it was hard for those who were accustomed to loose
living, especially when they pretended the liberty of the Gospel, to be
restrained in these banquets. But on the other hand, the apostle calls
them by a pleasant similitude, and also by his own example, to sobriety
and mortification of the flesh, showing that they cannot be fit to run
or wrestle (as then the games of Isthmies were) who pamper up their
bodies. And therefore affirming that they can have no reward unless they
take another course and manner of life.

[1 Corinthians 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 9:25</span></span>

And every man that striveth for the mastery is (s) temperate in all
things. Now they \[do it\] to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an
incorruptible.

\(s\) Uses a most excellent and moderate diet.

[1 Corinthians 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 9:27</span></span>

But I keep under my (t) body, and bring \[it\] into subjection: lest
that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be
(u) a castaway.

\(t\) The old man which strives against the Spirit.

\(u\) Or, "reproved". And this word "reproved" is not contrasted with
the word "elect", but with the word "approved", when we see someone who
is experienced not to be such a one as he ought to be.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 10](co1010)

</div>
