<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1002)  [Next](co1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 3:1</span></span>

And (1) I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as
unto (a) carnal, \[even\] as unto babes in Christ.

\(1\) Having declared the worthiness of heavenly wisdom, and of the
Gospel, and having generally condemned the blindness of man's mind, now
at length he applies it particularly to the Corinthians, calling them
carnal, that is, those in whom the flesh still prevails against the
Spirit. And he brings a twofold testimony of it: first, because he had
proved them to be such, in so much that he dealt with them as he would
with ignorant men, and those who are almost babes in the doctrine of
godliness, and second, because they showed indeed by these dissensions,
which sprang up by reason of the ignorance of the power of the Spirit,
and heavenly wisdom, that they had profited very little or nothing.

\(a\) He calls them carnal, who are as yet ignorant, and therefore to
express it better, he calls them "babes".

[1 Corinthians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 3:2</span></span>

I have fed you with milk, and not with (b) meat: for hitherto ye were
not (c) able \[to bear it\], neither yet now are ye able.

\(b\) Substantial meat, or strong meat.

\(c\) To be fed by me with substantial meat: therefore as the
Corinthians grew up in age, so the apostle nourished them by teaching,
first with milk, then with strong meat. The difference was only in the
manner of teaching.

[1 Corinthians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 3:3</span></span>

For ye are yet carnal: for whereas \[there is\] among you envying, and
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as (d) men?

\(d\) Using the tools of man's intellect and judgment.

[1 Corinthians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 3:5</span></span>

\(2\) Who then is Paul, and who \[is\] Apollos, but ministers by whom ye
believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?

\(2\) After he has sufficiently reprehended ambitious teachers, and
those who foolishly esteemed them, now he shows how the true ministers
are to be esteemed, that we do not attribute to them more or less than
we ought to do. Therefore he teaches us that they are those by whom we
are brought to faith and salvation, but yet as the ministers of God, and
such as do nothing of themselves, but God so working by them as it
pleases him to furnish them with his gifts. Therefore we do not have to
regard or consider what minister it is that speaks, but what is spoken:
and we must depend only upon him who speaks by his servants.

[1 Corinthians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 3:6</span></span>

\(3\) I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.

\(3\) He beautifies the former sentence, with two similarities: first
comparing the company of the faithful to a field which God makes
fruitful, when it is sown and watered through the labour of his
servants. Second, be comparing it to a house, which indeed the Lord
builds, but by the hands of his workmen, some of whom he uses in laying
the foundation, others in building it up. Now, both these similarities
are for this purpose, to show that all things are wholly accomplished
only by God's authority and might, so that we must only have an eye to
him. Moreover, although God uses some in the better part of the work, we
must not therefore condemn others, in respect of them, and much less may
we divide or set them apart (as these factious men did) seeing that all
of them labour in God's business. They work in such a way, that they
serve to finish the very same work, although by a different manner of
working, in so much that they all need one another's help.

[1 Corinthians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 3:9</span></span>

For we are (e) labourers together with God: ye are God's husbandry, \[ye
are\] God's building.

\(e\) Serving under him: now they who serve under another do nothing by
their own strength, but as it is given them of grace, which grace makes
them fit for that service. See ([Co1
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010); [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)). All the increase that comes by
their labour proceeds from God in such a way that no part of the praise
of it may be given to the servant.

[1 Corinthians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 3:10</span></span>

According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon.
(4) But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.

\(4\) Now he speaks to the teachers themselves, who succeeded him in the
church of Corinth, and in this regard to all that were after or will be
pastors of congregations, seeing that they succeed into the labour of
the apostles, who were planters and chief builders. Therefore he warns
them first that they do not persuade themselves that they may build
after their own fantasy, that is, that they may propound and set forth
anything in the Church, either in matter, or in type of teaching,
different from the apostles who were the chief builders.

[1 Corinthians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 3:11</span></span>

\(5\) For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ.

\(5\) Moreover, he shows what this foundation is, that is, Christ Jesus,
from whom they may not turn away in the least amount in the building up
of this building.

[1 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 3:12</span></span>

\(6\) Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble;

\(6\) Thirdly he shows that they must take heed that the upper part of
the building is answerable to the foundation. That is that admonitions,
exhortations, and whatever pertains to the edifying of the flock, is
answerable to the doctrine of Christ, in the matter as well as in form.
This doctrine is compared to gold, silver, and precious stones: of which
material Isaiah also and John in the Revelation build the heavenly city.
And to these are the opposites, wood, hay, stubble, that is to say,
curious and vain questions or decrees: and to be short, all the type of
teaching which serves to vain show. For false doctrines, of which he
does not speak here, are not correctly said to be built upon this
foundation, unless perhaps in show only.

[1 Corinthians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 3:13</span></span>

\(7\) Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare
it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every
man's work of what sort it is.

\(7\) He testifies, as indeed it truly is, that all are not good
builders, not even all of those who stand upon this one and only
foundation. However, this work of evil builders, he says, stands for a
season, yet it will not always deceive, because the light of the truth
appearing at length, as day, will dissolve this darkness, and show what
it is. And as that stuff is tried by the fire, whether it is good or
not, so will God in his time, by the touch of his Spirit and word, try
all buildings, and so will it come to pass, that those which are found
pure and sound, will still continue so, to the praise of the workmen.
But they that are otherwise will be consumed and vanish away, and so
will the workman be frustrated of the hope of his labour, who pleased
himself in a thing of nothing.

[1 Corinthians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 3:15</span></span>

If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but (8) he
himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

\(8\) He does not take away the hope of salvation from the unskilful and
foolish builders, who hold fast the foundation, of which sort were those
rhetoricians, rather than the pastors of Corinth. However, he adds an
exception, that they must nonetheless suffer this trial of their work,
and also abide the loss of their vain labours.

[1 Corinthians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 3:16</span></span>

\(9\) Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and \[that\] the Spirit
of God dwelleth in you?

\(9\) Continuing still in the metaphor of building, he teaches us that
this ambition is not only vain, but also sacrilegious: for he says that
the Church is as it were the Temple of God, which God has as it were
consecrated to himself by his Spirit. Then turning himself to these
ambitious men, he shows that they profane the Temple of God, because
those vain arts in which they please themselves so much are, as he
teaches, many pollutions of the holy doctrine of God, and the purity of
the Church. This wickedness will not go unpunished.

[1 Corinthians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 3:17</span></span>

If any man (f) defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the
temple of God is holy, which \[temple\] ye are.

\(f\) Defiles it and makes it unclean, being holy: and surely they do
defile it, by Paul's judgment, who by fleshly eloquence defile the
purity of the Gospel.

[1 Corinthians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 3:18</span></span>

\(10\) Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be
wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

\(10\) He concludes by the opposite, that they profess pure wisdom in
the Church of God, who refuse and cast away all those vanities of men.
Further, if they are mocked by the world, it is sufficient for them that
they are wise according to the wisdom of God, and as he will have them
to be wise.

[1 Corinthians 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 3:19</span></span>

For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written,
He (g) taketh the wise in their own craftiness.

\(g\) Be they ever so crafty, yet the Lord will take them when he will
discover their treachery.

[1 Corinthians 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 3:21</span></span>

\(11\) Therefore let no man (h) glory in men. For all things are (i)
yours;

\(11\) He returns to the proposition of the second verse, first warning
the hearers, that from now on they do not esteem as lords those whom God
has appointed to be ministers and not lords of their salvation. This is
done by those that depend upon men, and not upon God that speaks by
them.

\(h\) Please himself.

\(i\) Helps, appointed for your benefit.

[1 Corinthians 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 3:22</span></span>

Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the (12) world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours;

\(12\) He passes from the persons to the things themselves, that his
argument may be more forcible. Indeed, he ascends from Christ to the
Father, to show that we rest ourselves not in Christ himself, in that he
is man, but because he carries us up even to the Father, as Christ
witnesses of himself everywhere that he was sent by his Father, that by
this band we may be all united with God himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 4](co1004)

</div>
