<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2011)  [Next](co2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 12:1</span></span>

It (1) is not expedient for me doubtless to glory. I will come to
visions and revelations of the Lord.

\(1\) He continues in his purpose, and because those braggarts boasted
of revelations, he reckons up those things which lift him up above the
common capacity of men. But he uses a preface, and prudently excuses
himself.

[2 Corinthians 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 12:2</span></span>

I knew a man (a) in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the
body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God
knoweth;) such an one caught up to the (b) third heaven.

\(a\) I speak this in Christ, that is, it is spoken without
boastfulness, for I seek nothing but Christ Jesus only.

\(b\) Into the highest heaven: for we do not need to dispute subtly upon
the word "third". But yet this passage is to be marked against those who
would make heaven to be everywhere.

[2 Corinthians 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 12:4</span></span>

How that he was caught up into (c) paradise, and heard (d) unspeakable
words, which it is not (e) lawful for a man to utter.

\(c\) So the Greeks name that which we call a park, that is to say, a
place where trees are planted, and wild beasts kept. And those that
translated the Old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek, called the garden
of Eden by this name, into which Adam was put immediately after his
creation, as a most delicate and pleasant place. And from this it
occurred that the blessed seat of the glory of God is called by that
name.

\(d\) Which no man is able to utter.

\(e\) Which the saints themselves are not by any means able to express,
because it is God himself. This is the way that Clement of Alexandria
explains this passage, Strom. 5.

[2 Corinthians 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 12:5</span></span>

\(2\) Of such an one will I glory: yet of myself I will not glory, but
in mine infirmities.

\(2\) To remove all suspicion of seeking glory, he witnesses that he
brags not of those things as though they were of himself, but as outside
of himself. And yet nonetheless he pretends nothing, lest by this
occasion other men should attribute to him more than he indeed is: and
therefore he would rather glory in his miseries.

[2 Corinthians 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 12:7</span></span>

\(3\) And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance
of the revelations, there was given to me (f) a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of (g) Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above
measure.

\(3\) An excellent doctrine: why God will have even his best servants to
be vexed by Satan, and by every type of temptations: that is, lest they
should be too much puffed up, and also that they may be made perfect by
being continually exercised in them.

\(f\) He means sinful lust, that sticks fast in us as it were a thorn,
to such a degree that it forced Paul himself who was regenerated to cry
out, "I do not that good that I would", etc. And he calls it a thorn by
a metaphor taken from thorns, or stumps, which are very dangerous and
harmful for the feet, if a man walks through woods that are cut down.

\(g\) Which sets those lusts on fire.

[2 Corinthians 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 12:8</span></span>

For this thing I besought the Lord (h) thrice, that it might depart from
me.

\(h\) Often.

[2 Corinthians 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 12:9</span></span>

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is
made perfect in weakness. (4) Most gladly therefore will I rather glory
in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may (i) rest upon me.

\(4\) He concludes that he will only set his miseries against the vain
braggings of the false apostles, and with this also excuses himself,
because by their troublesome braggings he was forced to speak as much of
those things as he did. That is, because if his apostleship were
subverted, his doctrine would necessarily fall.

\(i\) That I might feel the power of Christ more and more: for the
weaker that our tabernacles are, the more does Christ's power appear in
them.

[2 Corinthians 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 12:10</span></span>

Therefore I take (k) pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for when
I am weak, then am I strong.

\(k\) I do not only take them patiently and with a good heart, but I
also take great pleasure in them.

[2 Corinthians 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 12:11</span></span>

I am become a fool in glorying; ye have compelled me: (5) for I ought to
have been commended of you: for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest
apostles, though I be nothing.

\(5\) Again he makes the Corinthians witnesses of those things by which
God had sealed his apostleship among them, and again he declares by
certain arguments how far he is from all covetousness, and also how he
is affectionate towards them.

[2 Corinthians 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 12:12</span></span>

Truly the (l) signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all
patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds.

\(l\) The arguments by which it may well appear that I am indeed an
apostle of Jesus Christ.

[2 Corinthians 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 12:13</span></span>

For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches, except \[it
be\] that I myself was not (m) burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong.

\(m\) I was not slothful with my own hands, so that I might not be
burdensome to you.

[2 Corinthians 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 12:16</span></span>

\(6\) But be it so, I did not burden you: nevertheless, being crafty, I
caught you with guile.

\(6\) He sets aside another most grievous slander, that is, that he did
subtly and by others make his gain and profit of them.

[2 Corinthians 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 12:19</span></span>

\(7\) Again, think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you? we speak before
God in (n) Christ: but \[we do\] all things, dearly beloved, for your
edifying.

\(7\) He concludes that he does not write these things to them as though
he needed to defend himself, for he is guilty of nothing: but because it
is appropriate for them to doubt nothing of his fidelity, who instructed
them.

\(n\) As it becomes him to speak truly and sincerely, that professes
himself to be in Christ, that is to say, to be a Christian.

[2 Corinthians 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 12:20</span></span>

\(8\) For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I
would, and \[that\] I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest
\[there be\] debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings,
whisperings, swellings, tumults:

\(8\) Having confirmed his authority to them, he rebukes them sharply,
and threatens them also like an apostle, showing that he will not spare
them from now on, unless they repent, seeing that this is the third time
that he has warned them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 13](co2013)

</div>
