<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](col001)  [Next](col003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)

[Colossians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 2:1</span></span>

For I (1) would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and
\[for\] them at Laodicea, and \[for\] as many as have not seen my (a)
face in the flesh;

\(1\) The taking away of an objection: in that he did not visit the
Colossians or the Laodiceans, he was not being negligent; rather, he is
so much the more careful for them.

\(a\) Me, present in body.

[Colossians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">col 2:2</span></span>

\(2\) That (b) their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in
love, and unto all riches of the (c) full assurance of understanding, to
the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of
Christ;

\(2\) He concludes shortly the sum of the former doctrine, that is, that
the whole sum of true wisdom, and most secret knowledge of God, consists
in Christ alone, and that this is the use of it with regard to men, that
they are knit together in love, and rest themselves happily in the
knowledge of so great a goodness, until they come to fully enjoy it.

\(b\) Whom, he never says.

\(c\) Of that understanding, which brings forth a certain and undoubted
persuasion in our minds.

[Colossians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">col 2:3</span></span>

In whom are hid all the treasures of (d) wisdom and knowledge.

\(d\) There is no true wisdom outside of Christ.

[Colossians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">col 2:4</span></span>

\(3\) And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with (e) enticing
words.

\(3\) A passing over to the treatise following, against the corruptions
of Christianity.

\(e\) With a planned type of talk made to persuade.

[Colossians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">col 2:5</span></span>

For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
joying and beholding your (f) order, and the stedfastness of your (g)
faith in Christ.

\(f\) The manner of your ecclesiastical discipline.

\(g\) Doctrine.

[Colossians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">col 2:6</span></span>

As ye have therefore (h) received Christ Jesus the Lord, \[so\] walk ye
in him:

\(h\) So then Christ does not depend upon men's traditions.

[Colossians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">col 2:8</span></span>

\(4\) Beware lest any man (i) spoil you through philosophy and vain
deceit, (5) after the tradition of men, (6) after the (k) rudiments of
the world, (7) and not after Christ.

\(4\) He brings all corruptions under three types. The first is that
which rests on vain and curious speculations, and yet bears a show of
certain subtle wisdom.

\(i\) This is a word of war, and it is as much as to drive or carry away
a spoil or booty. (5) The second, which is manifestly superstitious and
vain, and stands only upon custom and pretended inspirations. (6) The
third type was of those who joined the rudiments of the world (that is
to say, the ceremonies of the Law) with the Gospel.

\(k\) Principles and rules, with which God ruled his Church, as it were
under a schoolmaster. (7) A general confutation of all corruptions is
this, that if it adds anything to Christ, it must necessarily be a false
religion.

[Colossians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">col 2:9</span></span>

\(8\) For in (l) him (m) dwelleth (n) all the fulness of the Godhead (o)
bodily.

\(8\) A reason: because only Christ, being God and man, is most perfect,
and passes far above all things, so that whoever has him, requires
nothing more.

\(l\) By these words is shown a distinction of the natures.

\(m\) This word "dwelleth" notes out to us the joining together of those
natures, so that God and man, is one Christ.

\(n\) These words declare that the perfect Godhead is in Christ.

\(o\) The union of God and man, is substantial and essential.

[Colossians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">col 2:11</span></span>

\(9\) In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the (p) body of the sins of the flesh by the
circumcision of Christ:

\(9\) Now he deals precisely against the third type, that is to say,
against those who urged the Jewish religion: and first of all, he denies
that we have need of the circumcision of the flesh, seeing that without
it we are circumcised within, by the power of Christ.

\(p\) These many words are used to show what the old man is, whom Paul
in other places calls the body of sin.

[Colossians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">col 2:12</span></span>

\(10\) (q) Buried with (r) him in baptism, (11) wherein also ye are
risen with \[him\] through the faith of the operation of (s) God, who
hath raised him from the dead.

\(10\) The taking away of an objection: we do not need an external sign
to the extent which our fathers had, seeing that our baptism is a most
effectual pledge and witness, of that inward restoring and renewing.

\(q\) See ([Rom 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)).

\(r\) So then all the force of the matter comes not from the very deed
done, that is to say, it is not the dipping of us into the water by a
minister that makes us to be buried with Christ, as the papists say,
that even by the very act's sake we become very Christians, but it comes
from the power of Christ, for the apostle adds the resurrection of
Christ, and faith.

\(11\) One purpose of baptism is to symbolise the death and burial of
the old man, and that by the mighty power of God alone, whose power we
lay hold on by faith, in the death and resurrection of Christ.

\(s\) Through faith which comes from God.

[Colossians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">col 2:13</span></span>

\(12\) And you, being dead in your sins (13) and the uncircumcision of
your flesh, hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses;

\(12\) Another thing baptism symbolises is, that we who were dead in
sin, might obtain free remission of sins and eternal life, through faith
in Christ who died for us.

\(13\) A new argument which lies in these few words, and it is this:
uncircumcision was no hindrance to you in obtaining life, because you
were justified in Christ; therefore you do not need circumcision for the
attainment of salvation.

[Colossians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">col 2:14</span></span>

\(14\) Blotting out the (t) handwriting of ordinances that was against
us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to
his cross;

\(14\) He speaks now more generally against the whole service of the
Law, and shows by two reasons, that it is abolished. First, to what
purpose would he that has obtained remission of all his sins in Christ,
require those helps of the Law? Secondly, because if a man rightly
considers those rites, he will find that they were so many testimonies
of our guiltiness, by which we manifestly witnessed as it were by our
own handwritings, that we deserved damnation. Therefore Christ put out
that handwriting by his coming, and fastening it to the cross, triumphed
over all our enemies, were they ever so mighty. Therefore to what end
and purpose should we now use those ceremonies, as though we were still
guilty of sin, and subject to the tyranny of our enemies?

\(t\) Abolishing the rites and ceremonies.

[Colossians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">col 2:15</span></span>

\[And\] having spoiled (u) principalities and powers, he (x) made a shew
of them openly, triumphing over them in (y) it.

\(u\) Satan and his angels.

\(x\) As a conqueror he made show of those captives, and put them to
shame.

\(y\) That is, the cross. The cross was a chariot of triumph. No
conqueror could have triumphed so gloriously in his chariot, as Christ
did upon the cross.

[Colossians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">col 2:16</span></span>

\(15\) Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in
respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath \[days\]:

\(15\) The conclusion: in which also he means certain types, as the
difference of days, and meats, and proves by a new argument, that we are
not bound to them: that is, because those things were shadows of Christ
to come, but now we possess him who was exhibited to us.

[Colossians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">col 2:17</span></span>

Which are a shadow of things to come; but the (z) body \[is\] of Christ.

\(z\) The body as a thing of substance and physical strength, he sets
against shadows.

[Colossians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">col 2:18</span></span>

\(16\) Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary (a) humility
and worshipping of angels, (17) intruding into those things which he
hath not seen, (18) (b) vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,

\(16\) He disputes against the first type of corruptions, and sets down
the worshipping of angels as an example: which type of false religion he
refutes, first, this way: because those who bring in such a worship,
attribute that to themselves which is proper only to God, that is,
authority to bind men's consciences with religion, even though they seem
to bring in these things by humility of mind.

\(a\) By foolish humility of mind: for otherwise humility is a virtue.
For these angel worshippers blamed those of pride who would go straight
to God, and use no other means besides Christ.

\(17\) Secondly, because they rashly thrust upon them as oracles those
things which they neither saw nor heard, but devised by themselves.

\(18\) Thirdly, because these things have no other ground upon which
they are built, but only the opinion of men, who please themselves
immensely in their own devices.

\(b\) Without reason.

[Colossians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">col 2:19</span></span>

\(19\) And not holding the (c) Head, from which all the body by joints
and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth
with the increase of (d) God.

\(19\) The fourth argument, which is of great weight: because they rob
Christ of his dignity, who alone is sufficient both to nourish and also
to increase his whole body.

\(c\) Christ.

\(d\) With the increasing which comes from God.

[Colossians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">col 2:20</span></span>

\(20\) Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world, why, (e) as though living in the world, are ye subject to
ordinances,

\(20\) Now last of all he fights against the second type of corruptions,
that is to say, against mere superstitions, invented by men, which
partly deceive the simplicity of some with their craftiness, and partly
with their foolish superstitions and to be laughed at: as when
godliness, remission of sins, or any such like virtue, is put in some
certain type of meat, and such like things, which the inventors of such
rites themselves do not understand, because indeed it is not there. And
he uses an argument taken of comparison. If by the death of Christ who
established a new covenant with his blood, you are delivered from those
external rites with which it pleased the Lord to prepare the world, as
it were by certain rudiments, to that full knowledge of true religion,
why would you be burdened with traditions, I know not what, as though
you were citizens of this world, that is to say, as though you depended
upon this life, and earthly things? Now this is the reason why before
verse eight he followed another order than he does in the refutation:
because he shows by this what degrees false religions came into the
world, that is, beginning first by curious speculations of the wise,
after which in process of time succeeded gross superstition, against
which mischiefs the Lord set at length that service of the Law, which
some abused in like sort. But in the refutation he began with the
abolishing of the Law service, that he might show by comparison, that
those false services ought much more to be taken away.

\(e\) As though your felicity stood in these earthly things, and the
kingdom of God was not rather spiritual.

[Colossians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">col 2:21</span></span>

\(21\) (Touch not; taste not; handle not;

\(21\) An imitation of these superstitious men, rightly expressing their
nature and use of speech.

[Colossians 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">col 2:22</span></span>

\(22\) Which all are to perish with the using;) (23) after the
commandments and doctrines of men?

\(22\) Another argument: the spiritual and inward kingdom of God cannot
consist in these outward things, which perish with the using.

\(23\) The third argument: because God is not the author of these
traditions, therefore they are not that which we are obligated to do.

[Colossians 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">col 2:23</span></span>

\(24\) Which things have indeed a shew of (f) wisdom in (g) will
worship, and humility, and (h) neglecting of the body; not in any honour
to the (i) satisfying of the flesh.

\(24\) The taking away of an objection. These things have a good
appearance, because men by this means seem to worship God with a good
mind, and humble themselves, and neglect the body, which the most part
of men curiously pamper and cherish. But yet nonetheless the things
themselves are of no value, for they do not pertain to the things that
are spiritual and everlasting, but to the nourishment of the flesh.

\(f\) Which seem indeed to be some exquisite thing, and such wise
devices as though they came from heaven.

\(g\) From here sprang the works of supererogation, as the papists call
them, that is to say, works that form a reserve fund of merit that can
be drawn on in favour of sinners, as though men performed more than is
commanded them: which was the beginning and the very ground upon which
monk's merits were brought in.

\(h\) A graphic description of monasticism.

\(i\) Seeing they stand in meat and drink, in which the kingdom of God
does not stand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 3](col003)

</div>
