<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan011)  [Next](hos001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)

[Daniel 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 12:1</span></span>

And at that (a) time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which
standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of
trouble, such as never was since there was a nation \[even\] to that
same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one
that shall be found written in the book.

\(a\) The angel here notes two things: first that the Church will be in
great affliction and trouble at Christ's coming, and next that God will
send his angel to deliver it, whom he here calls Michael, meaning
Christ, who is proclaimed by the preaching of the Gospel.

[Daniel 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 12:2</span></span>

And many (b) of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
some to everlasting life, and some to shame \[and\] everlasting
contempt.

\(b\) Meaning all will rise at the general resurrection, which thing he
here names because the faithful should always consider that: for in the
earth there will be no sure comfort.

[Daniel 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 12:3</span></span>

And they that be (c) wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament; and they that (d) turn many to righteousness as the stars for
ever and ever.

\(c\) Who have kept the true fear of God and his religion.

\(d\) He chiefly means the ministers of God's word, and next all the
faithful who instruct the ignorant, and bring them to the true knowledge
of God.

[Daniel 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 12:4</span></span>

But thou, O Daniel, (e) shut up the words, and seal the book, (f)
\[even\] to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased.

\(e\) Even though the most part despise this prophecy, yet make sure you
keep it and esteem it as a treasure.

\(f\) Until the time that God has appointed for the full revelation of
these things: and then many will run to and fro to search for the
knowledge of these mysteries, which things they obtain now by the light
of the Gospel.

[Daniel 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 12:5</span></span>

Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two, the one on
this side of the bank of the (g) river, and the other on that side of
the bank of the river.

\(g\) Which was the Tigris.

[Daniel 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 12:7</span></span>

And I heard the man clothed in linen, which \[was\] upon the waters of
the river, when he held up his (h) right hand and his left hand unto
heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that \[it shall be\] for a
(i) time, times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplished (k) to
scatter the power of the holy people, all these \[things\] shall be
finished.

\(h\) Which was as it were a double oath, and did the more confirm the
thing.

\(i\) Meaning, a long time, a longer time, and at length a short time:
signifying that their troubles would have an end.

\(k\) When the Church will be scattered and diminished in such a way as
it will seem to have no power.

[Daniel 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 12:11</span></span>

And from the time \[that\] the (l) daily \[sacrifice\] shall be taken
away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, \[there (m) shall
be\] a thousand two hundred and ninety days.

\(l\) From the time that Christ by his sacrifice will take away the
sacrifices and ceremonies of the Law.

\(m\) Signifying that the time will be long until Christ's second
coming, and yet the children of God ought not to be discouraged, even
though it is deferred.

[Daniel 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 12:12</span></span>

Blessed \[is\] he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred
and (n) five and thirty days.

\(n\) In this number he adds a month and a half to the former number,
signifying that it is not in man to appoint the time of Christ's coming,
but that they are blessed that patiently wait for his appearing.

[Daniel 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 12:13</span></span>

But go (o) thou thy way till the end \[be\]: for thou shalt rest, and
stand in thy lot at the end of the days.

\(o\) The angel warns the Prophet patiently to wait, until the time
appointed comes, signifying that he should depart this life, and rise
again with the elect, when God had sufficiently humbled and purged his
Church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 1](hos001)

</div>
