<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan007)  [Next](dan009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)

[Daniel 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 8:1</span></span>

In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision appeared unto
me, \[even unto\] me Daniel, (a) after that which appeared unto me at
the first.

\(a\) After the general vision, he comes to certain particular visions
with regard to the destruction of the monarchy of the Persians, and
Macedonians: for the ruin of the Babylonians was at hand, and also he
had sufficiently spoken of it.

[Daniel 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 8:2</span></span>

And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when I saw, that I \[was\]
at Shushan \[in\] the palace, which \[is\] in the province (b) of Elam;
and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river of Ulai.

\(b\) That is, of Persia.

[Daniel 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 8:3</span></span>

Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood before the
river a (c) ram which had \[two\] horns: and the \[two\] horns \[were\]
high; but one \[was\] (d) higher than the other, and the higher came up
last.

\(c\) Which represented the kingdom of the Persians and Medes, which
were united together.

\(d\) Meaning Cyrus, who after grew greater in power than Darius his
uncle and father-in-law.

[Daniel 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 8:4</span></span>

I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward; so that no
(e) beasts might stand before him, neither \[was there any\] that could
deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his will, and became
great.

\(e\) That is, no kings or nations.

[Daniel 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 8:5</span></span>

And as I was considering, behold, (f) an he goat came from the west on
the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground: and the goat
\[had\] a notable (g) horn between his eyes.

\(f\) Meaning Alexander that came from Greece with great speed and
warlike undertaking.

\(g\) Even though he came in the name of all Greece, yet he bore the
title and dignity of the general captain, so that the strength was
attributed to him, which is meant by this horn.

[Daniel 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 8:7</span></span>

And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler
against him, and (h) smote the ram, and brake his two horns: and there
was no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the
ground, and stamped upon him: and there was none that could deliver the
ram out of his hand.

\(h\) Alexander overcame Darius in two different battles, and so had the
two kingdoms of the Medes and Persians.

[Daniel 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 8:8</span></span>

Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he was strong, the
great (i) horn was broken; and for it came up four (k) notable ones
toward the four winds of heaven.

\(i\) Alexander's great power was broken: for when he had overcome all
the East, he thought to return towards Greece to subdue those that had
rebelled, and so died along the way.

\(k\) That is, who were famous: for almost in the space of fifteen years
there were fifteen different successors before this monarchy was divided
to these four, of which Cassander had Macedonia, Seleucus had Syria,
Antigonus had Asia the less, and Ptolemeus had Egypt.

[Daniel 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 8:9</span></span>

And out of one of them came forth a (l) little horn, which waxed
exceeding great, toward the (m) south, and toward the (n) east, and
toward the (o) pleasant \[land\].

\(l\) Which was Antiochus Epiphanes, who was of a servile and flattering
nature, and also there were others between him and the kingdom: and
therefore he is here called the little horn, because neither princely
conditions, nor any other thing was in him, why he should obtain this
kingdom.

\(m\) That is, towards Egypt.

\(n\) By which he means Ptolemais.

\(o\) That is, Judea.

[Daniel 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 8:10</span></span>

And it waxed great, \[even\] to the (p) host of heaven; and it cast down
\[some\] of the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon
them.

\(p\) Antiochus raged against the elect of God, and tread his precious
stars underfoot, who are so called because they are separated from the
world.

[Daniel 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 8:11</span></span>

Yea, he magnified \[himself\] even to the (q) prince of the host, and by
him the (r) daily \[sacrifice\] was taken away, and the place of his
sanctuary was cast down.

\(q\) That is, God, who governs and maintains his Church.

\(r\) He laboured to abolish all religion, and therefore cast God's
service out of his temple, which God had chosen as a little corner from
all the rest of the world to have his name there truly called upon.

[Daniel 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 8:12</span></span>

And (s) an host was given \[him\] against the daily \[sacrifice\] by
reason of transgression, and it (t) cast down the truth to the ground;
and it practised, and prospered.

\(s\) He shows that their sins are the cause of these horrible
afflictions: and yet comforts them, in that he appoints this tyrant for
a time, whom he would not allow to utterly abolish his religion.

\(t\) This horn will abolish for a time the true doctrine, and so
corrupt God's service.

[Daniel 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 8:13</span></span>

Then I heard one (u) saint speaking, and another saint said unto that
certain \[saint\] which spake, How long \[shall be\] the vision
\[concerning\] the daily \[sacrifice\], and the transgression of (x)
desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the (y) host to be trodden
under foot?

\(u\) Meaning that he heard one of the angels asking this question of
Christ, whom he called a certain one, or a secret one, or a marvellous
one.

\(x\) That is, the Jews' sins, which were the cause of its destruction.

\(y\) That is, which suppresses God's religion and his people.

[Daniel 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 8:14</span></span>

And (z) he said unto me, Unto (a) two thousand and three hundred days;
then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.

\(z\) Christ answered me for the comfort of the Church.

\(a\) That is, until so many natural days have passed, which make six
years, and three and a half months: for the temple was profaned this
long under Antiochus.

[Daniel 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 8:15</span></span>

And it came to pass, when I, \[even\] I Daniel, had seen the vision, and
sought for the meaning, then, behold, there stood before me (b) as the
appearance of a man.

\(b\) Who was Christ who in this manner declared himself to the old
fathers, how he would be God manifest in flesh.

[Daniel 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 8:16</span></span>

And I heard a man's voice between \[the banks of\] Ulai, which called,
and said, Gabriel, (c) make this \[man\] to understand the vision.

\(c\) This power to command the angel, declared that he was God.

[Daniel 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 8:17</span></span>

So he came near where I stood: and when he came, I was afraid, and fell
upon my face: but he said unto me, Understand, O son of man: for (d) at
the time of the end \[shall be\] the vision.

\(d\) The effect of this vision will not yet appear, until a long time
after.

[Daniel 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 8:19</span></span>

And he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the last (e)
end of the indignation: for at the time appointed the end \[shall be\].

\(e\) Meaning that great rage which Antiochus would show against the
Church.

[Daniel 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 8:22</span></span>

Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall
stand up (f) out of the nation, but not (g) in his power.

\(f\) That is, out of Greece.

\(g\) They will not have similar power as Alexander had.

[Daniel 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 8:23</span></span>

And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are come
to the full, a king of (h) fierce countenance, and understanding dark
sentences, shall stand up.

\(h\) Noting that this Antiochus was impudent and cruel, and also crafty
so that he could not be deceived.

[Daniel 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 8:24</span></span>

And his power shall be mighty, but not (i) by his own power: and he
shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall
destroy the (k) mighty and the holy people.

\(i\) That is, not like Alexander's strength.

\(k\) Both the Gentiles that dwelt around him, and also the Jews.

[Daniel 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 8:25</span></span>

And through his (l) policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his
hand; and he shall magnify \[himself\] in his heart, and by (m) peace
shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the (n) Prince of
princes; but he shall be broken (o) without hand.

\(l\) Whatever he goes about by his craft, he will bring it to pass.

\(m\) That is, under pretence of peace, or as it were in sport.

\(n\) Meaning, against God.

\(o\) For God would destroy him with a notable plague, and so comfort
his Church.

[Daniel 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 8:26</span></span>

And the vision of the (p) evening and the morning which was told \[is\]
true: wherefore shut thou up the vision; for it \[shall be\] for many
days.

\(p\) Read ([Dan 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014)).

[Daniel 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 8:27</span></span>

And I Daniel fainted, and was sick (q) \[certain\] days; afterward I
rose up, and did the king's business; and I was astonished at the
vision, but none understood \[it\].

\(q\) Because of fear and astonishment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 9](dan009)

</div>
