<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](pro031)  [Next](ecc002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 1:1</span></span>

The words of the (a) Preacher, the son of David, king of Jerusalem.

The Argument - Solomon as a preacher and one that desired to instruct
all in the way of salvation, describes the deceivable vanities of this
world: that man should not be addicted to anything under the sun, but
rather inflamed with the desire of the heavenly life: therefore he
confutes their opinions, which set their happiness either in knowledge
or in pleasures, or in dignity and riches, wishing that man's true
happiness consists in that he is united with God and will enjoy his
presence: so that all other things must be rejected, save in as much as
they further us to attain to this heavenly treasure, which is sure and
permanent, and cannot be found in any other save in God alone.

\(a\) Solomon is here called a preacher, or one who assembles the
people, because he teaches the true knowledge of God, and how men ought
to pass their life in this transitory world.

[Ecclesiastes 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 1:2</span></span>

\(b\) Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all
\[is\] vanity.

\(b\) He condemns the opinions of all men who set happiness in anything
but in God alone, seeing that in this world all things are as vanity and
nothing.

[Ecclesiastes 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 1:3</span></span>

What profit hath a man of all his (c) labour which he taketh under the
sun?

\(c\) Solomon does not condemn man's labour or diligence, but shows that
there is no full contentment in anything under the heavens, nor in any
creature, as all things are transitory.

[Ecclesiastes 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 1:4</span></span>

\[One\] generation passeth away, and \[another\] generation cometh: but
the earth abideth for (d) ever.

\(d\) One man dies after another, and the earth remains longest, even to
the last day, which yet is subject to corruption.

[Ecclesiastes 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 1:6</span></span>

The (e) wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about to the north; it
whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according to
its circuits.

\(e\) By the sun, wind and rivers, he shows that the greatest labour and
longest has an end, and therefore there can be no happiness in this
world.

[Ecclesiastes 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 1:7</span></span>

All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea \[is\] not full; to the
place from (f) which the rivers come, there they return again.

\(f\) The sea which compasses all the earth, fills the veins of it which
pour out springs and rivers into the sea again.

[Ecclesiastes 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 1:9</span></span>

\(g\) The thing that hath been, it \[is that\] which shall be; and that
which is done \[is\] that which shall be done: and \[there is\] no new
\[thing\] under the sun.

\(g\) He speaks of times and seasons, and things done in them, which as
they have been in times past, so come they to pass again.

[Ecclesiastes 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 1:12</span></span>

\(h\) I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.

\(h\) He proves that if any could have attained happiness in this world
by labour and study, he should have obtained it, because he had gifts
and aids from God to it above all others.

[Ecclesiastes 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 1:13</span></span>

And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all
\[things\] that are done under heaven: this grievous labour hath God
given to the sons of man (i) to be exercised with it.

\(i\) Man by nature has a desire to know, and yet is not able to come to
the perfection of knowledge, which is the punishment of sin, to humble
man, and to teach him to depend only on God.

[Ecclesiastes 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 1:15</span></span>

\[That which is\] (k) crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is
lacking cannot be numbered.

\(k\) Man is not able by all his diligence to cause things to go other
than they do: neither can he number the faults that are committed, much
less remedy them.

[Ecclesiastes 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 1:17</span></span>

And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know (l) madness and folly: I
perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.

\(l\) That is, vain things, which served to pleasure, in which was no
convenience, but grief and trouble of conscience.

[Ecclesiastes 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 1:18</span></span>

For in much wisdom \[is\] much (m) grief: and he that increaseth
knowledge increaseth sorrow.

\(m\) Wisdom and knowledge cannot be come by without great pain of body
and mind: for when a man has attained the highest, yet is his mind never
fully content: therefore in this world is no true happiness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 2](ecc002)

</div>
