<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb008)  [Next](heb010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)

[Hebrews 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 9:1</span></span>

Then verily (1) the first \[covenant\] had also ordinances of divine
service, and a (a) worldly sanctuary.

\(1\) A division of the first tabernacle which he calls worldly, that is
to say, transitory, and earthly, into two parts, that is, into the holy
places, and the Holiest of all.

\(a\) An earthy and a fleeting.

[Hebrews 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 9:3</span></span>

And after (b) the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the (c)
Holiest of all;

\(b\) He calls it the second veil, not because there were two veils, but
because it was behind the sanctuary or the first tabernacle.

\(c\) The holiest sanctuary.

[Hebrews 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 9:5</span></span>

And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the (d) mercyseat; of which
we cannot now speak particularly.

\(d\) The Hebrews call the cover of the ark of the covenant the mercy
seat, which both the Greeks and we do also.

[Hebrews 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 9:6</span></span>

\(2\) Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always
into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service \[of God\].

\(2\) Now he comes to the sacrifices which he divides into those daily
sacrifices and that yearly and solemn sacrifice with which the high
priest only but once every year entering into the Holiest of all with
blood, offered for himself and the people.

[Hebrews 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 9:7</span></span>

But into the second \[went\] the high priest alone once every year, not
without blood, which he offered for himself, and \[for\] the (e) errors
of the people:

\(e\) For the sins, see ([Heb 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#002)).

[Hebrews 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 9:8</span></span>

\(3\) The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of
all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet
standing:

\(3\) Of that yearly rite and the ceremony, he gathers that the way into
heaven was not opened by such sacrifices, which was shadowed by the
Holiest of all. For why did only the high priest enter in, excluding all
others, to offer sacrifices there both for himself and for others, and
after, shut the Holiest of all again?

[Hebrews 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 9:9</span></span>

\(4\) Which \[was\] a figure (f) for the time then present, in which
were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did
the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience;

\(4\) An objection: If the way to heaven was not opened by those
sacrifices (that is to say, if the worshippers were not purged by them)
why then were those ceremonies used? That is, that men might be called
back to that spiritual example, that is to say, to Christ who would
correct all those things at his coming.

\(f\) For that time that that figure had to last.

[Hebrews 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 9:10</span></span>

\(5\) \[Which stood\] only in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and
carnal ordinances, (g) imposed \[on them\] until the time of
reformation.

\(5\) Another reason why they could not clear the conscience of the
worshipper is because they were outward and carnal or material things.

\(g\) For they were as you would say, a burden, from which Christ
delivered us.

[Hebrews 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 9:11</span></span>

\(6\) But Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, (7)
by a (h) greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that
is to say, not of this building;

\(6\) Now he enters into the declaration of the types, and first of all
comparing the Levitical high priest with Christ, (that is to say, the
figure with the thing itself) he attributes to Christ the administration
of good things to come, that is, everlasting, which those carnal things
had respect to. (7) Another comparison of the first corrupt tabernacle
with the latter, (that is to say, with the human nature of Christ) which
is the true incorruptible temple of God, into which the Son of God
entered, as the Levitical high priests into the other which was frail
and transitory.

\(h\) By a more excellent and better.

[Hebrews 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 9:12</span></span>

\(8\) Neither by the blood of (i) goats and calves, but by his own blood
he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption \[for us\].

\(8\) Another comparison of the blood of the sacrifices with Christ, the
Levitical high priests entering by their holy places into the sanctuary,
offered corruptible blood for one year only: but Christ entering into
that holy body of his, entered by it into heaven itself, offering his
own most pure blood for an everlasting redemption: for Christ is both
the High Priest, Tabernacle, Sacrifices and Offerings themselves, indeed
all those both truly and for ever.

\(i\) For in this yearly sacrifice of reconciliation, there were two
kinds of sacrifices, the one a goat, the other a heifer, or calf.

[Hebrews 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 9:13</span></span>

\(9\) For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the (k) purifying of the flesh:

\(9\) If the outward sprinkling of blood and ashes of beasts was a true
and effectual sign of purifying and cleansing, how much more shall the
thing itself and the truth being present which in times past was
shadowed by those external sacraments do it? That is to say, his blood,
which is man's blood and also the blood of the Son of God, and therefore
has an everlasting power of purifying and cleansing.

\(k\) He considers the signs separately, being separate from the thing
itself.

[Hebrews 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 9:14</span></span>

How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from (l) dead
works to serve the living God?

\(l\) From sins which proceed from death, and bring forth nothing but
death.

[Hebrews 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 9:15</span></span>

\(10\) And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that
by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions \[that
were\] under the first testament, they which are called might receive
the promise of eternal inheritance.

\(10\) The conclusion of the former argument: therefore seeing the blood
of beasts did not purge sins, the new Testament which was promised
before, to which those outward things had respect, is now indeed
established by the power by which all transgressions might be taken
away, and heaven indeed opened to us. It follows that Christ shed his
blood also for the fathers, for he was foreshadowed by these old
ceremonies, otherwise, unless they served to represent him, they were
not at all profitable. Therefore this Testament is called the latter,
not concerning the power of it, (that is to say, remission of sins) but
in respect of that time in which the thing itself was finished, that is
to say, in which Christ was exhibited to the world, and fulfilled all
things necessary for our salvation.

[Hebrews 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 9:16</span></span>

\(11\) For where a testament \[is\], there must also of necessity be the
death of the testator.

\(11\) A reason why the testament must be established by the death of
the Mediator, because this testament has the condition of a testament or
gift, which is made effective by death, and therefore that it might be
effective, it must be that he that made the Testament, should die.

[Hebrews 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 9:18</span></span>

\(12\) Whereupon neither the first \[testament\] was dedicated without
blood.

\(12\) There must be a proportion between those things which purify and
those which are purified: Under the law all those figures were earthly,
the tabernacle, the book, the vessels, the sacrifices, although they
were the signs of heavenly things. Therefore it was required that all
those should be purified with some matter and ceremony of the same
nature, that is, with the blood of beasts, with water, wool, hyssop. But
under Christ all things are heavenly, a heavenly tabernacle, heavenly
sacrifice, heavenly people, heavenly doctrine, and heaven itself is set
open before us for an eternal home. Therefore all these things are
sanctified in a similar way, that is, with the everlasting offering of
the quickening blood of Christ.

[Hebrews 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 9:19</span></span>

For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people (m) according
to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and
scarlet wool, and hyssop, and (n) sprinkled both the book, and all the
people,

\(m\) As the Lord had commanded.

\(n\) He used to sprinkle.

[Hebrews 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 9:23</span></span>

\[It was\] therefore necessary that the (o) patterns of things in the
heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things
themselves with better sacrifices than these.

\(o\) The counterparts of heavenly things were earthly, and therefore
they were to be set forth with earthly things, as with the blood of
beasts, wool and hyssop. But under Christ all things are heavenly, and
therefore they could not be sanctified with the offering of his living
blood.

[Hebrews 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">heb 9:24</span></span>

\(13\) For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands,
\[which are\] the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to
appear in the presence of God for us:

\(13\) Another twofold comparison: the Levitical high priest entered
into the sanctuary, which was made indeed by the commandment of God, but
yet with men's hands, that it might be a pattern of another more
excellent, that is, of the heavenly place, but Christ entered into
heaven itself. Again he appeared before the ark, but Christ before God
the Father himself.

[Hebrews 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 9:25</span></span>

\(14\) Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest
entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others;

\(14\) Another double comparison: the Levitical high priest offered
other blood, but Christ offered his own: he every year once repeated his
offering: Christ offering himself but once, abolished sin altogether,
both of the former ages and of the ages to come.

[Hebrews 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 9:26</span></span>

\(15\) For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the
world: but now once in the (p) end of the world hath he appeared to put
away (q) sin by the sacrifice of himself.

\(15\) An argument to prove that Christ's offering should not be
repeated: seeing that sins were to be purged from the beginning of the
world, and it is proved that sins cannot be purged, but by the blood of
Christ: he would have needed to have died repeatedly, since the
beginning of the world. But a man can die only once: therefore Christ's
sacrifice which was once done in the later days, neither could nor can
be repeated. Seeing that it is so, surely the power of it extends both
to sins that were before, and to sins that are after his coming.

\(p\) In the later days.

\(q\) That whole root of sin.

[Hebrews 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">heb 9:27</span></span>

And as it is appointed unto men (r) once to die, but after this the
judgment:

\(r\) He speaks of the natural state and condition of man: For though
Lazarus and certain others died twice, that was no usual thing, but
extraordinary: and as for them that shall be changed, their changing is
a kind of death. See [Co1 15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)

[Hebrews 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 9:28</span></span>

So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of (s) many; (16) and unto
them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto
salvation.

\(s\) Thus the general promise is restrained to the elect only: and we
have to seek the testimony of our election, not in the secret counsel of
God, but in the effects that our faith works, and so we must climb up
from the lowest step to the highest, there to find such comfort as is
most certain, and shall never be moved.

\(16\) Shortly by the way he sets Christ as Judge, partly to terrify
those who are not trusting in the only sacrifice of Christ once made,
and partly to keep the faithful in their duty, so that they will not go
back.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 10](heb010)

</div>
