<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb009)  [Next](heb011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)

[Hebrews 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 10:1</span></span>

For (1) the law having a shadow of good things to (a) come, \[and\] not
the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they
offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect.

\(1\) He prevents a private objection. Why then were those sacrifices
offered? The apostle answers, first concerning the yearly sacrifice
which was the solemnest of all, in which (he says) there was made every
year a remembrance again of all former sins. Therefore that sacrifice
had no power to sanctify: for to what purpose should those sins which
are purged be repeated again, and why should new sins come to be
repeated every year, if those sacrifices abolished sin?

\(a\) Of things which are everlasting, which were promised to the
fathers, and exhibited in Christ.

[Hebrews 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 10:5</span></span>

\(2\) Wherefore when he (b) cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice
and offering thou wouldest not, but a (c) body hast thou prepared me:

\(2\) A conclusion following those things that went before, and
encompassing also the other sacrifices. Seeing that the sacrifices of
the law could not do it, therefore Christ speaking of himself as of our
High Priest manifested in the flesh, witnesses plainly that God rests
not in the sacrifices, but in the obedience of his Son our High Priest,
in whose obedience he offered up himself once to his Father for us.

\(b\) The Son of God is said to come into the world, when he was made
man.

\(c\) It is word for word in the Hebrew text, "You have pierced my ears
through" that is, "you have made me obedient and willing to hear".

[Hebrews 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 10:9</span></span>

Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. He taketh away the (d)
first, that he may establish the second.

\(d\) That is, the sacrifices, to establish the second, that is, the
will of God.

[Hebrews 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 10:11</span></span>

\(3\) And every priest standeth (e) daily ministering and offering
oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins:

\(3\) A conclusion, with the other part of the comparison: The Levitical
high priest repeats the same sacrifices daily in his sanctuary: upon
which it follows that neither those sacrifices, nor those offerings, nor
those high priests could take away sins. But Christ having offered one
sacrifice once for the sins of all men, and having sanctified his own
for ever, sits at the right hand of the Father, having all power in his
hands.

\(e\) At the altar.

[Hebrews 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 10:13</span></span>

\(4\) From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.

\(4\) He prevents a private objection, that is, that yet nonetheless we
are subject to sin and death, to which the apostle answers, that the
full effect of Christ's power has not yet shown itself, but shall
eventually appear when he will at once put to flight all his enemies,
with whom we still struggle.

[Hebrews 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 10:15</span></span>

\(5\) \[Whereof\] the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us: for after that
he had said before,

\(5\) Although there remains in us relics of sin, yet the work of our
sanctification which is to be perfected, hangs on the same sacrifice
which never shall be repeated: and that the apostle proves by referring
again to the testimony of Jeremiah, thus: Sin is taken away by the new
testament, seeing the Lord says that it shall come to pass, that
according to the form of it, he will no more remember our sins:
Therefore we need now no purging sacrifice to take away that which is
already taken away, but we must rather take pains, that we may now
through faith be partakers of that sacrifice.

[Hebrews 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">heb 10:17</span></span>

And their sins and iniquities will I remember (f) no more.

\(f\) Why then, where is the fire of purgatory, and that popish
distinction of the fault, and the punishment?

[Hebrews 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 10:18</span></span>

Now where remission of these \[is, there is\] no more offering for (g)
sin.

\(g\) He said well, for sin: for there remains another offering, that
is, of thanksgiving.

[Hebrews 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 10:19</span></span>

\(6\) Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by
the blood of Jesus,

\(6\) The sum of the former treatise: We are not shut out from the holy
place, as the fathers were, but we have an entrance into the true holy
place (that is, into heaven) seeing that we are purged with the blood,
not of beasts, but of Jesus. Neither as in times past, does the High
Priest shut us out by setting the veil against us, but through the veil,
which is his flesh, he has brought us into heaven itself, so that we
have now truly an High Priest who is over the house of God.

[Hebrews 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 10:20</span></span>

By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the
veil, that is to say, his (h) flesh;

\(h\) So Christ's flesh shows us the Godhead as if it were under a veil,
For otherwise we could not stand the brightness of it.

[Hebrews 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">heb 10:22</span></span>

\(7\) Let us draw near with a (i) true heart in full assurance of faith,
having our (k) hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with (l) pure water.

\(7\) A most grave exhortation, in which he shows how the sacrifice of
Christ may be applied to us: that is, by faith which also he describes
by the consequence, that is, by sanctification of the Spirit, which
causes us to hope in God, and to procure by all means possible one
another's salvation, through the love that is in us one towards another.

\(i\) With no double and counterfeit heart, but with such a heart as is
truly and indeed given to God.

\(k\) This is it which the Lord says, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

\(l\) With the grace of the Holy Spirit.

[Hebrews 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 10:25</span></span>

Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of
some \[is\]; but exhorting \[one another\]: (8) and so much the more, as
ye see the day approaching.

\(8\) Having mentioned the last coming of Christ, he stirs up the godly
to the meditation of a holy life, and cites the faithless fallers from
God to the fearful judgment seat of the Judge, because they wickedly
rejected him in whom only salvation consists.

[Hebrews 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 10:26</span></span>

For if we sin (m) wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins,

\(m\) Without any cause or occasion, or show of occasion.

[Hebrews 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">heb 10:27</span></span>

But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the (n) adversaries.

\(n\) For it is another matter to sin through the frailty of man's
nature, and another thing to proclaim war on God as on an enemy.

[Hebrews 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 10:28</span></span>

\(9\) He that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three
witnesses:

\(9\) If the breach of the law of Moses was punished by death, how much
more worthy of death is it to fall away from Christ?

[Hebrews 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">heb 10:30</span></span>

\(10\) For we know him that hath said, Vengeance \[belongeth\] unto me,
I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall (o) judge
his people.

\(10\) The reason of all these things is, because God is a revenger of
those who despise him: otherwise he could not rightly govern his Church.
Now there is nothing more horrible then the wrath of the living God.

\(o\) Rule or govern.

[Hebrews 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">heb 10:32</span></span>

\(11\) But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions;

\(11\) As he terrified the fallers away from God, so does he now comfort
them that are constant and stand firm, setting before them the success
of their former fights, so stirring them up to a sure hope of a full and
ready victory.

[Hebrews 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">heb 10:33</span></span>

Partly, whilst ye were made a (p) gazingstock both by reproaches and
afflictions; and partly, whilst ye became (q) companions of them that
were so used.

\(p\) You were brought forth to be shamed.

\(q\) In taking their miseries, to be your miseries.

[Hebrews 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">heb 10:34</span></span>

For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling
of your goods, knowing in yourselves that ye have in heaven a better and
an enduring (r) substance.

\(r\) Goods and riches.

[Hebrews 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">heb 10:37</span></span>

For yet a (s) little while, and he that shall come will come, and will
not tarry.

\(s\) He will come within this very little while.

[Hebrews 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">heb 10:38</span></span>

\(12\) Now the just shall live by faith: but if \[any man\] draw back,
my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

\(12\) He commends the excellency of a sure faith by the effect, because
it is the only way to life, which sentence he sets forth and amplifies
by contrast.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 11](heb011)

</div>
