<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa065)  [Next](jer001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)

[Isaiah 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 66:1</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD, The (a) heaven \[is\] my throne, and the earth
\[is\] my footstool: where \[is\] the house that ye build to me? and
where \[is\] the place of my rest?

\(a\) My majesty is so great, that it fills both heaven and earth, and
therefore cannot be included in a temple like an idol, condemning by
this their main confidence which trusted in the temple and sacrifices.

[Isaiah 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 66:2</span></span>

For all these \[things\] hath my hand made, (b) and all these \[things\]
have been, saith the LORD: but to this \[man\] will I look, \[even\] to
\[him that is\] poor and of (c) a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my
word.

\(b\) Seeing that both the temple and the things in it, with the
sacrifices were made and done by his appointment, he shows that he has
no need of it, and that he can be without them, See [Psa
50:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010).

\(c\) To him that is humble and pure in heart, who receives my doctrine
with reverence and fear.

[Isaiah 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 66:3</span></span>

He that killeth an ox \[is as if\] he (d) slew a man; he that
sacrificeth a lamb, \[as if\] he cut off a dog's neck; he that offereth
an oblation, \[as if he offered\] swine's blood; he that burneth
incense, \[as if\] he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own
ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations.

\(d\) Because the Jews thought themselves holy by offering their
sacrifices, and in the mean season had neither faith or repentance, God
shows that he no less detests these ceremonies than he does the
sacrifices of the heathen, who offered men, dogs and swine to their
idols, which things were expressly forbidden in the law.

[Isaiah 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 66:4</span></span>

I also will (e) choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon
them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spoke, they did not
hear: but they did evil before my eyes, and chose \[that\] in which I
delighted not.

\(e\) I will discover their wickedness and hypocrisy, with which they
think to blind my eyes to all the world.

[Isaiah 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 66:5</span></span>

Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his (f) word; Your
brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let
the LORD be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall
be ashamed.

\(f\) He encourages the faithful by promising to destroy their enemies,
who pretended to be as brethren, but were hypocrites, and hated them
that feared God.

[Isaiah 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 66:6</span></span>

\(g\) A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice
of the LORD that rendereth recompence to his enemies.

\(g\) The enemies will shortly hear a more terrible voice, even fire and
slaughter, seeing they would not hear the gentle voice of the prophets,
who called them to repentance.

[Isaiah 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 66:7</span></span>

Before (h) she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she
was delivered of a male child.

\(h\) Meaning, that the restoration of the church would be so sudden and
contrary to all men's opinions as when a woman is delivered before she
looked for it, and without pain in travail.

[Isaiah 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 66:8</span></span>

Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth
be made to bring forth in one (i) day? \[or\] shall a nation be born at
once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.

\(i\) This will pass the capacity of man to see such a multitude that
will come up at once, meaning under the preaching of the gospel of which
they who came out of Babylon were a sign.

[Isaiah 66:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 66:9</span></span>

Shall I (k) bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith the
LORD: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut \[the womb\]? saith thy
God.

\(k\) Declaring by this that as by his power and providence women
travailed and delivered so he gives power to bring forth the Church at
his appointed time.

[Isaiah 66:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 66:11</span></span>

That ye may nurse, (l) and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolations; that ye may draw milk, and be delighted with the abundance
of her glory.

\(l\) That is may rejoice for all the blessings that God bestows on his
Church.

[Isaiah 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 66:12</span></span>

For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will extend (m) peace to her like a
river, and the glory of the (n) Gentiles like a flowing stream: then
shall ye be nursed, ye shall be (o) borne upon \[her\] sides, and be
dandled upon \[her\] knees.

\(m\) I will give her happiness and prosperity in great abundance.

\(n\) Read ([Isa 60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016)).

\(o\) You will be cherished as her dearly beloved children.

[Isaiah 66:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 66:14</span></span>

And when ye see \[this\], your heart shall rejoice, and your (p) bones
shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the LORD shall be known
toward his servants, and \[his\] indignation toward his enemies.

\(p\) You will have new strength and new beauty.

[Isaiah 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 66:15</span></span>

For, behold, the LORD will come with fire, and with his chariots like a
whirlwind, to (q) render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames
of fire.

\(q\) This vengeance God began to execute at the destruction of Babylon
and has always continued it against the enemies of his Church, and will
do till the last day, which will be the accomplishment of it.

[Isaiah 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 66:17</span></span>

They that sanctify (r) themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens
behind one \[tree\] in the midst, eating (s) swine's flesh, and the
abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the LORD.

\(r\) Meaning, the hypocrites.

\(s\) By which are meant them that maliciously transgressed the law, by
eating beasts forbidden, even to the mouse which nature abhors.

[Isaiah 66:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 66:18</span></span>

For I \[know\] their works and their thoughts: it shall come, that I
will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my (t)
glory.

\(t\) The Gentiles will be partakers of that glory, which before I
showed to the Jews.

[Isaiah 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 66:19</span></span>

And I will set a (u) sign among them, and I will send those that (x)
escape of them to the nations, \[to\] (y) Tarshish, (z) Pul, and (a)
Lud, that draw the (b) bow, \[to\] (c) Tubal, and (d) Javan, \[to\] the
isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory;
and (e) they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.

\(u\) I will make these that I chose, that they perish not with the rest
of the infidels: by which he alludes to the marking of the posts of his
people, whom he preserved, ([Exo
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007)).

\(x\) I will scatter the rest of the Jews, who escaped destruction, into
various nations.

\(y\) That is, Cecilia.

\(z\) Meaning Africa.

\(a\) That is Lydia, or Asia minor.

\(b\) Signifying the Parthians.

\(c\) Italy.

\(d\) Greece.

\(e\) Meaning, the apostles, disciples and others who he first chose of
the Jews to preach to the Gentiles.

[Isaiah 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 66:20</span></span>

And they shall bring all your (f) brethren \[for\] an offering to the
LORD out of all nations upon (g) horses, and in chariots, and in
litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain
Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of Israel bring an offering
in a clean vessel into the house of the LORD.

\(f\) That is the Gentiles, who by faith will be made the children of
Abraham as you are.

\(g\) By which he means that no necessary means will want, when God will
call the Gentiles to the knowledge of the gospel.

[Isaiah 66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 66:21</span></span>

And I will also take of them for (h) priests \[and\] for Levites, saith
the LORD.

\(h\) That is, of the Gentiles, as he did Luke, Timothy and Titus first,
and others after to preach his word.

[Isaiah 66:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 66:22</span></span>

For as the new (i) heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall
remain before me, saith the LORD, so shall your seed and your name
remain.

\(i\) By this he signifies the kingdom of Christ in which his Church
will be renewed, and where before there were appointed seasons to
sacrifice in this there will be one continual Sabbath, so that all times
and seasons will be meet.

[Isaiah 66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 66:24</span></span>

And they shall go forth, and look upon the (k) carcases of the men that
have transgressed against me: for their (l) worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorrence (m) to all
flesh.

\(k\) As he who declared the happiness that will be within the Church
for the comfort of the godly, so does he show what horrible calamity
will come to the wicked, that are out of the Church.

\(l\) Meaning, a continual torment of conscience, which will always gnaw
them, and never permit them to be at rest, ([Mar
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)).

\(m\) This is the just recompense for the wicked, who contemning God and
his word, will be by God's just judgments abhorred by all his creatures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 1](jer001)

</div>
