<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa001)  [Next](isa003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)

[Isaiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 2:2</span></span>

And it (a) shall come to pass in the last days, \[that\] the mount of
the LORD'S house (b) shall be established on the top of the mountains,
and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall (c) flow to
it.

\(a\) The decree and ordinance of God, concerning the restoration of the
Church, which is chiefly meant by the time of Christ.

\(b\) In an evident place to be seen and discerned.

\(c\) When the kingdom of Christ will be enlarged by the preaching of
the doctrine. Here also is declared the zeal of the children of God when
they are called.

[Isaiah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 2:3</span></span>

And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to (d) the
mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion
shall go forth the (e) law, and the word of the LORD from (f) Jerusalem.

\(d\) Alluding to mount Zion, where the visible Church then was.

\(e\) Meaning, the whole doctrine of salvation.

\(f\) This was accomplished when the gospel was first preached in
Jerusalem, and from there went through all the world.

[Isaiah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 2:4</span></span>

And (g) he shall judge among the nations, and shall (h) rebuke many
people: and they shall (i) beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
neither shall they learn (k) war any more.

\(g\) The Lord, who is Christ, will have all power given to him.

\(h\) That they may acknowledge their sins, and turn to him.

\(i\) He shows the fruit of the peace which the gospel should bring,
that is, that men should do good to one another, while before they were
enemies.

\(k\) He speaks not against the use of weapons and lawful war, but shows
how the hearts of the godly will be affected one toward another, which
peace and love begin and grow in this life, but will be perfected when
we are joined with our head Jesus Christ.

[Isaiah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 2:5</span></span>

O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us (l) walk in the light of the LORD.

\(l\) Seeing the Gentiles will be ready, make haste, and show them the
way to worship God.

[Isaiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 2:6</span></span>

Therefore thou (m) hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because
they are (n) filled \[with customs\] from the east, and \[are\]
soothsayers like the Philistines, (o) and they please themselves in the
children of foreigners.

\(m\) The prophet seeing the small hope that the Jews would convert,
complains to God as though he had utterly forsaken them for their sins.

\(n\) Full of the corruptions that reigned chiefly in the east parts.

\(o\) They altogether gave themselves to the fashions of other nations.

[Isaiah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 2:7</span></span>

Their land also is full of (p) silver and gold, neither \[is there any\]
end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither \[is
there any\] end of their chariots:

\(p\) The prophet first condemned their superstition and idolatry next
their covetousness and thirdly their vain trust in worldly means.

[Isaiah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 2:9</span></span>

And the mean man boweth down, and the great man (q) humbleth himself:
therefore (r) forgive them not.

\(q\) He notes the nature of the idolaters who are never satisfied in
their superstitions.

\(r\) Thus the prophet spoke being inflamed with the zeal of God's
glory, and that he might fear them with God's judgment.

[Isaiah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 2:11</span></span>

The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men
shall be abased, and the LORD alone shall be exalted in (s) that day.

\(s\) Meaning, as soon as God will begin to execute his judgments.

[Isaiah 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 2:14</span></span>

And upon all the high (t) mountains, and upon all the hills \[that are\]
lifted up,

\(t\) By high trees and mountains are he means the proud and lofty, who
think themselves most strong in this world.

[Isaiah 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 2:16</span></span>

And upon (u) all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.

\(u\) He condemns their vain confidence which they had in strongholds
and in their rich merchandise which brought in vain pleasures with which
men's minds became effeminate.

[Isaiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 2:20</span></span>

In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold,
which they made \[each one\] for himself to worship, (x) to the moles
and to the bats;

\(x\) They will cast them into vile and filthy places when they perceive
that they are not able to help them.

[Isaiah 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 2:22</span></span>

Cease ye from man, whose (y) breath \[is\] in his nostrils: for why is
he to be esteemed?

\(y\) Cast off your vain confidence in man, whose life is so frail that
if his nose is stopped he is dead and consider that you are dealing with
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 3](isa003)

</div>
