<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1003)  [Next](jo1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)

[1 John 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 4:1</span></span>

\(1\) Beloved, believe not every (a) spirit, but try the spirits whether
they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the
world.

\(1\) Taking occasion by the name of the Spirit, lest love and charity
should be separated from the worship of God, which chiefly depends on
his true knowledge, he returns to that which he spoke of in the second
chapter concerning the taking heed of antichrists: He will have us here
take heed of two things, the one is, that seeing there are many false
prophets, we should not trust every man: the other is, that because many
men teach false things, we should not therefore believe any. We must
then observe, that we may be able to discern the spirits of God which
are to be followed, from impure spirits which are to be avoided.

\(a\) This is spoken by metonymy and it is as if he had said, Believe
not every one who says that he has a gift of the Holy Spirit to do the
office of a prophet.

[1 John 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 4:2</span></span>

\(2\) Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: (b) Every spirit that confesseth
that (c) Jesus Christ is come in the (d) flesh is of God:

\(2\) He gives a certain and perpetual rule to know the doctrine of
antichrist, that is, if either the divine or human nature of Christ, or
the true uniting of them together is denied: or if the least jot that
may be, be detracted from his office who is our only king, prophet and
everlasting high priest.

\(b\) He speaks simply of the doctrine, and not of the person.

\(c\) The true Messiah.

\(d\) Is true man.

[1 John 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 4:4</span></span>

\(3\) Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

\(3\) He comforts the elect with a most sure hope of victory: but yet
so, that he teaches them that they fight not with their own power, but
with the virtue and power of God.

[1 John 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 4:5</span></span>

\(4\) They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the
world heareth them.

\(4\) He brings a reason why the world receives these teachers more
willingly than the true: that is, because they speak nothing but that
which is worldly: which is another note also to know the doctrine of
antichrist by.

[1 John 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 4:6</span></span>

\(5\) We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of
God heareth not us. Hereby know we the (e) spirit of truth, and the
spirit of error.

\(5\) He testifies to them that his doctrine and the doctrine of his
companions, is the assured word of God which of necessity we have boldly
to set against all the mouths of the whole world, and thereby discern
the truth from falsehood.

\(e\) True prophets, against whom are false prophets, that is, those who
err and lead others into error.

[1 John 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 4:7</span></span>

\(6\) Beloved, let us love one another: (7) for love is of God; and
every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.

\(6\) He returns to the commending of brotherly love and charity. (7)
The first reason: because it is a very divine thing, and therefore very
fitting for the sons of God: so that whoever is missing it cannot be
said to know God correctly.

[1 John 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 4:8</span></span>

He that loveth not knoweth not God; (8) for God is love.

\(8\) A confirmation: for it is the nature of God to love men, of which
we have a most manifest proof above all other, in that of his only free
and infinite good will towards us his enemies, he delivered to death,
not a common man, but his own Son, indeed his only begotten Son, to the
end that we being reconciled through his blood might be partakers in his
everlasting glory.

[1 John 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 4:11</span></span>

\(9\) Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

\(9\) An other reason by comparison: if God so loved us, shall not we
his children love one another?

[1 John 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo1 4:12</span></span>

\(10\) No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God
dwelleth in us, and his love is (g) perfected in us.

\(10\) A third reason: Because God is invisible, therefore by this
effect of his Spirit, that is, by charity, he is understood to be not
out of us, but united with us and in us, in whom he is so effectually
working.

\(g\) Is surely in us indeed, and in truth.

[1 John 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 4:14</span></span>

\(11\) And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son \[to
be\] the Saviour of the world.

\(11\) He underlays this charity with another foundation, that is, faith
in Jesus, which joins us indeed with him, even as charity witnesses that
we are joined with him. Furthermore he testifies of Christ, as who had
seen him with his eyes.

[1 John 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jo1 4:15</span></span>

Whosoever shall (h) confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth
in him, and he in God.

\(h\) With such a confession as comes from true faith, and is
accompanied with love, so that there is an agreement of all things.

[1 John 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jo1 4:16</span></span>

And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. (12) God is
love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.

\(12\) A fourth reason: God is the fountain and wellspring of charity
indeed charity itself: therefore whoever abides in it, has God with him.

[1 John 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jo1 4:17</span></span>

\(13\) Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the
day of judgment: because (i) as he is, so are we in this world.

\(13\) Again (as before) he commends love, seeing that by our agreement
with God in this thing, we have a sure testimony of our adoption, it
comes to pass by this that without fear we look for that latter day of
judgment, so that trembling and torment of conscience is cast out by
this love.

\(i\) This signifies a likeness, not an equality.

[1 John 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 4:18</span></span>

There is no (k) fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear: because
fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love.

\(k\) If we understand by love, that we are in God, and God in us, that
we are sons, and that we know God, and that everlasting life is in us:
he concludes correctly, that we may well gather peace and quietness by
this.

[1 John 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jo1 4:19</span></span>

\(14\) We love him, because he first loved us.

\(14\) Lest any man should think that that peace of conscience proceeds
from our love as the cause, he goes back to the fountain, that is, to
the free love with which God loves us although we deserved and do
deserve his wrath. From this springs another double charity, which both
are tokens and witnesses of that first, that is, that we love God who
loved us first, and then for his sake our neighbours also.

[1 John 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jo1 4:20</span></span>

\(15\) If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar:
(16) for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he
love God whom he hath not seen?

\(15\) As he showed that the love of our neighbour cannot be separate
from the love with which God loves us because this last gives rise to
the other: so he denies that the other kind of love with which we love
God, can be separate from the love of our neighbour: of which it
follows, that they who say they worship God, and yet do not regard their
neighbours lie shamelessly.

\(16\) The first reason taken from comparison: why we cannot hate our
neighbour and love God, that is, because he that cannot love his brother
whom he sees, how can he love God whom he cannot see?

[1 John 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jo1 4:21</span></span>

\(17\) And this commandment have we from him, That he who loveth God
love his brother also.

\(17\) A second reason, why God cannot be hated and our neighbour loved,
because this same lawmaker commanded us both to love him and our
neighbour.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 5](jo1005)

</div>
