<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](est010)  [Next](job002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

[Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 1:1</span></span>

There was a man in the land of (a) Uz, whose name \[was\] Job; and that
man was perfect and (b) upright, and (c) one that feared God, and
eschewed evil.

The Argument - In this history the example of patience is set before our
eyes. This holy man Job was not only extremely afflicted in outward
things and in his body, but also in his mind and conscience, by the
sharp temptation of his wife and friends: who by their vehement words
and subtle disputations brought him almost to despair. They set forth
God as a sincere judge, and mortal enemy to him who had cast him off,
therefore in vain he should seek him for help. These friends came to him
under pretence of consolation, and yet they tormented him more than all
his afflictions did. Even so, he constantly resisted them, and
eventually succeeded. In this story we must note that Job maintains a
good cause, but handles it badly. His adversaries have an evil matter,
but they defend it craftily. Job held that God did not always punish men
according to their sins, but that he had secret judgments, of which man
knew not the cause, and therefore man could not reason against God in
it, but he should be convicted. Moreover, he was assured that God had
not rejected him, yet through his great torments and afflictions he
speaks many inconveniences and shows himself as a desperate man in many
things, and as one that would resist God, and this is his good cause
which he handles well. Again the adversaries maintain with many good
arguments that God punishes continually according to the trespass,
grounding on God's providence, his justice and man's sins, yet their
intention is evil; for they labour to bring Job into despair, and so
they maintain an evil cause. Ezekiel commends Job as a just man, ([Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)) and James sets out his patience
for an example, ([Jam 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011)).

\(a\) That is, of the country of Idumea, ([Lam
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021)), or bordering on it: for the
land was called by the name of Uz, the son of Dishan, the son of Seir
([Gen 36:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#028)).

\(b\) Since he was a Gentile and not a Jew and yet is pronounced upright
and without hypocrisy, it declares that among the heathen God revealed
himself.

\(c\) By this it is declared what is meant by an upright and just man.

[Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 1:3</span></span>

His (d) substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand
camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and a
very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the men
of (e) the east.

\(d\) His children and riches are declared, to commend his virtue in his
prosperity and his patience and constancy when God took them from him.

\(e\) Meaning, the Arabians, Chaldeans, Idumeans etc.

[Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 1:5</span></span>

And it was so, when the days of \[their\] feasting were gone about, that
Job sent and (f) sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and
(g) offered burnt offerings \[according\] to the number of them all: for
Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and (h) cursed God in
their hearts. Thus did Job (i) continually.

\(f\) That is, commanded them to be sanctified: meaning, that they
should consider the faults that they had committed, and reconcile
themselves for the same.

\(g\) That is, he offered for each of his children an offering of
reconciliation, which declared his religion toward God, and the care
that he had for his children.

\(h\) In Hebrew it is, "blessed God", which is sometimes taken for
blaspheming and cursing, as it is here and in ([Kg1
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#010), [Kg1
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#013)).

\(i\) While the feast lasted.

[Job 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 1:6</span></span>

Now there was a day when the (k) sons of God came to present themselves
(l) before the LORD, and Satan (m) came also among them.

\(k\) Meaning the angels, who are called the sons of God because they
are willing to execute his will.

\(l\) Because our infirmity cannot comprehend God in his majesty, he is
set forth to us as a King, that our capacity may be able to understand
that which is spoken of him.

\(m\) This declares that although Satan is an adversary to God, yet he
is compelled to obey him, and do him all homage, without whose
permission and appointment he can do nothing.

[Job 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 1:7</span></span>

And the LORD said unto Satan, Whence (n) comest thou? Then Satan
answered the LORD, and said, (o) From going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it.

\(n\) This question is asked for our infirmity: for God knew where he
had come from.

\(o\) In this is described the nature of Satan, which is always seeking
his prey, ([Pe1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)).

[Job 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 1:9</span></span>

Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, Doth Job fear God for (p)
nought?

\(p\) He fears you not for your own sake, but for the blessing that he
received from you.

[Job 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 1:10</span></span>

Hast not thou made (q) an hedge about him, and about his house, and
about all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land.

\(q\) Meaning, the grace of God, which served Job as a rampart against
all temptations.

[Job 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 1:11</span></span>

But put forth thine hand now, and (r) touch all that he hath, and he
will curse thee to (s) thy face.

\(r\) This signifies that Satan is not able to touch us, but it is God
that must do it.

\(s\) Satan notes the vice to which men are commonly subjected, that is,
to hide their rebellion and to be content with God in the time of
prosperity which view is disclosed in the time of their adversity.

[Job 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 1:12</span></span>

And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath \[is\] in (t) thy
power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth
from the (u) presence of the LORD.

\(t\) God does not give Satan power over man to gratify him, but to
declare that he has no power over man, but that which God gives him.

\(u\) That is, went to execute that which God had permitted him to do
for else he can never go out of God's presence.

[Job 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 1:15</span></span>

And the (x) Sabeans fell \[upon them\], and took them away; yea, they
have slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am
escaped alone to tell thee.

\(x\) That is, the Arabians.

[Job 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 1:16</span></span>

While he \[was\] yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The
(y) fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and
the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee.

\(y\) Which was also done by the craft of Satan, to tempt Job even more
grievously, so he might see that not only men were his enemies, but that
God made war against him.

[Job 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 1:18</span></span>

While he \[was\] yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy
(z) sons and thy daughters \[were\] eating and drinking wine in their
eldest brother's house:

\(z\) This last plague declares that when one plague is past which seems
hard to bear, God can send us another far more grievous, to try his and
teach them obedience.

[Job 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 1:20</span></span>

Then Job arose, and (a) rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell
down upon the ground, and worshipped,

\(a\) Which came not from impatience, but declares that the children of
God are not insensible like blocks, but that in their patience they feel
affliction and grief of mind: yet they do not rebel against God as the
wicked do.

[Job 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 1:21</span></span>

And said, Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return
(b) thither: the LORD gave, and the LORD hath taken away; (c) blessed be
the name of the LORD.

\(b\) That is, into the belly of the earth, which is the mother of all.

\(c\) By this he confesses that God is just and good, although his hand
is sore on him.

[Job 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 1:22</span></span>

In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God (d) foolishly.

\(d\) But declared that God did all things according to justice and
equity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 2](job002)

</div>
