<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh008)  [Next](joh010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001)

[John 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 9:1</span></span>

And (1) as \[Jesus\] passed by, he saw a man which was blind from
\[his\] birth.

\(1\) Sin is even the beginning of all bodily diseases, and yet it does
not follow that in punishing, even very severely, that God is punishing
because of sin.

[John 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 9:3</span></span>

Jesus answered, (a) Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but
that the works of God should be made manifest in him.

\(a\) Christ reasons here as his disciples thought, who presupposed that
no diseases came except for the reason of sins: as a result of this he
answers that there was another cause of this man's blindness, and that
was in order that God's work might be seen.

[John 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 9:4</span></span>

\(2\) I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is (b) day:
the night cometh, when no man can work.

\(2\) The works of Christ are is it were a light, which enlighten the
darkness of the world.

\(b\) By "day" is meant the light, that is, the enlightening doctrine of
the heavenly truth: and by night is meant the darkness which comes by
the obscurity of the same doctrine.

[John 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 9:6</span></span>

\(3\) When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of
the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay,

\(3\) Christ healing the man born blind by taking the symbol of clay,
and afterward the symbol of the fountain of Siloam (which signifies
"sent") shows that as he at the beginning made man, so does he again
restore both his body and soul: and yet in such a way that he himself
comes first of his own accord to heal us.

[John 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 9:8</span></span>

\(4\) The neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen him that
he was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged?

\(4\) A true image of all men, who as they are naturally blind do not
themselves receive the light that is offered unto them, nor endure it in
another, and yet make a great fuss among themselves.

[John 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 9:10</span></span>

Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes (c) opened?

\(c\) This is a Hebrew idiom, for they call a man's eyes shut when they
cannot receive any light: and therefore blind men who are made to see
are said to have their eyes opened.

[John 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 9:16</span></span>

\(5\) Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God,
because he keepeth not the sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that
is a sinner do such miracles? And there was a division among them.

\(5\) Religion is assaulted most by the pretence of religion: but the
more it is pressed down, the more it rises up.

[John 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 9:24</span></span>

Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, (d)
Give God the praise: we know that this man is a (e) sinner.

\(d\) A solemn order, by which men were put under oath in ancient time
to acknowledge their fault before God, as if it was said to them,
"Consider that you are before God, who knows the entire matter, and
therefore be sure that you revere his majesty, and do him this honour
and confess the whole matter openly rather than to lie before him";
([Jos 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019); [Sa1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#005)).

\(e\) He is called a sinner in the Hebrew language, who is a wicked man,
and someone who makes an art of sinning.

[John 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 9:28</span></span>

\(6\) Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are
Moses' disciples.

\(6\) Eventually, proud wickedness must necessarily break forth, which
lies vainly hidden under a zeal of godliness.

[John 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 9:34</span></span>

They answered and said unto him, (f) Thou wast altogether born in sins,
and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.

\(f\) You are wicked even from your cradle, and as we used to say, there
is nothing in you but sin.

[John 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 9:35</span></span>

\(7\) Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him,
he said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God?

\(7\) Most happy is their state who are cast furthest out of the Church
of the wicked (who themselves proudly boast to be of the Church) so that
Christ may come nearer to them.

[John 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 9:39</span></span>

\(8\) And Jesus said, For (g) judgment I am come into this world, that
they (h) which see not might see; and that they which see might be made
blind.

\(8\) Christ enlightens all those by the preaching of the Gospel who
acknowledge their own darkness, but those who seem to themselves to see
clearly enough, those he altogether blinds: and these latter ones are
often those who have the highest place in the Church.

\(g\) With great power and authority, to do what is righteous and just:
as if he said, "These men take upon themselves to govern the people of
God after their own desire, as though they saw all things, and no one
else did: but I will rule much differently than these men do: for those
whom they consider as blind men, them will I enlighten, and those who
take themselves to be wisest, them will I drown in most abundant
darkness of ignorance.

\(h\) In these words of seeing and not seeing there is a secret taunting
and rebuff to the Pharisees: for they thought all men to be blind but
themselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 10](joh010)

</div>
