<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](oba001)  [Next](jon002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001)

[Jonah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 1:1</span></span>

Now the word of the LORD came (a) unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,

The Argument - When Jonah had long prophesied in Israel and had little
profited, God gave him specific charge to go and denounce his judgments
against Nineveh, the chief city of the Assyrians, because he had
appointed that those who were of the heathen, should convert by the
mighty power of his word. And this was so that within three day's
preaching, Israel might see how horribly they had provoked God's wrath,
who for the space of so many years, had not converted to the Lord, for
so many prophets and such diligent preaching. He prophesied under Jonah,
and Jeroboam; ([Kg2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025)).

\(a\) After he had preached a long time in Israel: and so Ezekiel, after
he had prophesied in Judah for a time, had visions in Babylon; ([Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)).

[Jonah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jon 1:2</span></span>

Arise, go to (b) Nineveh, that (c) great city, and cry against it; for
their wickedness is come up before me.

\(b\) For seeing the great obstipation of the Israelites, he sent his
Prophet to the Gentiles, that they might provoke them to repentance, or
at least make them inexcusable: for Nineveh was the chief city of the
Assyrians.

\(c\) For as authors write, it contained in circuit about forty-eight
miles, and had 1500 towers, and at this time there were 120,000 children
in it; ([Jon 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011)).

[Jonah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jon 1:3</span></span>

But Jonah rose up to (d) flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the
LORD, and went down to (e) Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish:
so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto
Tarshish from the (f) presence of the LORD.

\(d\) By which he declares his weakness, that would not promptly follow
the Lord's calling, but gave place to his own reason, which persuaded
him that he would not profit these people at all, seeing he had done
such little good among his own people; ([Jon
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#002)).

\(e\) Which was the haven, and port to take shipping there, also called
Joppa.

\(f\) From that vocation to which God had called him, and in which he
would have assisted him.

[Jonah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 1:5</span></span>

Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and
cast forth the wares that \[were\] in the ship into the sea, to lighten
\[it\] of them. But Jonah was gone down (g) into the sides of the ship;
and he lay, and was fast asleep.

\(g\) As one that would have cast off this care and concern by seeking
rest and quietness.

[Jonah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jon 1:6</span></span>

So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O
sleeper? arise, call upon thy (h) God, if so be that God will think upon
us, that we perish not.

\(h\) As they had called on their idols, which declares that idolaters
have no rest nor certainty, but in their troubles seek what they do not
even know.

[Jonah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jon 1:7</span></span>

And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast (i) lots,
that we may know for whose cause this evil \[is\] upon us. So they cast
lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.

\(i\) Which declares that the matter was very extreme and in doubt,
which was God's way of getting them to test for the cause: and this may
not be done except in matters of great importance.

[Jonah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jon 1:14</span></span>

Wherefore they cried unto the LORD, and said, (k) We beseech thee, O
LORD, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man's life, and lay
not upon us innocent blood: for thou, O LORD, hast done as it pleased
thee.

\(k\) This declares that the very wicked in their time of need flee to
God for help, and also that they are touched with a certain fear of
shedding man's blood, whereas they know no manifest sign of wickedness.

[Jonah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jon 1:16</span></span>

Then the men (l) feared the LORD exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice
unto the LORD, and made vows.

\(l\) They were touched with a certain repentance of their past life,
and began to worship the true God by whom they saw themselves as
wonderfully delivered. But this was done for fear, and not from a pure
heart and affection, neither according to God's word.

[Jonah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jon 1:17</span></span>

Now the LORD had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah
was in the (m) belly of the fish three days and three nights.

\(m\) Thus the Lord would chastise his Prophet with a most terrible
spectacle of death, and by this also strengthened and encouraged him of
his favour and support in this duty which was commanded him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 2](jon002)

</div>
