<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](zac014)  [Next](mal002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

[Malachi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 1:1</span></span>

The (a) burden of the word of the LORD to Israel by Malachi.

The Argument - This Prophet was one of the three who God raised up for
the comfort of the Church after the captivity, and after him there was
no one else until John the Baptist was sent, which was either a token of
God's wrath, or an admonition that they should with more fervent desires
look for the coming of the Messiah. He confirms the same doctrine, that
the two former do: chiefly he reproves the priests for their
covetousness, and because they served God after their own fantasies, and
not according to the direction of his word. He also notes certain
distinct sins, which were then among them, such as the marrying of
idolatrous and many wives, murmurings against God, impatience, and
things such as these. Nonetheless, for the comfort of the godly he
declares that God would not forget his promise made to their fathers,
but would send Christ his messenger, in whom the covenant would be
accomplished, whose coming would be terrible to the wicked, and bring
all consolation and joy to the godly.

\(a\) See [Isa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001)

[Malachi 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 1:2</span></span>

I have loved you, saith the LORD. Yet ye say, (b) Wherein hast thou
loved us? \[Was\] not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the LORD: yet I loved
Jacob,

\(b\) Which declares their great ingratitude that did not acknowledge
this love, which was so evident, in that he chose Abraham from out of
all the world, and next chose Jacob the younger brother from whom they
came, and left Esau the elder.

[Malachi 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 1:3</span></span>

And I (c) hated Esau, (1) and laid his mountains and his heritage waste
for the dragons of the wilderness.

\(c\) For besides this the signs of my hatred appeared even when he was
made servant to his younger brother, being yet in his mother's belly,
and also afterward in that he was put from his birthright. Yet even now
before your eyes the signs of this are evident, in that his country lies
waste, and he will never return to inhabit it.

\(d\) Whereas you my people, whom the enemy hated more than them, are by
my grace and love towards you delivered; read ([Rom
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013)).

[Malachi 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 1:6</span></span>

A son honoureth \[his\] father, and a servant his master: if then I
\[be\] a father, where \[is\] mine honour? and if I \[be\] a master,
where \[is\] my fear? saith the LORD of hosts unto you, (d) O priests,
that despise my name. And ye say, (e) Wherein have we despised thy name?

\(d\) Besides the rest of the people he mainly condemns the priests,
because they should have reproved others for their hypocrisy, and for
not yielding to God, and should not have hardened them by their example
to do greater evils.

\(e\) He notes their great hypocrisy, who would not see their faults,
but most impudently covered them, and so were blind guides.

[Malachi 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mal 1:7</span></span>

Ye offer (f) polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we
polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of

the LORD \[is\] (g) contemptible.

\(f\) You receive all types of offerings for your own greediness, and do
not examine whether they are according to my Law or not.

\(g\) Not that they said this, but by their doings they declared it.

[Malachi 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mal 1:8</span></span>

And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, \[is it\] (h) not evil? and if
ye offer the lame and sick, \[is it\] not evil? offer it now unto thy
governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith the
LORD of hosts.

\(h\) You make it no fault: and by this he condemns them that think it
sufficient to serve God partly as he has commanded, and partly after
man's fantasy, and so do not come to the pureness of religion, which he
requires. And therefore in reproach he shows them that a mortal man
would not be content to be served in such a way.

[Malachi 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mal 1:9</span></span>

And now, I pray you, (i) beseech God that he will be gracious unto us:
this hath been by your means: will he regard (k) your persons? saith the
LORD of hosts.

\(i\) He derides the priests who deceived the people in saying that they
prayed for them, and shows that they were the occasion that these evils
came upon the people.

\(k\) Will God consider your office and state, seeing you are so
covetous and wicked?

[Malachi 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 1:10</span></span>

Who \[is there\] even among you (l) that would shut the doors \[for
nought\]? neither do ye kindle \[fire\] on mine altar for nought. I have
no pleasure in you, saith the LORD of hosts, neither will I accept an
offering at your hand.

\(l\) Because the Levites who kept the doors did not test whether the
sacrifices that came in were according to the Law, God wishes that they
would rather shut the doors, than to receive such as were not perfect.

[Malachi 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mal 1:11</span></span>

For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my
name \[shall be\] (m) great among the Gentiles; and in every place
incense \[shall be\] offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my
name \[shall be\] great among the heathen, saith the LORD of hosts.

\(m\) God shows that their ingratitude and neglect of his true service
will be the cause of the calling of the Gentiles: and here the Prophet
that was under the Law, used words that the people would understand, and
by the altar and sacrifice he means the spiritual service of God, which
should be under the Gospel, when an end would be made to all these legal
ceremonies by Christ's sacrifice alone.

[Malachi 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mal 1:12</span></span>

But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, (n) The table of the LORD
\[is\] polluted; and the fruit thereof, \[even\] his meat, \[is\]
contemptible.

\(n\) Both the priests and the people were infected with this error,
that they did not regard what was offered: for they thought that God was
as well content with the lean, as with the fat. But in the meantime they
did not show the obedience to God which he required, and so committed
impiety, and also showed their contempt of God, and covetousness.

[Malachi 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mal 1:13</span></span>

Ye said also, Behold, what a (o) weariness \[is it\]! and ye have
snuffed at it, saith the LORD of hosts; and ye brought \[that which
was\] torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering:
should I accept this of your hand? saith the LORD.

\(o\) The priests and people were both weary with serving God, and did
not regard what manner of sacrifice and service they gave to God: for
that which was least profitable, was thought good enough for the Lord.

[Malachi 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mal 1:14</span></span>

But cursed \[be\] the deceiver, which hath in his flock (p) a male, and
voweth, and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I \[am\] a
great King, saith the LORD of hosts, and my name \[is\] dreadful among
the heathen.

\(p\) That is, has ability to serve the Lord according to his word, and
yet will serve him according to his covetous mind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 2](mal002)

</div>
