<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nahum Index](nah)  
  [Previous](mic007)  [Next](nah002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

[Nahum 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">nah 1:1</span></span>

The (a) burden of Nineveh. (b) The book of the vision of Nahum the (c)
Elkoshite.

The Argument - As those of Nineveh showed themselves prompt and ready to
receive the word of God at Jonah's preaching, and so turned to the Lord
by repentance, so after a certain time they gave themselves to worldly
means to increase their dominion, rather than seeking to continue in
that fear of God, and path in which they had begun. They cast off the
care of religion, and so returned to their vomit and provoked God's just
judgment against them, in afflicting his people. Therefore their city
Nineveh was destroyed, and Meroch-baladan, king of Babel (or as some
think, Nebuchadnezzar) enjoyed the empire of the Assyrians. But because
God has a continual care for his Church, he stirs up his Prophet to
comfort the godly, showing that the destruction of their enemies would
be for their consolation: and as it seems, he prophesies around the time
of Hezekiah, and not in the time of Manasseh his son, as the Jews write.

\(a\) See [Isa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001)

\(b\) The vision or revelation, which God commanded Nahum to write
concerning the Ninevites.

\(c\) That is, born in a poor village in the tribe of Simeon.

[Nahum 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">nah 1:2</span></span>

God \[is\] (d) jealous, and the LORD revengeth; the LORD revengeth, and
(e) \[is\] furious; the LORD will take vengeance on his adversaries, and
he reserveth \[wrath\] for his enemies.

\(d\) Meaning, of his glory.

\(e\) With his own he is but angry for a time, but his anger is never
appeased toward the reprobate, even though he defers it for a time.

[Nahum 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">nah 1:3</span></span>

The (f) LORD \[is\] slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at
all acquit \[the wicked\]: the LORD hath his way in the whirlwind and in
the storm, and the clouds \[are\] the dust of his feet.

\(f\) Thus the wicked would make God's mercy an occasion to sin, but the
Prophet wishes them to consider his power and justice.

[Nahum 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">nah 1:6</span></span>

\(g\) Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks
are thrown down by him.

\(g\) If all creatures are at God's commandment, and none are able to
resist his wrath, will man flatter himself, and think by any means to
escape, when he provokes his God to anger?

[Nahum 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">nah 1:7</span></span>

The LORD \[is\] good, (h) a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he
knoweth them that trust in him.

\(h\) Lest the faithful should be discouraged by hearing the power of
God, he shows them that his mercy appertains to them, and that he has
care over them.

[Nahum 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">nah 1:8</span></span>

But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the (i) place
thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.

\(i\) Signifying that God will suddenly destroy Nineveh and the
Assyrians in such a way, that they will lie in perpetual darkness, and
never recover their strength again.

[Nahum 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">nah 1:9</span></span>

What do ye (k) imagine against the LORD? he will make an utter end:
affliction shall not rise up the second time.

\(k\) He shows that the undertakings of the Assyrians against Judah and
the Church were against God, and therefore he would so destroy them the
first time, that he would not need to return the second time.

[Nahum 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">nah 1:10</span></span>

For while \[they be\] folden together \[as\] (l) thorns, and while they
are drunken \[as\] drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully
dry.

\(l\) Though the Assyrians think themselves like thorns that prick on
all sides, yet the Lord will set fire on them, and as drunken men are
not able to stand against any force, so they will not be able to resist
him at all.

[Nahum 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">nah 1:11</span></span>

There is \[one\] (m) come out of thee, that imagineth evil against the
LORD, a wicked counsellor.

\(m\) Which may be understood either of Sennacherib, or of the whole
body of the people of Nineveh.

[Nahum 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">nah 1:12</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD; Though \[they be\] (n) quiet, and likewise many,
yet thus shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through. Though I
have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.

\(n\) Though they think themselves in most safety, and of greatest
strength, yet when God will pass by, he will destroy them: nonetheless,
he comforts his Church, and promises to stop punishing them by the
Assyrians.

[Nahum 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">nah 1:14</span></span>

And the LORD hath given a commandment concerning thee, \[that\] no more
of thy name be (o) sown: out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the
graven image and the molten image: I will make thy grave; for thou art
vile.

\(o\) Meaning, Sennacherib, who would have no more children, but be
slain in the house of his gods; ([Kg2
19:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#036)).

[Nahum 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">nah 1:15</span></span>

Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings,
that publisheth (p) peace! O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy
vows: for the wicked shall no more pass through thee; he is utterly cut
off.

\(p\) Which peace the Jews would enjoy by the death of Sennacherib.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 2](nah002)

</div>
