<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1001)  [Next](pe1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001)

[1 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 2:1</span></span>

Wherefore (1) laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, and all evil speakings,

\(1\) Having laid for the foundation the Spirit of God effectually
working by the word, and having built on it three virtues which are the
grounds of all Christian actions, that is, faith, hope, and charity: now
he proceeds to a general exhortation the first part being that we flee
all show of both secret and open malice.

[1 Peter 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe1 2:2</span></span>

\(2\) As (a) newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby:

\(2\) The second is, that being newly begotten and born of the new seed
of the incorrupt word, drinking and sucking greedily the same word as
milk, we should grow more and more in that spiritual life. And he calls
it, sincere, not only because it is a most pure thing, but also that we
should take heed of them which corrupt it.

\(a\) As it becomes new men.

[1 Peter 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 2:3</span></span>

\(3\) If so be ye have tasted that the Lord \[is\] gracious.

\(3\) He commends that spiritual nourishment for the sweetness and
profit of it.

[1 Peter 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe1 2:4</span></span>

\(4\) To whom coming, \[as unto\] a living stone, disallowed indeed of
men, but chosen of God, \[and\] precious,

\(4\) He advances the same exhortation, but uses another kind of
borrowed speech, alluding to the temple. Therefore he says, that the
company of the faithful is as a certain holy and spiritual building,
built of the living stones, the foundation of which is Christ, as a
living stone sustaining all that are joined to him with his living power
and knitting them together with himself, although this great treasure is
neglected by men.

[1 Peter 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 2:5</span></span>

Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, (5) an holy
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ.

\(5\) Continuing, he compares us now to priests, placed for this purpose
in the spiritual temple, that we should serve him with a spiritual
worship, that is, with holiness and righteousness: but as the temple, so
is the priesthood built upon Christ, in who alone all our spiritual
offerings are accepted.

[1 Peter 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 2:6</span></span>

\(6\) Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in
Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him
shall not be confounded.

\(6\) He proves it by the testimony of the prophet Isaiah.

[1 Peter 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 2:7</span></span>

\(7\) Unto you therefore which believe \[he is\] precious: but unto them
which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same
is made the head of the corner,

\(7\) By setting the most blessed condition of the believers and
triumphs over the other: and also prevents an offence which arises here,
that none do more resist this doctrine of the gospel, than they who are
chiefest among the people of God. In the time that Peter wrote these
things, they were the priests, elders and scribes. Therefore he answers
first of all, that there is no reason why any man should be astonished
by their stubbornness, as though it were a strange matter, seeing as we
have been foretold so long before, that it should so come to pass: and
moreover, that it pleased God to create and make certain for this same
purpose, that the Son of God might be glorified in their just
condemnation. Thirdly, that the glory of Christ is hereby set forth
greatly, whereas nonetheless Christ remains the sure head of his Church,
and they that are offended by him, cast down and overthrow themselves,
and not Christ. Fourthly, although they are created for this end and
purpose, yet their fall and destruction is not to be attributed to God,
but to their own obstinate stubbornness, which comes between God's
decree, and the execution of it, or their condemnation, and is the true
and proper cause of their destruction.

[1 Peter 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe1 2:9</span></span>

\(8\) But ye \[are\] a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him
who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light:

\(8\) On the other hand, he describes the singular excellency of the
elect, and also lest any man should doubt whether he is chosen or not,
the apostle calls us back to the effectual calling, that is, to the
voice of the gospel sounding both in our ears and minds by the outward
preaching and ordinances, by which we may certainly understand that
everlasting decree of our salvation (which otherwise is most secret and
hidden) and that through the only mercy of God who freely chooses and
calls us. Therefore only this remains, faith, that by all means possible
we set forth the great goodness of the most mighty God.

[1 Peter 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe1 2:11</span></span>

\(9\) Dearly beloved, (10) I beseech \[you\] as strangers and pilgrims,
(11) abstain from fleshly lusts, (12) which war against the soul;

\(9\) He returns to that general exhortation.

\(10\) A reason why we ought to live holy, that is, because we are
citizens of heaven, and therefore we ought to live not according to the
laws of this world, which is most corrupt, but of the heavenly city,
although we are strangers in the world.

\(11\) Another argument: The children of God live not according to the
flesh, that is, according to that corrupt nature, but according to the
Spirit. Therefore fleshly actions should not rule us.

\(12\) The third argument: for although those lusts gratify us, yet they
do not cease to fight against our salvation.

[1 Peter 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 2:12</span></span>

\(13\) Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas
they speak against you as evildoers, they (14) may by \[your\] good
works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of (b)
visitation.

\(13\) The fourth argument, taken from the profit of so doing: for by
this means also we provide for our good name and estimation, while we
compel them at length to change their minds, who speak evil of us.

\(14\) The fifth argument, which is also of great force: because the
glory of God is greatly set forth by that means, by example of our
honest life, then the most corrupt men are brought to God, and submit
themselves to him.

\(b\) When God shall have mercy on them.

[1 Peter 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 2:13</span></span>

\(15\) Submit yourselves to (c) every ordinance of man (16) for the
Lord's sake: (17) whether it be to the king, as supreme;

\(15\) That which he spoke generally, he now expounds in detail,
describing individually every man's duty. First, he speaks of the
obedience that is due both to the laws, and also to the magistrates both
higher and lower.

\(c\) By ordinance, is meant the inventing and ordering of civil
government, which he calls ordinance of man, not because man invented
it, but because it is proper for men.

\(16\) The first argument: because the Lord is the author and avenger of
this policy of men, that is, which is set among men: and therefore the
true servants of the Lord must above all others be diligent observers of
this order.

\(17\) He prevents a frivolous objection which is made by some, who say
they will obey kings and the higher magistrates, and yet condemn their
ministers, as though their ministers were not armed with the authority
of those who sent them.

[1 Peter 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe1 2:14</span></span>

Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him (18) for the
punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.

\(18\) The second argument taken from the end of this order, which is
not only most profitable, but also very necessary: seeing that by that
this means virtue is rewarded, and vice punished, in which the
peacefulness and happiness if this life consists.

[1 Peter 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe1 2:15</span></span>

\(19\) For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men:

\(19\) He declares the first argument more amply, showing that Christian
liberty does among all things least or not at all consist in this, that
is, to cast off the bridle of laws (as at that time some altogether
unskilful in the kingdom of God reported) but rather in this, that
living holy lives according to the will of God, we should reveal to all
men, that the gospel is not a cloak for sin and wickedness, seeing we
are free of this sort, that yet we are still the servants of God, and
not of sin.

[1 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 2:17</span></span>

\(20\) (d) Honour all \[men\]. Love the (e) brotherhood. Fear God.
Honour the king.

\(20\) He divides the civil life of man, by occasion of those things of
which he spoke, into two general parts: that is, into those duties which
private men owe to private men, and especially the faithful to the
faithful, and into that subjection by which inferiors are bound to their
superiors, but so that kings are not made equal to God, seeing that fear
is due to God, and honour to kings.

\(d\) Be charitable and dutiful towards all men.

\(e\) The assembly and fellowship of the brethren. ([Zac
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014))

[1 Peter 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe1 2:18</span></span>

\(21\) Servants, \[be\] subject to \[your\] masters with all fear; not
only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward.

\(21\) He goes to the duty of servants towards their masters, which he
describes with these bounds, that servants submit themselves willingly
and not by force, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the
perverse and severe matters.

[1 Peter 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe1 2:19</span></span>

\(22\) For this \[is\] thankworthy, if a man for (f) conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.

\(22\) The taking away of an objection: indeed the condition of servants
is hard, especially if they have perverse masters, but thus their
subjection shall be so much more acceptable to God, if his will prevails
more with servants, than the masters wrong treatment.

\(f\) Because he makes a conscience of it, to offend God, by whose good
will and appointment he knows this burden is laid upon him.

[1 Peter 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe1 2:21</span></span>

\(23\) For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an (g) example, that ye should follow his steps:

\(23\) He alleviates the grievousness of servanthood, while he shows
plainly that Christ died also for servants, that they should bear so
much more patiently this inequality between men who are of the same
nature: moreover setting before them Christ the Lord of lords for an
example, he signifies that they cannot but seem too subdued, who show
themselves more grieved in the bearing of injuries, than Christ himself
who was most just, and most severely of all afflicted, and yet was most
patient.

\(g\) A metaphor of speech taken from painters and schoolmasters.

[1 Peter 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pe1 2:23</span></span>

Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not; but (24) committed \[himself\] to him (25) that judgeth
righteously:

\(24\) He shows them a remedy against injuries, that is, that they
commend their cause to God, by the example of Christ.

\(25\) He seems now to turn his speech to masters, who have also
themselves a master and judge in heaven, who will justly avenge the
injuries that are done to servants, without any respecting of people.

[1 Peter 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pe1 2:24</span></span>

\(26\) Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that
we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes
ye were healed.

\(26\) He calls the servants back from considering the injuries which
they are constrained to bear, to think instead on the greatness and the
end of the benefit received from Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 3](pe1003)

</div>
