<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](eph006)  [Next](phi002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

[Philippians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 1:1</span></span>

Paul (1) and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints
in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the (a) bishops and deacons:

\(1\) The Paul's point in writing this epistle, is to strengthen and
encourage the Philippians by all means possible, not to faint, but more
than that, to go forward. And first of all he commends their former
deeds, to exhort them to go forward: which thing he says he fully hopes
they will do, and that by the testimony of their abundant charity. But
in the meantime he refers all things to the grace of God.

\(a\) By the bishops are meant both the pastors who have the
dispensation of the word, and the elders that govern: and by deacons are
meant those that were stewards of the treasury of the Church, and had to
look after the poor.

[Philippians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">phi 1:5</span></span>

For your (b) fellowship in the gospel from the (c) first day until now;

\(b\) Because you also are made partakers of the Gospel.

\(c\) Ever since I knew you.

[Philippians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">phi 1:6</span></span>

Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work
in you will perform \[it\] until the (d) day of Jesus Christ:

\(d\) The Spirit of God will not forsake you to the very latter end,
until your mortal bodies will appear before the judgment of Christ to be
glorified.

[Philippians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">phi 1:7</span></span>

Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have you
in my heart; inasmuch as both in my (e) bonds, and in the defence and
confirmation of the gospel, ye all are partakers of my (f) grace.

\(e\) A true proof of a true knitting together with Christ.

\(f\) He calls his bonds "grace", as though he had received some
singular benefit.

[Philippians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">phi 1:8</span></span>

\(2\) For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the
bowels of Jesus Christ.

\(2\) He declares his good will towards them, in addition showing by
what means they may chiefly be strengthened and encouraged, that is, by
continual prayer.

[Philippians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">phi 1:9</span></span>

\(3\) And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge and \[in\] all judgment;

\(3\) He shows what thing we ought to chiefly desire, that is, first of
all that we may increase in the true knowledge of God (so that we may be
able to discern things that differ from one another), and also in
charity, that even to the end we may give ourselves to truly good works,
to the glory of God by Jesus Christ.

[Philippians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">phi 1:11</span></span>

Being filled with the (g) fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

\(g\) If righteousness is the tree, and good works the fruits, then the
papists are truly deceived indeed, when they say that works are the
cause of righteousness.

[Philippians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 1:12</span></span>

\(4\) But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things
\[which happened\] unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance
of the gospel;

\(4\) He prevents the offence that might come by his persecution, by
which different ones took occasion to disgrace his apostleship. And to
these he answers, that God has blessed his imprisonment in such a way,
that he has by that means become more famous, and the dignity of the
Gospel by this occasion is greatly enlarged, although not all men are
happy with it, yet it has enlarged indeed.

[Philippians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">phi 1:13</span></span>

So that my bonds (h) in Christ are manifest in all the (i) palace, and
in all other \[places\];

\(h\) For Christ's sake.

\(i\) In the emperor's court.

[Philippians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">phi 1:14</span></span>

And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are
much more bold to speak the (k) word without fear.

\(k\) The Gospel is called the word, to set forth the excellence of it.

[Philippians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">phi 1:16</span></span>

The one preach Christ of contention, not (l) sincerely, supposing to add
affliction to my bonds:

\(l\) Not with a pure mind: for otherwise their doctrine was pure.

[Philippians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">phi 1:18</span></span>

\(5\) What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in (m) pretence, or
in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice.

\(5\) He shows by setting forth his own example, that the end of our
afflictions is true joy, and this results through the power of the
Spirit of Christ, who he gives to those that ask.

\(m\) Under a false pretence and disguise: for they make Christ a cloak
for their ambition and envy.

[Philippians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">phi 1:20</span></span>

\(6\) According to my earnest expectation and \[my\] hope, that in
nothing I shall be ashamed, but \[that\] with all boldness, as always,
\[so\] now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether \[it be\]
by life, or by death.

\(6\) We must continue even to the end, with great confidence, having
nothing before our eyes except for Christ's glory alone, whether we live
or die.

[Philippians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">phi 1:22</span></span>

\(7\) But if I live in the (n) flesh, this \[is\] the fruit of my
labour: yet what I shall choose I wot not.

\(7\) An example of a true shepherd, who considers more how he may
profit his sheep, than he considers any benefit of his own whatsoever.

\(n\) To live in this mortal body.

[Philippians 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">phi 1:27</span></span>

\(8\) Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ:
that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your
affairs, that ye (o) stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving
together for the faith of the gospel;

\(8\) Having set down those things before in manner of a preface, he
descends now to exhortations, warning them first of all to consent both
in doctrine and mind, and afterward, that being thus knit together with
those common bonds, they continue through the strength of faith to bear
all adversity in such a way, that they allow nothing unworthy of the
profession of the Gospel.

\(o\) The word signifies to stand fast in, and it is proper to
wrestlers, that stand fast and do not move their feet back at all.

[Philippians 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">phi 1:28</span></span>

\(9\) And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an
evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.

\(9\) We ought not to be discouraged but rather encouraged by the
persecutions which the enemies of the Gospel imagine and practise
against us: seeing that the persecutions are certain witnesses from God
himself both of our salvation, and of the destruction of the wicked.

[Philippians 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">phi 1:29</span></span>

\(10\) For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake;

\(10\) He proves his statement that persecution is a token of our
salvation, because it is a gift of God to suffer for Christ, which gift
he bestows upon his own, as he does the gift of faith.

[Philippians 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">phi 1:30</span></span>

\(11\) Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear \[to
be\] in me.

\(11\) Now he shows for what purpose he made mention of his afflictions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 2](phi002)

</div>
