<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](phi001)  [Next](phi003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001)

[Philippians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 2:1</span></span>

If (1) \[there be\] therefore any consolation in (a) Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any (b) bowels and
mercies,

\(1\) A most earnest request to remove all those things, by which that
great and special consent and agreement is commonly broken, that is,
contention and pride, by which it comes to pass that they separate
themselves from one another.

\(a\) Any Christian comfort.

\(b\) If any seeking of inward love.

[Philippians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">phi 2:2</span></span>

Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the (c) same love,
\[being\] of one accord, of one mind.

\(c\) Equal love.

[Philippians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">phi 2:5</span></span>

\(2\) Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus:

\(2\) He sets before them a most perfect example of all modesty and
sweet conduct, Christ Jesus, whom we ought to follow with all our might:
who abased himself so much for our sakes, although he is above all, that
he took upon himself the form of a servant, that is, our flesh,
willingly subject to all weaknesses, even to the death of the cross.

[Philippians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">phi 2:6</span></span>

Who, being in the (d) form of God, (e) thought it not robbery to be (f)
equal with God:

\(d\) Such as God himself is, and therefore God, for there is no one in
all parts equal to God but God himself.

\(e\) Christ, that glorious and everlasting God, knew that he might
rightfully and lawfully not appear in the base flesh of man, but remain
with majesty fit for God: yet he chose rather to debase himself.

\(f\) If the Son is equal with the Father, then is there of necessity an
equality, which Arrius that heretic denies: and if the Son is compared
to the Father, then is there a distinction of persons, which Sabellius
that heretic denies.

[Philippians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">phi 2:7</span></span>

But made himself of (g) no reputation, and took upon him the (h) form of
a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:

\(g\) He brought himself from all things, as it were to nothing.

\(h\) By taking our manhood upon him.

[Philippians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">phi 2:9</span></span>

\(3\) Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a (i)
name which is above every name:

\(3\) He shows the most glorious even of Christ's submission, to teach
us that modesty is the true way to true praise and glory.

\(i\) Dignity and high distinction, and that which accompanies it.

[Philippians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">phi 2:10</span></span>

That at the name of Jesus (k) every knee should bow, of \[things\] in
heaven, and \[things\] in earth, and \[things\] under the earth;

\(k\) All creatures will at length be subject to Christ.

[Philippians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">phi 2:11</span></span>

And \[that\] (l) every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ \[is\]
Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

\(l\) Every nation.

[Philippians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 2:12</span></span>

\(4\) Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, (m) work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling.

\(4\) The conclusion: we must go on to salvation with humility and
submission by the way of our vocation.

\(m\) He is said to make an end of his salvation who runs in the race of
righteousness.

[Philippians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">phi 2:13</span></span>

\(5\) For it is God which worketh in you both (n) to will and to do of
\[his\] good pleasure.

\(5\) A most sure and grounded argument against pride, because we have
nothing in us praiseworthy, but it comes from the free gift of God, and
is outside of us, for we do not have ability or power, so much as to
will well (much less to do well), except only by the free mercy of God.

\(n\) The reason why we are not statues; and yet we do not will well by
nature, but only because God has made of our wicked will a good will.

[Philippians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">phi 2:14</span></span>

\(6\) Do all things without murmurings and disputings:

\(6\) He describes modesty by the contrary effects of pride, teaching us
that it is far both from all malicious and secret or inward hatred, and
also from open contentions and brawlings.

[Philippians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">phi 2:15</span></span>

\(7\) That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye
shine as lights in the world;

\(7\) To be short, he requires a life without fault, and pure, so that
being enlightened with the word of God, they may shine in the darkness
of this world.

[Philippians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">phi 2:16</span></span>

Holding forth the (o) word of life; (8) that I may rejoice in the day of
Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain.

\(o\) The Gospel is called the word of life, because of the effects
which it produces. (8) Again he urges them forward, setting before them
his true apostolic care that he had for them: in addition comforting
them to the end that they should not be sorry for the greatness of his
afflictions, no, not even if he should die to make perfect their
sacrifice with his blood, as it were with a drink offering.

[Philippians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">phi 2:17</span></span>

Yea, and if I be offered upon the (p) sacrifice and service of your
faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all.

\(p\) As if he said, I brought you Philippians to Christ, and my desire
is that you present yourselves a living sacrifice to him, and then it
will not grieve me to be offered up as a drink offering, to accomplish
this your spiritual offering.

[Philippians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">phi 2:19</span></span>

\(9\) But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you,
that I also may be of (q) good comfort, when I know your state.

\(9\) Moreover, he strengthens and encourages their minds both by
sending back Epaphroditus to them, whose fidelity towards them, and
great pains in helping him, he commends: and also promising to send
Timothy shortly to them, by whose presence they will receive great
benefit. And he hopes also himself to come shortly to them, if God
wills.

\(q\) May be confirmed in the joy of my mind.

[Philippians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">phi 2:21</span></span>

For (r) all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

\(r\) The most part.

[Philippians 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">phi 2:30</span></span>

Because for the (s) work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding
his life, to supply your lack of service toward me.

\(s\) He calls here the work of Christ the visiting of Christ, being
poor and in bonds in the person of Paul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 3](phi003)

</div>
