<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom007)  [Next](rom009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)

[Romans 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 8:1</span></span>

\[There is\] (1) therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who (2) walk not after the (a) flesh, but after the
Spirit.

\(1\) A conclusion of all the former discussion, from ([Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)) to this verse: seeing that we,
being justified by faith in Christ, obtain remission of sins and
imputation of righteousness, and are also sanctified, it follows from
this that those who are grafted into Christ by faith, need have no fear
of condemnation. (2) The fruits of the Spirit, or effects of
sanctification, which are begun in us, do not ingraft us into Christ,
but declare that we are grafted into him.

\(a\) Do not follow the flesh as their guide: for he is not said to live
after the flesh that has the Holy Spirit for his guide, even though he
sometimes takes a step off of the path.

[Romans 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 8:2</span></span>

\(3\) For the (b) law of the Spirit of (c) life in (d) Christ Jesus hath
(e) made me free from the law of sin and death.

\(3\) A preventing of an objection: seeing that the power of the Spirit
is in us is so weakly, how may we gather by this that there is no
condemnation for those that have that power? Because, he says, that
power of the life-giving Spirit which is so weak in us, is most perfect
and most mighty in Christ, and being imputed to us who believe, causes
us to be thought of as though there were no relics of corruption and
death in us. Therefore until now Paul reasons of remission of sins, and
imputation of fulfilling the Law, and also of sanctification which is
begun in us: but now he speaks of the perfect imputation of Christ's
manhood, which part was necessarily required for the full appeasing of
our consciences: for our sins are destroyed by the blood of Christ, and
the guiltiness of our corruption is covered with the imputation of
Christ's obedience, and the corruption itself (which the apostle calls
sinful sin) is healed in us little by little, by the gift of
sanctification: but yet it is not complete, in that it still lacks
another remedy, that is, the perfect sanctification of Christ's own
flesh, which is also imputed to us.

\(b\) The power and authority of the Spirit, against which is set the
tyranny of sin.

\(c\) Which kills the old man, and brings the new man to life.

\(d\) That is, absolutely and perfectly.

\(e\) For Christ's sanctification being imputed to us perfects our
sanctification which is begun in us.

[Romans 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 8:3</span></span>

\(4\) For what the law (f) could not do, in that it was weak through the
(g) flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of (h) sinful flesh,
and for (i) sin, (k) condemned sin in the flesh:

\(4\) He does not use an argument here, but expounds the mystery of
sanctification, which is imputed to us: because, he says, the power of
the law was not such (and that by reason of the corruption of our
nature) that it could make man pure and perfect, and because it rather
kindled the flame of sin than put it out and extinguish it, therefore
God clothed his Son with flesh just like our sinful flesh, in which he
utterly abolished our corruption, that being accounted thoroughly pure
and without fault in him, apprehended and laid hold of by faith, we
might be found to fully have the singular perfection which the law
requires, and therefore that there might be no condemnation in us.

\(f\) Which is not the fault of the law, but is due to our fault.

\(g\) In man when he is not born again, whose disease the law could
point out, but it could not heal it.

\(h\) Of man's nature which is corrupt through sin, until Christ
sanctified it.

\(i\) To abolish sin in our flesh.

\(k\) Showed that sin has no right to be in us.

[Romans 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 8:4</span></span>

That the (l) righteousness of the law might be fulfilled (5) in us, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

\(l\) The very substance of the law of God might be fulfilled, or that
same which the law requires, that we may be found just before God: for
if with our justification there is joined that sanctification which is
imputed to us, we are just, according to the perfect form which the Lord
requires. (5) He returns to that which he said, that the sanctification
which is begun in us is a sure testimony of our ingrafting into Christ,
which is a most plentiful fruit of a godly and honest life.

[Romans 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 8:5</span></span>

\(6\) For they that are after the (m) flesh do mind the things of the
flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit.

\(6\) A reason why walking after the flesh does not agree to those who
are grafted into Christ, but to walk after the Spirit agrees and is
proper for them: because, he says, those who are after the flesh savour
the things of the flesh, but those who are after the Spirit, the things
of the Spirit.

\(m\) They that live as the flesh leads them.

[Romans 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 8:6</span></span>

\(7\) For to be carnally minded \[is\] death; but to be spiritually
minded \[is\] life and peace.

\(7\) He demonstrates what follows from his argument: because whatever
the flesh savours, that brings about death: and whatever the Spirit
savours, that is conducive to joy and everlasting life.

[Romans 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 8:7</span></span>

\(8\) Because the carnal mind \[is\] enmity against God: (9) for it is
not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

\(8\) A reason and proof why the wisdom of the flesh is death: because,
he says, it is the enemy of God. (9) A reason why the wisdom of the
flesh is enmity to God, because it neither wants to nor can be subject
to him, and by flesh he means a man that is not regenerated.

[Romans 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 8:8</span></span>

\(10\) So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.

\(10\) The conclusion. Therefore they that walk after the flesh cannot
please God: by which it follows that they are not grafted into Christ.

[Romans 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 8:9</span></span>

\(11\) But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the
Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his.

\(11\) He addresses the others, that is, those who walk after the
Spirit, of whom we have to understand contrary things to the former: and
first of all, he defines what it is to be in the Spirit, or to be
sanctified: that is, to have the Spirit of God dwelling in us. Then he
declares that sanctification is so joined and knit to our grafting into
Christ, that it can by no means be separated.

[Romans 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 8:10</span></span>

\(12\) And if Christ \[be\] in you, the (n) body \[is\] dead because of
sin; but the Spirit \[is\] life because of righteousness.

\(12\) He confirms the faithful against the relics of flesh and sin,
granting that these things are yet (as appears by the corruption which
is in them) having effects on one of their parts (which he calls the
body, that is to say, a lump) which is not yet purged from this earthly
filthiness in death: but in addition not wanting to doubt at all of the
happy success of this combat, because even this little spark of the
Spirit (that is, of the grace of regeneration), which is evidently in
them as appears by the fruits of righteousness, is the seed of life.

\(n\) The flesh, or all that which as yet remains fast in the grips of
sin and death.

[Romans 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 8:11</span></span>

\(13\) But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his Spirit that (o) dwelleth in you.

\(13\) A confirmation of the former sentence. You have the very same
Spirit which Christ has: therefore at length he will do the same in you,
that he did in Christ, that is, when all infirmities being utterly laid
aside, and death overcome, he will clothe you with heavenly glory.

\(o\) By the strength and power of him, who showed the same might first
in our head, and daily works in his members.

[Romans 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 8:12</span></span>

\(14\) Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
after the flesh.

\(14\) An exhortation to oppress the flesh daily more and more by the
power of the Spirit of regeneration, because (he says) you are debtors
to God, in that you have received so many benefits from him.

[Romans 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 8:13</span></span>

\(15\) For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

\(15\) Another reason for the profit that follows: for those who battle
and fight valiantly will have everlasting life.

[Romans 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 8:14</span></span>

\(16\) For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.

\(16\) A confirmation of this reason: for they are the children of God
who are governed by his Spirit, therefore they will have everlasting
life.

[Romans 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 8:15</span></span>

\(17\) For ye have not received the (p) spirit of bondage again (q) to
fear; but ye have received the Spirit of (r) adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father.

\(17\) He declares and expounds (as an aside) in these two verses by
what right this name, to be called the children of God, is given to the
believers: and it is because, he says, they have received the grace of
the gospel, in which God shows himself, not (as before in the
proclaiming of the law) terrible and fearful, but a most gentle and
loving Father in Christ, so that with great boldness we call him Father,
the Holy Spirit sealing this adoption in our hearts by faith.

\(p\) By the "Spirit" is meant the Holy Spirit whom we are said to
receive, when he works in our minds.

\(q\) Which fear the Spirit stirred up in our minds by the preaching of
the law.

\(r\) Who seals our adoption in our minds, and therefore opens our
mouths.

[Romans 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 8:17</span></span>

\(18\) And if children, then (s) heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ; (19) if so be that we suffer with \[him\], that we may be
also glorified together.

\(18\) A proof of what follows from the confirmation: because he who is
the son of God enjoys God with Christ.

\(s\) Partakers of our Father's goods, and that freely, because we are
children by adoption.

\(19\) Now Paul teaches by what way the sons of God come to that
happiness, that is, by the cross, as Christ himself did: and in addition
declares to them fountains of comfort: firstly, that we have Christ a
companion and associate of our afflictions: secondly, that we will also
be his companions in everlasting glory.

[Romans 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 8:18</span></span>

\(20\) For I (t) reckon that the sufferings of this present time \[are\]
not worthy \[to be compared\] with the glory which shall be revealed in
us.

\(20\) Thirdly, that this glory which we look for surpasses a thousand
times the misery of our afflictions.

\(t\) All being well considered, I gather.

[Romans 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 8:19</span></span>

\(21\) For the earnest expectation of the (u) creature waiteth for the
manifestation of the sons of God.

\(21\) Fourthly, he plainly teaches us that we will certainly be renewed
from that confusion and horrible deformation of the whole world, which
cannot be continual, as it was not this way at the beginning: but as it
had a beginning by the sin of man, for whom it was made by the ordinance
of God, so will it at length be restored with the elect.

\(u\) All this world.

[Romans 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 8:20</span></span>

For the creature was made subject to (x) vanity, not (y) willingly, but
by reason (z) of him who hath subjected \[the same\] in (a) hope,

\(x\) Is subject to a vanishing and disappearing state.

\(y\) Not by their natural inclination.

\(z\) That they should obey the Creator's commandment, whom it pleased
to show by their sickly state, how greatly he was displeased with man.

\(a\) God would not make the world subject to be cursed forever because
of the sin of man, but gave it hope that it would be restored.

[Romans 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 8:21</span></span>

Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the (b) bondage
of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

\(b\) From the corruption which they are now subject to, they will be
delivered and changed into the blessed state of incorruption, which will
be revealed when the sons of God will be advanced to glory.

[Romans 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 8:22</span></span>

For we know that the whole creation groaneth and (c) travaileth in pain
together until now.

\(c\) By this word is meant not only exceeding sorrow, but also the
fruit that follows from it.

[Romans 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 8:23</span></span>

\(22\) And not only \[they\], but ourselves also, which have the
firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within (d) ourselves,
waiting for the adoption, \[to wit\], (e) the redemption of our body.

\(22\) Fifthly, if the rest of the world looks for a restoring, groaning
as it were for it and that not in vain, let us also sigh, indeed, let us
be more certainly persuaded of our redemption to come, for we already
have the first fruits of the Spirit.

\(d\) Even from the bottom of our hearts.

\(e\) The last restoring, which will be the accomplishment of our
adoption.

[Romans 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 8:24</span></span>

\(23\) For we are saved by hope: but (f) hope that is seen is not hope:
for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?

\(23\) Sixthly, hope is necessarily joined with faith: seeing then that
we believe those things which we are not yet in possession of, and hope
does not refer to the thing that is present, we must therefore hope and
patiently wait for that which we believe will come to pass.

\(f\) This is spoken by the figure of speech metonymy, that is, "hope",
which stands for that which is hoped for.

[Romans 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 8:26</span></span>

\(24\) Likewise the Spirit also (g) helpeth our infirmities: for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh
(h) intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.

\(24\) Seventhly, there is no reason why we should faint under the
burden of afflictions, seeing that prayers minister to us a most sure
help: which cannot be frustrated, seeing that they proceed from the
Spirit of God who dwells in us.

\(g\) Bears our burden, as it were, so that we do not faint under it.

\(h\) Incites us to pray, and tells us as it were within, what we will
say, and how we will speak.

[Romans 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 8:27</span></span>

And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what \[is\] the (i) mind of the
Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints (k) according to
\[the will of\] God.

\(i\) What sighs and sobs proceed from the impulse of his Spirit.

\(k\) Because he teaches the godly to pray according to God's will.

[Romans 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 8:28</span></span>

\(25\) And we know that (l) all things work together for good to them
that love God, to them who are the called according to \[his\] (m)
purpose.

\(25\) Eighthly, we are not afflicted, either by chance or to our harm,
but by God's providence for our great profit: who as he chose us from
the beginning, so has he predestined us to be made similar to the image
of his Son: and therefore will bring us in his time, being called and
justified, to glory, by the cross.

\(l\) Not only afflictions, but whatever else.

\(m\) He calls that "purpose" which God has from everlasting appointed
with himself, according to his good will and pleasure.

[Romans 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 8:30</span></span>

Moreover whom he did (n) predestinate, them he also called: and whom he
called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also
glorified.

\(n\) He uses the past tense for the present time, as the Hebrews use,
who sometimes describe something that is to come by using the past
tense, to signify the certainty of it: and he also is referring to God's
continual working.

[Romans 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 8:31</span></span>

\(26\) What shall we then say to these things? If God \[be\] for us, who
\[can be\] against us?

\(26\) Ninethly, we have no reason to fear that the Lord will not give
us whatever is profitable for us, seeing that he has not spared his own
Son to save us.

[Romans 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 8:32</span></span>

He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also freely (o) give us all things?

\(o\) Give us freely.

[Romans 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">rom 8:33</span></span>

\(27\) Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? \[It is\]
(p) God that justifieth.

\(27\) A most glorious and comfortable conclusion of the whole second
part of this epistle, that is of the treatise of justification. There
are no accusers that we have need to be afraid of before God, seeing
that God himself absolves us as just: and therefore much less need we to
fear damnation, seeing that we rest upon the death and resurrection, the
almighty power and defence of Jesus Christ. Therefore what can there be
so weighty in this life, or of so great force and power, that might
cause us to fear, as though we might fall from the love of God, with
which he loves us in Christ? Surely nothing, seeing that it is in itself
most constant and sure, and also in us being confirmed by steadfast
faith.

\(p\) Who pronounces us not only guiltless, but also perfectly just in
his Son.

[Romans 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">rom 8:35</span></span>

Who shall separate us from the love of (q) Christ? \[shall\]
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword?

\(q\) With which Christ loves us.

[Romans 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">rom 8:37</span></span>

\(r\) Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him
that loved us.

\(r\) We not only overcome so great and many miseries and calamities,
but are also more than conquerors in all of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 9](rom009)

</div>
