<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom015)  [Next](co1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001)

[Romans 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 16:1</span></span>

I (1) commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the
church which is at Cenchrea:

\(1\) Having made an end of the whole discussion, he comes now to
familiar commendations and salutations, and that to good consideration
and purpose, that is, that the Romans might know who are most to be
honoured and to be considered among them: and also whom they ought to
set before them to follow: and therefore he attributes to every of them
individual and singular testimonies.

[Romans 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 16:2</span></span>

That ye receive her in the (a) Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye
assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you: for she hath
been a succourer of many, and of myself also.

\(a\) For Christ's sake, which appropriately belongs to the Christians,
for the heathen philosophers have a resemblance of the same virtues.

[Romans 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 16:5</span></span>

Likewise \[greet\] the (b) church that is in their house. Salute my
wellbeloved Epaenetus, who is the (c) firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ.

\(b\) The company of the faithful, for in so great a city as that was,
there were different companies.

\(c\) For he was the first of Achaia that believed in Christ: and this
type of speech is an allusion to the ceremonies of the law.

[Romans 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 16:7</span></span>

Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellowprisoners, who are
of note among the apostles, who also were in (d) Christ before me.

\(d\) Ingrafted by faith.

[Romans 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 16:16</span></span>

Salute one another with an holy (e) kiss. The churches of Christ salute
you.

\(e\) He calls that a holy kiss which proceeds from a heart that is full
of that holy love: now this is to be understood as referring to the
manner used in those days.

[Romans 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 16:17</span></span>

\(2\) Now I beseech you, brethren, (f) mark them which cause divisions
and offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid
them.

\(2\) As by describing by name those who were worthy of commendation he
sufficiently declared whom they ought to hear and follow, so does he now
point out to them whom they ought to take heed of, yet he does not name
them, because it was not necessary.

\(f\) Watchfully and diligently, as though you should scout for your
enemies in a watch tower.

[Romans 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 16:18</span></span>

For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
belly; and by (g) good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple.

\(g\) The word which he uses signifies a promising which accomplishes
nothing, and if you hear any such, you may assure yourself that he who
promises to you is more concerned about receiving from you than he is
concerned about giving to you.

[Romans 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 16:19</span></span>

\(3\) For your obedience is come abroad unto all \[men\]. I am glad
therefore on your behalf: but yet I would have you (h) wise unto that
which is good, and (i) simple concerning evil.

\(3\) Simplicity must be joined with wisdom.

\(h\) Furnished with the knowledge of the truth and wisdom, so that you
may embrace good things, and avoid evil, beware of the deceits and
snares of false prophets, and resist them openly: and this place plainly
destroys the papists faith of credit, whereas they maintain it to be
sufficient for one man to believe as another man believes, without
further knowledge or examination what the matter is, or what ground it
has: using these daily speeches, "We believe as our fathers believed,
and we believe as the Church believes."

\(i\) As men that know no way to deceive, much less deceive indeed.

[Romans 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 16:20</span></span>

\(4\) And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[be\] with you. Amen.

\(4\) We must fight with a certain hope of victory.

[Romans 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 16:21</span></span>

\(5\) Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my
kinsmen, salute you.

\(5\) He adds salutations, partly to renew mutual friendship, and partly
to the end that this epistle might be of some weight with the Romans,
having the confirmation of so many that subscribed to it.

[Romans 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 16:22</span></span>

I Tertius, who (k) wrote \[this\] epistle, salute you in the Lord.

\(k\) Wrote it as Paul uttered it.

[Romans 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 16:24</span></span>

\(6\) The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[be\] with you all. Amen.

\(6\) Now taking his leave of them this third time, he wishes that to
them, upon which all the force of the former doctrine depends.

[Romans 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 16:25</span></span>

\(7\) Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my
gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation
of the (l) mystery, which was kept secret since the world began,

\(7\) He sets forth the power and wisdom of God with great thanksgiving,
which especially appears in the gospel, and makes mention also of the
calling of the Gentiles, to confirm the Romans in the hope of this
salvation.

\(l\) That secret and hidden thing, that is to say, the calling of the
Gentiles.

[Romans 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 16:26</span></span>

But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets,
according to the commandment of the everlasting God, (m) made known to
all nations for the obedience of faith:

\(m\) Offered and exhibited to all nations to be known.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 1](co1001)

</div>
