<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom008)  [Next](rom010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

[Romans 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 9:1</span></span>

I say (1) the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost,

\(1\) The third part of this epistle, which goes to the twelfth chapter,
in which Paul ascends to the higher causes of faith: and first of all,
because he purposed to speak much of the casting off of the Jews, he
uses a declaration, saying by a double or triple oath, and by witnessing
of his great desire towards their salvation, his singular love towards
them, and in addition granting to them all their privileges.

[Romans 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 9:3</span></span>

For I could wish that myself were (a) accursed from Christ for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the (b) flesh:

\(a\) The apostle loved his brethren so completely that if it had been
possible he would have been ready to have redeemed the castaways of the
Israelites with the loss of his own soul forever: for this word
"accursed" signifies as much in this place.

\(b\) Being brethren by flesh, as from one nation and country.

[Romans 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 9:4</span></span>

Who are Israelites; to whom \[pertaineth\] the adoption, and the (c)
glory, and the (d) covenants, and the giving of the (e) law, and the (f)
service \[of God\], and the (g) promises;

\(c\) The ark of the covenant, which was a token of God's presence.

\(d\) The tables of the covenant, and this is spoken by the figure of
speech metonymy.

\(e\) Of the judicial law.

\(f\) The ceremonial law.

\(g\) Which were made to Abraham and to his posterity.

[Romans 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 9:5</span></span>

Whose \[are\] the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ
\[came\], (2) who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.

\(2\) Or, "who is God over all, blessed for ever." A most manifest
testimony of the Godhead and divinity of Christ.

[Romans 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 9:6</span></span>

\(3\) Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect. For they
\[are\] not all (h) Israel, which are of Israel:

\(3\) He enters into the handling of predestination, by means of
presenting an objection: How may it be that Israel is cast off, and that
in addition we must also make the covenant which God made with Abraham
and his seed, frustrated and void? He answers therefore that God's word
is true, although Israel is cast off: for the election of the people of
Israel is so general and common, that nonetheless the same God chooses
by his secret council those as it pleases him. So then this is the
proposition and state of this treatise: the grace of salvation is
offered generally in such a way, that in spite of how it is offered, the
efficacy of it pertains only to the elect.

\(h\) Israel in the first place, is taken for Jacob: and in the second,
for the Israelites.

[Romans 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 9:7</span></span>

Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, \[are they\] all
children: (4) but, In (i) Isaac shall thy seed be called.

\(4\) The first proof is taken from the example of Abraham's own house,
in which Isaac only was considered the son, and that by God's ordinance:
although Ishmael also was born of Abraham, and circumcised before Isaac.

\(i\) Isaac will be your true and natural son, and therefore heir of the
blessing.

[Romans 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 9:8</span></span>

\(5\) That is, They which are the children of the (k) flesh, these
\[are\] not the children of God: but the children of the (l) promise are
counted for the seed.

\(5\) A general application of the former proof or example.

\(k\) Who are born of Abraham by the course of nature.

\(l\) Who are born by virtue of the promise.

[Romans 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 9:9</span></span>

\(6\) For this \[is\] the word of promise, At this time will I come, and
Sara shall have a son.

\(6\) A reason of that application: because Isaac was born by the power
of the promise, and therefore he was not chosen, no, he was not at all,
except by the free will of God: by which it follows that the promise is
the fountain of predestination, and not the flesh, from which promise
the particular election proceeds, that is, that the elect are born
elect, and not that they are first born, and then after elected, by God
who predestinates.

[Romans 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 9:10</span></span>

\(7\) And not only \[this\]; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one,
\[even\] by our father Isaac;

\(7\) Another strong and persuasive proof taken from the example of Esau
and Jacob, who were both born of the same Isaac, who was the son of
promise of one mother, and were born at the same time, and not at
different times as Ishmael and Isaac were: and yet nonetheless, as Esau
was cast off, only Jacob was chosen: and that before their birth, that
neither any goodness of Jacob's might be thought to be the cause of his
election, neither any wickedness of Esau to be the cause of his casting
away.

[Romans 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 9:11</span></span>

(For \[the children\] being not yet born, neither having done any good
or evil, that the (m) purpose of God according to election might (8)
stand, not of works, but of him that calleth;)

\(m\) God's decree which proceeds from only his good will, by which it
pleases him to choose one, and refuse the other. (8) Paul does not say,
"might be made", but "being made might remain". Therefore they are
deceived who make foreseen faith the cause of election, and foreknown
infidelity the cause of reprobation.

[Romans 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 9:12</span></span>

\(9\) It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.

\(9\) He proves the casting away of Esau in that he was made servant to
his brother: and proves the choosing of Jacob in that he was made lord
of his brother, although his brother was the first begotten. And in
order that no man might take what God had said, and refer it to external
things, the apostle shows out of Malachi, who is a good interpreter of
Moses, that the servitude of Esau was joined with the hatred of God, and
the lordship of Jacob with the love of God.

[Romans 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 9:14</span></span>

\(10\) What shall we say then? \[Is there\] (n) unrighteousness with
God? God forbid.

\(10\) The first objection: if God loves or hates without any
consideration of worthiness or unworthiness, then is he unjust, because
he may love those who are unworthy, and hate those who are worthy? The
apostle detests this blasphemy, and afterward responds to it in depth,
point by point.

\(n\) Man knows no other causes of love or hatred, but those that are in
the persons, and thereupon this objection arises.

[Romans 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 9:15</span></span>

\(11\) For he saith to Moses, I will (o) have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have (p) compassion on whom I will have compassion.

\(11\) He answers first with regard to those who are chosen to
salvation, in the choosing of whom he denies that God may seem unjust,
although he chooses and predestinates to salvation those that are not
yet born, without any respect of worthiness: because he does not bring
the chosen to the appointed end except by the means of his mercy, which
is a cause discussed under predestination. Now mercy presupposes misery,
and again, misery presupposes sin or voluntary corruption of mankind,
and corruption presupposes a pure and perfect creation. Moreover, mercy
is shown by her degrees: that is, by calling, by faith, by justification
and sanctification, so that at length we come to glorification, as the
apostle will show afterwards. Now all these things orderly following the
purpose of God, do clearly prove that he can by no means seem unjust in
loving and saving his.

\(o\) I will be merciful and favourable to whom I wish to be favourable.

\(p\) I will have compassion on whoever I wish to have compassion.

[Romans 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 9:16</span></span>

\(12\) So then \[it is\] not of him that (q) willeth, nor of him that
runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.

\(12\) The conclusion of the answer: therefore God is not unjust in
choosing and saving from his free goodness, such as it pleases him: as
he also answered Moses when he prayed for all of the people.

\(q\) By "will" he means the thought and endeavour of heart, and by
"running", good works, to neither of which he gives the praise, but only
to the mercy of God.

[Romans 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 9:17</span></span>

\(13\) For the (r) scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same
purpose have I (s) raised thee up, that I might (14) shew my power in
thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth.

\(13\) Now he answers concerning the reprobate, or those whom God hates
who are not yet born, and has appointed to destruction, without any
respect of unworthiness. And first of all he proves this to be true, by
alleging the testimony of God himself concerning Pharaoh, whom he
stirred up to this purpose, that he might be glorified in Pharaoh's
hardening and just punishing.

\(r\) God speaks unto Pharaoh in the scripture, or, the scripture in
talking about God, in this way talks to Pharaoh.

\(s\) Brought you into this world.

\(14\) Secondly, he brings the goal of God's counsel, to show that there
is no unrighteousness in him. Now the main goal is not properly and
simply the destruction of the wicked, but God's glory which appears in
their rightful punishment.

[Romans 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 9:18</span></span>

\(15\) Therefore hath he mercy on whom he (t) will \[have mercy\], and
whom he will he hardeneth.

\(15\) A conclusion of the full answer to the first objection: therefore
seeing that God does not save those whom he freely chose according to
his good will and pleasure, but by justifying and sanctifying them by
his grace, his counsels in saving them cannot seem unjust. And again,
there is not injustice in the everlasting counsel of God, with regard to
the destruction of those whom he lifts to destroy, because he hardens
before he destroys: therefore the third answer for the maintenance of
God's justice in the everlasting counsel of reprobation, consists in
this word "hardening": which nonetheless he concealed in the former
verse, because the history of Pharaoh was well known. But the force of
the word is great, for hardening, which is set against "mercy",
presupposes the same things that mercy did, that is, a voluntary
corruption, in which the reprobate are hardened: and again, corruption
presupposes a perfect state of creation. Moreover, this hardening also
is voluntary, for God hardens in such a way, being offended with
corruption, that he uses their own will whom he hardens, for the
executing of that judgment. Then follow the fruits of hardening, that
is, unbelief and sin, which are the true and proper causes of the
condemnation of the reprobate. Why does he then appoint to destruction?
Because he wishes: why does he harden? Because they are corrupt: why
does he condemn? Because they are sinners. Where then is
unrighteousness? Nay, if he would destroy all after this manner, to whom
would he do injury?

\(t\) Whom it pleased him to appoint, to show his favour upon.

[Romans 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 9:19</span></span>

\(16\) Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find fault? For who
hath resisted his will?

\(16\) Another objection, but only for the reprobate, rising upon the
former answer. If God appoints to everlasting destruction, such as he
wishes, and if that which he has decreed cannot be hindered nor
withstood, how does he justly condemn those who perish by his will?

[Romans 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 9:20</span></span>

\(17\) Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? (18)
Shall the thing (u) formed say to him that formed \[it\], Why hast thou
made me thus?

\(17\) The apostle does not answer that it is not God's will, or that
God does not either reject or elect according to his pleasure, which
thing the wicked call blasphemy, but he rather grants his adversary both
the antecedents, that is, that it is God's will, and that is must of
necessity so happen, yet he denies that God is therefore to be thought
an unjust avenger of the wicked: for seeing that it appears by manifest
proof that this is the will of God, and his doing, what impudency is it
for man, who is but dust and ashes, to dispute with God, and as it were
to call him into judgment? Now if any man say that the doubt is not so
dissolved and answered, I answer, that there is no surer demonstration
in any matter, because it is grounded upon this principle, that the will
of God is the rule of righteousness.

\(18\) An amplification of the former answer, taken from a comparison,
by which it also appears that God's determinate counsel is set by Paul
as the highest of all causes: so that it depends not in any way on the
second causes, but rather shapes and directs them.

\(u\) This similitude agrees very properly to the first creation of
mankind.

[Romans 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 9:21</span></span>

\(19\) Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make
one (20) vessel unto (x) honour, and another unto (21) dishonour?

\(19\) Alluding to the creation of Adam, he compares mankind not yet
made (but who are in the creators mind) to a lump of clay: who
afterwards God made, and daily makes, according as he purposed from
everlasting, both such as should be elect, and such as should be
reprobate, as also this word "make" declares.

\(20\) Whereas in the objection propounded, mention was only made of
vessels to dishonour, yet he speaks of the others also in this answer,
because he proves the Creator to be just in either of them.

\(x\) To honest uses.

\(21\) Seeing then, that in the name of dishonour the shame of
everlasting death is signified, those agree with Paul, who say that some
are made by God for most just destruction: and they that are offended
with this kind of speech betray their own folly.

[Romans 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 9:22</span></span>

\(22\) \[What\] if God, willing to shew \[his\] wrath, and to make his
power known, endured with much longsuffering the (y) vessels of wrath
fitted to (23) destruction:

\(22\) The second answer is this, that God, moreover and besides that he
justly decrees whatever he decrees, uses that moderation in executing
his decrees, as is declared his singular mercifulness even in the
reprobate, in that he endures them a long time, and permits them to
enjoy many and singular benefits, until at length he justly condemns
them: and that to good end and purpose, that is, to show himself to be
an enemy and avenger of wickedness, that it may appear what power he has
by these severe judgments, and finally by comparison of contraries to
set forth indeed, how great his mercy is towards the elect.

\(y\) By vessels, the Hebrews understand all types of instruments.

\(23\) Therefore again, we may say with Paul, that some men are made by
God the creator for destruction.

[Romans 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 9:23</span></span>

And that he might make known the (z) riches of his glory on the vessels
of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory,

\(z\) The unmeasurable and marvellous greatness.

[Romans 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 9:24</span></span>

\(24\) Even us, whom he hath called, not of the (a) Jews only, but also
of the Gentiles?

\(24\) Having established the doctrine of the eternal predestination of
God on both parts, that is, on the part of the reprobate as well as of
the elect, he comes now to show its use, teaching us that we ought not
to seek its testimony in the secret counsel of God, but by the calling
which is made manifest, and set forth in the Church, propounding to us
the example of the Jews and Gentiles, that the doctrine may be better
perceived.

\(a\) He does not say that each and every one of the Jews are called,
but some of the Jews, and some of the Gentiles.

[Romans 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 9:25</span></span>

\(25\) As he saith also in Osee, I will call them my people, which were
not my people; and her beloved, which was not beloved.

\(25\) Our vocation or calling is free, and of grace, even as our
predestination is: and therefore there is no reason why either our own
unworthiness, or the unworthiness of our ancestors should cause us to
think that we are not the elect and chosen of God, if we are called by
him, and so embrace through faith the salvation that is offered us.

[Romans 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 9:27</span></span>

\(26\) Esaias also crieth concerning Israel, Though the number of the
children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved:

\(26\) Contrary to this, neither any outward general calling, neither
any worthiness of our ancestors, is a sufficient witness of election,
unless by faith and belief we answer God's calling: which thing came to
pass in the Jews, as the Lord had foretold.

[Romans 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 9:28</span></span>

For he will finish the work, and cut \[it\] (b) short in righteousness:
because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth.

\(b\) God chooses and goes about to reduce the unkind and unthankful
people to a very small number.

[Romans 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 9:29</span></span>

And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of (c) Sabaoth had left us a
(d) seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrha.

\(c\) Armies, by which word the greatest power that exists is attributed
to God.

\(d\) Even as very few.

[Romans 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 9:30</span></span>

\(27\) What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed (e) not
after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the
righteousness which is of faith.

\(27\) The declaration and manifestation of our election is our calling
apprehended by faith, as it came to pass in the Gentiles.

\(e\) So then, the Gentiles had no works to prepare and procure God's
mercy before hand: and that the Gentiles attained to that which they did
not seek, the mercy of God is to be thanked for it: and in that the Jews
did not attain that which they sought after, they can only thank
themselves, because they did not seek for it in the proper way.

[Romans 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 9:31</span></span>

\(28\) But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, hath
not attained to the law of righteousness.

\(28\) The pride of men is the reason that they reject their calling, so
that the cause of their damnation need not to be sought for in any other
place but themselves.

[Romans 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 9:32</span></span>

Wherefore? Because \[they sought it\] not by faith, but as it were by
the (s) works of the law. For they stumbled at that stumblingstone;

\(s\) Seeking to attain righteousness, they followed the law of
righteousness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 10](rom010)

</div>
