<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom014)  [Next](rom016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)

[Romans 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 15:1</span></span>

We (1) then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak,
and not to (a) please ourselves.

\(1\) Now the apostle reasons generally of tolerating or bearing with
the weak by all means, in so far that it may be for their profit.

\(a\) And despise others.

[Romans 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 15:2</span></span>

Let every one of us please \[his\] neighbour for \[his\] (b) good to
edification.

\(b\) For his profit and edification.

[Romans 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 15:3</span></span>

\(2\) For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is written, The
reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.

\(2\) A confirmation taken from the example of Christ, who suffered all
things, to bring not only the weak, but also his most cruel enemies,
overcoming them with patience, to his Father.

[Romans 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 15:4</span></span>

\(3\) For whatsoever things were written (c) aforetime were written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the (d) scriptures
might have hope.

\(3\) The preventing of an objection: such things as are cited out of
the examples of the ancients, are propounded unto us to this end and
purpose, that according to the example of our fathers we should in
patience and hope bear one with another.

\(c\) By Moses and the prophets.

\(d\) The scriptures are said to teach and comfort, because God uses
them to teach and comfort his people with them.

[Romans 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 15:5</span></span>

\(4\) Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded
one toward another according to Christ Jesus:

\(4\) We must take an example of patience from God: that both the weak
and the strong, serving God with a mutual consent, may bring one another
to God, as Christ also received us to himself, although we were ever so
unworthy.

[Romans 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 15:7</span></span>

Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also (e) received us to the
glory of God.

\(e\) He did not shun us, but received us of his own accord, to make us
partakers of God's glory.

[Romans 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 15:8</span></span>

\(5\) Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the (f) circumcision
for the (g) truth of God, to confirm the promises \[made\] unto the
fathers:

\(5\) An applying of the example of Christ to the Jews, whom he granted
this honour for the promises which he made to their fathers, although
they were ever so unworthy, in that he executed the office of a minister
among them with marvellous patience: therefore much less ought the
Gentiles despise them for certain faults, whom the Son of God esteemed
so much.

\(f\) Of the circumcised Jews, for as long as he lived, he never went
out of their midst.

\(g\) That God might be seen to be true.

[Romans 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 15:9</span></span>

\(6\) And that the Gentiles might glorify God for \[his\] mercy; as it
is written, For this cause I will (h) confess to thee among the
Gentiles, and sing unto thy name.

\(6\) An applying of the same to the Gentiles, whom also the Lord by his
incomprehensible goodness had regard for, so that they are not to be
condemned by the Jews as strangers.

\(h\) I will openly confess and set forth your name.

[Romans 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 15:13</span></span>

\(7\) Now the God of (i) hope fill you with (k) all joy and peace in
believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy
Ghost.

\(7\) He seals up as it were all the former treatise with prayers,
wishing all that to be given them by the Lord, that he had commanded
them.

\(i\) In whom we hope.

\(k\) Abundantly and plentifully.

[Romans 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 15:14</span></span>

\(8\) And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that (l) ye
also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to
admonish one another.

\(8\) The conclusion of the epistle, in which he first excuses himself,
that he has written somewhat at length to them, rather to warn them than
to teach them, and that of necessity, by reason of his calling, which
binds him in a special way to the Gentiles.

\(l\) Of your own accord, and by yourselves.

[Romans 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 15:16</span></span>

That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering the gospel of God, that the (m) offering up of the Gentiles
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost.

\(m\) By the offering up of the Gentiles, he means the Gentiles
themselves, whom he offered to God as a sacrifice.

[Romans 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 15:17</span></span>

\(9\) I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in those
things which pertain to God.

\(9\) He commends his apostleship highly by the effects, but yet in such
a way that even though he speaks all things truly, he gives all the
glory to God as the only author: and he does not do this for his own
sake, but this rather, that men might doubt less of the truth of the
doctrine which he propounds to them.

[Romans 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 15:18</span></span>

For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which (n) Christ
hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient, by word and deed,

\(n\) Christ was so with me in all things, and by all means, that even
if I had wanted to, yet I cannot say what he has done by me to bring the
Gentiles to obey the gospel.

[Romans 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 15:19</span></span>

Through (o) mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God;
so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully
preached the gospel of Christ.

\(o\) In the first place this word "mighty" signifies the force and
working of the wonders in piercing men's minds: and in the latter, it
signifies God's mighty power which was the worker of those wonders.

[Romans 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 15:22</span></span>

\(10\) For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to
you.

\(10\) He writes in general to the Romans, and that familiarly, his
singular good will towards them, and the state of his affairs, but in
such a way that he does not swerve in the least way from the end of
apostolic doctrine: for he declares nothing but that which appertains to
his office, and is godly: and commending by a little digression as it
were, the liberality of the churches of Macedonia, he modestly incites
them to follow their godly deed.

[Romans 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 15:25</span></span>

But now I go unto Jerusalem to (p) minister unto the saints.

\(p\) Doing his duty for the saints, to carry to them that money which
was gathered for their use.

[Romans 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 15:27</span></span>

\(11\) It hath pleased them verily; and their debtors they are. For if
the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their
duty is also to (q) minister unto them in carnal things.

\(11\) Alms are voluntary, but yet we at the same time owe these by the
law of charity.

\(q\) To serve their turns.

[Romans 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 15:28</span></span>

When therefore I have performed this, and have (r) sealed to them this
(s) fruit, I will come by you into Spain.

\(r\) Performed it faithfully, and sealed it as it were with my ring.

\(s\) This money which was gathered for the use of the poor: and these
alms are very fitly called fruit.

[Romans 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 15:29</span></span>

\(12\) And I am sure that, when I come unto you, I shall come in the
fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.

\(12\) He promises them through the blessing of God, not to come empty
to them: and requiring of them the duty of prayers, he shows what thing
we ought mainly to rest upon in all difficulties and adversities.

[Romans 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 15:30</span></span>

Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for
the (t) love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in \[your\]
prayers to God for me;

\(t\) For the mutual union, with which the Holy Spirit has united our
hearts and minds together.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 16](rom016)

</div>
