<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom013)  [Next](rom015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)

[Romans 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 14:22</span></span>

\(19\) Hast thou (q) faith? have \[it\] to thyself before God. Happy
\[is\] he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he (r)
alloweth.

\(19\) He gives a double warning in these matters: one, which pertains
to the strong, that he who has obtained a sure knowledge of this
liberty, keep that treasure to the end that he may use it wisely and
profitably, as has been said: the second, which respects the weak, that
they do nothing rashly by other men's example with a wavering
conscience, for it cannot be done without sin if we are not persuaded by
the word of God that he likes and approves it.

\(q\) He showed before in ([Rom 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014))
what he means by faith, that is, for a man to be certain and without
doubt in matters and things indifferent.

\(r\) Embraces.

[Romans 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 14:23</span></span>

And he that (s) doubteth is damned if he eat, because \[he eateth\] not
of faith: for whatsoever \[is\] not of faith is sin.

\(s\) Reasons with himself.

[Romans 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 14:1</span></span>

Him (1) that is weak in the faith (a) receive ye, \[but\] not to (b)
doubtful disputations.

\(1\) Now he shows how we ought to behave ourselves toward our brethren
in matters and things indifferent, who offend in the use of them not
from malice or damnable superstition, but for lack of knowledge of the
benefit of Christ. And thus he teaches that they are to be instructed
gently and patiently, and so that we apply ourselves to their ignorance
in such matters according to the rule of charity.

\(a\) Do not for a matter or thing which is indifferent, and such a
thing as you may do or not do, shun his company, but take him to you.

\(b\) To make him by your doubtful and uncertain disputations go away in
more doubt than he came, or return back with a troubled conscience.

[Romans 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 14:2</span></span>

\(2\) For one (c) believeth that he may eat all things: another, who is
weak, eateth herbs.

\(2\) He propounds for an example the difference of meats, which some
thought was necessarily to be observed as a thing prescribed by the law
(not knowing that it was taken away) whereas on the other hand those who
had profited in the knowledge of the gospel knew well that this position
of the law as the schoolmaster was abolished.

\(c\) Knows by faith.

[Romans 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 14:3</span></span>

\(3\) Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not
him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for (4) God hath received
him.

\(3\) In such a matter, says the apostle, let neither those who know
their liberty proudly despise their weak brother, neither let the
unlearned wickedly or perversely condemn that which they do not
understand. (4) The first reason: because both he that eats and he that
does not eat is nonetheless the member of Christ, neither he who does
not eat can justly be condemned, neither he who eats be justly
condemned: now the first proposition is declared in the sixth verse
which follows ([Rom 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006)).

[Romans 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 14:4</span></span>

\(5\) Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? to his own master
he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to
make him stand.

\(5\) Another reason which depends upon the former: why the novice and
more unlearned ought not to be condemned by the more experienced, as men
without hope of salvation: because, says the apostle, he that is
ignorant today, may be endued tomorrow with further knowledge, so that
he may also stand sure: therefore it belongs to God, and not to man, to
pronounce the sentence of condemnation.

[Romans 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 14:5</span></span>

\(6\) One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every
day \[alike\]. (7) Let (d) every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

\(6\) Another example of the difference of days according to the law.
(7) He sets against this contempt, and hasty or rash judgments, a
continual desire to profit, that the strong may be certainly persuaded
of their liberty, of what manner and sort it is, and how they ought to
use it: and again the weak may profit daily, in order that they do not
abuse the gift of God, or please themselves in their infirmity.

\(d\) That he may say in his conscience that he knows and is persuaded
by Jesus Christ, that nothing is unclean of itself: and this persuasion
must be grounded upon the word of God.

[Romans 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 14:6</span></span>

\(8\) He that (e) regardeth the day, regardeth \[it\] unto the Lord; and
he that regardeth not the day, to the (f) Lord he doth not regard
\[it\]. He that (g) eateth, eateth to the Lord, (9) for he giveth God
thanks; and he that eateth (h) not, to the Lord he eateth not, and
giveth God thanks.

\(8\) A reason taken from the nature of indifferent things, which a man
may do with good conscience, and omit: for seeing that the difference of
days and meats was appointed by God, how could those who as yet did not
understand the abrogation of the law, and yet otherwise acknowledge
Christ as their Saviour, with good conscience neglect that which they
knew was commanded by God? And on the other hand, those who knew the
benefit of Christ in this behalf, did with good conscience neither
observe days nor meats: therefore, says the apostle in verse ten, "Let
not the strong condemn the weak for these things, seeing that the weak
brethren are brethren nonetheless." ([Rom
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)) Now if any man would apply this
doctrine to our times and ages, let him know that the apostle speaks of
indifferent things, and that those who thought them not to be
indifferent, had a basis in the law, and were deceived by simple
ignorance, and not from malice (for to such the apostle does not yield,
no not for a moment) nor superstition, but by a religious fear of God.

\(e\) Precisely observes.

\(f\) God will judge whether he does well or not: and therefore you
should rather strive about this, how every one of you will be considered
by God, than to think upon other men's doings.

\(g\) He that makes no difference between meats. (9) So the apostle
shows that he speaks of the faithful, both strong and weak: but what if
we have to deal with the unfaithful? Then we must take heed of two
things, as also is declared in the epistle to the Corinthians. The first
is that we do not consider their superstition as something indifferent,
as they did who sat down to eat meat in idol's temples: the second is
that then also when the matter is indifferent (as to buy a thing offered
to idols, in the butcher's store, and to eat it at home or at a private
meal) we do not wound the conscience of our weak brother.

\(h\) He that does not touch meats which he considers to be unclean by
the law.

[Romans 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 14:7</span></span>

\(10\) For none of us liveth to (i) himself, and no man dieth to
himself.

\(10\) We must not rest, he says, in the meat itself, but in the use of
the meat, so that he is justly to be reprehended that lives in such a
way that he does not cast his eyes upon God, for both our life and our
death is dedicated to him, and for this cause Christ has properly died,
and not simply that we might eat this meat or that.

\(i\) Has respect to himself only, which the Hebrews say in this manner,
"Do well to his own soul."

[Romans 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 14:10</span></span>

\(11\) But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at
nought thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ.

\(11\) The conclusion: we must leave to God his right, and therefore in
matters which are either good or evil according to the conscience of the
individual, the strong must not despise their weak brethren, much less
condemn them. But this consequent cannot be taken of equal force in the
contrary, that is, that the weak should not judge the strong, because
the weak do not know that those who do not observe a day and eat,
observe it not to the Lord, and eat to the Lord, as the strong men know
that the weak who observe a day and do not eat, observe the day to the
Lord, and eat not to the Lord.

[Romans 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 14:11</span></span>

For it is written, \[As\] I (k) live, saith the Lord, every knee shall
bow to me, and every tongue shall (l) confess to God.

\(k\) This is a form of an oath, proper to God alone, for he and none
but he lives, and has his being of himself.

\(l\) Will acknowledge be to be from God.

[Romans 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 14:13</span></span>

\(12\) Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge (m)
this rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in
\[his\] brother's way.

\(12\) After he has concluded what is not to be done, he shows what is
to be done: that is, we must take heed that we do not utterly abuse our
liberty and cast down our brother who is not yet strong.

\(m\) He rebukes along the way these malicious judgers of others who
occupy their heads about nothing, but to find fault with their
brethren's life, whereas they should rather focus their minds upon this,
that they do not with disdainfulness either cast their brethren
completely down, or give them any offence.

[Romans 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 14:14</span></span>

\(13\) I know, and am persuaded by the (n) Lord Jesus, that \[there is\]
nothing unclean of (o) itself: but to him that esteemeth any thing to be
unclean, to him \[it is\] unclean.

\(13\) The preventing of an objection: it is true that the right of the
law to be schoolmaster is taken away by the benefit of Christ, to those
who know it, but yet nonetheless we have to consider in the use of this
liberty what is expedient, that we may have regard to our weak brother,
seeing that our liberty is not lost in doing this.

\(n\) By the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, or by the Lord Jesus, who broke
down the wall at his coming.

\(o\) By nature.

[Romans 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 14:15</span></span>

But if thy brother be grieved with \[thy\] meat, now walkest thou not
charitably. (14) Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom (15) Christ
died.

\(14\) It is the part of a cruel mind to make more account of meat than
of our brother's salvation. Which thing those do who eat with the intent
of giving offence to any brother, and so give him occasion to turn back
from the Gospel.

\(15\) Another argument: we must follow Christ's example: and Christ was
so far from destroying the weak with meat that he gave his life for
them.

[Romans 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 14:16</span></span>

\(16\) Let not then your good be evil spoken of:

\(16\) Another argument: because by this means evil is spoken of the
liberty of the gospel, as though it opens the way to attempt anything
whatever, and gives us boldness to do all things.

[Romans 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 14:17</span></span>

\(17\) For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

\(17\) A general reason, and the foundation of the entire argument: the
kingdom of heaven consists not in these outward things, but in the study
of righteousness, and peace, and comfort of the Holy Spirit.

[Romans 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 14:18</span></span>

For he that in (p) these things serveth Christ \[is\] acceptable to God,
and approved of men.

\(p\) He that lives peaceably, and does righteously, through the Holy
Spirit.

[Romans 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 14:19</span></span>

\(18\) Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another.

\(18\) A general conclusion: the use of this liberty, indeed, and our
whole life, ought to be concerned with the edifying of one another,
insomuch that we consider that thing unlawful, by reason of the offence
of our brother, which is of itself pure and lawful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 15](rom015)

</div>
