<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1002)  [Next](ti1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)

[1 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 3:1</span></span>

This (1) \[is\] a true saying, (2) If a man (a) desire the office of a
bishop, he desireth a good work.

\(1\) Having completed the treatise of doctrine and of the manner of
handling of it, as well also of public prayer, he now in the third place
comes to the persons themselves, speaking first of pastors, and
afterwards of deacons. And he uses a preface, so that the church may
know that these are certain and sure rules. (2) The office of bishop, or
the ministry of the word is not an idle dignity, but a work, and that an
excellent work: and therefore a bishop must be furnished with many
virtues both at home and abroad. Therefore it is necessary before he is
chosen to examine well his learning, his gifts, his abilities, and his
life.

\(a\) He does not speak here of ambitious seeking, of which there cannot
be a worse fault in the Church, but generally of the mind and
disposition of man, prepared and disposed to help and edify the Church
of God, when and wherever it will please the Lord.

[1 Timothy 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 3:2</span></span>

A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of (b) one wife, vigilant,
sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach;

\(b\) Therefore he that shuts out married men from the office of
bishops, only because they are married, is antichrist.

[1 Timothy 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 3:3</span></span>

Not (c) given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but
patient, not a brawler, not covetous;

\(c\) A common drinker and one that will often partake of it.

[1 Timothy 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 3:6</span></span>

Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the (d)
condemnation of the devil.

\(d\) Lest by reason that he is advanced to that position, he takes
occasion to be proud, which will undo him, and so he fall into the same
condemnation that the devil himself has fallen into.

[1 Timothy 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 3:8</span></span>

\(3\) Likewise \[must\] the (e) deacons \[be\] grave, not doubletongued,
not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre;

\(3\) Likewise the deacons must first be proved, that there may be a
good trial of their honesty, truth, sobriety, mind void of covetousness,
that they are well instructed in the doctrine of faith, and to be short,
of their good conscience and integrity.

\(e\) These are those that had to look after the poor.

[1 Timothy 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 3:9</span></span>

Holding the (f) mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.

\(f\) The doctrine of the Gospel, which is indeed a mystery: for flesh
and blood do not reveal it.

[1 Timothy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 3:11</span></span>

\(4\) Even so \[must their\] wives \[be\] grave, not slanderers, sober,
faithful in all things.

\(4\) Regard must also be had for the pastor's and deacon's wives.

[1 Timothy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 3:12</span></span>

\(5\) Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children
and their own houses well.

\(5\) They that have than one wife, at one time, must neither by called
to be ministers, nor to be deacons.

[1 Timothy 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 3:13</span></span>

For they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase to
themselves a good (g) degree, and (h) great boldness in the faith which
is in Christ Jesus.

\(g\) Honour and estimation.

\(h\) Bold and assured confidence without fear.

[1 Timothy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 3:14</span></span>

\(6\) These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly:

\(6\) Paul purposing to add many particular things pertaining to the
daily office of a pastor, speaks first a word or two concerning his
coming to Timothy, that he should be so much the more careful, lest at
his coming he might be reproved of negligence.

[1 Timothy 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 3:15</span></span>

But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave
thyself in the (7) house of God, which is the church of the living God,
the (i) pillar and ground of the truth.

\(7\) The pastor always has to consider how he carries out his duties in
the house of the living God, in which the treasure of the truth is kept.

\(i\) That is, with regard to man: for the Church rested upon that
cornerstone, Christ, and is the preserver of the truth, but not the
mother.

[1 Timothy 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 3:16</span></span>

\(8\) And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was
manifest in the flesh, (k) justified in the Spirit, seen of angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
glory.

\(8\) There is nothing more excellent than this truth, of which the
Church is the keeper and preserver here among men, the ministry of the
word being appointed to that end and purpose: for it teaches us the
greatest matters that may be thought, that is, that God has become
visible in the person of Christ by taking our nature upon him, whose
majesty, even though in such great weakness, was manifested in many
ways, in so much that the sight of it pierced the very angels. And to
conclude, he being preached to the Gentiles was received by them, and is
now placed above in unspeakable glory.

\(k\) The power of the Godhead showed itself so marvellously in the weak
flesh of Christ, that even though he was a weak man, yet all the world
knows he was and is God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 4](ti1004)

</div>
