<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1005)  [Next](ti2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001)

[1 Timothy 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 6:1</span></span>

Let (1) as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters
worthy of all honour, (2) that the name of God and \[his\] doctrine be
not blasphemed.

\(1\) He adds also rules for the servant's duty towards their masters:
upon which matter there were no doubt many questions asked by those who
took occasion by the Gospel to trouble the normal manner of life. And
this is the first rule: let servants that have come to the faith and
have the unfaithful for their masters, serve them nonetheless with great
faithfulness. (2) The reason: lest God should seem by the doctrine of
the Gospel to stir up men to rebellion and all wickedness.

[1 Timothy 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 6:2</span></span>

\(3\) And they that have believing masters, let them not despise
\[them\], because they are brethren; but rather do \[them\] service,
because they are faithful and beloved, (a) partakers of the benefit. (4)
These things teach and exhort.

\(3\) The second rule: let not servants that have come to the faith, and
have also masters of the same profession and religion, abuse the name of
brotherhood, but let them so much the rather obey them.

\(a\) Let this be sufficient, that with regard to those things which
pertain to everlasting life, they are partakers of the same good will
and love of God, as their masters themselves are. (4) A general
conclusion, that these things ought not only to be simply taught, but
must with exhortations be diligently learned by them.

[1 Timothy 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 6:3</span></span>

\(5\) If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
\[even\] the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which
is according to godliness;

\(5\) He severely condemns and excommunicates or casts out of the Church
as proud men, those who do not content themselves with Christ's
doctrine, (that is to say, the doctrine of godliness) but weary both
themselves and others, in vain questions (for all other things are
vain), because they do not content themselves in Christ's doctrine. He
condemns them as lying deceivers, because they savour or sound of
nothing but vanity: as mad men, because they trouble themselves so much
in matters of nothing: as evil plagues, because they cause great
contentions, and corrupt men's minds and judgment. To be short, he
condemns them as profane and wicked, because they abuse the precious
name of godliness and religion, for the sake of wicked gain.

[1 Timothy 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 6:4</span></span>

He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and (b) strifes
of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,

\(b\) Strivings about words, and not about matter: and by words he means
all those things which do not have substance in them, and by which we
can reap no profit.

[1 Timothy 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 6:5</span></span>

Perverse (c) disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thyself.

\(c\) Such as we see in those shameless schools of popery, which are
nothing else but vain babbling and foolish talking.

[1 Timothy 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 6:6</span></span>

\(6\) But godliness with contentment is great gain.

\(6\) He properly dismisses the name of gain and lucre, confessing that
godliness is great gain, but in a far different manner, that is, because
it brings true sufficiency.

[1 Timothy 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 6:7</span></span>

\(7\) For we brought nothing into \[this\] world, \[and it is\] certain
we can carry nothing out.

\(7\) He mocks the folly of those who do so greedily hunger after frail
things, who can in no way be satisfied, and yet nonetheless cannot enjoy
their excess.

[1 Timothy 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 6:9</span></span>

\(8\) But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and
\[into\] many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction
and perdition.

\(8\) He puts fear into Timothy to avoid covetousness using a different
reasoning, that is, because it draws with it an infinite sort of lusts
and those very hurtful, with which covetous men do torment themselves to
the degree that in the end, they cast away from them their faith and
salvation.

[1 Timothy 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 6:10</span></span>

For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted
after, they have erred from the faith, and (d) pierced themselves
through with many sorrows.

\(d\) Sorrow and grief do as it were pierce through the mind of man, and
are the harvest and true fruits of covetousness.

[1 Timothy 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 6:11</span></span>

\(9\) But thou, O (e) man of God, flee these things; and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.

\(9\) A peculiar exhortation to various virtues, with which it
appropriate for the pastors especially to be furnished.

\(e\) Whom the Spirit of God rules.

[1 Timothy 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 6:13</span></span>

\(10\) I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all
things, and \[before\] Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed
a good confession;

\(10\) A most earnest request and charge, to observe and keep all the
things faithfully, with our eyes set upon the coming of Jesus Christ,
whose glory we have to contrast with the vain glittering of this world,
and his power with all the terrors of the wicked.

[1 Timothy 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 6:15</span></span>

Which in his times he shall shew, \[who is\] the (f) blessed and only
Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;

\(f\) He combines many words together for one purpose: by which he
confirms the power of God, which if we trust steadfastly in, we will not
be moved out of our position.

[1 Timothy 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti1 6:17</span></span>

\(11\) Charge them that are rich in (g) this world, that they be not
highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the (h) living God,
who giveth us richly all things to enjoy;

\(11\) He adds as an overabundance as it were a sharp admonition to the
rich, that they mainly take heed of two evils, that is, of pride, and
deceitful hope, against which he sets three excellent virtues, hope in
the living God, liberality towards their neighbour, and gentle
conditions.

\(g\) In things pertaining to this life, with whom those men are
compared who are rich in good works.

\(h\) Who alone is, and that everlasting: for he sets the frail nature
of riches against God.

[1 Timothy 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti1 6:19</span></span>

\(12\) Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

\(12\) The praise of liberality, by the effects of it, because it is a
sure testimony of the Spirit of God who dwells in us, and therefore of
the salvation that will be given to us.

[1 Timothy 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti1 6:20</span></span>

\(13\) O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane \[and\] vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so
called:

\(13\) He repeats the most important of all the former exhortations,
which ought to be deeply imprinted in the minds of all ministers of the
word, that is, that they avoid all vain babblings of false wisdom, and
continue in the simplicity of sincere doctrine.

[1 Timothy 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ti1 6:21</span></span>

Which some (i) professing have erred concerning the faith. Grace \[be\]
with thee. Amen. "\[The first to Timothy was written from Laodicea,
which is the chiefest city of Phrygia Pacatiana.\]"

\(i\) Not only in word, but also in appearance and gesture: to be short,
while their behaviour was such that even when they held their peace they
would make men believe, their heads were occupied about nothing but high
and lofty matters, and therefore they erred concerning the faith.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 1](ti2001)

</div>
