<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1004)  [Next](ti1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001)

[1 Timothy 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 5:1</span></span>

Rebuke (1) not an elder, but intreat \[him\] as a father; \[and\] the
younger men as brethren;

\(1\) Of giving personal reprehensions appropriately, according to the
degrees of ages and gender.

[1 Timothy 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 5:3</span></span>

\(2\) (a) Honour widows that are widows indeed.

\(2\) The apostle gives these rules concerning the care of widows.

\(a\) Have care of those widows who have need of help.

[1 Timothy 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 5:4</span></span>

\(3\) But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to
shew piety (4) at home, and (5) to requite their parents: (6) for that
is good and acceptable before God.

\(3\) Widow's children and nephews must take care of their parents
according to their ability. (4) The first reason, because that which
they bestow upon their parents, they bestow it upon themselves. (5)
Another, because nature itself teaches us to repay our parents. (6) The
third: because this duty pleases God.

[1 Timothy 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 5:5</span></span>

\(7\) Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God, and
continueth in supplications and prayers night and day.

\(7\) The second rule. Let the church take care of those who are indeed
widows, that is to say, those who are poor and destitute of help from
their own friends, and live godly and religiously.

[1 Timothy 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 5:6</span></span>

\(8\) But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth.

\(8\) The third rule: let widows that live in pleasure, and neglect the
care of their own family, be held and considered as fallers away from
God and his religion, and worse than the unfaithful themselves.

[1 Timothy 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 5:9</span></span>

\(9\) Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years
old, having been the wife of (b) one man,

\(9\) The fourth rule: let none under sixty years old be taken into the
number of widows, to serve the congregations or churches. And they must
be those who are free from every reproach of immorality, and are well
reported of, for their diligence, charity, and integrity.

\(b\) That has only ever had one husband at a time.

[1 Timothy 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 5:10</span></span>

Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if she
have lodged strangers, if she have (c) washed the saints' feet, if she
have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good
work.

\(c\) This is spoken with regard to the manner of those countries.

[1 Timothy 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 5:11</span></span>

\(10\) But the younger widows (d) refuse: for when they have begun to
wax wanton against Christ, they will marry;

\(10\) The first reason why younger widows are not to be admitted to
this ministry, that is, because of the unsteadiness of their age they
will at length shake off the burden that Christ has laid upon them, and
think rather upon marrying again: and so will forsake the ministry to
which they had bound themselves.

\(d\) Take them not into the assembly of widows.

[1 Timothy 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 5:13</span></span>

\(11\) And withal they learn \[to be\] idle, wandering about from house
to house; and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies, speaking
things which they ought not.

\(11\) Another reason: because they are for the most part gossips and
busybodies, and idly roving up and down, neglecting their charge and
duty.

[1 Timothy 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 5:14</span></span>

\(12\) I will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children,
guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak
reproachfully.

\(12\) The fifth rule: let younger widows marry and govern their houses
in a godly way.

[1 Timothy 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 5:16</span></span>

\(13\) If any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve
them, and let not the church be charged; that it may relieve them that
are widows indeed.

\(13\) The sixth rule: let the faithful help their widows at their own
expense as much as they can, and do not let the congregation be burdened
with these expenses.

[1 Timothy 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti1 5:17</span></span>

\(14\) Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of (e) double
honour, (f) especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.

\(14\) Now he gives rules, and shows how he ought to behave himself with
the elders, that is to say, with the pastors, and those who have the
governance in the discipline of the church, who is president of their
company. The first rule: let the church or congregation see to this
especially, as God himself has commanded, that the elders that do their
duty well, are honestly supported.

\(e\) We must be more concerned for them, than for the rest.

\(f\) There were two types of elders: the one dealt with the government
only, and looked to the behaviour of the congregation; the other in
addition to that, dealt with both preaching and prayers, to and for the
congregation.

[1 Timothy 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti1 5:19</span></span>

\(15\) Against an elder receive not an accusation, but before two or
three witnesses.

\(15\) The second rule: allow no accusation to be considered against an
elder, unless there are two or three witnesses.

[1 Timothy 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti1 5:20</span></span>

\(16\) Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

\(16\) The third rule: let the leaders so convicted be openly rebuked,
so that they may be an example to others.

[1 Timothy 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ti1 5:21</span></span>

\(17\) I charge \[thee\] before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
elect angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one
before another, doing nothing by partiality.

\(17\) The fourth rule: let sincerity be used without any prejudice or
respect of persons in ecclesiastical proceedings (especially against the
elders), because God himself is present there, and the Lord Jesus Christ
with a multitude of angels.

[1 Timothy 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ti1 5:22</span></span>

\(18\) Lay hands (g) suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other
men's sins: keep thyself pure.

\(18\) The fifth rule: let the minister lay hands suddenly on no man.
Let him not be faulty in this, either by favouring any man's folly, or
perverse affection. If anything is not done well by his fellow elders,
let him keep his conscience pure.

\(g\) As much as you are able, do not rashly admit anyone at all to any
ecclesiastical function.

[1 Timothy 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ti1 5:23</span></span>

\(19\) Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's
sake and thine often infirmities.

\(19\) The sixth rule: let the elders have consideration for their
health, in their diet.

[1 Timothy 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ti1 5:24</span></span>

\(20\) Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment;
and some \[men\] they follow after.

\(20\) Because hypocrites sometimes creep into the ministry, even though
there is ever so great diligence used, the apostle wishes the pastors
not to be therefore troubled, or slack at all in their diligence in
trying and examining, because the Lord has appointed a time to discover
the faults of such men, and it is our duty to take heed that we do not
offend in our trying and examining.

[1 Timothy 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ti1 5:25</span></span>

\(21\) Likewise also the good works \[of some\] are manifest beforehand;
and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.

\(21\) Another comfort belonging to them, who are sometimes slandered
and misreported.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 6](ti1006)

</div>
