<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2001)  [Next](ti2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001)

[2 Timothy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 2:1</span></span>

Thou (1) therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus.

\(1\) The conclusion of the former exhortation which has also a
declaration added to it: how those who do not keep that worthy thing
that is committed to them, who keep it to themselves, but rather those
who do most freely communicate it with others, to the end that many may
be partakers of it, without any man's loss or hindrance.

[2 Timothy 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti2 2:2</span></span>

And the things that thou hast heard of me among (a) many witnesses, the
same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others
also.

\(a\) When many were there, who can bear witness of these things.

[2 Timothy 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti2 2:3</span></span>

\(2\) Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.

\(2\) Another admonition: that the ministry of the word is a spiritual
warfare, which no man can so travail in that he pleases his captain,
unless he abstains from and parts with all hindrances which might draw
him away from it.

[2 Timothy 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti2 2:4</span></span>

No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of (b) \[this\]
life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.

\(b\) With affairs of household, or other things that belong to other
ordinary businesses.

[2 Timothy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti2 2:5</span></span>

\(3\) And if a man also strive for masteries, \[yet\] is he not crowned,
except he strive lawfully.

\(3\) The third admonition: the ministry is similar to a game in which
men strive for the victory, and no man is crowned, unless he strive
according to the laws which are prescribed, be they ever so hard and
painful.

[2 Timothy 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti2 2:6</span></span>

\(4\) The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the
fruits.

\(4\) Another similarity with respect to the same matter: no man may
look for the harvest, unless he first take pains to plow and sow his
ground.

[2 Timothy 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti2 2:7</span></span>

\(5\) Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things.

\(5\) All these things cannot be understood, and much less practised,
unless we ask of God and he gives us understanding.

[2 Timothy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti2 2:8</span></span>

\(6\) Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from
the dead according to my gospel:

\(6\) He confirms plainly two principles of our faith, which are alway
assaulted by heretics, the one of which (that is, that Christ is the
true Messiah, made man of the seed of David) is the ground of our
salvation: and the other is the highest part of it, that is, that he is
risen again from the dead.

[2 Timothy 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti2 2:9</span></span>

\(7\) Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, \[even\] unto bonds;
but the word of God is not bound.

\(7\) The taking away of an objection: it is true that he is kept in
prison as an evildoer, yet there is no reason why some should therefore
go about to take away credit from his Gospel. And this is because God
has blessed his ministry; indeed, the example of this his captivity and
patience, did rather in different ways strengthen and encourage his
Church in the hope of a better life.

[2 Timothy 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti2 2:11</span></span>

\(8\) \[It is\] a faithful saying: For if we be (c) dead with \[him\],
we shall also live with \[him\]:

\(8\) The fourth admonition: we ought not to contend upon words and
questions, which are not only unprofitable, but also for the most part
hurtful: but rather upon this, how we may compose ourselves to every
manner of patience, and to die also with Christ (that is to say, for
Christ's name) because that is the plain way to the most glorious life.
And contrary to this, the falling away of men can diminish no part of
the truth of God, even though by such means they procure most certain
destruction to themselves.

\(c\) If we are afflicted with Christ, and for Christ's sake.

[2 Timothy 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 2:14</span></span>

Of these things put \[them\] in remembrance, (d) charging \[them\]
before the Lord that they strive not about words to no profit, \[but\]
to the subverting of the hearers.

\(d\) Call God to witness, or as a Judge: as Moses, Joshua, Samuel, and
Paul himself did, in Acts 13.

[2 Timothy 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti2 2:15</span></span>

\(9\) Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth
not to be ashamed, (e) rightly dividing the word of truth.

\(9\) The fifth admonition: a minister must not be an idle disputer, but
a faithful steward in correctly dividing the word of truth, in so much
that he must stop the mouths of other vain babblers.

\(e\) By adding nothing to it, neither deleting anything, neither
mangling it, nor rending it apart, nor distorting it: but marking
diligently what his hearers are able to bear, and what is fit to
edifying.

[2 Timothy 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti2 2:16</span></span>

\(f\) But shun profane \[and\] vain babblings: (10) for they will
increase unto more ungodliness.

\(f\) Mark and watch, and see that they do not creep on further.

\(10\) He reveals the subtilty of Satan, who beginning with these
principles, draws us by little and little to ungodliness through the
means of that wicked and profane babbling, which gradually increases.
And this he proves by the horrible example of those that taught that the
resurrection was already past.

[2 Timothy 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti2 2:19</span></span>

\(11\) Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this
seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that (g)
nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.

\(11\) A digression, in which he heals the offence that rose by their
falling away. Firstly, he shows that the elect are out of all danger of
any such falling away. Secondly, that they are known to God, and not to
us: and therefore it is no marvel if we often mistake hypocrites for
true brethren. But we must take heed that we are not like them, but
rather that we are indeed such as we are said to be.

\(g\) That serves and worships him, and as it were named of him, a
faithful man or Christian.

[2 Timothy 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti2 2:20</span></span>

\(12\) But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of
silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to
dishonour.

\(12\) The taking away of an objection: it is not dishonour to the good
man of the house, that he has not in a great house all vessels of one
sort and for one service, but we must look to this, that we are found
vessels prepared to honour.

[2 Timothy 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ti2 2:21</span></span>

If a man therefore (h) purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, \[and\] prepared
unto every good work.

\(h\) By these words is meant the execution of the matter, and not the
cause: for in that we purge ourselves, it is not to be attributed to any
free will that is in us, but to God, who freely and wholly works in us,
a good and an effectual will.

[2 Timothy 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ti2 2:22</span></span>

\(13\) Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith,
charity, (14) peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure
heart.

\(13\) Returning to the matter from where he digressed in ([Ti2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016)), he warns him to exercise
himself in serious matters, and such as pertain to godliness.

\(14\) The sixth admonition: we must above all things avoid all
bitterness of mind, both in teaching all men, and also in calling those
back who have gone out of the way.

[2 Timothy 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ti2 2:24</span></span>

And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all
\[men\], apt to teach, (i) patient,

\(i\) To win them through our patient bearing with them, but not to
please them or excuse them in their wickedness.

[2 Timothy 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ti2 2:25</span></span>

In meekness instructing those that (k) oppose themselves; if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
truth;

\(k\) He means those who do not yet see the truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 3](ti2003)

</div>
