[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](is318)  [Next](is320) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

B.     --- EXTRACTS FROM THE NJAL'S SAGA.

 

To Ch. 13.  Earl Sigurd and Brian's Battle.

 

84.  Now it must be told how Njal's sons, Grim and Helgi, left Iceland
the same summer that Thrain and his fellows went abroad;  and were
aboard ship with Olaf Kettle's son of Elda, and Bard.  They got so
strong a wind from the north that then they were driven south into the
main;  and so thick a mist drove over them that they could not tell
whither they were going, and they were out a long while.  Then they came
to where was a great ground-sea, and thought they must be near land. 
Njal's sons asked if Bard could tell at all to what lands they were
likely to be nearest.  "Many lands there are," said he, "after the set
of wind that we have had, the Orkneys, or Scotland, or Ireland."  Two
nights after they saw land on both boards, and a great surf running up
in the firth.  They cast anchor outside the breakers.  Then the wind
began to fall;  and next morning it was clear.  Then they see thirteen
ships coming out towards them.  Then Bard spoke and said, "What counsel
shall we take now, for these men must be going to make an onslaught on
us?"  So they took counsel whether they should defend themselves or
yield, but before they could make up their minds the vikings were upon
them.  Then each side asked the other their names, and what their
leaders were called.  Then the leaders of the chapmen told their names,
and asked back who might lead that host.  One called himself Gritgard,
and the other Snowcolf, sons of Moldan of Duncansby in Scotland, kinsmen
of Malcolm the Scot king.  "And now," says Gritgard, "we have laid down
two choices, one that ye go on shore, and we will take your goods;  the
other is, that we fall on you and slay every man that we catch."  "The
will of the chapmen," sais Helgi, "is to defend themselves."  Then the
chapmen called out, "Wretch that thou art to speak thus!  What defence
can we make?  Lading is less than life."  Grim, he fell upon a plan to
shout out to the vikings, and would not let them hear the bad grumbling
of the chapmen.  Bard and Olaf said, "Think ye not that these Icelanders
will make game of your bad manners;  take rather your weapons and guard
your goods."  Then they all seized their weapons and bound themselves,
one with another, never to give up so long as they had strength to
fight.

85.  Then the vikings shot at them and the fight began, and the chapmen
guard themselves well.  Snowcolf sprang at Olaf, and thrust his spear
through his body, but Grim thrust at Snowcolf with his spear, and so
stoutly, that he fell overboard.  Then Helgi turned to meet Grim, and
they drove down all the vikings, and Njal's sons were ever where there
was most need.  The vikings called out to the chapmen and bade them give
up, but they say they would never yield.  Just then some one looked
seaward, and there they see ships coming from the south round the Ness,
and they were not fewer than ten.  They row hard and steer
thitherwards.  Along their sides were shield on shield, but on that ship
that came first stood a man by the mast, who was clad in a silken
jacket, and had a gilded helm, and his hair was both fair and thick; 
that man had a spear inlaid with gold in his hand.  He asked "who have
here such an uneven game?"  Helgi tells his name, and said that against
them are Gritgard and Snowcolf.  "But who are your captains?"  he asks. 
Helgi answered, "Bard the black, who lives, but the other who is dead
and gone, was called Olaf."  "Are ye two men from Iceland?"  says he. 
"Sure enough we are," Helgi answers.  He asked whose sons they were. 
They told him, then he knew them and said, "Well known names have ye
all, father and sons both."  "Who art thou?" says Helgi.  "My name is
Kari, and I am Solmund's son."  "Whence comest thou?"  says Helgi. 
"From the Southern isles."  "Then thou art welcome," says Helgi, "if
thou wilt give us a little help."  "I'll give ye all the help ye need,"
says Kari;  "but what do ye ask?"  "To fall on them," says Helgi.  Kari
says that so it shall be.  So they pulled up to them, and then the
battle began the second time;  but when they had fought a while, Kari
springs up on Snowcolf's ship;  he turns to meet him and smites at him
with his sword.  Kari leaps nimbly backwards over a beam that lay
athwart the ship.  Snowcolf smote the beam so that both edges of the
sword were hidden.  Kari smites at him, and the sword fell on his
shoulder, and the stroke was so mighty that he cleft in twain shoulder,
arm, and all, and Snowcolf got his death there and then.  Gritgard
hurled a spear at Kari.  Kari saw it and sprang up aloft, and the spear
missed him.  Just then Helgi and Grim had come up both to meet Kari, and
Helgi springs on Gritgard and thrusts his spear through him, and that
was his deathblow;  after that they went round all the ships on both
boards.  Then men begged for peace.  So they gave them all peace, but
took all their goods.  After that they ran all the ships out under the
islands.

86.  Sigurd was the name of an earl who ruled over the Orkneys;  he was
the son of Hlodver, the son of Thorfinn the scull-splitter, the son of
Turf-Einar, the son of Rognvald, earl of Mœren, the son of Eystein the
noisy.  Kari was one of earl Sigurd's bodyguard, and had taken scatts in
the Southern isles from earl Gilli.  Now Kari asks them to go to
Hrossey, and said the earl would take to them well.  They agreed to
that, and went with Kari and came to Hrossey.  Kari led them to see the
earl, and said what men they were.  "How come they," says the earl, "to
fall upon thee?"  "I found them," says Kari, "in Scotland's firths, and
they were fighting with the sons of earl Moldan, and held their own so
well that they threw themselves about between the bulwarks, from side to
side, and were always there where the trial was greatest, and now I ask
you to give them quarters among your bodyguard."  "It shall be as thou
choosest," says the earl, "thou hast already taken so much for them on
thy hands."  Then they were there with the earl that winter, and were
worthily treated.  Helgi was silent as the winter wore on.  The earl
could not tell what was at the bottom of that, and asked why he was
silent, and what was on his mind.  "Thinkest thou it not good to be
here?"  "Good, methinks, it is here," he says.  "Then what art thou
thinking about?" says the earl.  "Hast thou any realm to guard in
Scotland?" says Helgi.  "So we think," says the earl, "but what of
that?"  "The Scots," says Helgi, "must have taken your steward's life,
and stopped all news bearers, that none should cross the Pentland
Firth."  "Hast thou the second sight?" said the earl.  "That has been
little proved," says Helgi.  "Well," says the earl,  "I will increase
thy honour if this be so, otherwise thou shalt smart for it."  "Nay,"
says Kari, "Helgi is not that kind of man, and like enough his words are
sooth, for his father has the second sight."  After that the earl sent
men south to Straumey (Stroma) to Arnljot, his steward there, and after
that Arnljot sent them across the Pentland firth, and they spied out
there and learnt that earl Hundi and earl Melsnati had taken the life of
Havard in Thraswick, Sigurd's brother in law.  Then Arnljot sends word
to earl Sigurd to come south with a great host and drive those earls out
of his realm.  As soon as the earl heard that, he gathered together a
mighty host.

87.  After that the earl set out with his host, and Kari went with him,
and Njal's sons too.  They came south to Caithness.  The earl had these
realms in Scotland --- Ross, and Moray, Sutherland, and the Dales. 
There came to meet them men from those realms, and say that the earls
were a short way off with a great host.  Then earl Sigurd turns with his
host thither, and the name of that place is Duncansnip, beyond which
they met.  And it came to a great battle between them.  The Scots had
let some of their host go free from the main battle, and these took the
earl's men in flank, and many men fell there till Njal's sons turned
against the foe, and fought with them and put them to flight.  Then it
came to a hard fight, and then Njal's sons turn back to the front by the
earl's standard, and fought well.  Now Kari turns to meet earl
Melsnati.  Melsnati hurled a spear at him, but Kari caught the spear and
threw it back and through the earl.  Then earl Hundi fled, but they
chased the fleers until they learnt that Malcolm was gathering a host
together at Duncansby.  Then the earl took counsel with his men, and it
seemed to all the best plan to turn back, and not to fight with such a
mighty land force.  Then they turned back.  But when the earl came to
Staumey they shared the battle spoil.  After that he went north to
Hrossey, and Njal's sons and Kari followed him.  Then the earl made a
great feast, and at that feast he gave Kari a good sword, and a spear
inlaid with gold;  but he gave Helgi a gold ring and a mantle, and Grim
a shield and sword.  After that he took Helgi and Grim into his
bodyguard, and thanked them for their boldness.  They were with the earl
that winter and the summer after, till Kari went sea roving.  They went
with him, and harried far and wide that summer, and everywhere won the
victory.  They fought against Godred, king of Man, and conquered him; 
and after that they fared back, and had gotten much goods.  Next winter
they were with the earl.  When the spring came Njal's sons asked leave
to go to Norway.  The earl said they should go as they pleased, and he
gave them a good ship and smart men.  Kari says he must come that summer
to Norway with earl Hacon's scatts, and then they would meet;  and so it
fell out that they gave each other their word as to that.  After that
Njal's sons put out to sea and sailed for Norway, and made the land
north near Drontheim. \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

90.   ............ After that Kari fared west across the sea to meet
earl Sigurd, and he greeted them (Kari and Njal's sons) very well, and
they were with the earl that winter.  But when the spring came, Kari
asked Njal's sons to go on warfare with him, but Grim said they would do
so if he would fare with them afterwards out to Iceland.  Kari gave his
word to do that.  Then they fared with him a sea roving.  They harried
south about Anglesea and all the Southern isles.  Thence they held on to
Cantyre, and landed there, and fought with the landsmen, and got thence
much goods, and so fared to their ships.  Thence they fared south to
Wales, and harried there.  Then they held on for Man.  There they met
Godred king of Man and fought with him, and got the victory, and slew
Dungal the king's son.  There they took great spoil.  Thence they held
on north to Coll, and found earl Gilli there, and he greeted them well,
and there they stayed with him a while.  The earl fared with them to the
Orkneys to meet earl Sigurd.  But next spring earl Sigurd gave away his
sister Nereid to earl Gilli.  Then he fared back to the Southern isles.

91.        That summer Kari and Njal's sons busked them for Iceland, and
when they were "all-boun" they went to see the earl.  The earl gave them
good gifts, and they parted with great friendship.  Now they put to sea
and have a short passage, and they got a fine fair breeze, and made the
land at Eyrar ..............

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Brian's Battle](is320)
