[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](is320)  [Next](is322) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

C.     --- BRIAN'S BATTLE.

 

(From the Saga of Thorstein Hall of the Side's Son.)

 

         Thorstein fared abroad and came to the Orkneys.  Earl Sigurd
Hlödver's son then ruled over the isles.  He gave Thorstein a hearty
welcome and asked him to stay with him, and he was with the earl that
winter in much esteem.  And when the spring came, then the earl asked
Thorstein whether he would fare with him a sea roving, or whether he
would stay behind.  Thorstein chose to fare, and was bowman on the
earl's ship, and was the ablest man in the ship, as though he had been
wont to that work.  Thorstein was a man of good counsel and wise and
bold;  and the earl asked him to stay long with him after he learned the
stock whence he sprang, and knew the kinship that was between them ---
for Thorey Özur's daughter was the mother of Hall of the Side, but Özur
was the son of Hrollaug, the son of Rögnvald of Mæren, and the father of
earl Thorfinn skullsplitter, the father of earl Hlödver, the father of
earl Sigurd. --- But earl Sigurd harried far and wide during the summer
about Scotland, and no man challenged Thorstein's dash and daring.  Both
these things pleaded Thorstein's cause, his kindred and his sturdiness. 
The earl slew many savage folk, but some fled away to the woods;  and
the earl fared far and wide about the Western lands, and burnt.  Late in
the autumn he fared home to the Orkneys, and then had rest for three
months, and then he gave his friends good gifts.  Then the earl spake to
Thorstein and said, "Good following hast thou shown me and like a man,
and now take of me this axe inlaid with gold;  it beseems thee to bear
it."  Thorstein thanks the earl, for that was the greatest treasure. 
That autumn came Burning-Flosi to the Orkneys and his men.  And those
dealings took place between them and earl Sigurd, as is said in Njals
Saga.

2.            This winter earl Sigurd busked him for Ireland.  And then
he fought with king Brian, and that battle has been the most famous
across the western sea, both for the host of men (who fought) and the
great tidings that happened there.  And when the earl busked him from
home he asked Thorstein whether he would fare too.  Thorstein said that
nothing else beseemed him than to fare and follow him in danger, "when
we think it good to lead a quiet life of ease with you in peace."  The
earl thanked him for his words.  After that they fared to Ireland and
fought with king Brian, and there many tidings happened at the same
time.  As is said in his Saga.  There fell three banner-bearers of earl
Sigurd;  and then the earl bade Thorstein to bear the banner.  Then
Thorstein said, "Bear thine own crow (1) thyself, earl."  Then a man (2)
spoke and said:  "Thou doest right, Thorstein, for from it I have lost
three of my sons."  The earl took the banner from the staff and hid it
among his clothing and then fought on most daringly.  And a little after
men heard it said up aloft:  "If earl Sigurd will have victory, then let
him make for Dumaz-hill with his men."  That (3) ....................
ever followed the earl, and so it was then.  There fell the earl in that
onslaught, and much folk with him.  and just then Brodir slew king
Brian;  but Ospak his brother took him and tore out his entrails, and
led him round and round the trunk of a tree, and so he died.  Then great
tidings happened afterwards in loss of life.  Thorstein and some few of
them together took their stand by the woodside.  Then a man said, "Why
fleest thou not, Thorstein?"  He answers, "Because I cannot reach home
this evening, even though I do fly."  Peace was given to Thorstein.  And
he fared back to the Orkneys and thence to Norway  .................. 
But when he had been three winters abroad and had grown very famous then
he fared out hither (to Iceland).  Thorstein was then twenty when he was
in Brian's battle.

 

 

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1.            "Crow," in allusion to the raven which was worked on the
banner.  Comp. Orkn. S. Ch. 12.  Njala reads "thy devil."

2.            "Amundi the white" according to Njala.

3.            Here there is a blank space for a word or two which has
been left in the MS.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix D. Helgi and Wolf (from the Flatey Book)](is322)
