<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots201)  [Next](lots203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

### June 25.—ST. PROSPER OF AQUITAINE.—ST WILLIAM OF MONTE-VERGINE.

ST. PROSPER was born at Aquitaine, in the year 403. His works show that
in his youth he had happily applied himself to all the branches both of
polite and sacred learning. On account of the purity and sanctity of his
manners, he is called by those of his age a holy and venerable man. Our
Saint does not appear to have been any more than a layman; but being of
great virtue, and of extraordinary talents and learning, he wrote
several works in which he ably refuted the errors of heresy. St. Leo the
Great, being chosen Pope in 440, invited St. Prosper to Rome, made him
his secretary, and employed him in the most important affairs of the
Church. Our Saint crushed the Pelagian heresy, which began again to
raise its head in that capital, and its final overthrow is said to be
due to his zeal, learning, and unwearied endeavors. The date of his
death is uncertain, but he was still living in 463.

ST. WILLIAM, having lost his father and mother in his infancy, was
brought up by his friends in great sentiments of piety; and at fifteen
years of age, out of an earnest desire to lead a penitential life, he
left Piedmont, his native country, made an austere pilgrimage to St.
James's in Galicia, and afterward retired into the kingdom of Naples,
where he chose for his abode a desert mountain, and lived in perpetual
contemplation and the exercises of most rigorous penitential
austerities. Finding himself discovered and his contemplation
interrupted, he changed his habitation and settled in a place called
Monte-Vergine, situated between Nola and Benevento, in the same kingdom;
but his reputation followed him, and he was obliged by two neighboring
priests to permit certain fervent persons to live with him and to
imitate his ascetic practices. Thus, in 1119, was laid the foundation of
the religious congregation called *de Monte-Vergine*. The Saint died on
the 25th of June, 1142.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. Sts. John and Paul, Martyrs](lots203)

</div>
