<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots014)  [Next](lots016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### January 5.—ST. SIMEON STYLITES.

ONE winter's day, about the year 401, the snow lay thick around Sisan, a
little town in Cilicia. A shepherd boy, who could not lead his sheep to
the fields on account of the cold, went to the church instead, and
listened to the eight Beatitudes, which were read that morning. He asked
how these blessings were to be obtained, and when he was told of the
monastic life a thirst for perfection arose within him. He became the
wonder of the world, the great St. Simeon Stylites. He was warned that
perfection would cost him dear, and so it did. A mere child, he began
the monastic life, and therein passed a dozen years in superhuman
austerity. He bound a rope round his waist till the flesh was putrefied.
He ate but once in seven days, and, when God led him to a solitary life,
kept fasts of forty days. Thirty-seven years he spent on the top of
pillars, exposed to heat and cold, day and night adoring the majesty of
God. Perfection was all in all to St. Simeon; the means nothing, except
in so far as God chose them for him. The solitaries of Egypt were
suspicious of a life so new and so strange, and they sent one of their
number to bid St. Simeon come down from his pillar and return to the
common life. In a moment the Saint made ready to descend; but the
Egyptian religious was satisfied with this proof of humility. "Stay," he
said, "and take courage; your way of life is from God."

Cheerfulness, humility, and obedience set their seal upon the
austerities of St. Simeon. The words which God put into his mouth
brought crowds of heathens to baptism and of sinners to penance. At
last, in the year 460, those who watched below noticed that he had been
motionless three whole days. They ascended, and found the old man's body
still bent in the attitude of prayer, but his soul was with God.
Extraordinary as the life of St. Simeon may appear, it teaches us two
plain and practical lessons: First, we must constantly renew within
ourselves an intense desire for perfection. Secondly, we must use with
fidelity and courage the means of perfection God points out.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

**Reflection**.—St. Augustine says: "This is the business of our life:
by effort and by toil, by prayer and supplication, to advance in the
grace of God, till we come to that height of perfection in which with
clean hearts we may behold God."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. The Epiphany of Our Lord](lots016.md)

</div>
