<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots156)  [Next](lots158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 16.—ST. JOHN NEPOMUCEN.

ST. JOHN was born, in answer to prayer, 1330, of poor parents, at
Nepomuc in Bohemia. In gratitude they consecrated him to God; and his
holy life as a priest led to his appointment as chaplain to the court of
the Emperor Wenceslas, where he converted numbers by his preaching and
example. Amongst those who sought his advice was the empress, who
suffered much from her husband's unfounded jealousy. St. John taught her
to bear her cross with joy; but her piety only incensed the emperor, and
he tried to extort her confessions from the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Saint. He threw
St. John into a dungeon, but gained nothing; then, inviting him to his
palace, he promised him riches if he would yield, and threatened death
if he refused. The Saint was silent. He was racked and burnt with
torches; but no words, save Jesus and Mary, fell from his lips. At last
set free, he spent his time in preaching, and preparing for the death he
knew to be at hand. On Ascension Eve, May 16, Wenceslas, after a final
and fruitless attempt to move his constancy, ordered him to be cast into
the river, and that night the martyr's hands and feet were bound, and he
was thrown from the bridge of Prague. As he died, a heavenly light
shining on the water discovered the body, which was buried with the
honors due to a Saint. A few years later, Wenceslas was deposed by his
own subjects, and died an impenitent and miserable death. In 1618 the
Calvinist and Hussite soldiers of the Protestant Elector Frederick tried
repeatedly to demolish the shrine of St. John at Prague. Each attempt
was miraculously frustrated; and once the persons engaged in the
sacrilege, among whom was an Englishman, were killed on the spot. In
1620 the imperial troops recovered the town by a victory which was
ascribed to the Saint's intercession, as he was seen on the eve of the
battle, radiant with glory, guarding the cathedral. When his shrine was
opened, three hundred and thirty years after his decease, the flesh had
disappeared, and one member alone remained incorrupt, the tongue; thus
still, in silence, giving glory to God.

**Reflection**.—St. John, who by his invincible sacramental silence won
his crown, teaches us to prefer torture and death to offending the
Creator with our tongue. How many times each day do we forfeit grace and
strength by sins of speech!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. St. Paschal Baylon](lots158)

</div>
