<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots257)  [Next](lots259) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 16.—ST. HYACINTH.

HYACINTH, the glorious apostle of Poland and Russia, was born of noble
parents in Poland, about the year 1185. In 1218, being already Canon of
Cracow, he accompanied his uncle, the bishop of that place, to Rome.
There he met St. Dominic, and received the habit of the Friar Preachers
from the patriarch himself, of whom be became a living copy. So
wonderful was his progress in virtue that within a year Dominic sent him
to preach and plant the Order in Poland, where he founded two houses.
His apostolic journeys extended over numerous regions. Austria, Bohemia,
Livonia, the shores of the Black Sea, Tartary, and Northern China on the
east, and .Sweden and Norway to the west, were evangelized by him, and
he is said to have visited Scotland. Everywhere multitudes were
converted, churches and convents were built; one

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

hundred and twenty thousand pagans and infidels were baptized by his
hands. He worked numerous miracles, and at Cracow raised a dead youth to
life. He had inherited from St. Dominic a most filial confidence in the
Mother of God; to her he ascribed his success, and to her aid he looked
for his salvation. When St. Hyacinth was at Kiev the Tartars sacked the
town, but it was only as he finished Mass that the Saint heard of the
danger. Without waiting to unvest, he took the ciborium in his hands,
and was leaving the church. As he passed by an image of Mary a voice
said: "Hyacinth, my son, why dust thou leave me behind? Take me with
thee, and leave me not to mine enemies." The statue was of heavy
alabaster, but when Hyacinth took it in his arms it was light as a reed.
With the Blessed Sacrament and the image he came to the river Dnieper,
and walked dry-shod over the surface of the waters. On the eve of the
Assumption he was warned of his coming death. In spite of a wasting
fever, he celebrated Mass on the feast, and communicated as a dying man.
He was anointed at the foot of the altar, and died the same day, 1257.

**Reflection**.—St. Hyacinth teaches us to employ every effort in the
service of God, and to rely for success not on our own industry, but on
the prayer of His Immaculate Mother.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. St. Liberatus, Abbot, and Six Monks, Martyrs](lots259)

</div>
