<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots071)  [Next](lots073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 27.—ST. LEANDER, Bishop.

ST. LEANDER was born of an illustrious family at Carthagena in Spain. He
was the eldest of five brothers, several of whom are numbered among the
Saints. He entered into a monastery very young, where he lived many
years and attained to an eminent degree of virtue and sacred learning.
These qualities occasioned his being promoted to the see of Seville; but
his change of condition made little or no alteration in his method of
life, though it brought on him a great increase of care and solicitude.
Spain at that time was in possession of the Visigoths. These Goths,
being infected with Arianism, established this

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

heresy wherever they came; so that when St. Leander was made bishop it
had reigned in Spain a hundred years. This was his great affliction;
however, by his prayers to God, and by his most zealous and unwearied
endeavors, he became the happy instrument of the conversion of that
nation to the Catholic faith. Having converted, among others,
Hermenegild, the king's eldest son and heir apparent, Leander was
banished by King Leovigild. This pious prince was put to death by his
unnatural father, the year following, for refusing to receive Communion
from the hands of an Arian bishop. But, touched with remorse not long
after, the king recalled our Saint; and falling sick and finding himself
past hopes of recovery, he sent for St. Leander, and recommended to him
his son Recared. This son, by listening to St. Leander, soon became a
Catholic, and finally converted the whole nation of the Visigoths. He
was no less successful with respect to the Suevi, a people of Spain,
whom his father Leovigild had perverted.

St. Leander was no less zealous in the reformation of manners than in
restoring the purity of faith; and he planted the seeds of that zeal and
fervor which afterwards produced so many martyrs and Saints. This holy
doctor of Spain died about the year 596, on the 27th of February, as
Mabillon proves from his epitaph. The Church of Seville has been a
metropolitan see ever since the third. century. The cathedral is the
most magnificent, both as to structure and ornament, of any in all
Spain.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. Sts. Romanus and Lupicinus, Abbots](lots073)

</div>
