<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots176)  [Next](lots178.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 2.—STS. POTHINUS, Bishop, SANCTUS, ATTALUS, BLANDINA, and the other Martyrs of Lyons.

AFTER the miraculous victory obtained by the prayer; of the Christians
under Marcus Aurelius, in 174, the Church enjoyed a kind of peace,
though it was often disturbed in particular places by popular
commotions, or by the superstitious fury of certain governors. This
appears from the violent persecution which was raised three years after
the aforesaid victory, at Vienne and Lyons, in 177, whilst St. Pothinus
was Bishop of Lyons, and St. Irenæus, who had been sent thither by St.
Polycarp out of Asia, was a priest of that city. Many of the principal
Christians were brought before the Roman governor. Among them was a
slave, Blandina: and her mistress, also a Christian, feared that
Blandina lacked strength to brave the torture. She was tormented a whole
day through, but she bore it all with joy till the executioners gave up,
confessing

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

themselves outdone. Red-hot plates were held to the sides of Sanctus, a
deacon of Vienne, till his body became one great sore, and he looked no
longer like a man; but in the midst of his tortures he was "bedewed and
strengthened by the stream of heavenly water which flows from the side
of Christ." Meantime, many confessors were kept in prison and with them
were some who had been terrified into apostasy. Even the heathens marked
the joy of martyrdom in the Christians who were decked for their eternal
espousals, and the misery of the apostates. But the faithful confessors
brought back those who had fallen, and the Church, "that Virgin Mother,"
rejoiced when she saw her children live again in Christ. Some died in
prison, the rest were martyred one by one, St. Blandina last of all,
after seeing her younger brother put to a cruel death, and encouraging
him to victory.

**Reflection**.—In early times the Christians were called the children
of joy. Let us seek the joy of the Holy Spirit to sweeten suffering, to
temper earthly delight, till we enter into the joy of Our Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. St. Clotilda, Queen](lots178.md)

</div>
