<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots204)  [Next](lots206.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 28.—ST. IRENÆUS, Bishop, Martyr.

THIS Saint was born about the year 120. He was a Grecian, probably a
native of Lesser Asia. His parents, who were Christians, placed him
under the care of the great St. Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna. It was in so
holy a school that he learned that sacred science which rendered him
afterward a great ornament of the Church and the terror of her enemies.
St. Polycarp cultivated his rising genius, and formed his mind to piety
by precepts and example; and the zealous scholar was careful to reap all
the advantages which were offered him by the happiness

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

of such a master. Such was his veneration for his tutor's sanctity that
he observed every action and whatever be saw in that holy man, the
better to copy his example and learn his spirit. He listened to his
instructions with an insatiable ardor, and so deeply did he engrave them
on his heart that the impressions remained most lively even to his old
age. In order to confute the heresies of his age, this father made
himself acquainted with the most absurd conceits of their philosophers,
by which means he was qualified to trace up every error to its sources
and set it in its full light. St. Polycarp sent St. Irenæus into Gaul,
in company with some priest; he was himself ordained priest of the
Church of Lyons by St. Pothinus. St. Pothinus having glorified God by
his happy death, in the year 177, our Saint was chosen the second Bishop
of Lyons. By his preaching, he in a short time converted almost that
whole country to the Faith. He wrote several works against heresy, and
at last, with many others, suffered martyrdom about the year 202, under
the Emperor Severus, at Lyons.

**Reflection**.—Fathers and mothers, and heads of families, spiritual
and temporal, should bear in mind that inferiors "will not be corrected
by words" alone, but that example is likewise needful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. St. Peter, Apostle](lots206.md)

</div>
