<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots101)  [Next](lots103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 27.—ST. JOHN OF EGYPT.

TILL he was twenty-five, John worked as a carpenter with his father.
Then feeling a call from God, he left the world and committed himself to
a holy solitary in the desert. His master tried his spirit by many
unreasonable commands, bidding him roll the hard rocks, tend dead trees,
and the like. John obeyed in all things with the simplicity of a child.
After a careful training of sixteen years he withdrew to the top of a
steep cliff to think only of God and his soul. The more he knew of
himself, the more he distrusted himself. For the last fifty years,
therefore, he never saw women, and seldom men. The result of this
vigilance and purity was threefold: a holy joy and cheerfulness which
consoled all who conversed with him; perfect obedience to superiors;
and, in return for this, authority over creatures, whom he had forsaken
for the Creator. St. Augustine tells us of his appearing in a vision to
a holy woman, whose sight he had restored, to avoid seeing her face to
face. Devils assailed him continually, but John never ceased his prayer.
From his long communings with God, he turned to men with gifts of
healing and prophecy. Twice each week he spoke through a window with
those who came to him, blessing oil for their sick and predicting things
to come. A deacon came to him in disguise, and he reverently kissed his
hand. To the Emperor Theodosius he foretold his future victories and the
time of his death. The three last days of his life John gave wholly to
God: on the third he was found on

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

his knees as if in prayer, bud his soul was with the blessed. He died in
394.

**Reflection**.—The Saints examine themselves by the perfections of God,
and do penance. We judge our conduct by the standard of other men, and
rest satisfied with it. Yet it is by the divine holiness alone that we
shall be judged when we die.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. St. Gontran, King](lots103)

</div>
