<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots027)  [Next](lots029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### January 18.—ST. PETER'S CHAIR AT ROME.

ST. PETER having triumphed over the devil in the East, the latter
pursued him to Rome in the person of Simon Magus. He who had formerly
trembled at the voice of a poor maid now feared not the very throne of
idolatry and superstition. The capital of the empire of the world, and
the centre of impiety, called for the zeal of the Prince of Apostles.
God had established the Roman Empire, and extended its dominion beyond
that of any former monarchy, for the more easy propagation of His
Gospel. Its metropolis was of the greatest importance for this
enterprise. St. Peter took that province upon himself, and, repairing to
Rome, there preached the faith and established his ecclesiastical chair.
That St. Peter preached in Rome, founded the Church there, and died
there by martyrdom under Nero, are facts the most incontestable, by the
testimony of all writers of different countries who lived near that
time; persons of unquestionable veracity, and who could not but be
informed of the truth in a point so interesting and of its own nature so
public and notorious. This is also attested by monuments of every kind;
by the prerogatives, rights, and privileges which that church enjoyed
from those early ages in consequence of this title. It was an ancient
custom observed by churches to keep an annual festival of the
consecration of their bishops. The feast of the Chair of St. Peter is
found in ancient martyrologies. Christians justly celebrate the founding
of this mother-church, the centre of Catholic communion, in thanksgiving
to God for His mercies to His Church, and to implore His future
blessings.

**Reflection**.—As one of God's greatest mercies to His Church, let us
earnestly beg of Him to raise up in it zealous pastors, eminently
replenished with His Spirit, with which He animated His apostles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. St. Canutus, King, Martyr](lots029)

</div>
