<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots211)  [Next](lots213.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### July 5.—ST. PETER OF LUXEMBURG.

PETER OF LUXEMBURG, descended both by his father and mother from the
noblest families in Europe, was born in Lorraine, in the year 1369. When
but a schoolboy, twelve years of age, he went to London as a hostage for
his brother, the Count of St. Pol, who had been taken prisoner. The
English were so won by Peter's holy example that they released him at
the end of the year, taking his word for the ransom. Richard II. now
invited him to remain at the English court; but Peter returned to Paris,
determined to have no master but Christ. At the early age of fifteen he
was appointed, on account of his prudence and sanctity, Bishop of Metz,
and made his public entry into his see barefoot and riding an ass. He
governed his diocese with ail the zeal and prudence of maturity, and
divided his revenues in three parts—for the Church, the poor, and his
household. His charities often left him personally destitute, and he had
but twenty pence left when he died. Created Cardinal of St. George, his
austerities in the midst of a court were so severe that he was ordered
to moderate them. Peter replied, "I shall always be an unprofitable
servant, but I can at least obey." Ten months after his promotion he
fell sick of a fever, and lingered for some time in a sinking condition,
his holiness increasing as he drew near his end. St. Peter, it was
believed, never

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

stained his soul by mortal sin; yet as he grew in grace his holy hatred
of self became more and more intense. At length, when he had received
the last sacraments, he forced his attendants each in turn to scourge
him for his faults, and then lay silent till he died. But God was
pleased to glorify His servant. Among other miracles is the following:
On July 5, 1432, a child about twelve years old was killed by falling
from a high tower, in the palace of Avignon, upon a sharp rock. The
father, distracted with grief, picked up the scattered pieces of the
skull and brains, and carried them in a sack, with the mutilated body of
his son, to St. Peter's shrine, and with many tears be- sought the
Saint's intercession. After a while the child returned to life, and was
placed upon the altar for all to witness. In honor of this miracle the
city of Avignon chose St. Peter as its patron Saint. He died in 1387,
aged eighteen years.

**Reflection**.—St. Peter teaches us how, by self-denial, rank, riches,
the highest dignities, and all this world can give, may serve to make a
Saint.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. St. Goar, Priest](lots213.md)

</div>
