<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots082)  [Next](lots084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 8.—ST. JOHN OF GOD.

NOTHING in John's early life foreshadowed his future sanctity. He ran
away as a boy from his home in Portugal, tended sheep and cattle in
Spain, and served as a soldier against the French, and afterwards
against the Turks. When about forty years of age, feeling remorse for
his wild life, he resolved to devote himself to the ransom of the
Christian slaves in Africa, and went thither with the family of an
exiled noble, which he maintained by his labor. On his return to Spain
he sought to do good by selling holy pictures and books at low prices.
At length the hour of grace struck. At Granada a sermon by the
celebrated John of Avila shook his soul to its depths, and his
expressions of self-abhorrence were so extraordinary that he was taken
to the asylum as one mad. There he employed himself in ministering to
the sick. On leaving he began to collect homeless poor, and to support
them by his work and by begging. One night St. John found in the streets
a poor man who seemed near death, and, as was his wont, he carried him
to the hospital, laid him on a bed, and went to fetch water to wash his
feet. When he had washed them, he knelt to kiss them, and started with
awe: the feet were pierced, and the print of the nails bright with an
unearthly radiance. He raised his eyes to look, and heard the words,
"John, to Me thou doest all that thou doest to the poor in My name: I
reach forth My hand for the alms thou givest; Me dost thou clothe, Mine
are the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

feet thou dost wash." And then the gracious vision disappeared, leaving
St. John filled at once with confusion and consolation. The bishop
became the Saint's patron, and gave him the name of John of God. When
his hospital was on fire, John was seen rushing about uninjured amidst
the flames until he had rescued all his poor. After ten years spent in
the service of the suffering, the Saint's life was fitly closed. He
plunged into the river Xenil to save a drowning boy, and died, 1550, of
an illness brought on by the attempt, at the age of fifty-five.

**Reflection**.—God often rewards men for works that are pleasing in His
sight by giving them grace and opportunity to do other works higher
still. St. John of God used to attribute his conversion, and the graces
which enabled him to do such great works, to his self-denying charity in
Africa.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. St. Frances of Rome](lots084)

</div>
