<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots258)  [Next](lots260) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 17.—ST. LIBERATUS, Abbot, and Six Monks, Martyrs.

HUNERIC, the Arian Vandal king in Africa, in the seventh year of his
reign, published fresh edicts against the Catholics, and ordered their
monasteries to be everywhere demolished. Seven monks, named Liberatus,
Boniface, Servus, Rusticus, Rogatus, Septimus, and Maximus, who lived in
a monastery near Capsa, in the province of Byzacena, were at that time
summoned to Carthage. They were first tempted with great promises, but
as they remained constant in the belief of the Trinity, and of one
Baptism, they were loaded with irons and thrown into a dark dungeon. The
faithful, having bribed the guards,

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

visited the Saints day and night, to be instructed by them and mutually
to encourage one another to suffer for the faith of Christ. The king,
learning this, commanded them to be more closely confined, loaded with
heavier irons, and tortured with a cruelty never heard of till that
time. Soon after, he condemned them to be put into an old ship and burnt
at sea. The martyrs walked cheerfully to the shore, contemning the
insults of the Arians as they passed along. Particular endeavors were
used by the persecutors to gain Maximus, who was very young; but God,
Who makes the tongues of children eloquent to praise His name, gave him
strength to withstand all their efforts, and he boldly told them that
they should never be able to separate him from his holy abbot and
brethren, with whom he had borne the labors of a penitential life for
the sake of everlasting glory. An old vessel was filled with dry sticks,
and the seven martyrs were put on board and bound on the wood; and fire
was put to it several times, but it went out immediately, and all
endeavors to kindle it were in vain. The tyrant, in rage and confusion,
gave orders that the martyrs’ brains should be dashed out with oars,
which was done, and their bodies cast into the sea, which threw them all
on the shore. The Catholics interred them honorably in the monastery of
Bigua, near the Church of St. Celerinus. They suffered in the year 483.

**Reflection**.—"Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or a
railer, or a coveter of other men's things; but if as a Christian, let
him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in that name."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. St. Helena, Empress; St. Agapetus, Martyr](lots260)

</div>
