<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots157)  [Next](lots159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 17.—ST. PASCHAL BAYLON.

FROM a child Paschal seems to have been marked out for the service of
God; and amidst his daily labors he found time to instruct and
evangelize the rude herdsmen who kept their flocks on the hills of
Arragon. At the rage of twenty-four he entered the Franciscan Order, in

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

which, however, he remained, from humility, a simple lay-brother, and
occupied himself, by preference, with the roughest and most servile
tasks. He was distinguished by an ardent love and devotion to the
Blessed Sacrament. He would spend hours on his knees before the
tabernacle—often he was raised from the ground in the fervor of his
prayer—and there, from the very and eternal Truth, he drew such stores
of wisdom that, unlettered as he was, he was counted by all a master in
theology and spiritual science. Shortly after his profession he was
called to Paris on business connected with his Order. The journey was
full of peril, owing to the hostility of the Huguenots, who were
numerous at the time in the south of France; and on four separate
occasions Paschal was in imminent danger of death at the hands of the
heretics. But it was not God's will that His servant should obtain the
crown of martyrdom which, though judging himself all unworthy of it, he
so earnestly desired, and he returned in safety to his convent, where he
died in the odor of sanctity, May 15, 1592.

As Paschal was watching his sheep on the mountainside, he heard the
consecration bell ring out from a church in the valley below, where the
villagers were assembled for Mass. The Saint fell on his knees, when
suddenly there stood before him an angel of God, bearing in his hands
the Sacred Host, and offering it for his adoration. Learn from this how
pleasing to Jesus Christ are those who honor Him in this great mystery
of His love; and how to them especially this promise is fulfilled: "I
will not leave you orphans: I will come unto you " (John xiv. 18) .

**Reflection**.—St. Paschal teaches us never to suffer a day to pass
without visiting Jesus in the narrow chamber where He, Whom the heaven
itself cannot contain, abides day and night for our sake.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. St. Venantius, Martyr](lots159)

</div>
