<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots168)  [Next](lots170) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 27.—ST. MARY MAGDALEN OF PAZZI.

ST. MARY MAGDALEN OF PAZZI, of an illustrious house in Florence, was
born in the year 1566, and baptized by the name of Catherine. She
received her first Communion at ten years of age, and made a vow of
virginity at twelve. She took great pleasure in carefully teaching the
Christian doctrine to the ignorant. Her father, not knowing her vow,
wished to give her in marriage, but she persuaded him to allow her to
become a religious. It was more difficult to obtain her mother's
consent; but at last she gained it, and she was professed, being then
eighteen years of age, in the Carmelite monastery of Santa Maria degli
Angeli in Florence, May 17, 1584. She changed her name Catherine into
that of Mary Magdalen on becoming a

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

nun, and took as her motto, "To suffer or die; " and her life henceforth
was a life of penance for sins not her own, and of love of Our Lord, Who
tried her in ways fearful and strange. She was obedient, observant of
the rule, humble and mortified, and had a great reverence for the
religious life. She loved poverty and suffering, and hungered after
Communion. The day of Communion she called the day of love. The charity
that burned in her heart led her in her youth to choose the house of the
Carmelites, because the religious therein communicated every day. She
rejoiced to see others communicate, even when she was not allowed to do
so herself; and her love for her sisters grew when she saw them receive
Our Lord.

God raised her to high states of prayer, and gave her rare gifts,
enabling her to read the thoughts of her novices, and filling her with
wisdom to direct them aright. She was twice chosen mistress of novices,
and then made superioress, when God took her to Himself, May 25, 1607.
Her body is incorrupt.

**Reflection**.—St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi was so filled with the love
of God that her sisters in the monastery observed it in her love of
themselves, and called her "the Mother of Charity" and "the Charity of
the Monastery."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. Venerable Bede](lots170)

</div>
