<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots180)  [Next](lots182.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June. 6.—ST. NORBERT, Bishop.

OF noble rank and rare talents, Norbert passed a most pious youth, and
entered the ecclesiastical state. By a strange contradiction, his
conduct now became a scandal to his sacred calling, and at the court of
the Emperor Henry IV. he led, like many clerics of that age, a life of
dissipation and luxury. One day, when he was thirty years of age, he was
thrown half dead from his horse, and on recovering his senses, resolved
upon a new life. After a severe and searching preparation, he was
ordained priest, and began to expose the abuses of his Order. Silenced
at first by a local council, he obtained the Pope's sanction and
preached penance to listening crowds in France and the Netherlands. In
the wild vale of Prémontré he gave to some trained disciples the rule of
St. Austin, and a white habit to denote the angelic purity proper to the
priesthood. The Canons Regular, or *Premonstratensians*, as they were
called, were to unite the active work of the country clergy with the
obligations of the monastic life. Their fervor renewed the spirit of the
priesthood, quickened the faith of the people, and drove out heresy. A
vile heretic, named Tankelin, appeared at Antwerp, in the time of St.
Norbert, and denied the reality of the priesthood, and especially
blasphemed the Blessed Eucharist. The Saint was sent for to drive out
the pest. By his burning words he exposed the impostor and rekindled the
faith in the Blessed Sacrament. Many of the apostates had proved their
contempt for the Blessed Sacrament by burying it in filthy places.
Norbert bade them search for the Sacred Hosts. They found them entire
and uninjured, and the Saint bore them back in triumph to the
tabernacle. Hence he is generally painted with the monstrance in his
hand. In 1126 Norbert found himself appointed Bishop of Magdeburg;

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

and there, at the risk of his life, he zealously carried on his work of
reform, and died, worn out with toil, at the age of fifty-three.

**Reflection**.—Reparation for the injuries offered to the Blessed
Sacrament was the aim of St. Norbert's great work of reform—in himself,
in the clergy, and in the faithful. How much does our present worship
repair for our own past irreverences, and for the outrages offered by
others to the Blessed Eucharist.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. St. Robert of Newminster](lots182.md)

</div>
