<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots262)  [Next](lots264.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

### August 21.—ST. JANE FRANCES DE CHANTAL.

AT the age of sixteen, Jane Frances de Frémyot, already a motherless
child, was placed under the care of a worldly-minded governess. In this
crisis she offered herself to the Mother of God, and secured Mary's
protection for life. When a Protestant sought her hand, she steadily
refused to marry "an enemy of God and His Church," and shortly
afterwards, as the loving and beloved wife of the Baron de Chantal, made
her house the pattern of a Christian home. But God had marked her for
something higher than domestic sanctity. Two children and a dearly
beloved sister died, and, in the full tide of prosperity, her husband's
life was taken by the innocent hand of a friend. For seven years the
sorrows of her widowhood were increased by ill-usage from servants and
inferiors, and the cruel importunities of friends, who urged her to
marry again. Harassed almost to despair by their entreaties, she branded
on her heart the name of Jesus, and in the end left her beloved home and
children to live for God alone. It was on the 19th of March, 1609, that
Madame de Chantal bade farewell to her family and relations. Pale, and
with tears in her eyes, she passed round the large room, sweetly and
humbly taking leave of each. Her son, a boy of fifteen, used every
entreaty, every endearment, to induce his mother not to leave them, and
at last passionately flung himself across the door of the room. In an
agony of distress, she passed on over the body of her son to the embrace
of her aged and disconsolate father. The anguish of that parting reached
its height when, kneeling at the feet of the venerable old man, she
sought and obtained his last blessing, promising to repay in her new
home his sacrifice by her prayers. Well might St. Francis call her "the
valiant woman." She was to found with St. Francis de Sales a great
Order. Sickness, opposition, want, beset her, and the death of children,
friends, and of St. Francis himself followed, while eighty-seven houses
of the Visitation rose under her hand. Nine long years of interior
desolation completed the work of God's grace; and in her seventieth year
St. Vincent of Paul saw, at the moment

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

of her death, her soul ascend, as a ball of fire, to heaven.

**Reflection**.—Profit by the successive trials of life to gain the
strength and courage of St. Jane Frances, and they will become
stepping-stones from earth to heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. St. Symphorian, Martyr](lots264.md)

</div>
