<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots001)  [Next](lots003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_start_text"></span>

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# LIVES OF CERTAIN SAINTS

#### CONTAINED IN THE CALENDAR OF SPECIAL FEASTS FOR THE UNITED STATES AND OF SOME OTHERS RECENTLY CANONIZED

### ST. PHILIP OF JESUS, Martyr, Patron of the City of Mexico.

PHILIP DE LAS CASAS was born in the city of Mexico. Brought up piously,
Philip at first showed little care for the pious teaching of his
parents, but at last resolved to enter the Reformed Franciscan Convent
of Santa Barbara at Pueblo. He was not yet weaned from the world and
soon left the novitiate. Grieved at the inconstancy of his son, de las
Casas sent him to the Philippine Islands on a business errand. In vain
did Philip seek to satisfy his heart with pleasure. He could not but
feel that God called him to a religious life. Gaining courage by prayer,
he entered the Franciscan Convent of Our Lady of the Angels at Manila,
and persevered, taking his vows in 1594. The richest cargo that he could
have sent to Mexico would not have gratified his pious father as much as
the tidings that Philip was a professed friar. Alonso de las Casas
obtained from the Commissary of the Order directions that Philip should
be sent to Mexico. He embarked on the St. Philip in July, 1596, with
other religious. Storms drove the vessel to the coast of Japan, and it
was wrecked while endeavoring to enter a port. Amid the storm Philip saw
over Japan a white cross, in the shape used in that country, which after
a time became blood-red, and remained so for some time. It was an omen
of his coming victory. The commander of the vessel sent our Saint and
two other religious to the emperor to solicit permission to continue
their voyage, but they could not

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

obtain an audience. He then proceeded to Macao, to a house of his Order,
to seek the influence of the Fathers there; but the pilot of the vessel
by idle boasts had excited the emperor's fears of the Christians, and
the heathen ruler resolved to exterminate the Catholic missionaries. In
December, officers seized a number of the Franciscan Fathers, three
Jesuits, and several of their young pupils. St. Philip was one of those
arrested and heard with holy joy that sentence of death had been passed
on them all. His left ear was cut off, and he offered this first-fruit
of his blood to God for the salvation of that heathen land. The martyrs
were taken to Nagasaki, where crosses had been erected on a high hill.
When St. Philip was led to that on which he was to die, he knelt down
and clasped it, exclaiming: "O happy ship! O happy galleon for Philip,
lost for my gain! Loss—no loss for me, but the greatest of all gain!" He
was bound to the cross, but the rest under him gave way, so that he was
strangled by the cords. While repeating the holy name of Jesus he was
the first of the happy band to receive the death-stroke. Miracles
attested the power before God of these first martyrs of Japan. Pope
Urban VIII. granted permission to say an Office and Mass in their honor,
and Pope Pius IX. formally canonized them.

St. Philip died at the age of twenty-five and his feast is celebrated
February 5th.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Turribius, Archbishop of Lima](lots003)

</div>
