<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots166)  [Next](lots168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 26.—ST. PHILIP NERI.

PHILIP was one of the noble line of Saints raised up by God in the
sixteenth century to console and bless His Church. After a childhood of
angelic beauty the Holy Spirit drew him away from Florence, the place of
his birth, showed him the world, that he might freely renounce it, led
him to Rome, modelled him in mind and heart and will, and then, as by a
second Pentecost, came down in visible form and filled his soul with
light and peace and joy. He would have gone to India, but God reserved
him for Rome. There he went on simply from day to day, drawing souls to
Jesus, exercising them in mortification and charity, and binding them
together by cheerful devotions; thus, unconsciously to himself, under
the hands of Mary, as he said, the Oratory grew up, and all Rome was
pervaded and transformed by its spirit. His life was a continuous
miracle, his habitual state an ecstasy. He read the hearts of men,
foretold their future, knew their eternal destiny. His touch gave health
of body; his very look calmed souls in trouble and drove away
temptations. He was gay, genial,

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

and irresistibly winning; neither insult nor wrong could dim the
brightness of his joy.

Philip lived in an atmosphere of sunshine and gladness which brightened
all who came near him. "When I met him in the street," says one, "he
would pat my cheek and say, 'Well, how is Don Pellegrino?' and leave me
so full of joy that I could not tell which way I was going." Others said
that when he playfully pulled their hair or their ears, their hearts
would bound with joy. Marcio Altieri felt such overflowing gladness in
his presence that he said Philip's room was a paradise on earth.
Fabrizio de Massimi would go in sadness or perplexity and stand at
Philip's door; he said it was enough to see him, to be near him. And
long after his death it was enough for many, when troubled, to go into
his room to find their hearts lightened and gladdened. He inspired a
boundless confidence and love, and was the common refuge and consoler of
all. A gentle jest would convey his rebukes and veil his miracles. The
highest honors sought him out, but he put them from him. He died in his
eightieth year, in 1595, and bears the grand title of Apostle of Rome.

**Reflection**.—Philip wished his children to serve God, like the first
Christians, in gladness of heart. He said this was the true filial
spirit; this expands the soul, giving it liberty and perfection in
action, power over temptations, and fuller aid to perseverance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. St. Augustine, Apostle of England](lots168)

</div>
