<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots081)  [Next](lots083.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 7.—ST. THOMAS AQUINAS.

ST. THOMAS was born of noble parents at Aquino in Italy, in 1226. At the
age of nineteen he received the Dominican habit at Naples, where he was
studying. Seized by his brothers on his way to Paris, he suffered a two
years’ captivity in their castle of Rocca-Secca; but neither the
caresses of his mother and sisters, nor the threats and stratagems of
his brothers, could shake him in his vocation. While St. Thomas was in
confinement at Rocca-Secca, his brothers endeavored to entrap him into
sin, but the attempt only ended in the triumph of his purity. Snatching
from the hearth a burning brand, the Saint drove from his chamber the
wretched creature whom they had there concealed. Then marking a cross
upon the wall, he knelt down to pray, and forthwith, being rapt in
ecstasy, an angel girded him with a cord, in token of the gift of
perpetual chastity which God had given him. The pain caused by the
girdle was so sharp that St. Thomas uttered a piercing cry, which
brought his guards into the room. But he never told this grace to any
one save only to Father Raynald, his confessor, a little while before
his death. Hence originated the Confraternity of the "Angelic Warfare,"
for the preservation of the virtue of chastity. Having at length
escaped, St. Thomas went to Cologne to study under Blessed Albert the
Great, and after that to Paris, where for many years he taught
philosophy and theology. The Church has ever venerated his numerous
writings as a treasure-house of sacred doctrine; while in naming him the
Angelic Doctor she has indicated that his science is more divine than
human. The rarest gifts of intellect were combined in him with the
tenderest piety. Prayer, he said, had taught him more than study. His
singular devotion to the Blessed Sacrament

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

shines forth in the Office and hymns for Corpus Christi, which he
composed. To the words miraculously uttered by a crucifix at Naples,
"Well hast thou written concerning Me, Thomas. What shall I give thee as
a reward?" he replied, "Naught save Thyself, O Lord." He died at
Fossa-Nuova, 1274, on his way to the General Council of Lyons, to which
Pope Gregory X. had summoned him.

**Reflection**.—The knowledge of God is for all, but hidden treasures
are reserved for those who have ever followed the Lamb.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. St. John of God](lots083.md)

</div>
