<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots144)  [Next](lots146.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 4.—ST. MONICA.

MONICA, the mother of St. Augustine, was born in 332. A, a girlhood of
singular innocence and piety, she was given in marriage to Patritius, a
pagan. She at once devoted herself to his conversion, praying for him
always,

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

and winning his reverence and love by the holiness of her life and her
affectionate forbearance. She was rewarded by seeing him baptized a year
before his death. When her son Augustine went astray in faith and
manners her prayers and tears were incessant. She was once very urgent
with a learned bishop that he would talk to her son in order to bring
him to a better mind, but he declined, despairing of success with one at
once so able and so headstrong. However, on witnessing her prayers and
tears, he bade her be of good courage; for it might not be that the
child of those tears should perish. By going to Italy, Augustine could
for a time free himself from his mother's importunities; but he could
not escape from her prayers, which encompassed him like the providence
of God. She followed him to Italy, and there by his marvellous
conversion her sorrow was turned into joy. At Ostia, on their homeward
journey, as Augustine and his mother sat at a window conversing of the
life of the blessed, she turned to him and said, "Son, there is nothing
now I care for in this life. What I shall now do or why I am here, I
know not. The one reason I had for wishing to linger in this life a
little longer was that I might see you a Catholic Christian before I
died. This has God granted me superabundantly in seeing you reject
earthly happiness to become His servant. What do I here?" A few days
afterwards she had an attack of fever, and died in the year 387.

**Reflection**.—It is impossible to set any bounds to what persevering
prayer may do. It gives man a share in the Divine Omnipotence. St.
Augustine's soul lay bound in the chains of heresy and impurity, both of
which had by long habit grown inveterate. They were broken by his
mother's prayers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. St. Pius V](lots146.md)

</div>
