<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots267)  [Next](lots269) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 26.—ST. ZEPHYRINUS, Pope and Martyr.

ZEPHYRINUS, a native of Rome, succeeded Victor in the pontificate, in
the year 202, in which Severus raised the fifth most bloody persecution
against the Church, which continued not for two years only, but until
the death of that emperor in 211. Under this furious storm this holy
pastor was the support and comfort of the distressed flock of Christ,
and he suffered by charity and compassion what every confessor
underwent. The triumphs of the martyrs were indeed his joy, but his
heart received many deep wounds from the fall of apostates and heretics.
Neither did this latter affliction cease when peace was restored to the
Church. Our Saint had also the affliction to see the fall of Tertullian,
which seems to have been owing partly to his pride. Eusebius tells us
that this holy Pope exerted his zeal so strenuously against the
blasphemies of the heretics that they treated him in the most
contumelious manner; but it was his glory that they called him the
principal defender of Christ's divinity. St. Zephyrinus filled the
pontifical chair seventeen years, dying in 219. He was buried in his own
cemetery, on the 26th of August. He is, in some Martyrologies, styled a
martyr, which title he might deserve by what he suffered in the
persecution, though he perhaps did not die by the executioner.

**Reflection**.—God has always raised up holy pastors zealous to
maintain the faith of His Church inviolable, and to

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

watch over the purity of its morals and the sanctity of its discipline.
We enjoy the greatest advantages of the divine grace through their
labors, and we owe to God a tribute of perpetual thanksgiving and
immortal praise for all those mercies which He has afforded His Church
on earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. St. Joseph Calasanctius](lots269)

</div>
