<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots069)  [Next](lots071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 25.—ST. TARASIUS.

TARASIUS was born at Constantinople about the middle of the eighth
century, of a noble family. His mother Eucratia, brought him up in the
practice of the most eminent virtues. By his talents and virtue he
gained the esteem of all, and was raised to the greatest honors of the
empire, being made consul, and afterwards first secretary of state to
the Emperor Constantine and the Empress Irene, his mother. In the midst
of the court, and in its highest honors, he led a life like that of a
religious man. Paul, Patriarch of Constantinople, the third of that
name, though he had conformed in some respects to the then, reigning
heresy, had several good qualities, and was not only beloved by the
people for his charity to the poor, but highly esteemed by the whole
court for his great prudence. Touched with remorse, he quitted the
patriarchal see, and put on a religious habit in the monastery of Florus
in Constantinople. Tarasius was chosen to succeed him by the unanimous
consent of the court, clergy, and people. Finding it in vain to oppose
his election, he. declared that he could not in conscience accept of the
government of a; see which had been cut off from the Catholic communion,
except on condition that a general council should be called to compose
the disputes which divided the Church at that time in relation to holy
images. This being agreed to, he was solemnly declared patriarch, and
consecrated soon after, on Christmas Day. The council was opened on the
1st of August, in the Church of the Apostles at Constantinople, in 786;
but, being disturbed by the violences of the Iconoclasts, it adjourned,
and met again the year following

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

in the Church of St. Sophia at Nice. The council, having declared the
sense of the Church in relation to the matter in debate, which was found
to be the allowing to holy pictures and images a relative honor, was
closed with the usual acclamations and prayers for the prosperity of the
emperor and empress; after which, synodal letters were sent to all the
churches, and in particular to the Pope, who approved the council. The
life of this holy patriarch was a model of perfection to his clergy and
people. His table contained barely the necessaries of life; he allowed
himself very little time for sleep, being always up the first and last
in his family. Reading and prayer filled all his leisure hours. The
emperor having become enamoured of Theodota, a maid of honor to his
wife, the Empress Mary, was resolved to divorce the latter. He used all
his efforts to gain the patriarch over to his desires, but St. Tarasius
resolutely refused to countenance the iniquity. The holy man gave up his
soul to God in peace on the 25th of February, 806, after having sat
twenty-one years and two months.

**Reflection**.—The highest praise which Scripture pronounces on the
holy man Job is comprised in these words, "He was simple and upright."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. St. Porphyry, Bishop](lots071.md)

</div>
