<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots199)  [Next](lots201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 23.—ST. ETHELDREDA, Abbess.

BORN and brought up in the fear of God—her mother and three sisters are
numbered among the Saints—Etheldreda had but one aim in life, to devote
herself to His service in the religious state. Her parents, however, had
other views for her, and, in spite of her tears and prayers, she was
compelled to become the wife of Tonbercht, a tributary of the Mercian
king. She lived with him as a virgin for three years, and at his death
retired to the isle of Ely, that she might apply herself wholly to
heavenly things. This happiness was but short-lived; for Egfrid, the
powerful King of Northumbria, pressed his suit upon her with such
eagerness that she was forced into a second marriage.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Her life at his
court was that of an ascetic rather than a queen: she lived with him not
as a wife but as a sister, and, observing a scrupulous regularity of
discipline, devoted her time to works of mercy and love. After twelve
years, she retired with her husband's consent to Coldingham Abbey, which
was then under the rule of St. Ebba, and received the veil from the
hands of St. Wilfrid. As soon as Etheldreda had left the court of her
husband, he repented of having consented to her departure, and followed
her, meaning to bring her back by force. She took refuge on a headland
on the coast near Coldingham; and here a miracle took place, for the
waters forced themselves a passage round the hill, barring the further
advance of Egfrid. The Saint remained on this island refuge for seven
days, till the king, recognizing the divine will, agreed to leave her in
peace. God, Who by a miracle confirmed the Saint's vocation, will not
fail us if, with a single heart, we elect for Him. In 672 she returned
to Ely, and founded there a double monastery. The nunnery she governed
herself, and was by her example a living rule of perfection to her
sisters. Some time after her death, in 679, her body was found
incorrupt, and St. Bede records many miracles worked by her relics.

**Reflection**.—The soul cannot truly serve God while it is involved in
the distractions and pleasures of the world. Etheldreda knew this, and
chose rather to be a servant of Christ her Lord than the mistress of an
earthly court. Resolve, in whatever stat s you are, to live absolutely
detached from the world, and to separate yourself as much as possible
from it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. St. John the Baptist](lots201)

</div>
