<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots242)  [Next](lots244.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ST. ALPHONSUS LIGUORI.

ST. ALPHONSUS was born of noble parents, near Naples, in 1696. His
spiritual training was intrusted to the Fathers of the Oratory in that
city, and from his boyhood Alphonsus was known as a most devout Brother
of the Little Oratory. At the early age of sixteen he was made

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

doctor in law, and he threw himself into this career with ardor and
success. A mistake, by which he lost an important cause, showed him the
vanity of human fame, and determined him to labor only for the glory of
glory He entered the priesthood, devoting himself to. the most neglected
souls; and to carry on this work he founded later the missionary
Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer. At the age of sixty-six he
became Bishop of St. Agatha, and undertook the reform of his diocese
with the zeal of a Saint. He made a vow never to lose time, and, though
his life was spent in prayer and work, he composed a vast number of
books, filled with such science, unction, and wisdom that he has been
declared one of the Doctors of the Church. St. Alphonsus wrote his first
book at the age of forty-nine, and in his eighty-third year had
published about sixty volumes, when his director forbade him to write
more. Very many of these books were written in the half-hours snatched
from his labors as missionary, religious superior, and Bishop, or in the
midst of continual bodily and mental sufferings. With his left hand he
would hold a piece of marble against his aching head while his right
hand wrote. Yet he counted no time wasted which was spent in charity. He
did not refuse to hold a long correspondence with a simple soldier who
asked his advice, or to play the harpsichord while he taught his novices
to sing spiritual canticles. He lived in evil times, and met with many
persecutions and disappointments. For his last seven years he was
prevented by constant sickness from offering the Adorable Sacrifice; but
he received Holy Communion daily, and his love for Jesus Christ and his
trust in Mary's prayers sustained him to the end. He died in 1787, in
his ninety-first year.

**Reflection**.—Let us do with all our heart the duty of each day,
leaving the result to God, as well as the care of the future.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Finding of St. Stephen's Relics](lots244.md)

</div>
