<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots263)  [Next](lots265.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 22.—ST. SYMPHORIAN, Martyr.

ABOUT the year 180 there was a great procession of the heathen goddess
Ceres, at Autun, in France. Amongst the crowd was one who refused to pay
the ordinary marks of worship. He was therefore dragged before the
magistrate and accused of sacrilege and sedition. When asked his name
and condition, he replied, "My name is Symphorian; I am a Christian!' He
came of a noble and Christian family. He was still young, and so
innocent that he was said to converse with the holy angels. The
Christians of Autun were few and little known, and the judge could not
believe that the youth was serious in his purpose. He caused the laws
enforcing heathen worship to be read, and looked for a speedy
compliance. Symphorian replied that he must obey the laws of the King of
kings. "Give me a hammer," he said, "and I will break your idol in
pieces." He was scourged and thrown into a dungeon. Some days later this
son of light came forth from the darkness of his prison, haggard and
worn, but full of joy. He despised the riches and honors offered to him
as he had despised torments. He died by the sword, and went to the court
of the heavenly King. The mother of St. Symphorian stood on the city
walls and saw her son led out to die. She knew the honors he had refused
and the dishonor of his death, but she esteemed the reproach of Christ
better than all the riches of Egypt, and she cried out to him, "My son,
my son, keep the living God in your heart; look up to Him Who reigns in
heaven." Thus she shared in the glory of his passion, and her name lives
with his in the records of the Church. Little more than a century later
the Roman Empire bowed before the faith of Christ. Many miracles spread
the glory of St. Symphorian, and of Christ the King of Saints.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

**Reflection**.—The Catholic religion teaches us to be subject to every
rightful authority. But no earthly authority has any right against
Christ and His Church. If we are accused of sedition or disobedience
because we are faithful to our religion, then we must choose as St.
Symphorian chose, and obey God rather than man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. St. Philip Benizi](lots265.md)

</div>
