<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots084)  [Next](lots086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 10.—THE FORTY MARTYRS OF SEBASTE.

THE FORTY MARTYRS were soldiers quartered at Sebaste in Armenia, about
the year 320. When their legion was ordered to offer sacrifice they
separated themselves from the rest and formed a company of martyrs.
After they had been torn by scourges and iron hooks they were chained
together and led to a lingering death. It was a cruel winter, and they
were condemned to lie naked on the icy surface of a pond in the open air
till they were frozen to death. But they ran undismayed to the place of
their combat, joyfully stripped off their garments, and with one voice
besought God to keep their Tanks unbroken. "Forty," they cried, "we have
come to combat: grant that forty may be crowned." There were warm baths
hard by, ready for any one amongst them who would deny Christ. The
soldiers who watched saw angels descending with thirty-nine crowns, and,
while he wondered at the deficiency in the number, one of the confessors
lost heart, renounced his faith, and, crawling to the fire, died body
and soul at the spot where he expected relief. But the soldier was
inspired to confess Christ and take his place, and again the number of
forty was complete. They remained steadfast while their limbs grew stiff
and frozen, and died

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

one by one. Among the Forty there was a young soldier who held nut
longest against the cold, and when the officers came to cart away the
dead bodies they found him still breathing. They were moved with pity,
and wanted to leave him alive in the hope that he would still change his
mind. But his mother stood by, and 'this valiant woman could not bear to
see her son separated from the band of martyrs. She exhorted him to
persevere, and lifted his frozen body into the cart. He was just able to
make a sign of recognition, and was borne away, to be thrown into the
flames with the dead bodies of his brethren.

**Reflection**.—All who live the life of grace are one in Christ. But
besides this there are many specialties—of religion, of community life,
or at least of aspirations in prayer, and pious works. Thank God if He
has bound you to others by these spiritual ties; remember the character
you have to support, and pray that the bond which unites you here may
last for eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. St. Eulogius, Martyr](lots086)

</div>
