<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots164)  [Next](lots166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 24.—STS. DONATIAN and ROGATIAN, Martyrs.

HERE lived at Nantes an illustrious young nobleman named Donatian, who,
having received the holy Sacrament of Regeneration, led a most edifying
life, and strove with much zeal to convert others to faith in Christ.
His elder brother, Rogatian, was not able to resist the moving example
of his piety and the force of his discourses, and desired to be
baptized. But the bishop having withdrawn and concealed himself for fear
of the persecution, he was not able to receive that sacrament, but was
shortly after baptized in his blood; for he declared himself a Christian
at a time when to embrace that sacred profession was to become a
candidate for martyrdom. Donatian was impeached for professing himself a
Christian, and for having withdrawn others, particularly his brother,
from the worship of the gods. Donatian was therefore apprehended, and
having boldly confessed Christ before the governor, was cast into prison
and loaded with irons. Rogatian was also brought before the prefect, who
endeavored first to gain him by flattering speeches, but Ending him
inflexible,

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

sent him to prison with his brother. Rogatian grieved that he had not
been able to receive the Sacrament of Baptism, and prayed that the kiss
of peace which his brother gave him might supply it. Donatian also
prayed for him that his faith might procure for him the effect of
Baptism, and the effusion of his blood that of the Sacrament of
Confirmation. They passed that night together in fervent prayer. They
were the next day called for again by the prefect, to whom they declared
that they were ready to suffer for the name of Christ whatever torments
were prepared for them. By the order of the inhuman judge they were
first stretched on the rack, afterwards their hands were pierced with
lanced, and lastly cut off, about the year 287.

**Reflection**.—Three things are pleasing unto God and man: concord
among brethren, the love of parents, and the union of man and wife.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. St. Gregory VII](lots166)

</div>
