<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots162)  [Next](lots164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 22.—ST. YVO, Confessor.

ST. YVO HELORI, descended from a noble and virtuous family near
Treguier, in Brittany, was born in 1253. At fourteen years of age he
went to Paris, and afterwards to Orleans, to pursue his studies. His
mother was won frequently to say to him that he ought so to live as
became a Saint, to which his answer always was, that he hoped to be one.
This resolution took deep root in his soul, and was a continual spur to
virtue, and a check against the least shadow of any dangerous course.
His time was chiefly divided between study and prayer; for his
recreation he visited the hospitals, where he attended the sick with
great charity, and comforted them under the severe trials of their
suffering condition. He made a private vow of perpetual chastity; but
this not being known, many honorable matches were proposed to him, which
he modestly

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

rejected as incompatible with his studious life. He long deliberated
whether to embrace a religious or a clerical state; but the desire of
serving his neighbor determined him at length in favor of the latter. He
wished, out of humility, to remain in the lesser orders; but his bishop
compelled him to receive the priesthood,—a step which cost him many
tears, though he had qualified himself for that sacred dignity by the
most perfect purity of mind and body, and by a long and fervent
preparation. He was appointed ecclesiastical judge for the diocese of
Rennes. St. Yvo protected the orphans and widows, defended the poor, and
administered justice to all with an impartiality, application, and
tenderness which gained him the good-will even of those who lost their
causes. He was surnamed the advocate and lawyer of the poor. He built a
house near his own for a hospital of the poor and sick; he washed their
feet, cleansed their ulcers, served them at table, and ate himself only
the scraps which they had left. He distributed his corn, or the price
for which he sold it, among the poor immediately after the harvest. When
a certain person endeavored to persuade him to keep it some months, that
he might sell it at a better price, he answered, "I know not whether I
shall be then alive to give it." Another time the same person said to
him, "I have gained a fifth by keeping my corn." "But I," replied the
Saint, "a hundredfold by giving it immediately away." During the Lent of
1303 he felt his strength failing him; yet, far from abating anything in
his austerities, he thought himself obliged to redouble his fervor in
proportion as he advanced nearer to eternity. On the eve of the
Ascension he preached to his people, said Mass, being upheld by two
persons, and gave advice to all who addressed themselves to him. After
this he lay down on his bed, which was a hurdle of twigs plaited
together, and received the last sacraments. From that moment he
entertained himself with God alone, till his soul went to possess Him in
His glory. His death happened on the 19th of May, 1303, in the fiftieth
year of his age.

**Reflection**.—St. Yvo was a Saint amidst the dangers of the world; but
he preserved his virtue untainted only by

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

arming himself carefully against them, by conversing assiduously with
God in prayer and holy meditation, and by most watchfully shunning the
snares of bad company. Without this precaution all the instructions of
parents and all other means of virtue are ineffectual; and the soul is
sure to split against this rock which does not steer wide of it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. St. Julia, Virgin, Martyr](lots164)

</div>
