<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots206)  [Next](lots208.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 30.—ST. PAUL.

ST. PAUL was born at Tarsus, of Jewish parents, and studied at
Jerusalem, at the feet of Gamaliel. While still a young man, he held the
clothes of those who stoned the proto-martyr Stephen; and in his
restless zeal he pressed on to Damascus, "breathing out threatenings and
slaughter against the disciples of Christ." But near Damascus a light
from heaven struck him to the earth. He heard a voice which said, "Why
persecutest thou Me? " He saw the form of Him Who had been crucified for
his

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

sins, and then for three days he saw nothing more. He awoke from his
trance another man—a new creature in Jesus Christ. He left Damascus for
a long retreat in Arabia, and then, at the call of God, he carried the
Gospel to the uttermost limits of the world, and for years he lived and
labored with no thought but the thought of Christ crucified, no desire
but to spend and be spent for Him. He became the apostle of the
Gentiles, whom he had been taught to hate, and wished himself anathema
for his own countrymen, who sought his life. Perils by land and sea
could not damp his courage, nor toil and suffering and age dull the
tenderness of his heart. At last he gave blood for blood. In his youth
he had imbibed the false zeal of the Pharisees at Jerusalem, the holy
city of the former dispensation. With St. Peter he consecrated Rome, our
holy city, by his martyrdom, and poured into its Church all his doctrine
with all his blood. He left fourteen Epistles, which have been a
fountain-head of the Church's doctrine, the consolation and delight of
her greatest Saints. His interior life, so far as words can tell it,
lies open before us in these divine writings, the life of one who has
died forever to himself and risen again in Jesus Christ. "In what," says
St. Chrysostom, "in what did this blessed one gain an advantage over the
other apostles? How comes it that he lives in all men's mouths
throughout the world? Is it not through the virtue of his Epistles?" Nor
will his work cease while the race of man continues. Even now, like a
most chivalrous knight, he stands in our midst, and takes captive every
thought to the obedience of Christ.

**Reflection**.—St. Paul complains that all seek the things which are
their own, and not the things which are Christ's. See if these words
apply to you, and resolve to give yourself without reserve to God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. St. Gal, Bishop](lots208.md)

</div>
