<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots195)  [Next](lots197.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

### June 19.—ST. JULIANA FALCONIERI.

JULIANA FALCONIERI was born in answer to prayer, in 1270. Her father
built the splendid church of the Annunziata in Florence, while her
uncle, Blessed Alexius, became one of the founders of the Servite Order.
Under his care Juliana grew up, as he said, more like an angel than a
human being. Such was her modesty that she never used a mirror or gazed
upon the face of a man during her whole life. The mere mention of sin
made her shudder and tremble, and once hearing a scandal related she
fell into a dead swoon. Her devotion to the sorrows of Our Lady drew her
to the Servants of Mary; and, at the age of fourteen, she refused an
offer of marriage, and received the habit from St. Philip Benizi
himself. Her sanctity attracted many novices, for whose direction she
was bidden to draw up a rule, and thus with reluctance she became
foundress of the "Mantellate." She was with her children as their
servant rather than their mistress, while outside her convent she led a
life of apostolic charity, converting sinners, reconciling enemies, and
healing the sick by sucking with her own lips their ulcerous sores. She
was sometimes rapt for whole days in ecstasy, and her prayers saved the
Servite Order when it was in danger of being suppressed. She was visited
in her last hour by angels in the form of white doves, and Jesus
Himself, as a beautiful child, crowned her with a garland of flowers.
She wasted away through a disease of the stomach, which prevented her
taking food. She bore her silent agony with constant cheerfulness,
grieving only for the privation of Holy Communion. At last, when, in her
seventieth year, she had sunk to the point of death, she begged to be
allowed once more to see and adore the Blessed Sacrament. It was brought
to her cell, and reverently laid on a corporal, which was placed over
her heart. At this moment she expired, and the Sacred Host disappeared.
After her death the form of the Host was found stamped upon her heart in
the exact spot over which the Blessed Sacrament ì had been placed.
Juliana died A. D. 1340.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

**Reflection**.—"Meditate often," says St. Paul of the Cross, "on the
sorrows of the holy Mother, sorrows inseparable from those of her
beloved Son. If you seek the Cross, there you will find the Mother; and
where the Mother is, there also is the Son."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. St. Silverius, Pope and Martyr](lots197.md)

</div>
