<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots038)  [Next](lots040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

### January 29.—ST. FRANCIS OF SALES.

FRANCIS was born of noble and pious parents, near Annecy, 1566, and
studied with brilliant success at Paris and Padua. On his return from
Italy he gave up the grand career which his father had marked out for
him in the service of the state, and became a priest. When the Duke of
Savoy had resolved to restore the Church in the Chablais, Francis
offered himself for the work, and set out on foot with his Bible and
breviary and one companion, his cousin Louis of Sales. It was a work of
toil, privation, and danger. Every door and every heart was closed
against him. He was rejected with insult and threatened with death. But
nothing could daunt or resist him, and ere long the Church burst forth
into a second spring. It is stated that he converted 72,000 Calvinists.
He was then compelled by the Pope to become Coadjutor Bishop of Geneva,
and succeeded to the see in 1602. At times the exceeding gentleness with
which he received heretics and sinners almost scandalized his friends,
and one of them said to him, "Francis of Sales will go to Paradise, of
course; but I am not so sure of the Bishop of Geneva: I am almost afraid
his gentleness will play him a shrewd turn." "Ah," said the Saint, "I
would rather account to God for too great gentleness than for too great
severity. Is not God all love? God the Father is the Father of mercy;
God the Son is a Lamb; God the Holy Ghost is a Dove—that is, gentleness
itself. And are you wiser than God?" In union with St. Jane Frances of
Chantal he founded at Annecy the Order of the Visitation, which soon
spread over Europe. Though poor, he refused provisions and dignities,
and even the great see of Paris. He died at Avignon, 1622.

**Reflection**.—"You will catch more flies," St. Francis used to say,
"with a spoonful of honey than with a hundred barrels of vinegar. Were
there anything better or fairer on earth than gentleness, Jesus Christ
would have taught it us; and yet He has given us only two lessons to
learn of Him—meekness and humility of heart."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. St. Bathildes, Queen](lots040.md)

</div>
