<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots052)  [Next](lots054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 10.—ST. SCHOLASTICA, Abbess.

OF this Saint but little is known on earth, save that she was the sister
of the great patriarch St. Benedict, and that, under his direction, she
founded and governed a numerous community near Monte Casino. St. Gregory
sums up her life by saying that she devoted herself to God from her
childhood, and that her pure soul went to God in the likeness of a dove,
as if to show that her life had been enriched with the fullest gifts of
the Holy Spirit. Her brother was accustomed to visit her every year, for
"she could not be sated or wearied with the words of grace

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

which flowed from his lips." On his last visit, after a day passed in
spiritual converse, the Saint, knowing that her end was near, said, "My
brother, leave me not, I pray you, this night, but discourse with me
till dawn on the bliss of those who see God in heaven." St. Benedict
would not, break his rule at the bidding of natural affection; and then
the Saint bowed her head on her hands and prayed; and there arose a
storm so violent that St. Benedict could not return to his monastery,
and they passed the night in heavenly conversation. Three days later St.
Benedict saw in a vision the soul of his sister going up in the likeness
of a dove into heaven. Then he gave thanks to God for the graces He had
given her, and for the glory which had crowned them. When she died, St.
Benedict, her spiritual daughters, and the monks sent by St. Benedict
mingled their tears and prayed, "Alas! alas! dearest mother, to whom
dost thou leave us now? Pray for us to Jesus, to Whom thou art gone."
They then devoutly celebrated holy Mass, "commending her soul to God;"
and her body was borne to Monte Casino, and laid by her brother in the
tomb he had prepared for himself." And they bewailed her many days;" and
St. Benedict said, "Weep not, sisters and brothers; for assuredly Jesus
has taken her before us to be our aid and defence against all our
enemies, that we may stand in the evil day and be in all things
perfect." She died about the year 543.

**Reflection**.--Our relatives must be loved in and for God; otherwise
the purest affection becomes inordinate and is so much taken from Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. St. Severinus, Abbot of Agaunum](lots054)

</div>
