<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots092)  [Next](lots094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 18.—ST. CYRIL OF JERUSALEM.

CYRIL was born at or near the city of Jerusalem, about the year 315. He
was ordained priest by St. Maximus, who gave him the important charge of
instructing and preparing the candidates for Baptism. This charge he
held for several years, and we still have one series of his
instructions, given in the year 347 or 318. They are of singular
interest as being the earliest record of the systematic teaching of the
Church on the creed and sacraments, and as having been given in the
church built by Constantine on Mount Calvary. They are solid, simple,
profound; saturated with Holy Scripture; exact, precise, and terse; and,
as a witness and exposition of the Catholic faith, invaluable. On the
death of St. Maximus, Cyril was chosen Bishop of Jerusalem. At the
beginning of his episcopate a cross was seen in the air reaching from
Mount Calvary to Mount Olivet, and so bright that it shone at noonday.
St. Cyril gave an account of it to the emperor; and the faithful
regarded it as a presage of victory over the Arian heretics. While Cyril
was bishop, the apostate Julian resolved to falsify the words of Our
Lord by rebuilding the Temple at Jerusalem. He employed the power and
resources of a Roman emperor; the Jews thronged enthusiastically to him
and gave munificently. But Cyril was unmoved. " The word of God

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

abides," he said; "one stone shall not be laid on another." When the
attempt was made, a heathen writer tells us that horrible flames came
forth from the earth, rendering the place inaccessible to the scorched
and scared workmen. The attempt was made again and again, and then
abandoned in despair. Soon after, the emperor perished miserably in a
war against the Persians, and the Church had rest. Like the other great
bishops of his time, Cyril was persecuted, and driven once and again
from his see; but on the death of the Arian Emperor Valens he returned
to Jerusalem. He was present at the second General Council at
Constantinople, and died in peace in 386, after a troubled episcopate of
thirty-five years.

**Reflection**.—"As a stout staff," says St. John Chrysostom, "supports
the trembling limbs of a feeble old man, so does faith sustain our
vacillating mind, lest it be tossed about by sinful hesitation and
perplexity."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. St. Joseph, Spouse of the Blessed Virgin and Patron of the
Universal Church](lots094.md)

</div>
