<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots036)  [Next](lots038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### January 27.—ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM.

ST. JOHN was born at Antioch in 344. In order to break with a world
which admired and courted him, he in 374 retired for six years to a
neighboring mountain. Having thus acquired the art of Christian silence,
he returned to Antioch, and there labored as priest, until he was
ordained Bishop of Constantinople in 398. The effect of his sermons was
everywhere marvellous. He was very urgent that his people should
frequent the holy sacrifice, and in order to remove all excuse he
abbreviated the long Liturgy until then in use. St. Nilus relates that
St. John Chrysostom was wont to see, when the priest began the holy
sacrifice, "many of the blessed ones coming down from heaven in shining
garments, and with bare feet, eyes intent, and bowed heads, in utter
stillness and silence, assisting at the consummation of the tremendous
mystery." Beloved as he was in Constantinople, his denunciations of vice
made him numerous enemies. In 403 these procured his banishment; and
although he was almost immediately recalled, it was not more than a
reprieve. In 404 he was banished to Cucusus in the deserts of Taurus. In
407 he was wearing out, but his enemies were impatient. They hurried him
off to Pytius on the Euxine, a rough journey of nigh 400 miles. He was
assiduously exposed to every hardship, cold, wet, and semi-starvation,
but nothing could overcome his cheerfulness and his consideration for
others. On the journey his sickness increased, and he was warned that
his end was nigh. Thereupon, exchanging his travel-stained clothes for
white garments, he received Viaticum, and with his customary words,
"Glory be to God for all things. Amen," passed to Christ.

**Reflection**.—We should try to understand that the most productive
work in the whole day, both for time and eternity, is that involved in
hearing Mass. St. John Chrysostom felt this so keenly that he allowed no
consideration of venerable usage to interfere with the easiness of
hearing Mass.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. St. Cyril of Alexandria](lots038)

</div>
