<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots008)  [Next](lots010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_jan"></span>

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

# LIVES OF THE SAINTS.

### January 1.—THE CIRCUMCISION OF OUR LORD.

CIRCUMCISION was a sacrament of the Old Law, and the first legal
observance required by Almighty God of the descendants of Abraham. It
was a sacrament of initiation in the service of God, and a promise and
engagement to believe and act as He had revealed and directed. The law
of circumcision continued in force until the death of Christ, and Our
Saviour being born under the law, it *became Him*, Who came to teach
mankind obedience to the law of God, *to fulfil all justice*, and to
submit to it. Therefore He was circumcised that He might *redeem them
that were under the law*, by freeing them from the servitude of it; and
that those who were in the condition of servants before might be set at
liberty, and *receive the adoption of sons* in Baptism, which, by
Christ's institution, succeeded to circumcision. On the day that the
divine Infant was circumcised, He received the name of Jesus, which
signifies SAVIOUR, which had been given Him by the angel before He was
conceived. That name, so beautiful, so glorious, the divine Child does
not wish to bear for one moment without fulfilling its meaning; even at
the moment of His circumcision He showed Himself a SAVIOUR by shedding
for us that blood a single drop of which is more than sufficient for the
ransom and salvation of the whole world.

**Reflection**.—Let us profit by the circumstance of the new year, and
of the wonderful renewal wrought in the world by the great mystery of
this day, to renew in our

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

hearts an increase of fervor and of generosity in the service of God.
May this year be one of fervor and of progress! It will go by rapidly,
like that which has just ended. If God permits us to see its end, how
glad and happy we shall be to have passed it holily!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. St. Fulgentius, Bishop](lots010)

</div>
