<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots260)  [Next](lots262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 19.—ST. LOUIS, Bishop.

THIS Saint was little nephew to St. Louis, King of France, and nephew,
by his mother, to St. Elizabeth of Hungary. He was born at Brignoles, in
Provence, in. 1274. He was a Saint from the cradle, and from his
childhood made it his earnest study to do nothing which was not directed
to the divine service, and with a view only to eternity. Even his
recreations he referred to this end, and chose only such as were serious
and seemed barely necessary for the exercise of the body and preserving
the vigor of the mind. His walks usually led him to some church or
religious house. It was his chief delight to hear the servants of God
discourse of mortification or the most perfect practices of piety. His
modesty and recollection in the church inspired with devotion all who
saw him. When he was only seven years old his mother found him often
lying in the night on a mat which was spread on the floor near his bed,
which he did out of an early spirit of penance. In 1284 our Saint's
father, Charles II., then Prince of Salerno, was taken prisoner in a
sea-fight by the King of Arragon, and was only released on condition
that he sent into Arragon, as hostages, fifty gentlemen and three of his
sons, one of whom was our Saint. Louis was set at liberty in 1294, by a
treaty concluded between the King of Naples, his father, and James II.,
King of Arragon, one condition of which was the marriage of his sister
Blanche with the King of Arragon. Both courts had at the same time
extremely at heart the project of a double marriage, and that the
princess of Majorca, sister to King James of Arragon, should be married
to Louis, but the Saint's resolution of dedicating himself to God was
inflexible, and he resigned his right to the crown of Naples, which he
begged his father to confer on his next brother, Robert. The opposition
of his family obliged the superiors of the Friar Minors to refuse for
some time to admit

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

him into their body, wherefore he took holy orders at Naples. The pious
Pope St. Celestine had nominated him Archbishop of Lyons in 1294; but,
as he had not then taken the tonsure, he found means to defeat that
project. Boniface VIII. gave him a dispensation to receive priestly
orders in the twenty-third year of his age, and afterward sent him a
like dispensation for the episcopal character, together with his
nomination to the archbishopric of Toulouse, and a severe injunction, in
virtue of holy obedience, to accept the same. However, he first made his
religious profession among the Friar Minors on Christmas eve, 1296, and
received the episcopal consecration in the beginning of the February
following. He travelled to his bishopric as a poor religious, but was
received at Toulouse with the veneration due to a Saint and the
magnificence that became a prince. His modesty, mildness, and devotion
inspired a love of piety in all who beheld him. It was his first care to
provide for the relief of the indigent, and his first visits were made
to the hospitals and the poor. In his apostolical labors, he abated
nothing of his austerities, said Mass every day, and preached
frequently. Being obliged to go into Provence for certain very urgent
ecclesiastical affairs, he fell sick at the castle of Brignoles. Finding
his end draw near, he received the Viaticum on his knees, melting in
tears, and in his last moments ceased not to repeat the Hail Mary. He
died on the 19th of August, 1297, being only twenty-three years and six
months old.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. St. Bernard](lots262)

</div>
