<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots153)  [Next](lots155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 13.—ST. JOHN THE SILENT.

JOHN was born of a noble family at Nicopolis, in Armenia, in the year
454; but he derived from the virtue of his parents a much more
illustrious nobility than that of their pedigree. After their death, he
built at Nicopolis a church in honor of the Blessed Virgin, as also a
monastery, in which, with ten fervent companions, he shut himself up
when only eighteen years of age, with a view of making the salvation and
most perfect sanctification of his soul his only and earnest pursuit.
Not only to shun the danger of sin by the tongue, but also out of
sincere humility and contempt of himself, and the love of interior
recollection and prayer, he very seldom spoke; and when obliged to, it
was always in a very few words, and with great discretion. To his
extreme affliction, when he was only twenty-eight years old, the
Archbishop of Sebaste obliged him to quit his retreat, and ordained him
Bishop of Colonian in Armenia, in 482. In this dignity John preserved
always the same spirit, and, as much as was compatible with the, duties
of his charge, continued his monastic austerities and exercises. Whilst
he was watching one night in prayer, he saw before him a bright cross
formed in the air, and heard a voice which said to him, "If thou
desirest to be saved, follow this light." It seemed to move before him,
and at length point out to the monastery of St. Sabas. Being satisfied
what the sacrifice was which God required at his hands, he found means
to abdicate the episcopal charge, and retired to the neighboring
monastery of St. Sabas, which at that time contained one hundred and
fifty fervent monks. St. John was then thirty-eight years old. After
living there unknown for some years, fetching water,

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

carrying stones, and doing other menial work, St. Sabas, judging him
worthy to be promoted to the priesthood, presented him to the Patriarch
Elias. St. John took the patriarch aside, and, having obtained from him
a promise of secrecy, said, "Father, I have been ordained bishop; but on
account of the multitude of my sins have fled, and am come into this
desert to wait the visit of the Lord." The patriarch was startled, but
God revealed to St. Sabas the state of the affair, whereupon, calling
for John, he complained to him of his unkindness in concealing the
matter from him. Finding himself discovered, John wished to quit the
monastery, nor could St. Sabas prevail on him to stay, but on a promise
never to divulge the. secret. In the year 503, St. John withdrew into a
neigh, boring wilderness, but in 510 went back to the monastery, and
confined himself for forty years to his cell. St. John, by his example
and counsels, conducted many fervent souls to God, and continued to
emulate, as much as this mortal state will allow, the glorious
employment of the heavenly spirits in an uninterrupted exercise of love
and praise, till he passed to their blessed company, soon after the year
558; having lived seventy-six years in the desert, which had only been
interrupted by the nine years of his episcopal dignity.

**Reflection**.—A love of Christian silence is a proof that a soul makes
it her chiefest delight to be occupied on God, and finds no comfort like
that of conversing with Him. This is the paradise of all devout souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. St. Pachomius, Abbot](lots155)

</div>
