<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots170)  [Next](lots172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 28.—ST. GERMANUS, Bishop.

ST. GERMANUS, the glory of the Church of France in the sixth century,
was born in the territory of Autun, about the year 469. In his youth he
was conspicuous for his fervor. Being ordained priest, he was made abbot
of St. Symphorian's; he was favored at that time with the gifts of
miracles and prophecy. It was his custom to watch the great part of the
night in the church in prayer, whilst his monks slept. One night, in a
dream, he thought

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

a venerable old man presented him with the keys of the city of Paris,
and said to him that God committed to his care the inhabitants of that
city, that he should save them from perishing. Four years after this
divine admonition, in 554, happening to be at Paris when that see became
vacant on the demise of the Bishop Eusebius, he was exalted to the
episcopal chair, though he endeavored by many tears to decline the
charge. His promotion made no alteration in his mode of life. The same
simplicity and frugality appeared in his dress, table, and furniture.
His house was perpetually crowded with the poor and the afflicted, and
he had always many beggars at his own table. God gave to his sermons a
wonderful influence over the minds of all ranks of people; so that the
face of the whole city was in a very short time quite changed. King
Childebert, who till then had been an ambitious, worldly prince, was
entirely converted by the sweetness and the powerful discourses of the
Saint, and founded many religious institutions, and sent large sums of
money to the good bishop, to be distributed among the indigent. In his
old age St. Germanus lost nothing of that zeal and activity with which
he had filled the great duties of his station in the vigor of his life;
nor did the weakness to which his corporal austerities had reduced him
make him abate anything in the mortifications of his penitential life,
in which he redoubled his fervor as he approached nearer to the end of
his course. By his zeal the remains of idolatry were extirpated in
France. The Saint continued his labors for the conversion of sinners
till he was called to receive the reward of them, on the 28th of May,
576, being eighty years old.

**Reflection**.—"In the churches bless ye God the Lord. From Thy temple
kings shall offer presents to Thee."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. St. Cyril, Martyr](lots172)

</div>
