<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots103)  [Next](lots105.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 29.—STS. JONAS, BARACHISIUS, and their Companions, Martyrs.

KING SAPOR, of Persia, in the eighteenth year of his reign, raised a
bloody persecution against the Christians, and laid waste their churches
and monasteries, Jonas and Barachisius, two brothers of the city
Beth-Asa, hearing that several Christians lay under sentence of death at
Hubaham, went thither to encourage and serve them. Nine of that number
received the crown of martyrdom. After their execution, Jonas and
Barachisius were apprehended for having exhorted them to die. The
president entreated the two brothers to obey the king of Persia, and to
worship the sun, moon, fire, and water. Their answer was, that it was
more reasonable to obey the immortal King of heaven and earth than a
mortal prince. Jonas was beaten with knotty clubs and with rods, and
next set in a frozen pond, with a cord tied to his foot. Barachisius had
two red-hot iron plates and two red-hot hammers applied under each arm,
and melted lead dropped into his nostrils and eyes; after which he was
carried to prison, and there hung up by one foot. Despite these cruel
tortures, the two brothers remained steadfast in the Faith. New and more
horrible torments were then devised under which at last they yielded up
their lives, while their pure souls winged their flight to heaven, there
to gain the martyr's crown, which they had so faithfully won.

**Reflection**.—Those powerful motives which supported the martyrs under
the sharpest torments ought to inspire us with patience, resignation,
and holy joy under sickness and all crosses or trials. Nothing is more
heroic in the practice of Christian virtue, nothing more precious in the
sight of God, than the sacrifice of patience, submission, constant
fidelity, and charity in a state of suffering.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. St. John Climacus](lots105.md)

</div>
