<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots072)  [Next](lots074.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 28.—STS. ROMANUS and LUPICINUS, Abbots.

ROMANUS at thirty-five years of age left his relatives and spent some
time in the monastery of Ainay at Lyons, at the great church at the
conflux of the Saône and Rhone which the faithful had built over the
ashes of the famous martyrs of that city; for their bodies being burned
by the pagans, their ashes were thrown into the Rhone, but a great part
of them was gathered by the Christians and deposited in this place.
Romanus a short time after retired

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

into the forests of Mount Jura, between France and Switzerland, and
fixed his abode at a place called Condate, at the conflux of the rivers
Bienne and Aliere, where he found a spot of ground fit for culture, and
some trees which furnished him with a kind of wild fruit. Here he spent
his time in praying, reading, and laboring for his subsistence.
Lupicinus, his brother, came to him some time after in company with
others, who were followed by several more, drawn by the fame of the
virtue and miracles of these two Saints. Their numbers increasing, they
built several monasteries, and a nunnery called La Beaume, which no men
were allowed ever to enter, and where St. Romanus chose his
burial-place. The brothers governed the monks jointly and in great
harmony, though Lupicinus was the more inclined to severity of the two.
Lupicinus used no other bed than a chair or a hard board; never touched
wine, and would scarcely ever suffer a drop either of oil or milk to be
poured on his pottage. In summer his subsistence for many years was only
hard bread moistened in cold water, so that he could eat it with a
spoon. His tunic was made of various skins of beasts sewn together,.
with a cowl; he used wooden shoes, and wore no stockings unless when he
was obliged to go out of the monastery. St. Romanus died about the year
460, and St. Lupicinus survived him almost twenty years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. St. Oswald, Bishop](lots074.md)

</div>
