<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots167)  [Next](lots169.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ST. AUGUSTINE, Apostle of England.

AUGUSTINE was prior of the monastery of St. Andrew on the Cœlian, and
was appointed by St. Gregory the great chief of the missionaries whom he
sent to England. St. Augustine and his companions, having heard on their
journey many reports of the barbarism and ferocity of the pagan English,
were afraid, and wished to turn back. But St. Gregory replied, "Go on,
in God's name! The greater your hardships, the greater your crown. May
the grace of Almighty God protect you, and give me to see the fruit of
your labor in the heavenly country! If I cannot share your toil, I shall
yet share the harvest, for God knows

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

that it is not good-will which is wanting." The band of missionaries
went on in obedience.

Landing at Ebbsfleet, between Sandwich and Ramsgate, they met King
Ethelbert and his thanes under a great oak-tree at Minster, and
announced to him the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Instant and complete
success attended their preaching. On Whit-Sunday, 596, King Ethelbert
was baptized, and his example was followed by the greater number of his
nobles and people. By degrees the Faith spread far and wide, and
Augustine, as Papal Legate, set out on a visitation of Britain. He
failed in his attempt to enlist the Britons of the west in the work of
his apostolate through their obstinate jealousy and pride; but his
success was triumphant from south to north. St. Augustine died after
eight years of evangelical labors. The Anglo-Saxon Church, which he
founded, is still famous for its learning, zeal, and devotion to the
Holy See, while its calendar commemorates no less than 300 Saints, half
of whom were of royal birth.

**Reflection**.—The work of an apostle is the work of the right hand of
God. He often chooses weak instruments for His mightiest purposes. The
most sure augury of lasting success in missionary labor is obedience to
superiors and diffidence in self.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi](lots169.md)

</div>
