<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots010)  [Next](lots012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ST. MACARIUS OF ALEXANDRIA.

MACARIUS when a youth left his fruit-stall at Alexandria to join the
great St. Antony. The patriarch, warned by a miracle of his disciple's
sanctity, named him the heir of his virtues. His life was one long
conflict with self. "I am tormenting my tormentor," replied he to one
who met him bent double with a basket of sand in the heat of the day.
"Whenever I am slothful and idle, I am pestered by desires for distant
travel." When he was quite worn out he returned to his cell. Since sleep
at times overpowered him, he kept watch for twenty days and nights;
being about to faint, he entered his cell and slept, but henceforth
slept only at will. A gnat stung him; he killed it. In revenge for this
softness he remained naked in a marsh till his body was covered with
noxious bites and he was recognized only by his voice. Once when thirsty
he received a present of grapes, but passed them untouched to a hermit
who was toiling in the heat. This one gave them to a third, who handed
them to a fourth; thus the grapes went the round of the desert and
returned to Macarius, who thanked God for his brethren's abstinence.
Macarius saw demons assailing the hermits at prayer. They put their
fingers into the mouths of some, and made them yawn. They closed the
eyes of others, and walked upon them when asleep. They placed vain and
sensual images before many of the brethren, and then mocked those who
were captivated by them. None vanquished the devils effectually save
those who by constant vigilance repelled them at once. Macarius

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

visited one hermit daily for four months, but never could speak to him,
as he was always in prayer; so he called him an " angel on earth." After
being many years Superior, Macarius fled in disguise to St. Pachomius,
to begin again as his novice; but St. Pachomius, instructed by a vision,
bad, rim return to his brethren, who loved him as their father. In his
old age, thinking nature tamed, he determined to spend five days alone
in prayer. On the third day the cell seemed on fire, and Macarius came
forth. God permitted this delusion, he said, lest he be ensnared by
pride. At the age of seventy-three he was driven into exile and brutally
outraged by the Arian heretics. He died A. D. 394.

**Reflection**.—Prayer is the breath of the soul. But St. Macarius
teaches us that mind and body must be brought to subjection before the
soul is free to pray.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. St. Genevieve, Virgin](lots012.md)

</div>
