<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots012)  [Next](lots014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 4.—ST. TITUS, Bishop.

TITUS was a convert from heathenism, a disciple of St. Paul, one of the
chosen companions of the Apostles in his journey to the Council of
Jerusalem, and his fellow-laborers in many apostolic missions. From the
Second Epistle which St. Paul sent by the hand of Titus to the
Corinthians we gain an insight into his character and understand the,
strong affection which his master bore him. Titus had been commissioned
to carry out a twofold office needing much firmness, discretion, and
charity. He was to be the bearer of a severe rebuke to the Corinthians,
who were giving scandal and were wavering in their faith; and at the
same time he was to put their charity to a further test by calling upon
them for abundant alms for the church at Jerusalem. St. Paul meanwhile
was anxiously awaiting the result. At Troas he writes, "I had no rest in
my spirit, because I found not Titus, my brother." He set sail to
Macedonia. Here at last Titus brought the good news. His success had
been complete. He reported the sorrow, the zeal, the generosity of the
Christians, till the Apostle could not contain his joy, and sent back to
them his faithful

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

messenger with the letter of comfort from which we have quoted. Titus
was finally left as a bishop in Crete, and here he, in turn, received
the epistle which bears his name, and here at last he died in peace.

The mission of Titus to Corinth shows us how well the disciple caught
the spirit of his master. He knew how to be firm and to inspire respect.
The Corinthians, we are told, "received him with fear and trembling." He
was patient and painstaking. St. Paul "gave thanks to God, Who had put
such carefulness for them in the heart of Titus." And these gifts were
enhanced by a quickness to detect and call out all that was good in
others, and by a joyousness which overflowed upon the spirit of St. Paul
himself, who "abundantly rejoiced in the joy of Titus."

**Reflection**.—Saints win their empire over the hearts of men by their
wide and affectionate sympathy. This was the characteristic gift of St.
Titus, as it was of St. Paul, St-Francis Xavier, and many others.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. St. Gregory, Bishop](lots014)

</div>
