<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots107)  [Next](lots109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 2.—ST. FRANCIS OF PAULA.

AT the age of fifteen Francis left his poor home at Paula in Calabria,
to live as a hermit in a cave by the sea-coast. In time disciples
gathered round him, and with them, in 1436, he founded the "Minims," so
called to show that they were the least of monastic Orders. They
observed a perpetual Lent, and never touched meat, fish, eggs, or milk.
Francis himself made the rock his bed; his best garment was a
hair-shirt, and boiled herbs his only fare. As his body withered his
faith grew powerful, and he "did all things in Him Who strengthened
him." He cured the sick, raised the dead, averted plagues, expelled evil
spirits, and brought sinners to penance. A famous preacher, instigated
by a few misguided monks, set to work to preach against St. Francis and
his miracles. The Saint took no notice of it, and the preacher, finding
that he made no way with his hearers, determined to see this poor hermit
and confound him in person. The Saint received him kindly, gave him a
seat by the fire, and listened to a long exposition of his own frauds.
He then quietly took some glowing embers from the fire, and closing his
hands upon them unhurt, said, "Come, Father Anthony, warm yourself, for
you are shivering for want of a little charity" Father Anthony, falling
at the Saint's feet, asked for pardon, and then, having received his
embrace, quitted him, to become his panegyrist and attain himself to
great perfection. When the avaricious King Ferdinand of Naples offered
him money for his convent, Francis told him to give it back to his
oppressed subjects, and softened his heart by causing blood to flow from
the ill-gotten coin. Louis XI. of France, trembling at the approach of
death, sent for the poor hermit to ward off the foe whose advance
neither his fortresses nor his guards could check. Francis went by the
Pope's command, and prepared the king for a holy death. The successors
of Louis showered favors on the Saint, his Order spread throughout
Europe, and his

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

name was reverenced through the Christian world. He died at the age of
ninety-one, on Good Friday, 1507, with the crucifix in his hand, and the
last words of Jesus on hiss lips, "Into Thy hands, O Lord, I commend my
spirit."

**Reflection**.—Rely in all difficulties upon God. That which enabled
St. Francis to work miracles will in proportion do wonders for yourself,
by giving you strength and consolation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. St. Richard of Chichester](lots109)

</div>
