<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots032)  [Next](lots034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 23.—ST. RAYMUND OF PENNAFORT.

BORN A. D. 1175, of a noble Spanish family, Raymund, at the age of
twenty, taught philosophy at Barcelona with marvellous success. Ten
years later his rare abilities won for him the degree of Doctor in the
University of Bologna, and many high dignities. A tender devotion to our
blessed Lady, which had grown up with him from childhood, determined him
in middle life to renounce all his honors and to enter her Order of St.
Dominic. There, again, a vision of the Mother of Mercy instructed him to
coöperate with his penitent St. Peter Nolasco, and with James, King of
Aragon, in founding the Order of Our Lady of Ransom for the Redemption
of Captives. He began this great work by preaching a crusade against the
Moors, and rousing to penance the Christians, enslaved in both soul and
body by the infidel. King James of Aragon, a man of great qualities, but
held in bond by a ruling passion, was bidden by the Saint to put away
the cause of his sin. On his delay, Raymund asked for leave to depart
from Majorca, since he could not live with sin. The king refused, and
forbade, under pain of death, his conveyance by others. Full of faith,
Raymund spread his cloak upon the waters, and, tying one end to his
staff as a sail, made the sign of the cross and fearlessly stepped upon
it. In six hours he was borne to Barcelona, where, gathering up his
cloak dry, he stole into his monastery. The king, overcome by this
miracle, became a sincere penitent and the disciple of the Saint till
his death. In 1230,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gregory IX.
summoned Raymund to Rome, made him his confessor and grand penitentiary,
and directed him to compile "The Decretals," a collection of the
scattered decisions of the Popes and Councils. Having refused the
archbishopric of Tarragona, Raymund found himself in 1238 chosen third
General of his Order; which post he again succeeded in resigning, on the
score of his advanced age. His first act when set free was to resume his
labors among the infidels, and in 1256 Raymund, then eighty-one, was
able to report that ten thousand Saracens had received Baptism. He died
A. D. 1275.

**Reflection**.—Ask St. Raymund to protect you from that fearful
servitude, worse than any bodily slavery, which even one sinful habit
tends to form.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. St. Timothy, Bishop, Martyr](lots034.md)

</div>
