<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots186)  [Next](lots188.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 10.—ST. MARGARET OF SCOTLAND.

ST. MARGARET'S name signifies "pearl;" "a fitting name," says Theodoric,
her confessor and her first biographer, "for one such as she." Her soul
was like a precious pearl. A life spent amidst the luxury of a royal
court never dimmed its lustre, or stole it away from Him who had bought
it with His blood. She was the grand, daughter of an English king; and
in 1070 she became the bride of Malcolm, and reigned Queen of Scotland
till her death in 1093. How did she become a Saint in a position where
sanctity is so difficult? First, she burned with zeal for the house of
God. She built churches and monasteries; she busied herself in making
vestments; she could not rest till she saw the laws of God and His
Church observed throughout her realm. Next, amidst a thousand cares, she
found time to converse with God—ordering her piety with such sweetness
and discretion that she won her husband to sanctity like her own. He
used to rise with her at night for prayer; he loved to kiss the holy
books she used, and sometimes he would steal them away, and bring them
back to his wife covered with jewels. Lastly, with virtues so great, she
wept constantly over her sins, and begged her confessor to correct her
faults. St. Margaret did not neglect her duties in the world because she
was not of it. Never was a better mother. She spared no pains in the
education of her eight children, and their sanctity was the fruit of her
prudence and her zeal. Never was a better queen. She was the most
trusted counsellor of her husband, and she labored for the material
improvement of the country. But, in the midst of the world's pleasures,
she sighed for the better country, and accepted death as a release. On
her death-bed she received the news that her husband and her eldest son
were slain in battle. She thanked God, Who had sent this last

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

affliction as a penance for her sins. After receiving Holy Viaticum, she
was repeating the prayer from the Missal, "O Lord Jesus Christ, Who by
Thy death didst give life to the world, deliver me." At the words
"deliver me," says her biographer, she took her departure to Christ, the
Author of true liberty.

**Reflection**.—All perfection consists in keeping a guard upon the
heart. Wherever we are, we can make a solitude in our hearts, detach
ourselves from the world, and converse familiarly with God. Let us take
St. Margaret for our example and encouragement.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. St. Barnabas, Apostle](lots188.md)

</div>
