<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots070)  [Next](lots072.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 26.—ST. PORPHYRY, Bishop.

AT the age of twenty-five, Porphyry, a rich citizen of Thessalonica,
left the world for one of the great religious houses in the desert of
Sceté. Here he remained five years, and then, finding himself drawn to a
more solitary life, passed into Palestine, where he spent a similar
period in the severest penance, till ill health obliged him to moderate
his austerities. He then made his home in Jerusalem, and in spite of his
ailments visited the Holy Places every day; thinking, says his
biographer, so little of his sickness that he seemed to be afflicted in
another body, and not his own. About this time God put it into his heart
to sell all he had and give to the poor, and then in reward of the
sacrifice restored him by a miracle to perfect health. In 393 he was
ordained priest and intrusted with the care

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

of the relics of the true cross; three years later, in spite of all the
resistance his humility could make, he was consecrated Bishop of Gaza.
That city was a hotbed of paganism, and Porphyry found in it an ample
scope for his apostolic zeal. His labors and the miracles which attended
them effected the conversion of many; and an imperial edict for the
destruction of the pagan temples, obtained through the influence of St.
John Chrysostom, greatly strengthened his hands. When St. Porphyry first
went to Gaza, he found there one temple more splendid than the rest, in
honor of the chief god. When the edict went forth to destroy all traces
of heathen worship, St. Porphyry determined to put Satan to special
shame where he had received special honor. A Christian church was built
upon the site, and its approach was paved with the marbles of the
heathen temple. Thus every worshipper of Jesus Christ trod the relics of
idolatry and superstition underfoot each time he went to assist at the
holy Mass. He lived to see his diocese for the most part clear of
idolatry, and died in 420.

**Reflection**.—All superstitious searching into secret things is
forbidden by the First Commandment equally with the worship of any false
god. Let us ask St. Porphyry for a great zeal in keeping this
commandment, lest we be led away, as so many are, by a curious and
prying mind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. St. Leander, Bishop](lots072.md)

</div>
