<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots015)  [Next](lots017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 6.—THE EPIPHANY OF OUR LORD.

THE word Epiphany means "manifestation," and it has passed into general
acceptance throughout the universal Church, from the fact that Jesus
Christ *manifested* to the eyes of men His divine mission on this day
first of all, when a miraculous star revealed His birth to the kings of
the East, who, in spite of the difficulties and dangers of a long and
tedious journey through deserts and mountains almost impassable,
hastened at once to Bethlehem to adore Him and to offer Him mystical
presents, as to the Ding of kings, to the God of heaven and earth, and
to a Man withal feeble and mortal. The second manifestation was when,
going out from the waters of the Jordan after having received Baptism
from the hands of St. John, the Holy Ghost descended on Him in the
visible form of a dove, and a voice from heaven was heard, saying, "This
is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased." The third manifestation
was that of His divine power, when at the marriage-feast of Cana He
changed the water into wine, at the sight whereof His disciples believed
in Him. The remembrance of these three great events, concurring to the
same end, the Church has wished to celebrate in one and the same
festival.

**Reflection**.—Admire the almighty power of this little Child, Who from
His cradle makes known His coming to the shepherds and magi—to the
shepherds by means of His angel, to the magi by a star in the East.
Admire the docility of these kings. Jesus is born; behold them at His
feet? Let us be little, let us hide ourselves, and the divine strength
will be granted to us. Let us be docile and quick in following divine
inspirations, and we shall then become wise of the wisdom of God,
powerful in His almighty power.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. St. Lucian, Martyr](lots017)

</div>
