<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots117)  [Next](lots119.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 10.—ST. BADEMUS, Martyr.

BADEMUS was a rich and noble citizen of Bethlapeta in Persia, who
founded a monastery near that city, which he governed with great
sanctity. He conducted his religious in the paths of perfection with
sweetness, prudence, and charity. To crown his virtue, God permitted
him, with seven of his monks, to be apprehended by the followers of King
Sapor, in the thirty-sixth year of his persecution. He lay four months
in a dungeon, loaded with chains, during which lingering martyrdom he
every day received a number of stripes. But he triumphed over his
torments by the patience and joy with which he suffered them for Christ.
At the same time, a Christian lord named Nersan, Prince of Aria, was
cast into prison because he refused to adore the sun. At first he showed
some resolution; but at the sight of tortures his constancy failed him,
and he promised to conform. The king, to try if his change was sincere,
ordered Bademus to be introduced into the prison of Nersan, which was a
chamber in the royal palace, and sent word to Nersan that if he would
despatch Bademus, he should be restored to his liberty and former
dignities. The wretch accepted the condition; a sword was put into his
hand, and he advanced to plunge it into the breast of the abbot. But
being seized with a sudden terror, he stopped short, and remained some
time without being able to lift up his arm to strike. He had neither
courage to repent, nor heart to accomplish his crime. He strove,
however, to harden himself, and continued with a trembling

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

hand to aim at the sides of the martyr. Fear, shame, remorse, and
respect for the martyr made his strokes forceless and unsteady; and so
great was the number of the martyr's wounds, that the bystanders were in
admiration at his invincible patience. After four strokes, the martyr's
head was severed from the trunk. Nersan a short time after, falling into
public disgrace, perished by the sword. The body of St. Bademus was
reproachfully cast out of the city by the infidels, but was secretly
carried away and interred by the Christians. His disciples were released
from their chains four years afterward, upon the death of King Sapor.
St. Bademus suffered on the 10th of April in the year 376.

**Reflection**.—Oh! what ravishing delights does the soul taste which is
accustomed, by a familiar habit, to converse in the heaven of its own
interior with the Three Persons of the adorable Trinity! Worldlings
wonder how holy solitaries can pass their whole time buried in the most
profound solitude and silence. But those who have had any experience of
this happiness are surprised, with far greater reason, how it is
possible that any souls which are created to converse eternally with God
should here live in constant dissipation, seldom entertaining a devout
thought of Him Whose charms and sweet conversation eternally ravish all
the blessed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. St. Leo the Great](lots119.md)

</div>
