<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots135)  [Next](lots137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

### April 27.—ST. ZITA, Virgin.

ZITA lived for forty-eight years in the service of Fatinelli, a citizen
of Lucca. During this time she rose each morning, while the household
were asleep, to hear Mass, and then toiled incessantly till night came,
doing the work of others as well as her own. Once Zita, absorbed in.
prayer, remained in church past the usual hour of her bread-making. She
hastened home, reproaching herself with neglect of duty, and found the
bread made and ready for the oven. She never doubted that her mistress
or one of her servants had kneaded it, and going to them, thanked them;
but they were astonished. No human being had made the bread. A delicious
perfume rose from it, for angels had made it during her prayer. For
years her master and mistress treated her as a mere drudge, while her
fellow-servants, resenting her diligence as a reproach to themselves,
insulted and struck her. Zita united these sufferings with those of
Christ her Lord, never changing the sweet tone of her voice, nor
forgetting her gentle and quiet ways. At length Fatinelli, seeing the
success which attended her undertakings, gave her charge of his children
and of the household. She dreaded this dignity more than the worst
humiliation, but scrupulously fulfilled her trust. By her holy economy
her master's goods were multiplied, while the poor were fed at his door.
Gradually her unfailing patience conquered the jealousy of her
fellow-servants, and she became their advocate with their hot-tempered
master, who dared not give way to his anger before Zita. In the end her
prayer and toil sanctified the whole house, and drew down upon it the
benediction of Heaven. She died in 1272, and in the moment of her death
a bright star appearing above her attic showed that she had gained
eternal rest.

**Reflection**.—"What must I do to be saved?" said a certain one in fear
of damnation. "Work and pray, pray and work," a voice replied, "and thou
shalt be saved." The whole life of St. Zita teaches us this truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. St. Paul of the Cross](lots137)

</div>
