<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots122)  [Next](lots124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 15.—ST. PATERNUS, Bishop.

ST. PATERNUS was born at Poitiers, about the year 482. His father,
Patranus, with the consent of his wife, went into Ireland, where he
ended his days in holy solitude. Paternus, fired by his example,
embraced a monastic life in the abbey of Marnes. After some time,
burning with a desire of attaining to the perfection of Christian
virtue, he passed over to Wales, and in Cardiganshire founded a
monastery called Llan-patern-vaur, or the church of the great Paternus.
He made a visit to his father in Ireland, but being called back to his
monastery of Marnes, he soon after retired with St. Scubilion, a monk of
that house, and embraced an austere anchoretical life in the forests of
Scicy, in the diocese of Coutances, near the sea, having first obtained
leave of the bishop and of the lord of the place. This desert, which was
then of great extent, but which has been since gradually gained upon by
the sea, was anciently

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

in great request among the Druids. St. Paternus converted to the faith
the idolaters of that and many neighboring parts, as far as Bayeux, and
prevailed upon them to demolish a pagan temple in this desert, which was
held in great veneration by the ancient Gauls. In his old age he was
consecrated Bishop of Avranches by Germanus, Bishop of Rouen.

Some false brethren having created a division of opinion among the
bishops of the province with respect to St. Paternus, he preferred
retiring rather than to afford any ground for dissension, and, after
governing his diocese for thirteen years, he withdrew to a solitude in
France, and there ended his days about the year 550.

**Reflection**.—The greatest sacrifices imposed by the love of peace
will appear as naught if we call to mind the example of Our Saviour, and
remember His words, "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be
called the children of God."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. Eighteen Martyrs of Saragossa, and St. Encratis, or Engratia,
Virgin, Martyr](lots124)

</div>
