<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots158)  [Next](lots160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 18.—ST. VENANTIUS, Martyr.

ST. VENANTIUS was born at Camerino in Italy, and at the age of fifteen
was seized as a Christian and carried before a judge. As it was found
impossible to shake his constancy either by threats or promises, he was

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

condemned to be scourged, but was miraculously saved by an angel. He was
then burnt with torches and hung over a low fire that he might be
suffocated by the smoke. The judge's secretary, admiring the
steadfastness of the Saint, and seeing an angel robed in white, who
trampled out the fire and again set free the youthful martyr, proclaimed
his faith in Christ, was baptized with his whole family, and shortly
after won the martyr's crown himself. Venantius was then carried before
the governor, who, unable to make him renounce his faith, cast him into
prison with an apostate, who vainly strove to tempt him. The governor
then ordered his teeth and jaws to be broken, and had him thrown into a
furnace, from which the angel once more delivered him. The Saint was
again led before the judge, who at sight of him fell headlong from his
seat and expired, crying, "The God of Venantius is the true God; let us
destroy our idols." This circumstance being told to the governor, he
ordered Venantius to be thrown to the lions; but these brutes,
forgetting their natural ferocity, crouched at the feet of the Saint.
Then, by order of the tyrant, the young martyr was dragged through a
heap of brambles and thorns, but again God manifested the glory of His
servant; the soldiers suffering from thirst, the Saint knelt on a rock
and signed it with a cross, when immediately a jet of clear, cool water
spurted up from the spot. This miracle converted many of those who
beheld it, whereupon the governor had Venantius and his converts
beheaded together in the year 250. The bodies of these martyrs are kept
in the church at Camerino which bears the Saint's name.

**Reflection**.—Love of suffering marks the most perfect degree in the
love of God. Our Lord Himself was consumed with the desire to suffer,
because He burnt with the love of God. We must begin with patience and
detachment. At last we shall learn to love the sufferings which conform
us to the Passion of our Redeemer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. St. Peter Celestine](lots160)

</div>
