<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots179)  [Next](lots181) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

### June 5.—ST. BONIFACE, Bishop, Martyr.

ST. BONIFACE was born at Crediton in Devonshire, England, in the year
680. Some missionaries staying at his father's house spoke to him of
heavenly things, and inspired him with a wish to devote himself, as they
did, to God. He entered the monastery of Exminster, and was there
trained for his apostolic work. His first attempt to convert the pagans
in Holland having failed, he went to Rome to obtain the Pope's blessing
on his mission, and returned with authority to preach to the German
tribes. It was a slow and dangerous task; his own life was in constant
peril, while his flock was often reduced to abject poverty by the
wandering robber bands. Yet his courage never flagged. He began with
Bavaria and Thuringia, next visited Friesland, then passed on to Hesse
and Saxony, everywhere destroying the idol temples and raising churches
on their site. He endeavored, as far as possible, to make every object
of idolatry contribute in some way to the glory of God; on one occasion,
having cut down on immense oak which was consecrated to Jupiter, he used
the tree in building a church, which he dedicated to the Prince of the
Apostles. He was now recalled to Rome, consecrated Bishop by the Pope,
and returned to extend and organize the rising German Church. With
diligent care he reformed abuses among the existing clergy, and
established religious houses throughout the land. At length, feeling his
infirmities increase, and fearful of losing his martyr's crown, Boniface
appointed a successor to his monastery, and set out to convert a fresh
pagan tribe. While St. Boniface was waiting to administer Confirmation
to some newly-baptized Christians, a troop of pagans arrived, armed with
swords and spears. His attendants would have opposed them, but the Saint
said to his followers: "My children, cease your resistance; the
long-expected day is come at last. Scripture forbids us to resist evil.
Let us put our hope in God: He will save our souls." Scarcely had he
ceased speaking, when the barbarians fell upon him and slew him with all
his attendants, to the number of fifty-two.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

**Reflection**.—St. Boniface teaches us how the love of Christ changes
all things. It was for Christ's sake that he toiled for souls,
preferring poverty to riches, labor to rest, suffering to pleasure,
death to life, that by dying he might live with Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. St. Norbert, Bishop](lots181)

</div>
