<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots030)  [Next](lots032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 21.—ST. AGNES, Virgin, Martyr.

ST. AGNES was but twelve years old when she was led to the altar of
Minerva at Rome and commanded to obey the persecuting laws of Diocletian
by offering incense. In the midst of the idolatrous rites she raised her
hands to Christ, her Spouse, and made the sign of the life-giving cross.
She did not shrink when she was bound hand and foot, though the gyves
slipped from her young hands, and the heathens who stood around were
moved to tears. The bonds were not needed for her, and she hastened
gladly to the place of her torture. Next, when the judge saw that pain
had no terrors for her, he inflicted an insult worse than death: her
clothes were stripped off, and she had to stand in the street before a
pagan crowd; yet even this did not daunt her. "Christ," she said, "will
guard His own." So it was. Christ showed, by a miracle, the value which
He sets upon the custody of the eyes. Whilst the crowd turned away their
eyes from the spouse of Christ, as she stood exposed to view in the
street, there was one young man who dared to gaze at the innocent child
with immodest eyes. A flash of light struck him blind, and his
companions bore him away half dead with pain and terror.

Lastly, her fidelity to Christ was proved by flattery and offers of
marriage. But she answered, "Christ is my Spouse: He chose me first, and
His I will be." At length the sentence of death was passed. For a moment
she stood erect in prayer, and then bowed her neck to the sword. At one
stroke her head was severed from her body, and the angels bore her pure
soul to Paradise.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

**Reflection**.—Her innocence endeared St. Agnes to Christ, as it has
endeared her to His Church ever since. Even as penitents we may imitate
this innocence of hers in our own degree. Let us strictly guard our
eyes, and Christ, when He sees that we keep our hearts pure for love of
Him, will renew our youth and give us back the years which the
canker-worm has wasted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. St. Vincent, Martyr](lots032.md)

</div>
