<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots031)  [Next](lots033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 22.—ST. VINCENT, Martyr.

VINCENT was archdeacon of the church at Saragossa. Valerian, the bishop,
had an impediment in his speech; thus Vincent preached in his stead, and
answered in his name when both were brought before Dacian, the
president, during the persecution of Diocletian. When the bishop was
sent into banishment, Vincent remained to suffer and to die. First of
all, he was stretched on the rack; and, when he was almost torn asunder,
Dacian, the president, asked him in mockery "how he fared now." Vincent
answered, with joy in his face, that he had ever prayed to be as he was
then. It was in vain that Dacian struck the executioners and goaded them
on in their savage work. The martyr's flesh was torn with hooks; he was
bound in a chair of red-hot iron; lard and salt were rubbed into his
wounds; and amid all this he kept his eyes raised to heaven, and
remained unmoved. He was cast into a solitary dungeon, with his feet in
the stocks; but the angels of Christ illuminated the darkness, and
assured Vincent that he was near his triumph. His wounds were now tended
to prepare him for fresh torments, and the faithful were permitted to
gaze on his mangled body. They came in troops, kissed the open sores,
and carried away as relics cloths dipped in his blood. Before the
tortures could recommence, the martyr's hour came, and he breathed forth
his soul in peace.

Even the dead bodies of the saints are precious in the sight of God, and
the hand of iniquity cannot touch them, A raven guarded the body of
Vincent where it lay flung upon the earth. When it was sunk out at sea
the waves cast it ashore; and his relics are preserved to this day in

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

the Augustinian monastery at Lisbon, for the consolation of the Church
of Christ.

**Reflection**.—Do you wish to be at peace amidst suffering and
temptation? Then make it your principal endeavor to grow in habits of
prayer and in union with Christ. Have confidence in Him. He will make
you victorious over your spiritual enemies and over yourself. He will
enlighten your darkness and sweeten your sufferings, and in your
solitude and desolation He will draw nigh to you with His holy angels.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. St. Raymund of Pennafort](lots033)

</div>
