<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots292)  [Next](lots294.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### September 17.—ST. LAMBERT, Bishop, Martyr.

ST. LAMBERT was a native of Maestricht. His father intrusted his
education to the holy Bishop St. Theodard, and on that good man being
assassinated, Lambert was chosen his successor. A revolution breaking
out which overturned the kingdom of Austrasia, our Saint was banished
from his see on account of his devotion to his sovereign. He retired to
the monastery of Stavelo, and there obeyed the rule as strictly as the
youngest novice could have done. One instance will suffice to show with
how perfect a sacrifice of himself he devoted his heart to serve God. As
he was rising one night in winter to his private devotions, he happened
to let fall his wooden sandal or slipper. The abbot, without asking who
had caused the noise, gave orders that the offender should go and pray
before the cross, which stood before the church door. Lambert, without
making any answer, went out as he was, barefoot, and covered only with
his hair shirt; and in this condition he prayed, kneeling before the
cross, where he I was found some hours after. At the sight of the holy
bishop the abbot and the monks fell on the ground and asked his pardon.
"God forgive you," said he, "for thinking you stand in need of pardon
for this action. As

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

for myself, is it not in cold and nakedness that, according to St. Paul,
I am to tame my flesh and to serve God?" While St. Lambert enjoyed the
quiet of holy retirement, he wept to see the greatest part of the
churches of France laid waste. In the mean time the political clouds
began to break away, and Lambert was restored to his see, but his mal in
suppressing the many and notorious disorders which existed in his
diocese led to his assassination on the 17th of September, 709.

**Reflection**.—How noble and heroic is this virtue of fortitude! how
necessary for every Christian, especially for a pastor of souls, that
neither worldly views nor fears may ever in the least warp his integrity
or blind his judgment!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. St. Thomas of Villanova](lots294.md)

</div>
