<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots133)  [Next](lots135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

### April 25.—ST. MARK, Evangelist.

ST. MARK was converted to the Faith by the Prince of the Apostles, whom
he afterwards accompanied to Rome, acting there as his secretary or
interpreter. When St. Peter was writing his first epistle to the
churches of Asia, he affectionately joins with his own salutation that
of his faithful companion, whom he calls "my son Mark." The Roman people
entreated St. Mark to put in writing for them the substance of St.
Peter's frequent discourses on Our Lord's life. This the Evangelist did
under the eye and with the express sanction of the apostle, and every
page of his brief but graphic gospel so bore the impress of St. Peter's
character, that the Fathers used to name it "Peter's Gospel" St. Mark
was now sent to Egypt to found the Church of Alexandria. Here his
disciples became the wonder of the world for their piety and asceticism,
so that St. Jerome speaks of St. Mark as the father of the anchorites,
who at a later time thronged the Egyptian deserts. Here, too, he set up
the first Christian school, the fruitful mother of many illustrious
doctors and bishops. After governing his see for many years, St. Mark
was one day seized by the heathen, dragged by ropes over stones, and
thrown into prison. On the morrow the torture was repeated, and having
been consoled by a vision of angels and the voice of Jesus, St. Mark
went to his reward.

It is to St. Mark that we owe the many slight touches which often give
such vivid coloring to the Gospel scenes, and help us to picture to
ourselves the very gestures and looks of our blessed Lord. It is he
alone who notes that in the temptation Jesus was "with the beasts;" that
He slept in the boat "on a pillow;" that He "embraced" the little
children. He alone preserves for us the commanding words "Peace, be
still!" by which the storm was quelled; or even the very sounds of His
voice, the "Ephpheta" and "Talitha cumi," by which the dumb were made to
speak and the dead to rise. So, too, the "looking round about with
anger," and the "sighing deeply," long treasured in the memory of the
penitent apostle, who was himself

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

converted by his Saviour's look, are here recorded by his faithful
interpreter.

**Reflection**.—Learn from St. Mark to keep the image of the Son of man
ever before your mind, and to ponder every syllable which fell from His
lips.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. Sts. Cletus and Marcellinus, Popes, Martyrs](lots135)

</div>
