<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots278)  [Next](lots280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### September 5.—ST. LAURENCE JUSTINIAN.

LAURENCE from a child longed to be a Saint; and when he was nineteen
years of age there was granted to him a vision of the Eternal Wisdom.
All earthly things paled in his eyes before the ineffable beauty of this
sight, and as it faded away a void was left in his heart which none but
God could fill. Refusing the offer of a brilliant marriage, he fled
secretly from his home at Venice, and joined the Canons Regular of St.
George. One by one he crushed every natural instinct which could bar his
union with his Love. When Laurence first entered religion, a nobleman
went to dissuade him from the folly of thus sacrificing every earthly
prospect. The young monk listened patiently in turn to his friend's
affectionate appeal, scorn, and violent abuse. Calmly and kindly he then
replied. He pointed out the shortness of life, the uncertainty of
earthly happiness, and the incomparable superiority of the prize he
sought to any his friend had named. The nobleman could make no answer;
he felt in truth that Laurence was wise, himself the fool. He left the
world, became a fellow-novice with the Saint, and his holy death bore
every mark that he too had secured the treasures which never fail. As
superior and as general, Laurence enlarged and strengthened his Order,
and as bishop of his diocese, in spite of slander and insult, thoroughly
reformed his see. His zeal led to his being appointed the first
patriarch of Venice, but he remained ever in heart and soul an humble
priest, thirsting for the sight of heaven. At length the eternal vision
began to dawn. "Are you laying a bed of feathers for me?" he said. "Not
so; my Lord was

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

stretched on a hard and painful free." Laid upon the straw, he exclaimed
in rapture, "Good Jesus, behold I come." He died in 1435, aged
seventy-four.

**Reflection**.—Ask St. Laurence to vouchsafe you such a sense of the
sufficiency of God that you too may fly to Him and be at rest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. St. Eleutherius, Abbot](lots280)

</div>
