<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots106)  [Next](lots108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_apr"></span>

### April 1.—ST. HUGH, Bishop.

IT was the happiness of this Saint to receive from his cradle the
strongest impressions of piety by the example and care of his
illustrious and holy parents. He was born at Chateau-neuf, in the
territory of Valence in Dauphiné, in 1053. His father, Odilo, who served
his

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

country in an honorable post in the army, labored by all the means in
his power to make his soldiers faithful servants of their Creator, and
by severe punishments to restrain vice. By the advice of his son, St.
Hugh, he afterwards became a Carthusian monk, and died at the age of a
hundred, having received Extreme Unction and Viaticum from the hands of
his son. Our Saint likewise assisted, in her last moments, his mother,
who had for many years, under his direction, served God in her own
house, by prayer, fasting, and plenteous alms-deeds. Hugh, from the
cradle, appeared to be a child of benediction. He went through his
studies with great applause, and having chosen to serve God in an
ecclesiastical state, he accepted a canonry in the cathedral of Valence.
His great sanctity and learning rendered him an ornament of that church,
and he was finally made Bishop of Grenoble. He set himself at once to
reprove vice and to reform abuses, and so plentiful was the benediction
of Heaven upon his labors that he had the comfort to see the face of his
diocese in a short time exceedingly changed. After two years he
privately resigned his bishopric, presuming on the tacit consent of the
Holy See, and, putting on the habit of St. Bennet, he entered upon a
novitiate in the austere abbey of Casa-Dei in Auvergne. There he lived a
year, a perfect model of all virtues to that house of Saints, till Pope
Gregory VII. commanded him, in virtue of holy obedience, to resume his
pastoral charge.

He earnestly solicited Pope Innocent II. for leave to resign his
bishopric, that he might die in solitude, but was never able to obtain
his request. God was pleased to purify his soul by a lingering illness
before He called him to Himself. Some time before his death he lost his
memory for everything but his prayers. He closed his penitential course
on the 1st of April in 1132, wanting only two months of being Eighty
years old, of which he had been fifty-two years bishop. Miracles
attested the sanctity of his happy death, and he was canonized by
Innocent II. in 1134.

**Reflection**.—Let us learn from the example of the Saints to shun the
tumult of the world as much as our

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

circumstances will allow, and give ourselves up to the exercises of holy
solitude, prayer, and pious reading.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. St. Francis of Paula](lots108.md)

</div>
