<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots183)  [Next](lots185.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 8.—ST. MEDARD, Bishop.

ST. MEDARD, one of the most illustrious prelates of the Church of France
in the sixth century, was born of a pious and noble family, at Salency,
about the year 457. From his childhood he evinced the most tender
compassion for the poor. On one occasion he gave his coat to a destitute
blind man, and when asked why he had done so, he answered that the
misery of a fellow-member in Christ so affected him that he could not
help giving him part of his own clothes. Being promoted to the
priesthood in the thirty-third year of his age, he became a bright
ornament of that sacred order. He preached the word of God with an
unction which touched the hearts of the most hardened; and the influence
of his example, by which he enforced the precepts which he delivered
from the pulpit, seemed irresistible. In 530, Alomer, the thirteenth
bishop of that country, dying, St. Medard was unanimously chosen to fill
the see, and was consecrated by St. Remigius, who had baptized King
Clovis in 496, and was then exceeding old. Our Saint's new dignity did
not make him abate anything of his austerities, and, though at that time
seventy-two years old, he thought himself obliged to redouble his
labors. Though his diocese was very wide, it seemed not to suffice for
his zeal, which could not be confined; wherever he saw the opportunity
of advancing the honor of God, and of abolishing the remains of
idolatry, he overcame all obstacles, and by his zealous labors and
miracles the rays of the Gospel dispelled the mists of idolatry
throughout the whole extent of his diocese. What rendered this task more
difficult and perilous was the savage and fierce disposition of the
ancient inhabitants of Flanders, who were the most barbarous of all the
nations of the Gauls and Franks. Our Saint, having completed this great
work in Flanders, returned to Noyon, where he shortly after fell sick,
and soon rested from his labors at an advanced age, in 545. The whole
kingdom lamented his death as the

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

loss of their common father and protector. His body was buried in his
own cathedral, but the many miracles wrought at his tomb so moved King
Clotaire that he translated the precious remains to Soissons.

**Reflection**.—The Church takes delight in styling her founder "THE
AMIABLE JESUS," and He likewise says of Himself, "I am meek and humble
of heart."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. Sts. Primus and Felicianus, Martyrs](lots185.md)

</div>
