<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots237)  [Next](lots239.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### July 29.—ST. MARTHA, Virgin.

ST. JOHN tells us that "Jesus loved Martha and Mary and Lazarus," and
yet but few glimpses are vouchsafed us of them. First, the sisters are
set before us with a word. Martha received Jesus into her house, and was
busy in outward, loving, lavish service, while Mary sat in silence at
the feet she had bathed with her tears. Then, their brother is ill, and
they send to Jesus, "Lord, he whom Thou lovest is sick." And in His own
time the Lord came, and they go out to meet Him; and then follows that
scene of unutterable tenderness and of sublimity unsurpassed: the silent
waiting of Mary; Martha strong in faith, but realizing so vividly, with
her practical turn of mind, the fact of death, and hesitating: "Canst
Thou show Thy wonders in the grave?" And then once again, on the eve of
His Passion, we see Jesus at Bethany. Martha, true to her character, is
serving; Mary, as at first, pours the precious ointment, in adoration
and love, on His divine head. And then we find the tomb of St. Martha,
at Tarascon, in Provence. When the storm of persecution came, the family
of Bethany, with a few companions, were put into a boat, without oars or
sail, and borne to the coast of France. St. Mary's tomb is at St. Baume;
St. Lazarus is venerated as the founder of the Church of Marseilles; and
the memory of the virtues and labors of St. Martha is still fragrant at
Avignon and Tarascon.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

**Reflection**.—When Martha received Jesus into her house, she was
naturally busy in preparations for such a Guest. Mary sat at His feet,
intent alone on listening to His gracious words. Her sister thought that
the time required other service than this, and asked our Lord to bid
Mary help in serving. Once again Jesus spoke in defence of Mary.
"Martha, Martha," He said, "thou art lovingly anxious about many things;
be not over-eager; do thy chosen work with recollectedness. Judge not
Mary. Hers is the good part, the one only thing really necessary. Thine
will be taken away, that something better be given thee." The life of
action ceases when the body is laid down; but the life of contemplation
endures and is perfected in heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. St. Germanus, Bishop](lots239.md)

</div>
