<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots047)  [Next](lots049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE MARTYRS OF JAPAN.

ABOUT forty years after St. Francis Xavier's death a persecution broke
out in Japan, and all Christian rites were forbidden under pain of
death. A confraternity of martyrs was at once formed, the object of
which was to die for Christ. Even the little children joined it. Peter,
a Christian child six years old, was awakened early and told that he was
to be beheaded, together with his father. Strong in grace, he expressed
his joy at the news, dressed himself in his gayest clothing, and took
the hand of the soldier who was to lead him to death. The headless trunk
of his father first met his view; calmly kneeling down, he prayed beside
the corpse, and, loosening his collar, prepared his neck for the stroke.
Moved by this touching scene, the executioner threw down his sabre and
fled. None but a brutal slave could be found for the murderous task;
with unskilled and trembling hand he hacked the child to pieces, who at
last died without uttering a single cry. Christians were branded with
the cross, or all but buried alive, while the head and arms were slowly
sawn off with blunt weapons. The least shudder under their anguish was
interpreted it into apostasy. The obstinate were put to the most cruel
deaths, but the survivors only envied them. Five noblemen were escorted
to the stake by 40,000 Christians with flowers and lights, singing the
litanies of Our Lady as they went. In the great martyrdom, at which
thousands also assisted, the martyrs sent up a flood of melody from the
fire, which only died away as one after another went to sing the new
song in heaven. Later on, a more awful doom was invented. The victims
were lowered into a sulphurous chasm, called the "mouth of hell," near
which no bird or beast could live. The chief of these,

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Paul Wiborg, whose
family bad been already massacred for the faith, was thrice let down;
thrice he cried, with a loud voice, "Eternal praise be to the
ever-adorable Sacrament of the Altar." The third time he went to his
reward.

**Reflection**.—If mere children face torture and death with joy for
Christ, can we begrudge the slight penance He asks us to bear?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. St. Dorothy, Virgin, Martyr](lots049.md)

</div>
