<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots247)  [Next](lots249) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 7.—ST. CAJETAN.

CAJETAN was born at Vicenza, in 1480, of pious and noble parents, who
dedicated him to our blessed Lady. From childhood he was known as the
Saint, and in later years as "the hunter of souls" A distinguished
student, he left his native town to seek obscurity in Rome, but was
there forced to accept office at the court of Julius II. On the death of
that Pontiff he returned to Vicenza, and disgusted his relatives by
joining the Confraternity of St. Jerome, whose members were drawn from
the lowest classes; while he spent his fortune in building hospitals,
and devoted himself to nursing the plague-stricken. To renew the lives
of the clergy, he instituted the first community of Regular Clerks,
known as Theatines. They devoted themselves to preaching, the
administration of the sacraments, and the careful performance of the
Church's rites and ceremonies. St. Cajetan was the first to introduce
the Forty Hours’ Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, as an antidote to
the heresy of Calvin. He had a most tender love for our blessed Lady,
and his piety was rewarded, for one Christmas eve she placed the Infant
Jesus in his arms. When the Germans, under the Constable Bourbon, sacked
Rome, St. Cajetan was barbarously scourged, to extort from him riches
which he had long before securely stored in heaven. When St. Cajetan was
on his death-bed, resigned to the will of God, eager for pain to satisfy
his love, and for death to attain to life, he beheld the Mother of God,
radiant with splendor and surrounded by ministering seraphim. In
profound veneration, he said, "Lady, bless me!" Mary replied, "Cajetan,
receive the blessing of my Son, and know that I am here as a reward for
the sincerity of your love, and to lead you to paradise." She then
exhorted him to patience in fighting an evil spirit who troubled him,
and gave orders to the

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

choirs of angels to escort his soul in triumph to heaven. Then, turning
her countenance full of majesty and sweetness upon him, she said,
"Cajetan, my Son calls thee. Let us go in peace." Worn out with toil and
sickness, he went to his reward in 1547.

**Reflection**.—Imitate St. Cajetan's devotion to our blessed Lady, by
invoking her aid before every work.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. St. Cyriacus and His Companions, Martyrs](lots249)

</div>
