<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots251)  [Next](lots253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 10.—ST. LAURENCE, Martyr.

ST. LAURENCE was the chief among the seven deacons of the Roman Church.
In the year 258 Pope Sixtus was led out to die, and St. Laurence stood
by, weeping that he could not share his fate. "I was your minister," he
said, "when you consecrated the blood of Our Lord; why do you leave me
behind now that you are about to shed your own?" The holy Pope comforted
him with the words, "Do not weep, my son; in three days you will follow
me." This prophecy came true. The prefect of the city knew the rich
offerings which the Christians put into the hands of the clergy, and he
demanded the treasures of the Roman Church from Laurence, their
guardian. The Saint promised, at the end of three days, to show him
riches exceeding all the wealth of the empire, and set about collecting
the poor, the infirm, and the religious who lived by the alms of the
faithful. He then bade the prefect "see the treasures of the Church"
Christ, whom Laurence had served in his poor, gave him strength in the
conflict which ensued. Roasted over a slow fire, he made sport of his
pains. "I am done enough," he said, "eat, if you will." At length
Christ, the Father of the poor, received him into eternal habitations.
God showed by the glory which shone around St. Laurence the value He set
upon his love for the poor. Prayers innumerable were granted at his
tomb; and he continued from his throne in heaven his charity to those in
need, granting them, as St. Augustine says, "the smaller graces which
they sought, and leading them to the desire of better gifts"

**Reflection**.—Our Lord appears before us in the persons of the poor.
Charity to them is a great sign of predestination. It is almost
impossible, the holy Fathers assure us, for any one who is charitable to
the poor for Christ's sake to perish.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Sts. Tiburtius and Susanna, Martyrs](lots253)

</div>
