<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots022)  [Next](lots024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 13.—ST. VERONICA OF MILAN.

VERONICA'S parents were peasants of a village near Milan. From her
childhood she toiled hard in the house and the field, and accomplished
cheerfully every menial task. Gradually the desire for perfection grew
within her; she became deaf to the jokes and songs of her

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

companions, and sometimes, when reaping and hoeing, would hide her face
and weep. Knowing no letters, she began to be anxious about her
learning, and rose secretly at night to teach herself to read. Our Lady
told her that other things were necessary, but not this. She showed
Veronica three mystical letters which would teach her more than books.
The first signified purity of intention; the second, abhorrence of
murmuring or criticism; the third, daily meditation on the Passion. By
the first she learned to begin her daily duties for no human motive, but
for God alone; by the second, to carry out what she had thus begun by
attending to her own affairs, never judging her neighbor, but praying
for those who manifestly erred; by the third she was enabled to forget
her own pains and sorrows in those of her Lord, and to weep hourly, but
silently, over the memory of His wrongs. She had constant ecstasies, and
saw in successive visions the whole life of Jesus, and many other
mysteries. Yet, by a special grace, neither her raptures nor her tears
ever interrupted her labors, which ended only with death. After three
years' patient waiting she was received as a lay-sister in the convent
of St. Martha at Milan. The community was extremely poor, and Veronica's
duty was to beg through the city for their daily food. Three years after
receiving the habit she was afflicted with secret but constant bodily
pains, yet never would consent to be relieved of any of her labors, or
to omit one of her prayers. By exact obedience she became a living copy
of the rule, and obeyed with a smile the least hint of her Superior. She
sought to the last the most hard and humbling occupations, and in their
performance enjoyed some of the highest favors ever granted to a Saint.
She died in 1497, on the day she had foretold, after a six months’
illness, aged fifty-two years, and in the thirtieth of her religious
profession.

**Reflection**.—When Veronica was urged in sickness to accept some
exemption from her labors, her one answer was, "I must work while I can,
while I have time." Dare we, then, waste ours?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. St. Hilary of Poitiers](lots024)

</div>
