<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots002)  [Next](lots004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ST. TURRIBIUS, Archbishop of Lima.

TURRIBIUS ALPHONSUS MOGROBEJO, whose feast the Church honors on April
27th, was born on the 6th of November, 1538, at Mayorga in the kingdom
of Leon in Spain. Brought up in a pious family where devotion was
hereditary, his youth was a model to all who knew him. All his leisure
was given to devotion or to works of charity. His austerities were
great, and he frequently made long pilgrimages on foot. The fame of
Turribius as a master of canon and civil law soon reached the ears of
King Philip II., who made him judge

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

at Granada. About that time the see of Lima, in Peru, fell vacant, and
among those proposed Philip found no one who seemed better endowed than
our Saint with all the qualities that were required at that city, where
much was to be done for religion. He sent to Rome the name of the holy
judge, and the Sovereign Pontiff confirmed his choice. Turribius in vain
sought to avoid the honor. The Pope, in reply, directed him to prepare
to receive Holy Orders and be consecrated. Yielding at last by direction
of his confessor, he was ordained priest and consecrated. He arrived at
Lima in 1587, and entered on his duties. All was soon edification and
order in his episcopal city. A model of all virtue himself, he confessed
daily and prepared for Mass by long meditation. St. Turribius then began
a visitation of his vast diocese, which he traversed three times, his
first visitation lasting seven years and his second four. He held
provincial councils, framing decrees of such wisdom that his regulations
were adopted in many countries. Almost his entire revenues were bestowed
on his creditors, as he styled the poor. While discharging with zeal his
duties he was seized with a fatal illness during his third visitation,
and died on the 23d of March, 1666, at Santa, exclaiming, as he received
the sacred Viaticum: "I rejoiced in the things that were said to me: 'We
shall go into the house of the Lord.'"

The proofs of his holy life and of the favors granted through his
intercession induced Pope Innocent XI. to beatify him, and he was
canonized by Pope Benedict XIII. in the year 1726.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Francis Solano](lots004.md)

</div>
