<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots061)  [Next](lots063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 18.—ST. SIMEON, Bishop, Martyr.

ST. SIMEON was the son of Cleophas, otherwise called Alpheus, brother to
St. Joseph, and of Mary, sister to the Blessed Virgin. He was therefore
nephew both to St. Joseph and to the Blessed Virgin, and cousin to Our
Saviour. We cannot doubt but that he was ail early follower of Christ,
and that he received the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, with the
Blessed Virgin and the apostles. When the Jews massacred St. James the
Lesser,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

his brother Simeon reproached them for their atrocious cruelty. St.
James, Bishop of Jerusalem, being put to death in the year 62,
twenty-nine years after Our Saviour's Resurrection, the apostles and
disciples met at Jerusalem to appoint him a successor. They unanimously
chose St. Simeon, who had probably before assisted his brother in the
government of that Church.

In the year 66, in which Sts. Peter and Paul suffered martyrdom at Rome,
the civil war began in Judea, by the seditions of the Jews against the
Romans. The Christians in Jerusalem were warned by God of the impending
destruction of that city. They therefore departed out of it the same
year,—before Vespasian, Nero's general, and afterwards emperor, entered
Judea,—and retired beyond Jordan to a small city called Pella, having
St. Simeon at their head. After the taking and burning of Jerusalem they
returned thither again, and settled themselves amidst its ruins, till
Adrian afterwards entirely razed it. The Church here flourished, and
multitudes of Jews were converted by the great number of prodigies and
miracles wrought in it.

Vespasian and Domitian had commanded all to be put to death who were of
the race of David. St. Simeon had escaped their searches; but, Trajan
having given the same order, certain heretics and Jews accused the
Saint, as being both of the race of David and a Christian, to Atticus,
the Roman governor in Palestine. The holy bishop was condemned to be
crucified. After having undergone the usual tortures during several
days, which, though one hundred and twenty years old, he suffered with
so much patience that he drew on him a universal admiration, and that of
Atticus in particular, he died in 107. He must have governed the Church
of Jerusalem about forty-three years.

**Reflection**.—We bear the name of Christians, but are full of the
spirit of worldlings, and our actions are infected with the poison of
the world. We secretly seek ourselves, even when we flatter ourselves
that God is our only aim; and whilst we undertake to convert the world,
we suffer it to pervert us. When shall we begin to study to crucify our
passions and die to ourselves, that we may

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

lay a solid foundation of true virtue and establish its reign in our
hearts?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. St. Barbatus, Bishop](lots063)

</div>
