<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots062)  [Next](lots064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 19.—ST. BARBATUS, Bishop.

ST. BARBATUS was born in the territory of Benevento in Italy, toward the
end of the pontificate of St. Gregory the Great, in the beginning of the
seventh century. His parents gave him a Christian education, and
Barbatus in his youth laid the foundation of that eminent sanctity which
recommends him to our veneration. The innocence, simplicity, and purity
of his manners, and his extraordinary progress in all virtues, qualified
him for the service of the altar, to which he was assumed by taking Holy
Orders as soon as the canons of the Church would allow it. He was
immediately employed by his bishop in preaching, for which he had an
extraordinary talent, and, after some time, made curate of St. Basil's
in Morcona, a town near Benevento. His parishioners were steeled in
their irregularities, and they treated him as a disturber of their
peace, and persecuted him with the utmost violence. Finding their malice
conquered by his patience and humility, and his character shining still
more bright, they had recourse to slanders, in which their virulence and
success were such that he was obliged to withdraw his charitable
endeavors among them. Barbatus returned to Benevento, where he was
received with joy. When St. Barbatus entered upon his ministry in that
city, the Christians themselves retained many idolatrous superstitions,
which even their duke, Prince Romuald, authorized by his example, though
son of Grimoald, King of the Lombards, who had edified all Italy by his
conversion. They expressed a religious veneration for a golden viper,
and prostrated themselves before it; they also paid superstitious honor
to a tree, on which they hung the skin of a wild beast; and those
ceremonies were closed by public games, in which the skin served for a
mark at which bowmen shot arrows over their shoulders. St. Barbatus
preached zealously against these abuses, and at length he roused the
attention of the people by foretelling the distress of their city, and
the calamities

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

which it was to suffer from the army of the Emperor Constans, who,
landing soon after in Italy, laid siege to Benevento. Ildebrand, Bishop
of Benevento, dying during the siege, after the public tranquillity was
restored St. Barbatus was consecrated bishop on the 10th of March, 663.
Barbatus, being invested with the episcopal character, pursued and
completed the good work which he had so happily begun, and destroyed
every trace of superstition in the whole state. In the year 680 he
assisted in a council held by Pope Agatho at Rome, and the year
following in the Sixth General Council held at Constantinople against
the Monothelites. He did not long survive this great assembly, for he
died on the 29th of February, 682, being about seventy years old, almost
nineteen of which he had spent in the episcopal chair.

**Reflection**.—St. Augustine says: "When the enemy has been cast out of
your hearts, renounce him, not only in word, but in work; not only by
the sound of the lips, but in every act of your life."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. St. Eucherius, Bishop](lots064.md)

</div>
