<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots110)  [Next](lots112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 5.—ST. VINCENT FERRER.

CH's wonderful apostle, the "Angel of the Judgment," was born at
Valencia in Spain, in 1350, and at the age of eighteen professed in the
Order of St. Dominic. After a brilliant course of study he became master
of sacred theology. For three years he read only the Scriptures, and
knew the whole Bible by heart. He converted the Jews of Valencia, and
their synagogue became a church. Grief at the great schism then
afflicting the Church reduced him to the point of death; but Our Lord
Himself in glory bade him go forth to convert sinners, "for My judgment
is nigh." This miraculous apostolate lasted twenty-one years. He
preached throughout Europe, in the towns and villages of Spain,
Switzerland, France, Italy, England, Ireland, Scotland. Everywhere tens
of thousands of sinners were reformed; Jews, infidels, and heretics were
converted. Stupendous miracles enforced his words. Twice each day the "
miracle bell " summoned the sick, the blind, the lame to be cured.
Sinners the most obdurate became Saints; speaking only his native
Spanish, he was understood in all tongues. Processions of ten thousand
penitents followed him in perfect order. Convents, orphanages,
hospitals, arose in his path. Amidst all, his humility remained
profound, his prayer constant. He always prepared for preaching by
prayer. Once, however, when a person of high rank was to be present at
his sermon he neglected prayer for study. The nobleman was not
particularly

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

struck by the discourse which had been thus carefully worked up; but
coming again to hear the Saint, unknown to the latter, the second sermon
made a deep impression on his soul. When St. Vincent heard of the
difference, he remarked that in the first sermon it was Vincent who had
preached, but in the second, Jesus Christ. He fell ill at Vannes in
Brittany, and received the crown of everlasting glory in 1419.

**Reflection**.—"Whatever you do," said St. Vincent, "think not of
yourself, but of God." In this spirit he preached, and God spoke by him;
in this spirit, if we listen, we shall hear the voice of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. St. Celestine, Pope](lots112)

</div>
