<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots203)  [Next](lots205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 27.—ST. LADISLAS, King.

LADISLAS the First, son of Bela, King of Hungary, was born in 1041. By
the pertinacious importunity of the people he was compelled, much
against his own inclination, to ascend the throne, in 1080. He restored
the good laws and discipline which St. Stephen had established, and
which seem to have been obliterated by the confusion of the times.
Chastity, meekness, gravity, charity, and piety

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

were from his infancy the distinguishing parts of his character; avarice
and ambition were his sovereign aversion, so perfectly had the maxims of
the Gospel extinguished in him all propensity to those base passions.
His life in the palace was most austere; he was frugal and abstemious,
but most liberal to the Church and the poor. Vanity, pleasure, or idle
amusements had no share in his actions or time, because all his moments
were consecrated to the exercises of religion and the duties of his
station, in which he had only the divine will in view, and sought only
God's greater honor. He watched over a strict and impartial
administration of justice, was generous and merciful to his enemies, and
vigorous in the defence of his country and the Church. He drove the Huns
out of his territories, and vanquished the Poles, Russians, and Tartars.
He was preparing to command, as general-in-chief, the great expedition
of the Christians against the Saracens for the recovery of the Holy
Land, when God called him to Himself, on the 30th of July, 1095.

**Reflection**.—The Saints filled all their moments with good works and
great actions; and, whilst they labored for an immortal crown, the
greatest share of worldly happiness of which this life is capable fell
in their way without being even looked for by them. In their afflictions
themselves virtue afforded them the most solid comfort, pointed out the
remedy, and converted their tribulations into the greatest advantages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. St. Irenæus, Bishop, Martyr](lots205)

</div>
