<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots254)  [Next](lots256.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 13.—ST. RADEGUNDES, Queen.

ST. RADEGUNDES was the daughter of a king of Thuringia who was
assassinated by his brother; a war ensuing, our Saint, at the age of
twelve, was made prisoner and carried captive by Clotaire, King of
Soissons, who had her instructed in the Christian religion and baptized.
The great mysteries of our Faith made such an impression on her tender
soul that she gave herself to God with her whole heart, and desired to
consecrate to him her virginity; she

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

was obliged at last, however, to yield to the king's wish that she
should become his wife. As a great queen, she continued no less an enemy
to sloth and vanity than she was before, and divided her time chiefly
between her oratory, the Church, and the care of the poor. She also kept
long fasts, and during Lent wore a hair-cloth under her rich garments.
Clotaire was at first pleased with her devotions, and allowed her full
liberty in them, but afterward used frequently to reproach her for her
pious exercises, saying he had married a nun rather than a queen, who
converted his court into a monastery. Seeing that Clotaire was inflamed
by bad passions, our Saint asked and obtained his leave to retire from
court. She went to Noyon, and was consecrated deaconess by St. Medard.
Radegundes first withdrew to Sais, and some time after she went to
Poitiers, and there built a great monastery. She had a holy virgin,
named Agnes, made the first abbess, and paid to her an implicit
obedience in all things, not reserving to herself the disposal of the
least thing. King Clotaire, repenting of his evil conduct, wished her to
return to court, but, through the intercession of St. Germanus of Paris,
she was allowed to remain in her retirement, where she died on the 13th
of August, 587.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. St. Eusebius, Priest](lots256.md)

</div>
