<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots011)  [Next](lots013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 3.—ST. GENEVIEVE, Virgin.

GENEVIEVE was born at Nanterre, near Paris. St. Germanus, when passing
through, specially noticed a little shepherdess, and predicted her
future sanctity. At seven years of age she made a vow of perpetual
chastity. After the death of her parents, Paris became her abode; but
she often travelled on works of mercy, which, by the gifts of prophecy
and miracles, she unfailingly performed. At one time she was cruelly
persecuted: her enemies, jealous of her power, called her a hypocrite
and. tried to drown her; but St. Germanus having sent her some blessed
bread as a token of esteem, the outcry ceased, and ever afterwards she
was honored as a Saint. During the siege of Paris by Childeric, king of
the Franks, Genevieve went out with a few followers and procured corn
for the starving citizens. Nevertheless Childeric, though a pagan,
respected her, and at her request spared the lives of many prisoners. By
her exhortations again, when Attila and his Huns were approaching the
city, the inhabitants, instead of taking flight, gave themselves to
prayer and penance, and averted, as she had foretold, the impending
scourge. Clovis, when converted from paganism by his

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

holy wife, St. Clotilda, made Genevieve his constant adviser, and, in
spite of his violent character, made a generous and Christian king. She
died within a few weeks of that monarch, in 512, aged eighty-nine.

A pestilence broke out at Paris in 1129, which in a short time swept off
fourteen thousand persons, and, in spite of all human efforts, daily
added to its victims. At length, on November 26th, the shrine of St.
Genevieve was carried in solemn procession through the city. That same
day but three persons died, the rest recovered, and no others were taken
ill. This was but the first of a series of miraculous favors which the
city of Paris has obtained through the relics of its patron Saint.

**Reflection**.—Genevieve was only a poor peasant girl, but Christ dwelt
in her heart. She was anointed with His Spirit, and with power; she went
about doing good, and God was with her.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. St. Titus, Bishop](lots013)

</div>
