<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots261)  [Next](lots263.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 20.—ST. BERNARD.

BERNARD was born at the castle of Fontaines, in Burgundy. The grace of
his person and the vigor of his intellect filled his parents with the
highest hopes, and the world lay bright and smiling before him when he
renounced it forever and joined the monks at Citeaux. All his brothers
followed Bernard to Citeaux except Nivard, the youngest, who was left to
be the stay of his father in his old age. "You will now be heir of
everything," said they to him, as they departed. "Yes," said the boy;
"you leave me earth, and keep heaven for yourselves; do you

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

call that fair?" And he too left the world. At length their aged father
came to exchange wealth and honor for the poverty of a monk of
Clairvaux. One only sister remained behind; she was married, and loved
the world and its pleasures. Magnificently dressed, she visited Bernard;
he refused to see her, and only at last consented to do so, not as her
brother, but as the minister of Christ. The words he then spoke moved
her so much that, two years later, she retired to a convent with her
husband's consent, and died in the reputation of sanctity. Bernard's
holy example attracted so many novices that other monasteries were
erected, and our Saint was appointed abbot of that of Clairvaux.
Unsparing with himself, he at first expected too much of his brethren,
who were disheartened at his severity; but soon perceiving his error, he
led them forward, by the sweetness of his correction and the mildness of
his rule, to wonderful perfection. In spite of his desire to lie hid,
the fame of his sanctity spread far and wide, and many churches asked
for him as their Bishop. Through the help of Pope Eugenius III., his
former subject, he escaped this dignity; yet his retirement was
continually invaded: the poor and the weak sought his protection;
bishops, kings, and popes applied to him for advice; and at length
Eugenius himself charged him to preach the crusade. By his fervor,
eloquence, and miracles Bernard kindled the enthusiasm of Christendom,
and two splendid armies were despatched against the infidel. Their
defeat was only due, said the Saint, to their own sins. Bernard died in
1153. His most precious writings have earned for him the titles of the
last of the Fathers and a Doctor of Holy Church.

**Reflection**.—St. Bernard used to say to those who applied for
admission to the monastery, "If you desire to enter here, leave at the
threshold the body you have brought with you from the world; here there
is room only for your soul." Let us constantly ask ourselves St.
Bernard's daily question, "To what end didst thou come hither?"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. St. Jane Frances de Chantal](lots263.md)

</div>
