<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots256)  [Next](lots258.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 15.—THE ASSUMPTION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY.

IN this festival the Church commemorates the happy departure from life
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and her translation into the kingdom of her
Son, in which she received from Him a crown of immortal glory, and a
throne above all the other Saints and heavenly spirits. After Christ, as
the triumphant Conqueror of death and hell, ascended into heaven, His
blessed Mother remained at Jerusalem, persevering in prayer with the
disciples, till, with them, she had received the Holy Ghost. She lived
to a very advanced age, but finally paid the common debt of nature, none
among the children of Adam being exempt from that rigorous law. But the
death of the Saints is

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

rather to be called a sweet sleep than death; much more that of the
Queen of Saints, who had been exempt from all sin. It is a traditionary
pious belief, that the body of the Blessed Virgin was raised by God soon
after her death, and taken up to glory, by a singular privilege, before
the general resurrection of the dead. The Assumption of the Blessed
Virgin Mary is the greatest of all the festivals which the Church
celebrates in her honor. It is the consummation of all the other great
mysteries by which her life was rendered most wonderful; it is the
birthday of her true greatness and glory, and the crowning of all the
virtues of her whole life, which we admire single in her other
festivals.

**Reflection**.—Whilst we contemplate, in profound sentiments of
veneration, astonishment, and praise, the glory to which Mary is raised
by her triumph on this day, we ought, for our own advantage, to consider
by what means she arrived at this sublime degree of honor and happiness,
that we may walk in her steps. No other way is open to us. The same path
which conducted her to glory will also lead us thither; we shall be
partners in her reward if we copy her virtues.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. St. Hyacinth](lots258.md)

</div>
