<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots118)  [Next](lots120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 11.—ST. LEO THE GREAT.

LEO was born at Rome. He embraced the sacred ministry, was made
archdeacon of the Roman Church by St. Celestine, and under him and
Sixtus III. had a large share in governing the Church. On the death of
Sixtus, Leo was chosen Pope, and consecrated on St. Michael's day, 440,
amid great joy. It was a time of terrible trial. Vandals and Huns were
wasting the provinces of the empire, and Nestorians, Pelagians, and
other heretics wrought more grievous havoc among souls. Whilst Leo's
zeal made head against these perils, there arose the new heresy of
Eutyches, who confounded the two natures of Christ. At once the vigilant
pastor proclaimed the true doctrine of the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Incarnation in his
famous "tome;" but fostered by the Byzantine court, the heresy gained a
strong hold amongst the Eastern monks and bishops. After three years of
unceasing toil, Leo brought about its solemn condemnation by the Council
of Chalcedon, the Fathers all signing his tome, and exclaiming, "Peter
hath spoken by Leo." Soon after, Attila with his Huns broke into Italy,
and marched through its burning cities upon Rome. Leo went out boldly to
meet him, and prevailed on him to turn back. Astonished to see the
terrible Attila, the "Scourge of God," fresh from the sack of Aquileia,
Milan, Pavia, with the rich prize of Rome within his grasp, turn his
great host back to the Danube at the Saint's word, his chiefs asked him
why he had acted so strangely. He answered that he saw two venerable
personages, supposed to be Sts. Peter and Paul, standing behind Leo, and
impressed by this vision he withdrew. If the perils of the Church are as
great now as in St. Leo's day, St. Peter's solicitude is not less. Two
years later the city fell a prey to the Vandals; but even then Leo saved
it from destruction. He died A. D. 461, having ruled the Church twenty
years.

**Reflection**.—Leo loved to ascribe all the fruits of his unsparing
labors to the glorious chief of the apostles, who, he often declared,
lives and governs in his successors.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. St. Julius, Pope](lots120)

</div>
