<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots159)  [Next](lots161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

### May 19.—ST. PETER CELESTINE.

AS a child, Peter had visions of our blessed Lady, and of the angels and
saints. They encouraged him in his prayer, and chided him when he fell
into any fault. His mother, though only a poor widow, put him to school,
feeling sure that he would one day be a Saint. At the age of twenty, he
left his home in Apulia to live in a mountain solitude. Here he passed
three years, assaulted by the evil spirits and beset with temptations of
the flesh, but consoled by angels’ visits. After this his seclusion was
invaded by disciples, who refused to be sent away; and the rule of life
which he gave them formed the foundation of the Celestine Order. Angels
assisted in the church which Peter built; unseen bells rang peals of
surpassing sweetness, and heavenly music filled the sanctuary when he
offered the Holy Sacrifice. Suddenly he found himself torn from his
loved solitude by his election to the Papal throne. Resistance was of no
avail. He took the name of Celestine, to remind him of the heaven he was
leaving and for which he sighed, and was consecrated at Aquila. After a
reign of four months, Peter summoned the cardinals to his presence, and
solemnly resigned his trust. St. Peter built himself a boarded cell in
his palace, and there continued his hermit's life; and when, lest his
simplicity might be taken advantage of to distract the peace of the
Church, he was put under guard, he said, "I desired nothing but a cell,
and a cell they have given me." There he enjoyed his former loving
intimacy with the saints and angels, and sang the Divine praises almost
continually. At length, on Whit-Sunday, he told his guards he should die
within the week, and immediately fell ill. He received the last
sacraments; and the following Saturday, as he finished the concluding
verse of Lauds, "Let every spirit bless the Lord!" he closed his eyes to
this world and opened them to the vision of God.

**Reflection**.—"Whose," says the *Imitation of Christ*, "withdraweth
himself from acquaintances and friends, to him will God draw near with
His holy angels."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. St. Bernardine of Siena](lots161)

</div>
