<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots095)  [Next](lots097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 21.—ST. BENEDICT, Abbot.

ST. BENEDICT, blessed by grace and in name, was born of a noble Italian
family about 480. When a boy he was sent to Rome, and there placed in
the public schools. Scared by the licentiousness of the Roman youth, he
fled to the desert mountains of Subiaco, and was directed by the Holy
Spirit into a cave, deep, craggy, and almost inaccessible. He lived
there for three years, unknown to any one save the holy monk Romanus,
who clothed him with the monastic habit and brought him food. But the
fame of his sanctity soon gathered disciples round him. The rigor of his
rule, however, drew on him the hatred of some of the monks, and one of
them mixed poison with the abbot's drink; but when the Saint made the
sign of the cross on the poisoned bowl, it broke and fell in pieces to
the ground. After he had built twelve monasteries at Subiaco, he removed
to Monte Casino, where he founded an abbey in which he wrote his rule
and lived until death. By prayer he did all things: wrought miracles,
saw visions, and prophesied. A peasant, whose boy had just died, ran in
anguish to St. Benedict, crying out, "Give me back my son!" The monks
joined the poor man in his entreaties; but the Saint replied, "Such
miracles are not for us to work, but for the blessed apostles. Why will
you lay upon me a burden which my weakness cannot bear? " Moved at
length by compassion he knelt down and, prostrating himself upon the
body of the child, prayed earnestly. Then rising, he cried out, "Behold
not, O Lord, my sins, but the faith of this man, who desireth the life
of his son, and restore to the body that soul which Thou hast taken
away." Hardly had he spoken when the child's body began to tremble, and
taking it by the hand he restored it alive to its father. Six days
before his death he ordered his grave to be opened, and fell ill of a
fever. On the sixth day he requested to be borne into the chapel, and,
having

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

received the body and blood of Christ, with hands uplifted, and leaning
on one of his disciples, he calmly expired in prayer on the 21st of
March, 543.

**Reflection**.—The Saints never feared to undertake any work, however
arduous, for God, because, distrusting self, they relied for assistance
and support wholly upon prayer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. St. Catharine of Sweden, Virgin](lots097)

</div>
