<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots085)  [Next](lots087.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 11.—ST. EULOGIUS, Martyr.

ST. EULOGIUS was of a senatorian family of Cordova, at that time the
capital of the Moors in Spain. Our Saint was educated among the clergy
of the Church of St. Zoilus, a martyr who suffered with nineteen others
under Diocletian. Here he distinguished himself, by his virtue and
learning, and, being made priest, was placed at the head of the chief
ecclesiastical school at Cordova. He joined assiduous watching, fasting,
and prayer to his studies, and his humility, mildness, and charity
gained him the affection and respect of every one. During the
persecution raised against the Christians in the year 850, St. Eulogius
was thrown into prison and there wrote his Exhortation to Martyrdom,
addressed to the virgins Flora and Mary, who were beheaded the 24th of
November, 851. Six days after their death Eulogius was set at liberty.
In the year 852 several others suffered the like martyrdom. St. Eulogius
encouraged all these martyrs to their triumphs, and was the support of
that distressed flock. The Archbishop of Toledo dying in 858. St.
Eulogius was

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

elected to succeed him; but there was some obstacle that hindered him
from being consecrated, though he did not outlive his election two
months. A virgin, by name Leocritia, of a noble family among the Moors,
had been instructed from her infancy in the Christian religion by one of
her relatives, and privately baptized. Her father and mother used her
very ill, and scourged her day and night to compel her to renounce the
Faith. Having made her condition known to St. Eulogius and his sister
Anulona, intimating that she desired to go where she might freely
exercise her religion, they secretly procured her the means of getting
away, and concealed her for some time among faithful friends. But the
matter was at length discovered, and they were all brought before the
cadi, who threatened to have Eulogius scourged to death. The Saint told
him that his torments would be of no avail, for he would never change
his religion. Whereupon the cadi gave orders that he should be carried
to the palace and be presented before the king's council. Eulogius began
boldly to propose the truths of the Gospel to them. But, to prevent
their hearing him, the council condemned him immediately to lose his
head. As they were leading him to execution, one of the guards gave him
a blow on the face, for having spoken against Mahomet; he turned the
other cheek, and patiently received a second. He received the stroke of
death with great cheerfulness, on the 11th of March, 859. St. Leocritia
was beheaded four days after him, and her body thrown into the river
Guadalquivir, but taken out by the Christians.

**Reflection**.—Beg of God, through the intercession of these holy
martyrs, the gift of perseverance. Their example will supply you with an
admirable rule for obtain., ing this crowning gift. Remember that you
have renounced the world and the devil once for all at your Baptism. Do
not hesitate; do not look back; do not listen to suggestions against
faith or virtue; but advance, day by day, along the road which you have
chosen, to Gods Who is your portion forever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. St. Gregory the Great](lots087.md)

</div>
