<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots185)  [Next](lots187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ST. COLUMBA, or COLUMKILLE, Abbot.

ST. COLUMBA, the apostle of the Picts, was born of a noble family, at
Gartan, in the county of Tyrconnel, Ireland, in 521. From early
childhood he gave himself to God. In all his labors—and they were
many—his chief thought was heaven and how he should secure the way
thither. The result was that he lay on the bare floor, with a stone for
his pillow, and fasted all the year round; yet the sweetness of his
countenance told of the holy soul's interior serenity. Though austere,
he was not morose; and, often as he longed to die, he was untiring in
good works, throughout his life. After he had been made abbot, his zeal
offended King Dermot; and in 565 the Saint departed for Scotland, where
he founded a hundred religious houses and converted the Picts, who in
gratitude gave him the island of Iona. There St. Columba founded his
celebrated monastery, the school of apostolic missionaries and martyrs,
and for centuries the last resting-place of Saints and kings. Four years
before his death, our Saint had a vision of angels, who told him that
the day of his death had been deferred four years, in answer to the
prayers of his children; whereat the Saint wept bitterly, and cried out,
"Woe is me that my sojourning is prolonged!" for he desired above all
things to reach his true home. How different is the conduct of most men,
who dread death above everything, instead of wishing "to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ"! On the day of his peaceful death, in the
seventy-seventh year of his age, surrounded in choir by his spiritual
children, the 9th of June, 597, he said to his disciple Diermit, "This
day is called the Sabbath, that is, the day of rest, and such will it
truly be to me; for it will put an end to my labors." Then, kneeling
before the altar, he received the Viaticum, and sweetly slept in the
Lord. His relics were carried to Down, and laid in the same shrine with
the bodies of St. Patrick and St. Brigid.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

**Reflection**.—The thought of the world to come will always make us
happy, and yet strict with ourselves in all our duties. The more perfect
we become, the sooner shall we behold that for which St. Columba sighed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. St. Margaret of Scotland](lots187)

</div>
