<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots240)  [Next](lots242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_aug"></span>

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

### August 1.—ST. PETER'S CHAINS.

HEROD AGRIPPA, King of the Jews, having put to death St. James the Great
in the year 44, in order to gain the affection and applause of his
people, caused St. Peter, the prince of the sacred college, to be cast
into prison. It was his intention to put him publicly to death after
Easter. The whole Church at Jerusalem put up its prayers to God for the
deliverance of the chief pastor of His whole flock, and God favorably
heard them. The king took all precautions possible to prevent the escape
of his prisoner. St. Peter lay fast asleep, on the very night before the
day intended for his execution, when it pleased God to deliver him out
of the hands of his enemies. He was guarded by sixteen soldiers, four of
whom always kept sentry in their turns: two in the same dungeon with
him, and two at the gate. He was fastened to the ground by two chains,
and slept between the two soldiers. In the middle of the night, a bright
light shone in the prison, and an angel appeared near him, and, striking
him on the side, awaked him out of his sleep, and bade him instantly
arise, gird his coat about him, put on his sandals and his cloak, and
follow him. The apostle did so, for the chains had dropped off from his
hands. Following his guide, he passed after him through the first and
second wards of watches, and through the iron gate which led into the
city, which opened to them of its own accord. The angel conducted him
through one street, then, suddenly disappearing, left him to seek some
asylum. The apostle went directly to the house of Mary the mother of
John, surnamed Mark, where several disciples were met together, and were
sending up their prayers to heaven for his deliverance. As he stood
knocking without, a young woman, knowing Peter's voice, ran in and
informed the company that he was at the door; they concluded it must be
his guardian angel, sent by God upon some extraordinary account, until,
being let in, he related to them the whole manner of his miraculous
escape; and having enjoined them to give notice thereof to St. James and
the rest of the brethren, he withdrew to a place of more retirement

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

and security, carrying, wherever he went, the heavenly blessing and
life.

**Reflection**.—This miracle affords a confirmation of the divine
promise, "If two of you shall consent upon earth concerning anything
whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be done to them by My Father Who is
in heaven."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. St. Stephen, Pope and Martyr](lots242)

</div>
