<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots146)  [Next](lots148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 6.—ST. JOHN BEFORE THE LATIN GATE.

IN the year 95, St. John, who was the only surviving apostle, and
governed all the churches of Asia, was apprehended at Ephesus, and sent
prisoner to Rome. The Emperor Domitian did not relent at the sight of
the venerable old man, but condemned him to be cast into a caldron of
boiling oil. The martyr doubtless heard, with great joy, this barbarous
sentence; the most cruel torments seemed

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

to him light and most agreeable, because they would, he hoped, unite him
forever to his divine Master and Saviour. But God accepted his will and
crowned his desire; He conferred on him the honor and merit of
martyrdom, but suspended the operation of the fire, as He had formerly
preserved the three children from hurt in the Babylonian furnace. The
seething oil was changed in his regard into an invigorating bath, and
the Saint came out more refreshed than when he had entered the caldron.
Domitian saw this miracle without drawing from it the least advantage,
but remained hardened in his iniquity. However, he contented himself
after this with banishing the holy apostle into the little island of
Patmos. St. John returned to Ephesus, in the reign of Nerva, who by
mildness, during his short reign of one year and four months, labored to
restore the faded lustre of the Roman Empire. This glorious triumph of
St. John happened without the gate of Rome called Latina. A church which
since has always borne this title was consecrated in the same place in
memory of this miracle, under the first Christian emperors.

**Reflection**.—St. John suffered above the other Saints a martyrdom of
love, being a martyr, and more than a martyr, at the foot of the cross
of his divine Master. All his sufferings were by love and compassion
imprinted in his soul, and thus shared by him. O singular happiness, to
have stood under the cross of Christ! O extraordinary privilege, to have
suffered martyrdom in the person of Jesus, and been eye-witness of all
He did or endured! If nature revolt within us against suffering, let us
call to mind those words of the divine Master: "Thou knowest not now
wherefore; but thou shalt know hereafter."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. St. Stanislas, Bishop, Martyr](lots148)

</div>
