<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots090)  [Next](lots092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 16.—STS. ABRAHAM and MARY.

ABRAHAM was a rich nobleman of Edessa. At his parents’ desire he
married, but escaped to a cell near the city as soon as the feast was
over. He walled up the cell-door, leaving only a small window through
which he received his food. There for fifty years he sang God's praises
and implored mercy for himself and for all men. The wealth which fell to
him on his parents’ death he gave to the poor. As many sought him for
advice and consolation, the Bishop of Edessa, in spite of his humility,
ordained him priest. St. Abraham was sent, soon after his ordination, to
an idolatrous city which had hitherto been deaf to every messenger. He
was insulted, beaten, and three times banished, but he returned each
time with fresh zeal. For three years he pleaded with God for those
souls, and in the end prevailed. Every citizen came to him for Baptism.
After providing for their spiritual needs he went back to his cell more
than ever convinced of the power of prayer. His brother died, leaving an
only daughter, Mary, to the Saint's care. He placed her in a cell near
his own, and devoted himself to training her in perfection. After twenty
years of innocence she fell, and fled in despair to a distant city,
where she drowned the voice of conscience in sin. The Saint and his
friend St. Ephrem prayed earnestly for her during two years. Then he
went disguised to seek the lost sheep, and had the joy of bringing her
back to the desert a true penitent. She received the gift of miracles,
and her countenance after

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

death shone as the sun. St. Abraham died five years before her, about
360. All Edessa came for his last blessing and to secure his relics.

**Reflection**.—Oh, that we realized the omnipotence of prayer! Every
soul was created to glorify God eternally; and it is in the power of
every one to add by the salvation of his neighbor to the glory of God.
Let us make good use of this talent of prayer, lest our brother's blood
be required of us at the last.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. St. Patrick, Bishop, Apostle of Ireland](lots092)

</div>
