<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots053)  [Next](lots055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 11.—ST. SEVERINUS, Abbot of Agaunum.

ST. SEVERINUS, of a noble family in Burgundy, was educated in the
Catholic faith, at a time when the Arian heresy reigned in that country.
He forsook the world in his youth, and dedicated himself to God in the
monastery of Agaunum, which then only consisted of scattered cells, till
the Catholic King Sigismund built there the great abbey of St. Maurice.
St. Severinus was the holy abbot of that place, and had governed his
community

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

many years in the exercise of penance and charity, when, in 504, Clovis,
the first Christian king of France, lying ill of a fever, which his
physicians had for two years ineffectually endeavored to remove, sent
his chamberlain to conduct the Saint to court; for it was said that the
sick from all parts recovered their health by his prayers. St. Severinus
took leave of his monks, telling them he should never see them more in
this world. On his journey he healed Eulalius, Bishop of Nevers, who had
been for some time deaf and dumb; also a leper, at the gates of Paris;
and coming to the palace he immediately restored the king to perfect
health, by putting on him his own cloak. The king, in gratitude,
distributed large alms to the poor and released all his prisoners. St.
Severinus, returning toward Agaunum, stopped at Château-Landon in
Gatinois, where two priests served God in a solitary chapel, among whom
he was admitted, at his request, as a stranger, and was soon greatly
admired by them for his sanctity. He foresaw his death, which happened
shortly after, in 507. The place is now an abbey of reformed canons
regular of St. Austin. The Huguenots scattered the greater part of his
relics when they plundered this church.

**Reflection**.—God loads with His favor those who delight in exercising
mercy. "According to thy ability be merciful: if thou hast much, give
abundantly; if thou hast little, take care even so to bestow willingly a
little."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. St. Benedict of Anian](lots055.md)

</div>
