<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots043)  [Next](lots045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 2.—THE PURIFICATION, COMMONLY CALLED CANDLEMAS-DAY.

THE law of God, given by Moses to the Jews, ordained that a woman, after
childbirth, should continue for a certain time in a state which that law
calls unclean, during which she was not to appear in public, nor presume
to touch anything consecrated to God. This term was of forty days upon
the birth of a son, and double that time for a daughter. On the
expiration of the term, the mother .vas to bring to the door of the
tabernacle, or Temple, a lamb and a young pigeon, or turtle-dove, as an
offering to God. These being sacrificed to Almighty God by the priest,
the woman was cleansed of the legal impurity and reinstated in her
former privileges.

A young pigeon, or turtle-dove, by way of a sin-offering, was required
of all, whether rich or poor; but as the expense of a lamb might be too
great for persons in poor circumstances, they were allowed to substitute
for it a second dove.

Our Saviour having been conceived by the Holy Ghost, and His blessed
Mother remaining always a spotless virgin, it is evident that she did
not come under the law; but as the world was, as yet, ignorant of her
miraculous conception, she submitted with great punctuality and
exactness to every humbling circumstance which the law required.
Devotion and mal to honor God, by every observance prescribed by His
law, prompted Mary to perform this act of religion, though evidently
exempt from the precept. Being poor herself, she made the offering
appointed for the poor; but; however mean in itself, it was made with a
perfect heart, which is what God chiefly regards in all that is offered
to Him. Besides the law which obliged the mother to purify herself,
there was another which ordered that the

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

first-born son should be offered to God, and that, after its
presentation, the child should be ransomed with a certain sum of money,
and peculiar sacrifices offered on the occasion.

Mary complies exactly with all these ordinances. She obeys not only in
the essential points of the law, but has strict regard to all the
circumstances. She remains forty days at home; she denies herself, all
this time, the liberty of entering the Temple; she partakes not of
things sacred; and on the day of her purification she walks several
miles to Jerusalem, with the world's Redeemer in her arms. She waits for
the priest at the gate of the Temple, makes her offerings of
thanksgiving and expiation, presents her divine Son by the hands of the
priest to His Eternal Father, with the most profound humility,
adoration, and thanksgiving. She then redeems Him with five shekels, as
the law appoints, and receives Him back again as a sacred charge
committed to her special care, till the Father shall again demand Him
for the full accomplishment of man's redemption.

The ceremony of this day was closed by a third mystery—the meeting in
the Temple of the holy persons Simeon and Anne with Jesus and His
parents. Holy Simeon, on that occasion, received into his arms the
object of all his desires and sighs, and praised God for being blessed
with the happiness of beholding the so-much-longed-for Messias. Re
foretold to Mary her martyrdom of sorrow, and that Jesus brought
redemption to those who would accept of it on the terms it was offered
them; but a heavy judgment on all infidels who should obstinately reject
it, and on Christians, also, whose lives were a contradiction to His
holy maxims and example. Mary, hearing this terrible prediction, did not
answer one word, felt no agitation of mind from the present, no dread
for the future; but courageously and sweetly committed all to God's holy
will. Anne, also, the prophetess, who in her widowhood served God with
great fervor, had the happiness to acknowledge and adore in this great
mystery the Redeemer of the world. Simeon, having beheld Our Saviour,
exclaimed: "Now dismiss Thy servant, O Lord, according to Thy word,
because my eyes have seen Thy salvation."

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

This feast is called CANDLEMAS, because the Church blesses the candles
to be borne in the procession of the day.

**Reflection**.—Let us strive to imitate the humility of the
ever-blessed Mother of God, remembering that humility is the path which
leads to abiding peace and brings us near to the consolations of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. St. Blase, Bishop and Martyr](lots045)

</div>
