<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots175)  [Next](lots177) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ST. PAMPHILUS, Martyr.

ST. PAMPHILUS was of a rich and honorable family, and a native of
Berytus, in which city, at that time famous for its schools, he in his
youth ran through the whole circle of the sciences, and was afterward
honored with the first employments of the magistracy. After he began to
know Christ, he could relish no other study but that of salvation, and
renounced everything else that he might apply himself wholly to the
exercise of virtue and the studies of the Holy Scriptures. This
accomplished master in profane sciences, and this renowned magistrate,
was not ashamed to become the humble scholar of Pierius, the successor
of Origen, in the great catechetical school of Alexandria. He afterward
made Cæsarea, in Palestine, his residence, where, at his private
expense, he collected a great library, which he bestowed on the church
of that city. The Saint established there also a public school of sacred
literature, and to his labors the Church was indebted for a most correct
edition of the Holy Bible, which, with infinite care, he transcribed
himself. But nothing was more remarkable in this Saint than his
extraordinary humility. His paternal estate he at length distributed
among the poor; towards his slaves and domestics his behavior was always
that of a brother or a tender father. He led a most austere life,
sequestered from the world and its company, and was indefatigable in
labor. Such a virtue was his apprenticeship to the grace of martyrdom.
In the year 307, Urbanus, the cruel governor of Palestine, caused him to
be apprehended, and commanded him to be most inhumanly tormented. But
the iron hooks which tore the martyr's sides served only to cover the
judge with confusion. After this, the Saint remained almost two years

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

in prison. Urbanus, the governor, was himself beheaded by an order of
the Emperor Maximinus, but was succeeded by Firmilian, a man not less
barbarous than bigoted and superstitious. After several butcheries, he
caused St. Pamphilus to be brought before him, and passed sentence of
death upon him. His flesh was torn off to the very bones, and his bowels
exposed to view, and the torments were continued a long time without
intermission, but he never once opened his mouth so much as to groan. He
finished his martyrdom by a slow fire, and died invoking Jesus, the Son
of God.

**Reflection**.--A cloud of witnesses, a noble army of martyrs, teach us
by their constancy to suffer wrong with patience, and strenuously to
resist evil. The daily trials we meet with from others or from ourselves
are always sent us by God, Who sometimes throws difficulties in our way
on purpose to reward our conquest; and sometimes, like a wise physician,
restores us to our health by bitter potions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Sts. Pothinus, Bishop, Sanctus, Attalus, Blandina, and the
other Martyrs of Lyons](lots177)

</div>
