<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots200)  [Next](lots202) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 24.—ST. JOHN THE BAPTIST.

THE birth of St. John was foretold by an angel of the Lord to his
father, Zachary, who was offering incense in the Temple. It was the
office of St. John to prepare the way for Christ, and before he was born
into the world he began to live for the Incarnate God. Even in the womb
he knew the presence of Jesus and of Mary, and he leaped with joy at the
glad coming of the son of man. In

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

his youth he remained hidden, because He for Whom he waited was hidden
also. But before Christ's public life began, a divine impulse led St.
John into the desert; there, with locusts for his food and haircloth on
his skin, in silence and in prayer, he chastened his own soul. Then, as
crowds broke in upon his solitude, he warned them to flee from the wrath
to come, and gave them the baptism of penance, while they confessed
their sins. At last there stood in the crowd One Whom St. John did not
know, till a voice within told him that it was his Lord. With the
baptism of St. John, Christ began His penance for the sins of His
people, and St. John saw the Holy Ghost descend in bodily form upon Him.
Then the Saint's work was done. He had but to point his own disciples to
the Lamb, he had but to decrease as Christ increased. He saw all men
leave him and go after Christ. "I told you," he said, "that I am not the
Christ. The friend of the Bridegroom rejoiceth because of the
Bridegroom's voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled." St. John had
been cast into the fortress of Machærus by a worthless tyrant whose
crimes be had rebuked, and he was to remain there till he was beheaded,
at the will of a girl who danced before this wretched king. In this time
of despair, if St. John could have known despair, some of his old
disciples visited him. St. John did not speak to them of himself, but he
sent them to Christ, that they might see the proofs of His mission. Then
the Eternal Truth pronounced the panegyric of the Saint who had lived
and breathed for Him alone: "Verily I say unto you, Among them that are
born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist"

**Reflection**.—St. John was great before God because he forgot himself
and lived for Jesus Christ, Who is the source of all greatness. Remember
that you are nothing; your own will and your own desires can only lead
to misery and sin. Therefore sacrifice every day some one of your
natural inclinations to the Sacred Heart of Our Lord, and learn little
by little to lose yourself in Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. St. Prosper of Aquitaine. St William of
Monte-Vergine](lots202)

</div>
