<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots230)  [Next](lots232.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### July 22.—ST. MARY MAGDALEN.

Or the earlier life of Mary Magdalen we know only that she was "a woman
who was a sinner." From the depth of her degradation she raised her eyes
to Jesus with sorrow, hope, and love. All covered with shame, she came
In where Jesus was at meat, and knelt behind him. She said not a word,
but bathed His feet with her tears, wiped them with the hair of her
head, kissed them in humility, and at their touch her sins and her stain
were gone. Then she poured on them the costly unguent prepared for far

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

other uses; and His own divine lips rolled away her reproach, spoke her
absolution, and bade her go in peace. Thenceforward she ministered to
Jesus, sat at His feet, and heard His words. She was one of the family
"whom Jesus so loved" that He raised her brother Lazarus from the dead.
Once again, on the eve of His Passion, she brought the precious
ointment, and, now purified and beloved, poured it on His head, and the
whole house of God is still filled with the fragrance of her anointing.
She stood with Our Lady and St. John at the foot of the cross, the
representative of the many who have had much forgiven. To her first,
after His blessed Mother, and through her to His apostles, Our Lord gave
the certainty of His resurrection; and to her first He made Himself
known, calling her by her name, because she was His. When the faithful
were scattered by persecution the family of Bethany found refuge in
Provence. The cave in which St. Mary lived for thirty years is still
seen, and the chapel on the mountaintop, in which she was caught up
daily, like St. Paul, to "visions and revelations of the Lord." When her
end drew near she was borne to a spot still marked by a "sacred pillar,"
where the holy Bishop Maximin awaited her; and when she had received her
Lord, she peacefully fell asleep in death.

**Reflection**.—"Compunction of heart," says St. Bernard, "is a treasure
infinitely to be desired, and an unspeakable gladness to the heart. It
is healing to the soul; it is remission of sins; it brings back again
the Holy Spirit into the humble and loving heart."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. St. Apollinaris, Bishop and Martyr](lots232.md)

</div>
