<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots142)  [Next](lots144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 2.—ST. ATHANASIUS, Bishop.

ATHANASIUS was born in Egypt towards the end of the third century, and
was from his youth pious, learned, and deeply versed in the sacred
writings, as befitted one whom God had chosen to be the champion and
defender of His Church against the Arian heresy. Though only a deacon he
was chosen by his bishop to go with him to the Council of Nicæa, in 325,
and attracted the attention of all by the learning and ability with
which he defended the faith. A few months later, he became Patriarch of
Alexandria, and for forty-six years he bore, often well-nigh alone, the
whole brunt of the Arian assault. On the refusal of the Saint to restore
Arius to Catholic communion, the emperor ordered the Patriarch of
Constantinople to do so. The wretched heresiarch took an oath that he
had always believed as the Church believes; and the patriarch, after
vainly using every effort to move the emperor, had recourse to fasting
and prayer, that God Would avert from the Church the frightful
sacrilege. The

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

day came for the solemn entrance of Arius into the great church of
Sancta Sophia. The heresiarch and his party set out glad and in triumph.
But before he reached the church, death smote him swiftly and awfully,
and the dreaded sacrilege was averted. St. Athanasius stood unmoved
against four Roman emperors; was banished five times; was the butt of
every insult, calumny, and wrong the Arians could devise, and lived in
constant peril of death. Though firm as adamant in defence of the Faith,
he was meek and humble, pleasant and winning in converse, beloved by his
flock, unwearied in labors, in prayer, in mortifications, and in zeal
for souls. In the year 373 his stormy life closed in peace, rather that
his people would have it so than that his enemies were weary of
persecuting him. He left to the Church the whole and ancient Faith,
defended and explained in writings rich in thought and learning, clear,
keen, and stately in expression. He is honored as one of the greatest of
the Doctors of the Church.

**Reflection**.—The Catholic Faith, says St. Augustine, is more precious
far than all the riches and treasures of earth; more glorious and
greater than all its honors, all its possessions. This it is which saves
sinners, gives light to the blind, restores penitents, perfects the
just, and is the crown of martyrs.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Discovery of the Holy Cross](lots144)

</div>
