<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots265)  [Next](lots267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 24.—ST. BARTHOLOMEW, Apostle.

ST. BARTHOLOMEW was one of the twelve who were called to the apostolate
by our blessed Lord Himself. Several learned interpreters of the Holy
Scripture take this apostle to have been the same as Nathaniel, a native
of Cana, in Galilee, a doctor in the Jewish law, and one of the
seventy-two disciples of Christ, to whom he was conducted by St. Philip,
and whose innocence and simplicity of heart deserved to be celebrated
with the highest eulogium by the divine mouth of Our Redeemer. He is
mentioned among the disciples who were met together in prayer after
Christ's ascension, and he received the Holy Ghost with the rest. Being
eminently qualified by the divine grace to discharge the functions of an
apostle, he carried the Gospel through the most barbarous countries of
the East, penetrating into the remoter Indies. He then returned again
into the northwest part of Asia, and met St. Philip, at Hierapolis, in
Phrygia. Hence he travelled into Lycaonia, where he instructed the
people in the Christian Faith; but we know not even the names of many of
the countries in which he preached. St. Bartholomew's last removal was
into Great Armenia, where, preaching in a place obstinately addicted to
the worship of idols, he was crowned with a glorious martyrdom. The
modern Greek historians say that he was condemned by the governor of
Albanopolis to be crucified. Others affirm that he was flayed alive,
which might well enough consist with his crucifixion, this double
punishment being in use not only in Egypt, but also among the Persians.

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

**Reflection**.—The characteristic virtue of the apostles was zeal for
the divine glory, the first property of the love of God. A soldier is
always ready to defend the honor of his prince, and a son that of his
father; and can a Christian say he loves God who is indifferent to His
honor?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. St. Louis, King](lots267)

</div>
