<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots076)  [Next](lots078.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 2.—ST. SIMPLICIUS, Pope.

ST. SIMPLICIUS was the ornament of the Roman clergy under Sts. Leo and
Hilarius, and succeeded the latter in the pontificate in 468. He was
raised by God to corn fort and support his Church amidst the greatest
storms. All the provinces of the Western Empire, out of Italy, were
fallen into the hands of barbarians. The emperors for many years were
rather shadows of power than sovereigns, and, in the eighth year of the
pontificate of Simplicius, Rome itself fell a prey to foreigners. Italy,
by oppressions and the ravages of barbarians, was left almost a desert
without inhabitants; and the imperial armies consisted chiefly of
barbarians, hired under the name of auxiliaries. These soon saw that
their masters were in their power. The Heruli demanded one third of the
lands of Italy, and upon refusal chose for their leader Odoacer, one of
the lowest extraction, but a resolute and intrepid man, who was
proclaimed king of Rome in 476. He put to death Orestes, who was regent
of the empire for his son Augustulus, whom the senate had advanced to
the imperial throne. Odoacer spared the life of Augustulus, appointed
him a salary of six thousand pounds of gold, and permitted him to live
at full liberty near Naples. Pope Simplicius was wholly taken up in
comforting and relieving the afflicted, and in sowing the seeds of the
Catholic faith among the barbarians. The East gave his zeal no less
employment and concern. Peter

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cnapheus, a
violent Eutychian, was made by the heretics Patriarch of Antioch; and
Peter Mengus, one of the most profligate men, that of Alexandria.
Acacius, the Patriarch of Constantinople, received the sentence of St.
Simplicius against Cnapheus, but supported Mongus against him and the
Catholic Church, and was a notorious changeling, double-dealer, and
artful hypocrite, who often made religion serve his own private ends.
St. Simplicius at length discovered his artifices, and redoubled his
zeal to maintain the holy faith, which he saw betrayed on every side,
whilst the patriarchal sees of Alexandria and Antioch were occupied by
furious wolves, and there was not one Catholic king in the whole world.
The emperor measured everything by his passions and human views. St.
Simplicius, having sat fifteen years, eleven months, and six days, went
to receive the reward of his labors in 483. He was buried in St. Peter's
on the 2d of March.

**Reflection**.—"He that trusteth in God shall fare never the worse,"
saith the Wise Man in the Book of Ecclesiasticus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. St. Cunegundes, Empress](lots078.md)

</div>
