<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots048)  [Next](lots050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 6.—ST. DOROTHY, Virgin, Martyr.

ST. DOROTHY was a young virgin, celebrated at Cæsarea, where she lived,
for her angelic virtue. Her parents seem to have been martyred before
her in the Diocletian persecution, and when the Governor Sapricius came
to Cæsarea he called her before him, and sent this child of martyrs to
the home where they were waiting for her.

She was stretched upon the rack, and offered marriage if she would
consent to sacrifice, or death if she refused. But she replied that
"Christ was her only Spouse, and death her desire." She was then placed
in charge of two women who had fallen away from the faith, in the hope
that they might pervert her; but the fire of her own heart rekindled the
flame in theirs, and led them back to Christ. When she was set once more
on the rack, Sapricius himself was amazed at the heavenly look she wore,
and asked her the cause of her joy. "Because," she said, "I have brought
back two souls to Christ, and because I shall soon be in heaven
rejoicing with the angels." Her joy grew as she was buffeted in the face
and her sides burned with plates of red-hot iron. "Blessed be Thou," she
cried, when she was sentenced to be beheaded,—"blessed be Thou, O Thou
Lover of souls! Who dost call me to Paradise, and invitest me to Thy
nuptial chamber."

St. Dorothy suffered in the dead of winter, and it is said that on the
road to her passion a lawyer called Theophilus, who had been used to
calumniate and persecute the Christians, asked her, in mockery, to send
him "apples or roses from the garden of her Spouse." The Saint promised
to grant his request, and, just before she died, a little child stood by
her side bearing three apples and three roses.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She bade him take
them to Theophilus and tell him this was the present which he sought
from the garden of her Spouse. St. Dorothy had gone to heaven, and
Theophilus was still making merry over his challenge to the Saint when
the child entered his room. He saw that the child was an angel in
disguise, and the fruit and flowers of no earthly growth. He was
converted to the faith, and then shared in the martyrdom of St. Dorothy.

**Reflection**.—Do you wish to be safe in the pleasures and happy in the
troubles of the world? Pray for heavenly desires, and say, with St.
Philip, "Paradise, Paradise!"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. St. Romuald, Abbot](lots050)

</div>
