<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots060)  [Next](lots062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 17.—ST. FLAVIAN, Bishop, Martyr.

FLAVIAN was elected Patriarch of Constantinople in 447. His short
episcopate of two years was a time of conflict and persecution from the
first. Chrysaphius, the emperor's favorite, tried to extort a large sum
of money from him on the occasion of his consecration. His fidelity in
refusing this simoniacal betrayal of his trust brought on him the enmity
of the most powerful man in the empire.

A graver trouble soon arose. In 448 Flavian had to

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

condemn the rising heresy of the monk Eutyches, who obstinately denied
that Our Lord was in two perfect natures after His Incarnation. Eutyches
drew to his cause all the bad elements which so early gathered about the
Byzantine court. His intrigues were long baffled by the vigilance of
Flavian; but at last he obtained from the emperor the assembly of a
council at Ephesus, in August 449, presided over by his friend
Dioscorus, Patriarch of Alexandria. Into this "robber council," as it is
called, Eutyches entered, surrounded by soldiers. The Roman legates
could not even read the Pope's letters; and at the first sign of
resistance to the condemnation of Flavian, fresh troops entered with
drawn swords, and, in spite of the protests of the legates, terrified
most of the bishops into acquiescence.

The fury of Dioscorus reached its height when Flavian appealed to the
Holy See. Then it was that he so forgot his apostolic office as to lay
violent hands on his adversary. St. Flavian was set upon by Dioscorus
and others, thrown down, beaten, kicked, and finally carried into
banishment. Let us contrast their ends. Flavian clung to the teaching of
the Roman Pontiff, and sealed his faith with his blood. Dioscorus
excommunicated the Vicar of Christ, and died obstinate and impenitent in
the heresy of Eutyches.

**Reflection**.—By his unswerving loyalty to the Vicar of Christ,
Flavian held fast to the truth and gained the martyr's crown. Let us
learn from him to turn instinctively to that one true guide in all
matters concerning our salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. St. Simeon, Bishop, Martyr](lots062.md)

</div>
