<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots045)  [Next](lots047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

### February 4.—St. JANE OF VALOIS.

BORN of the blood royal of France, herself a queen, Jane of Valois led a
life remarkable for its humiliations even in the annals of the Saints.
Her father, Louis XI., who had hoped for a son to succeed him, banished
Jane from his palace, and, it is said, even attempted her life. At the
age of five the neglected child offered her whole heart to God, and
yearned to do some special service in honor of His blessed Mother. At
the king's wish, though against her own inclination, she was married to
the Duke of Orleans. Towards an indifferent and unworthy husband her
conduct was ever most patient and dutiful. Her prayers and tears saved
him from a traitor's death and shortened the captivity which his
rebellion had merited. Still nothing could win a heart which was already
given to another. When her husband ascended the throne as Louis XII.,
his first act was to repudiate by false representations one who through
twenty-two years of cruel neglect had been his true and loyal wife. At
the final sentence of separation, the saintly queen exclaimed, "God be
praised Who has allowed this, that I may serve Him better . than I have
heretofore done." Retiring to Bourges, she there realized her
long-formed desire of founding the Order of the Annunciation, in honor
of the Mother of God.

Under the guidance of St. Francis of Paula, the director of her
childhood, St. Jane was enabled to overcome the serious obstacles which
even good people raised against the foundation of her new Order. In 1501
the rule of the Annunciation was finally approved by Alexander VI. The
chief aim of the institute was to imitate the ten virtues practised by
Our Lady in the mystery of the Incarnation, the superioress being called
"Ancelle," handmaid, in honor of Mary's humility. St. Jane built and
endowed the first convent of the Order in 1502. She died in heroic
sanctity, 1505, and was buried in the royal crown and purple, beneath
which lay the habit of her Order.

**Reflection**.—During the lifetime of St. Jane, the Angelus was
established in France. The sound of the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

thrice each day gave her hone in her sorrow, and fostered in her the
desire still further to honor the Incarnation. How often might we derive
grace from the same beautiful devotion, so enriched by the Church, yet
neglected by so many Christians!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. St. Agatha, Virgin, Martyr](lots047)

</div>
