<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots138)  [Next](lots140.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 29.—ST. PETER, Martyr.

IN 1205 the glorious martyr Peter was born at Verona of heretical
parents. He went to a Catholic school, and his Manichean uncle asked
what he learnt. "The Creed," answered Peter; "I believe in God, Creator
of heaven and earth." No persuasion could shake his faith, and at
fifteen he received the habit from St. Dominic himself at Bologna. After
ordination, he preached to the heretics of Lombardy, and converted
multitudes. St. Peter was constantly obliged to dispute with heretics,
and although he was able to confound them, still the devil took

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

occasion thence to tempt him once against faith. Instantly he had
recourse to prayer before an image of Our Lady, and heard a voice saying
to him the words of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, "I have prayed for thee,
Peter, that thy faith may not fail; and thou shalt confirm thy brethren
in it." Once when exhorting a vast crowd under the burning sun, the
heretics defied him to procure shade. He prayed, and a cloud
overshadowed the audience. In spite of his sanctity, he was foully
slandered and even punished for immorality. He submitted humbly, but
complained in prayer to Jesus crucified. The crucifix spoke, "And I,
Peter, what did I do?" Every day, as he elevated at Mass the precious
blood, he prayed, "Grant, Lord, that I may die for Thee, Who for me
didst die." His prayer was answered. The heretics, confounded by him,
sought his life. Two of them attacked him as he was returning to Milan,
and struck his head with an axe. St. Peter fell, commended himself to
God, dipped his finger in his own blood, and wrote on the ground, "I
believe in God, Creator of heaven and earth." They then stabbed him in
the side, and he received his crown.

**Reflection**.—From a boy St. Peter boldly professed his faith among
heretics. He spent his life in preaching the faith to heretics, and
received the glorious and long-desired crown of martyrdom from heretics.
We are surrounded by heretics. Are we courageous, firm, zealous, full of
prayer for their conversion, unflinching in our profession of faith?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. St. Hugh, Abbot of Cluny](lots140.md)

</div>
