[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dsc02) 
[Next](dsc04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406777439/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yoga Lessons for Developing Spiritual Consciousness*, by A.P. Mukerji,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### CHAPTER I.

#### THE YOGI CONCEPTION OF LIFE.

IF we study the action of mind upon mind, of mind over matter, of mind
over the human body, we may realize how "each man is a power in
himself"—to use Mr. Randall's phrase in his beautiful book on
psychology.

Life is demonstrative: it speaks with a million, million tongues. Life
stands for Light and Love. Contemplation of Death, which is really a
change, will not lead to Happiness.

All-stagnation is death. Humanity is a moving mass, and this is true of
it as regards single units as well as of the collective whole.

Stop we cannot. We must go forwards, which is "God-wards" or there is
the backward line of progress—which is IGNORANCE.

Spasms of activity catch hold of us and push us onward and, similarly,
fear, weakness and worry, the triple weapons of our Old Friend, the
Devil, catch us in their deadly grip and "crib, cabin and confine" us.

We all are preparing to live, day in and day out. Is it not so? The body
ages; the soul is ever on the alert.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We all are trying
to grasp life in its proper perspective, to get a clear view of the goal
ahead.

Some say "I am for enjoying life;" some say, "It is a bad mixture of
heaven and hell, for the most part, hell;" others stand on neutral
ground and say, "Let us make the best of a bad bargain. Since we are
here, it is no use grumbling. This world is for our education."

Right. Move we must. It may be progress forward or progress backwards.

Life is a series of awakenings. Ideas dawn upon the mind from time to
time, are caught up by brain and body and find physical expression as
acts. Our outward life with its environment is fitted to our inward
development. Wealth, position, fame, power,—all these are the simple
expressions of individual character. This is not a platitude. Look and
see for yourself.

It is quite necessary that we should pass through certain experiences,
that we rise from ideal to ideal. We create our own fate. Our
sufferings, our joys, are so many projections from ourselves. We alone
are responsible for them.

Like the silkworm we build a cocoon around the soul and then feeling
"Cramped," we set to loosening the bonds.

Enjoyment is not, ought not to be the goal of life. Sense-enjoyments end
in satiety and exhaustion. Power and self, riches and all that riches
mean, may tie

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

us down to a narrow sphere. But in the long run we do come to know that
happiness is not in them. This is a tremendous truth, yet God mercifully
screens it from us till we are prepared to receive it.

What remains then? Man wants happiness. He rushes from one thing to
another to grasp it, only to find everything slipping through his
fingers. Let none deny it. "The aim of philosophy is to put an end to
pain." All pain is caused by IGNORANCE. Apply the saving remedy of
KNOWLEDGE, and PAIN vanishes at once. This is a great fact and all young
men ought to stamp it well upon their minds.

While we are upon this phase of our subject, it may be worth while to go
farther into these important facts of life—PLEASURE and PAIN.

Our thoughts and actions are the forces we send out of ourselves. All
life is expression. The soul of man is trying to see itself in
everything. How did the different organs of the body come into
existence? How did man get his eyes, his ears, his nose and so forth?
How does the growth of things proceed on the subconscious plane of
existence? The soul willed to see and it saw, willed to hear and it
heard, willed to smell and it smelt. That is the right explanation.

Take a subject, throw him into a hypnotic trance, lead him into the
deepest state possible, give him vigorous suggestions that a steady
increase is taking place as to his physique, repeat the suggestions
twice every day for a few months and you will have put pounds of

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

flesh on his form. If you know anything of these things at all, you will
be hardly astonished. A striking case once occurred: Some frivolous
students of Aberdeen held a hypnotic seance. A friend of theirs was
hypnotised and made to go through certain illusions. Then a wet towel
was put upon his neck and it was suggested to him that a sharp knife had
been drawn right across his neck to cut his throat and that he was dead.
It was such fun! The students danced for joy. But what was their
surprise when they found the man was stone dead. It taught the eternal
truth—what man thinks that he is, that he shall be.

Now, man is trying to express himself on the different planes of his
being by appropriating to himself different vehicles of expression. When
he meets with opposition, an obstacle, he chafes like a caged lion. Load
the limbs of a man with fetters of iron and see the result. It is really
this—when we can push forward without opposition, it causes pleasure, a
sense of happiness; when we are held back it causes pain. Place good
food before a healthy man. See how he likes it. It is because he knows
that he is making an addition to himself. It brings on a sense of
"MORE-NESS" and pleasure follows. Of course there are higher grades of
this sense of "MORE-NESS." Some ancient doctors defined passion as an
accession of strength due to the surcharge of arterial blood in the
veins. All pleasure is from STRENGTH, all pain from WEAKNESS. There can
be no question as to this fact.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

There is a fire burning. Heap coals. The more coals, the brighter and
steadier the flame. All obstacles are really "coal" feeding the "flame"
of the spirit. They spur a man on. The vibrations of pain are often
blessings in disguise. They drive the lesson home. The effect is not
different from the cause. Both are the obverse and reverse of the same
coin. Painful results grow out of deeds that clash with the interests of
the DIVINITY WITHIN—which is for FREEDOM.

"Lord, I want nothing—neither health, nor beauty nor power. Give me
FREEDOM and I am content." This is *Jivan mukti*. This is the highest
ideal of life. Thinking of the little pleasures of the senses has
brought us to this: to dance, to laugh, to weep, and before the tears
are gone, to begin over again. Look at my condition. Slave of the flesh,
slave of the mind, wanting to have this, that and what not. DARKNESS
BEHIND—DARKNESS AHEAD. Such is the wail of IGNORANCE.

Get rid of it, O! My Friend. It is your greatest, direst enemy. Let the
LIGHT of KNOWLEDGE dissipate this DARKNESS of IGNORANCE. The Lord above
is our refuge. He alone is STRENGTH. "In Him we live and have our
being." Where seek you for your ideals. Here it is. FREEDOM—You are
rushing to it, and so am I. Welcome everything that helps you, yea,
compels you, to strike one more blow in the noble cause of EMANCIPATION.
"Can a marble figure brook the blow that an iron mass can bear."

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Know, slave is
slave, caressed or whipped. . . . Fetters, though of gold are not less
strong to bind."

Thus, let us work it out. Let us cut short this show of five minutes
with death and decay as its sequel. We shall go beyond this to the ONE
SOURCE, GOD; and there is PEACE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Ideal and the Practical](dsc04)
