[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dsc15) 
[Next](dsc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406777439/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yoga Lessons for Developing Spiritual Consciousness*, by A.P. Mukerji,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

### CHAPTER XIV.

#### CONQUEST OF FEAR.

#### "*There is Nothing to Fear But Fear*."

Fear is one of the cardinal emotions that result from the play of
certain forces in the human personality. Our emotional nature is not our
Self. I was amused to read in a Phrenological magazine various remarks
from certain learned Westerners on the nature and attributes of the
Soul. The question was "What is the Soul?" One of the writers insisted
upon having this theory accepted by his readers: that the soul has its
seat in the organs of Philoprogenitiveness and Friendship. Another one
defines these two words as (1) Parental Love and (2) Sociability and
Union of Friends. To my readers the fallacy of their statements ought to
be quite plain. Our emotions, Love (in the lower phases), Hate, Anger,
Fear, etc., bear a direct relation to the external world. When the
Intellect dwells upon a desire with a view to externalise or realise the
latter, emotion results. It is thus the reaction of the Ego upon
sense-impressions received from the objective universe. They have a
purely physio-psychological origin and must not be confused with our
Soul-processes which are due to

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the Divine Urge from within, ever impelling the Spirit to express itself
upon matter through more and more improved types of personality. Stop
right now and understand: Your mission was to energise upon matter, to
be master and not slaves. But instead of setting about your business
like a master you took hold of the wrong end of the stick and became
attached, nay, identified yourself with your forms. This is the supreme
tragedy of Maya: Man forgot himself.

What was the result? Ignorance;—and that developed fear. Just view
yourself from a physical standpoint. What are you? Are you any more than
a geometrical point, a mere human atom in a sea of tremendous forces
that could crush you—the form of flesh—in no time. There are
monsters—seismic disturbances, cataclysms, earthquakes, famines,
gravity, lightning and what not! I need hardly mention the Halley's
comet scare to illustrate my point. There is no escaping it that way.
Consider yourself as a sack of blood, bone, muscle, cell-stuff and nerve
force and you are eternally damned.

No, the remedy lies the other way. That remedy is a sovereign remedy.
You must give up your life, if you are to live truly. Sri Krishna taught
it in the Gita. He called it Vairagya: Dispassion: Non-attachment:
Renunciation. Here is the antidote. Open your Gita and read, "Weapons
pierce not the Real Man nor doth the fire burn him; the water affecteth
him not; nor the wind drieth him, nor bloweth him away. For he is

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

impregnable and impervious to these things of change—he is eternal,
permanent, unchangeable and unalterable—and Real."

You must understand your own nature, if you are to be Fearless. How? You
will at once ask me that question. My answer is: Learn to draw inwards
and upwards. The lower mind ever darts outwards. This is the sense-born
brain that you read of in Western works on Psychology generally. It
rests on sensation. It is enthralled by the limitations of temperament,
heredity, environment, and the sheaths and clogs of organization. It can
only function on the plane of Instinctivity. The way to conquer this
mind was pointed out in the Gita when Arjuna complained that it was
impetuous, hard to crib as the wind, ever moving outwards, ever
restless. The warrior prince was famed for his prowess; had faced strong
foes and vanquished them; yet even he cowered before the impetuous rush
of this mind; even he broke down in despair. Why not?

Look at the so-called great men of modern times. How full of pride and
approach-me-at-your-peril sort of hauteur they are! Just watch them when
their "material" or "social" self stands threatened by some approaching
danger. Gone is their inflated self-esteem. The whip has not yet been
applied; yet they shrink before the terrors of their imagination. Let me
say once more, that the worldly man, the purse-proud man, is proud and
conceited because his mind is befogged with the fumes of ignorance; a
moment shall come when

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

he shall have to face the terrors of his animal soul! then he must fight
on his individual strength; he will cry for help from outside but none
shall come; the world of the senses which ensnared his mind so long,
shall drop away; and the Higher Self must then overcome the Lower. Many
are the birth-pangs, but the end,—the goal—justifies the means.

Now turn to Shri Krishna's reply, which alone can solve this riddle for
you: Without doubt, O Mighty-armed, the mind is hard to curb and
restless but it may be curbed by constant practice (Abhyasa) and
dispassion (Vairagya). The student must renounce, once for ever, all
that pertains to his Lower Self and thus pull up the weeds that crowd
the soil of his mind. The supreme result of Renunciation is that it
enables you to leap from your present position, where there are a
thousand strings tugging at your heart; and prepares the way for the
inrush of higher, loftier thoughts. By practice is meant constant and
unremitting effort at control of the mind, which, by the way, is a
science by itself and may be handled later on.

Now, brother, renounce mentally, all attachment to impermanent ends.
Dedicate yourself to the Higher Life. The more completely you can do so,
the greater the influx of light, the clearer your vision spiritually.
You fear because you are laboring under the evil suggestions of your
brain-born intellect. As you succeed in "giving up," your soul shall
expand and burst asunder

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'the clinging
chains of the senses,' which breed Fear through Ignorance. Resolve, to
be perfectly "Fearless" and so shall you be according to the strength of
your resolution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. The Role of Prayer](dsc17)
