[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dsc11) 
[Next](dsc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406777439/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yoga Lessons for Developing Spiritual Consciousness*, by A.P. Mukerji,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### CHAPTER X.

#### DEVELOPING THE SPIRITUAL CONSCIOUSNESS.

<span class="small">"The mind which follows the rambling senses, makes
the Soul as helpless as the boat which the wind leads astray upon the
waters."  
[Bhagavad Gita](errata.htm#2).</span>

MAN is man by virtue of *willing*, not by virtue of knowing and
understanding. As he is, so he sees. His hopes and aspirations are in
exact proportion to the depth and power of his will: for, says Emerson,
"The height of the pinnacle is measured by the breadth of the base."

He is the microcosm of the macrocosm: the little world of the big world.
*The universe exists for the self:*—such is the dictum of the sages.

Man has appropriated this form, this coat of skin, for the exercise and
unfoldment of his Divine Nature. He is *above* Nature, his body is *of*
Nature.

Man, *Know Thyself*, was mandate of the [Delphic](errata.htm#3) Oracle.
All your efforts, your joys and sorrows, your ups and downs, are to this
end. You now grasp this thing, soon you drop it; then you grasp that
thing; soon you drop it;—Not this, Not that, you say. This is the speech
of Negation: neti, neti: Not this, Not this.

You who are Infinite in essence drank deep of the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

waters of Lethe and falling under the magic spell of Maya, forgot
yourself. You have ever since then been identifying yourself with
Nature, with your form, the Not-self. You do not see that this body,
this brittle casket of clay, is for disintegration, for dissolution. You
love it to infatuation. You draw the cruel, merciless knife across the
neck of poor, defenseless animals to gratify your lower Nature. This
body must live, though I eat burnt flesh, rotten flesh, to keep it
alive. Man would eat man, if his digestion did not get upset, thereby.
Do not say 'No,' you animalized ignorant soul! *You swallow camels and
yet you strain at gnats*. Thus through extreme attachment to your form,
have you contracted your soul, hypnotized yourself into a *finite*
being. You alone can strip off your limitations and stand in your
*Native* splendour once again. To realize this is to realize divinity—is
to transcend Nature!

As you learn to control Nature *within* you, so will you control things
*outside* of yourself, so shall your great, all-potent will shine out to
the universe.

*Man's will is God's will*. What is of God is God. The Infinite exists,
in full stature, in each living, breathing form. *Hence to know yourself
is to know God*. You are Bliss Eternal. You, the Infinite, became
confined in sheaths of matter. Your real, immortal self shines aloft,
but what little was caught up by the physical mechanism of
Consciousness, fell senseless under the hypnotic suggestions of Maya.
Yet an

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

impulsion from within is pushing you on. This is the Desire to achieve
happiness which is a distorted reflection on the physical plane of your
own blissful self that is on the spiritual.

It is the natural magnetism of your real self that is drawing you up.
*Ends ascend as Nature descends*, said [Swedenborg](errata.htm#4), the
Mystic. *All things are in a scale; and begin where we will, ascend and
ascend. All things are symbolical; and what we call results are
beginnings:* Emerson, on Plato, the philosopher.

So long as you are flung about under the influence of passions your
progress will be clogged. The soul is under the thrall of matter, just
as a muscular pair of wrists may be loaded with fetters. It is trying to
burst the shackles that chain it down. It is passing through a
transition stage. Its continued effort to free itself thoroughly and
entirely is the promise of the future. Conquest comes. Yes! Conquest
comes. I have not read these two words. I do not repeat them to you like
a parrot. It has been given to me to *feel* the fact. Do not say "I
cannot. It is beyond me;" say "*I can. It is in me*." So will you
conquer.

This ascension of the soul is the development of the Spiritual
Consciousness.

It is not intellectualism: nor spiritualism: nor supernaturalism: nor
any other ism.

It is the quickening of your evolution on the spiritual plane by the
up-keep of *a systematized line of thought activity plus the
self-determined exercise of volition*.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

It is the polarization of the human life force up to a high pitch of
concentrated exercise of the will-power in Man.

The task is not easy of accomplishment. You can achieve it only by
dedicating a whole life time to it. It is worth your while. Aim at
thoroughness. Take up the suggestions I pass on. Dream them out. Think
them out. Act them out.

*Your aim is the subjugation of the animal soul*. Have no other aim.
"When one becomes freed from the bondage of the senses, he transcends
all material relations and realizing the inward light regains his
knowledge of Himself—this a realization of the truth. It dwells beyond
Mortality and Fear."

One thing at a time and that with your entire heart and soul. The ideal
you have set up for yourself must absorb the best and the richest forces
in you. Introduce the thin end of the wedge. Each stroke shall drive it
deeper. Do not scatter your energy. Do not burn your candle at both
ends. The secret of success is Concentration. A man may be an omnivorous
reader. He is a walking Encyclopaedia. His brain is a
[Bodleian](errata.htm#5) Library. Yet he has no worth, no intrinsic
qualities, that can give him that breadth and depth of dignity that go
out of a man possessing inner force of character.

Remember, You are deathless, birthless. You live in the Eternal. One
life-span can be but a short one at best. Therefore arrange your forces
so that they shall flow in one even continuous stream along one line.
The

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

man who has thus lived upon five ideas in one life, will command more
than your Jack-of-all-trades-but-master-of-none man ever can. You must
stand body and soul, for your ideas, taking up each and quietly working
them out in life. This will avoid much friction and ever insure a clear
and steady brain.

Education, said Vivekananda, is a *man-making, life-building*
assimilation of ideas.

You must then by patient thinking build up an ideal for yourself. This
done, give up all dreaming, all castle- building, and start in for the
work. Then three things are necessary for effectual work.

The first is earnest, ardent Desire. Your heart is knitted to things of
the earth, earthy, by a myriad of tiny threads. To break up the links, a
strong, all-impelling force is needed. Desire ardently, longingly, for
perfect establishment of chastity in your Consciousness. This keen
desire is a *sine-a-qua-non*. Without it you cannot go through the
difficulties that bar your way. Clothe yourself in this panoply of power
and the shafts of adverse fortune, shall glance off from your strong
armour. If you haven't this gift, it shows that your sense of manhood is
small. You lack force. The greater the sinner, the greater the saint. A
man must have this force or his good intentions will die a natural
death. He can neither be a saint nor a sinner. He is *tamasic*; is of a
dull, lazy, ease-loving, insipid nature.

But do not lose heart, if you belong to this class of men. You can
cultivate this force. There is always a

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

way out. Your imagination is your creative power. Now there is a close
association between thought and imagination. Imagination is thought in
its full freedom. Therefore to train the desire-nature you must bring
thought to bear upon it. Desire cannot train desire. You are helpless
within the narrow limits of the desire aspect of the Self. You desire a
thing or you do not; that's all.

No. Thought alone can help you here. Says Emerson:—*There is no thought
in any mind but it quickly tends to convert itself into a power, and
organizes a huge instrumentality of means*.

One thought repeated for days, months and years will become very
strongly vitalized. Tremendous will be its telling force. It will go to
make or mar your destiny. As the famous axiom goes, "*Allow the thought,
and it may lead to a choice, 'carry out the choice, and it will be the
act,' repeat the act and it forms the habit; allow the habit and it
shapes the character; continue the character, and it fixes the
destiny*."

Thought, then, is the fine cause. Stamp it well upon your mind. It is a
tremendous fact. Learn it well, now: now, while you read it.

Picture to yourself, then, the benefits derivable from control of the
lower nature.

See how the man, who is chaste in word, deed and thought, is above the
din and strife of conflicting passions. He is calm, serene, and
self-poised. Having inner control, the control of the outer is an easy
affair

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

with him. He does not go about—anxious for recognition. He is master of
himself, and therefore of others. His mere presence brings peace to the
troubled souls of others. His speech is as a dash of cold water. It
makes you sit up and listen. It stimulates you; it uplifts you; it
expands you. Nothing is impossible to you. You seem or feel as if you
were another being. The chaste man has communicated himself to you in
all his fulness and breadth of nature. He has stirred up forces in you
of which perhaps you were never before conscious.

See how the chaste man seems to purify the very air he breathes. See how
dauntless is the courage that bubbles up from within him.

See how he is idolized by humanity. The mere sight of him puts new life
and vigor in others. His power of doing good seems to have an
inexhaustible reservoir behind it.

Thus go on picturing to yourself the all-inclusive uses of chastity.

This is the positive process of Visualization; Mental photography.

Now if your case is desperate, one of long standing, take up the
negative process.

Picture to yourself the disappointment, the loss of spiritual force, the
gloom and the melancholy, that cloy all passion; the swinish,
grovelling, aspect of the sensual soul: the consequent exhaustion: the
jeer and ridicule of the world: the breaking-down of all your fond

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

hopes: the pitiable poverty-stricken condition of those dependent on
you; the disgraceful passage through death into an even more hideous
condition of life: the utter degeneration: the shameful existence: the
haunting thoughts beyond.

This method is the negative one. It is like the surgeon's knife used to
cut out a cancer that threatens life. Desperate diseases require
desperate remedies. This process is not advisable, except in otherwise
hopeless cases. Rather use the positive method. As you sit up
visualizing your ideal day after day, its attraction to you will be
truly magnetic. Your heart shall go out to it in all its force. You
shall want to embrace the ideal every moment of your life. Energy will
come to you. Indeed your complaint then shall be: I have more energy
than I can control, more thoughts than I can marshal up for serene
action.

Your thoughts have been energized by constant repetition. Now you must
learn to dominate them: to command them to stillness: to relax the
tension in which your mind is constantly putting itself: to save your
brain from giving way under this surcharge of unmarshalled energy; to
absolutely vanquish the waves of force that bubble up each time you
think of your ideal; for it is intoxication—the irresistible spell of a
"fixed idea."

Says Swami Vivekananda: *The organs are the horses, the mind is the
reins, the intellect is the charioteer, the soul is the rider, and this
body is the chariot*.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *If the horses are
very strong and do not obey the reins, if the charioteer, the intellect,
does not know how to control the horses, then this chariot will come to
grief. But if the horses, i.e., the organs, are well-controlled, if the
reins, i.e., the mind, are well held in the hands of the charioteer,
i.e., the intellect, the chariot reaches the goal*.

This then is the line of action. Developing the will-force, the second
of the three requisites I spoke of. What is the principle of
development? *Exercise*. How did Ram Murti develop his splendid
physique, that today is the wonder of the world? *Exercise*. How did
Vivekananda develop that terrific magnetism that inundated the entire
Parliament of Religions at Chicago? *Exercise*. How did Sheridan who
once stuttered in his speech, deliver an oration at the famous
Impeachment of Warren Hastings that made the Speaker order an
adjournment that the House might recover from the effect of the volcanic
play of words. *Exercise*. Be convinced, then, My reader! *Exercise is
the first, last, and the only condition of growth*. The human will is
the grandest culmination of all the complex workings in the realm of
Consciousness. Schopenhauer the philosopher puts will a-top of all else
in Nature.

It is a grand thing, this human will. Its influence over man is one of
compelling, forcing, driving, impelling, overpowering, commanding,
demanding. This force is essentially *Masculine*.

I told you something about the desire-force: drawing,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

pulling, attracting, charming. This is the *Feminine* phase of Mental
energy.

When you combine the two, the positive and the negative electrodes in
the human brain, your suggestions whether turned in upon your
sub-conscious self or projected outward, command an irresistible
position; in fact, they influence the imagination, reason, or will of
another man in an uncontrolled man: this is what comes through the
practice of Concentration. We should learn to make use of both; whether
we are suggesting auto-ally or outwardly.

What is *concentration?* *Holding the mind to a point*. There are two
phases of concentration: a lower and a higher. We shall take up the
first only. You are not prepared for the second. Only those whose
soul-unfoldment is an actualized fact can practice it and they will not
need these teachings. They are their own teachers.

Resolve upon the performance of a certain mental work with
concentration, say for half an hour at the beginning. Then carry it out.
Do it every day, each time prolonging the duration of the exercise.
Suppose you cannot find a mental task. Here is one:

First of all "relax" mentally and physically, yet remain alert and
steady. Now: Take this virtue: Chastity. Read literature on this
subject. That will provide you with the requisite information and supply
many missing links. Study it from the physical, mental, and spiritual
viewpoints. Then sit up and calmly think

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

out the bearings of the virtue: What it is? How to practice it; its
resulting benefit to humanity; its appreciation; its lifting influence;
the sense of courage which it gives; its absolute importance in the
quickening of your Evolution and so on and on.

Then steady the mind upon this complete shaping of the virtue. Meditate
upon it. Dwell upon it. Will determinedly that it shall become
established in you: that from the moment you are sitting in this
[attitude](errata.htm#6) of Concentrated willing, all your forces are
being transmitted to Chastity: that the protoplasm of your very physique
are becoming sensitive to the fascination of this virtue: that there is
a tremendous force being generated right in the centre of your head that
shall present an irresistible front to all evil thoughts and tendencies:
that your entire nature vibrates to this thought:—*I am Chaste:* that
you recoil instinctively from all that may coarsen your finely-strung
spiritual fibres: that evil falls off, flies off, from your intensely
poised mind: that your Higher consciousness is unfolding: that your
intelligence is expanding: that your will is becoming strong, very
strong: that your body obeys you: that you have power, force, within
you: and that it all is developing. Now. Say "Now"—"this moment" and
insist upon immediate mastery. Do this regularly and at the same time
every day.

Thus you can will yourself into any state of mind you like. Not in one
day or in one week will you obtain control. It will require a hundred
sittings or even

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

more. But from the very first sitting a sense of assurance, the
consciousness of an internally developing force, shall come to you:—and
this if you have been thoroughly earnest over your task. Perseverance
and patience you must have. Indeed! to have these is to have everything.
There shall come about a step forward in your evolution at each sitting.
This is the art of willing. You get it cheap. Do not treat it with
indifference. Practice for a fortnight will prove to you conclusively
the verity of my remarks. You have been neck-deep in carnalities: it is
high time you thought of a change. Be earnest. Be a determined man.
Focus upon an idea and stick to it with the bull-dog's tenacity, till
you have seen it through to the end. Do not talk of it to others. Never
tell others that you are in! training. Sufficient gratification of your
vanity shall you have when you have acquired the wished-for object. The
praise of the world is not at all necessary to your happiness. The
approval of your own soul is quite sufficient. Each man sets his own
measure. If you believe that you are uniquely fitted to be a virtuous
pure-hearted man, so will the world also. Stick to your own. Do not be a
busy body, for then you shall be nobody. Be an earnest thoughtful man.
Stand rigidly by your ideal. Do not force it upon others. But do not be
forced out of it. Simply be earnest.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">      "To your own self be true,  
and it must follow, as the night the day,  
Thou can’st not then be false to any man."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

The third requisite is a keen and broad intelligence. You must not go
and buy a pig in a poke. You must not drive a nail where it won't go. By
steady and much thinking, you shall be able to expand this faculty.
Learn to study in the manner taught in Chapter III—"READ AND REFLECT."
There you have instructions that you may well utilize. You will be amply
repaid for the trouble of re-reading it. Books supply missing-links and
give you the loose-end of suggestions which you can work out at leisure.
*Read little, think much*. Your intelligence will be nurtured by contact
with a pure soul, for purity charges your body with subtle, radiant and
powerful forces. "Socrates declares that if some have grown wise by
associating with him, no thanks are due to him, but simply whilst they
were with him they grew wise and not because of him." This is the
secret. The vibrations of a stronger mind impinge upon your receptive
consciousness, shake up some of its grossness, and implant seeds that,
fructifying in the long run, work for your spiritual upliftment.
Associate with good men. Let their thought-magnetism encircle you and
exercise its subtle, mysteriously spiritualizing influence upon you. The
mere contact will act as a Living Force and awaken your latent powers.
It will shed benediction by its mere touch. Spirituality is not
intellectual gymnastics.

It is the life; and life alone can convey life. His words shall wring in
your ears even when you are far away from him. His glances shall remain
with you,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

stirring, prompting and stimulating you. This is why India's spiritual
teachers command the respect of their pupils.

Thus friend! when you have gone through this simple training, your inner
spirit shall transmute all things that approach you to the nature of
your ideals. Obstructions will be brushed aside. Many of the vexations
and tribulations that you may be suffering now shall be smoothed out of
your path. As you speak, as you look, as you move about, your inner
nature shall flash out of you. It will enter your hands and feet and
compel your entire being. Thus by educating yourself shall you set
others a good example. Life will he worth living: Death will lose its
horrible aspect: love, power, and peace shall flow out of you, and
chasten others. Guard it well. Wield it for good purposes alone. You are
now for the divine side of things. Your will is law. Let it be strong
and guided by Love. That will develop in your nature *Sattvic* or
[rhythmic](errata.htm#7) qualities. Then shall you find harmony and
peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Who Can Be a Yogi?](dsc13)
