[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gto08)  [Next](gto10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

### THE SOURSOPS IN ICELAND.

WELL, they had a long and hard passage, and are out more than a hundred
days: they made the north of the island, and coasted it westward along
the Strand, and so on west off the firths. At last they ran their ship
into Dyrafirth, at the mouth of the Hawkdale river. Then they unlade
their ship and set up tents, and it was soon noised abroad that a ship
had come. There was a man named Thorkel who dwelt at Alvidra, on the
north side of Dyrafirth: he was a wealthy man of good birth. In
Springdale, on the south side of the firth, dwelt another Thorkel, the
son of Eric. At that time all the land round the west firths was
settled. This Thorkel, Eric's son, sold land in Hawkdale to Thorbjorn
Soursop, for he was so called after he quenched the fire with the sour
whey; the inner bight of the stream was already settled, and Thorgrim
Bottlenose was the name of the man who lived there. Far up the dale
dwelt another Thorkel, and his nickname was "Faulty." He had a wife, and
her name was Thorhalla; she was a sister of Thorgrim Bottlenose. Thorkel
the Faulty was just what his nickname called him, but it could not be
said that Thorhalla made any of his faults better, for she was worse
than her husband. They had a son called

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thorstein: he was tall and strong. In Tweendale,
that turns aside from Hawkdale, dwelt a man whose name was Aunund: he
was well to do, and a trustworthy man. So there, at Sæbol in Hawkdale,
Thorbjorn, and Gisli, and Thorkel took up their abode, and Gisli built
their house.

In the same neighbourhood dwelt Vestein, the son of Vestein. He was a
seafaring man, but he had a house under Hest, a hill in Aunundarfirth.
His sister's name was Auda. Just about this time Thorbjorn Soursop and
Isgerda his wife died, and were buried in a howe in Hawkdale. Thorkel
and Gisli took the homestead at Sæbol after him. A little after, Thorkel
looked out for a wife. There was a man named Thorbjorn Sealnip. He dwelt
at Talknafirth. His wife's name was Thordisa, and Asgerda was their
daughter. Thorkel Soursop asked Asgerda to wife, and got her; but his
brother Gisli wooed Auda, the sister of Vestein, and got her. So both of
them went on living under the same roof at Sæbol in Hawkdale, and did
not part their goods though they were married. The story goes on to say
that one spring Thorkel of Alvidra had to make a journey south to
Thorsness Thing, and Gisli and Thorkel, the Soursops, went with him. At
that time Thorstein Codbiter dwelt on Thorsness. He was the son of
Thorolf Mosttrarskegg. Thorgrim and Bork the Stout were the sons of
Thorstein, and his daughter's name was Thordisa. When Thorkel had got
through his business at the Thing, Thorstein Codbiter asked him and the
Soursops to come to his house, and gave them good gifts, and ere they
parted they asked Thorstein's sons to

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

come and see them the spring after, west at the Dyrafirth Thing. So the
winter passed over, and there were no tidings. Now the next spring
comes, and the sons of Thorstein fared from home--Thorgrim and Bork and
fourteen men more. When they came west to the Valsere Thing they met the
Soursops there, and they asked the sons of Thorstein to come home with
them after the Thing, for up to that time they had been guests of
Thorkel of Alvidra. So they accepted the bidding, and fared home with
the Soursops. But Thordisa, the sister of those brothers, seemed fair in
the eyes of Thorgrim, and he lifted up his voice and asked for her, and
she was then and there betrothed to Thorgrim, and the wedding-feast took
place at once, and it was settled that she should have Sæbol for her
dower, the farm where these brothers had dwelt before. Then Gisli and
Thorkel went to Hol and set up their abode there; but Thorgrim took up
his abode there in the west, and dwelt at Sæbol. Bork, his brother, had
the management in Thorsness when his father Thorstein died, and there
with him dwelt his nephews Quarrelsome Stein and Thorodd.

So those brothers-in-law dwell hard by as neighbours in Hawkdale, and
are great friends. Thorkel. and Gisli built a fine house at Hol, so that
it was soon no less a homestead than Sæbol: their lands touched and
their friendship seemed likely to last. Thorgrim had the priesthood, and
he was a great stay to those brothers. Now they fare in spring-time to
the leet, forty men of them together and they were all in holiday
clothes. There too, was Vestein, Gisli's brother-in-law, and every man
of the Soursops

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

following. Gest, the son of Oddleif, the wisest man in Iceland, had also
come to that leet, and he turned into the booth of Thorkel the Wealthy
of Alvidra. The Hawkdalemen sit at drink, while the rest of the freemen
were at the court, for it was a Thing for trying suits. All at once
there came into the Hawkdale booth a great oaf, Arnor by name, who spoke
and said: "You Hawkdalemen are strange fellows, who take heed for naught
but drink, and never go near the court where your followers have suits
to settle. This is what all think, though I alone utter it."

Then Gisli said: "Let us go to the courts as soon as ever we can; maybe
that others than Arnor utter this."

Now they go to the courts, and Thorgrim asks if there were any there who
stood in need of their help, "for we will leave nothing undone to help
our men, and they shall never be shorn of their rights so long as we
stand straight."

Then Thorkel the Wealthy spoke and said: "This business that we have in
hand is little worth. We will send and tell you as soon as we need your
help."

Now men fell to talking about their band, how brave it was in attire,
and about Thorgrim's haughty speech, and about his gallant bearing; and
when men went home to their booths Thorkel the Wealthy said to Gest the
Wise: "How long thinkest thou that the spirit of these Hawkdalemen will
last? How long will they bear all before them?"

"They will not," said Gest, "be all of one and the same mind as they are
now three springs hence."

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

But Arnor the oaf was by when Gest said this, and ran at once to the
Hawkdale booth, and told these words which had passed between Thorkel
and Gest.

Then Gisli answered: "He must have said this because all feel it; but
let us beware that it does not turn out true, for Gest says sooth about
many things; and now methinks I see a plan by which we may well guard
against it."

"What is that?"

"We shall bind ourselves by more lasting utterances than ever. Let us
four take the oath of foster-brothers."

Well, they all thought that good counsel; and after that they went out
of their booth to the point of the "ere," <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) and there cut up a sod of turf in such wise
that both its ends were still fast to the earth, and propped it up by a
spear scored with runes, so tall that a man might lay his hand on the
socket of the spear-head. Under this yoke they were all four to
pass--Thorgrim, Gisli, Thorkel, and Vestein. Now they breathe each a
vein, and let their blood fall together on the mould whence the turf had
been cut up, and all touch it; and afterwards they all fall on their
knees and were to take hands, and swear to avenge each the other as
though he were his brother, and to call all the gods to witness.

But now, just as they were going to take hands, Thorgrim said: "I shall
have quite enough on my hands if I do this towards Thorkel and Gisli, my
brothers-in-law; but towards Vestein I have no tie to bind me to so
great a charge." As he said this he drew back his hand.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

"Then more will do the like," says Gisli, and drew back his hand. "I
will be bound by no tie to the man who will not be bound by the same tie
to my brother-in-law Vestein."

Now men began to think there was some weight in Gest's spaedom. But
Gisli said to Thorkel: "All this happened as I foreboded, and this which
we have done is of no good, for I guess that fate rules in this too."

Now men fare home from the leet, and all is still and tidingless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[23:1](gto09.htm#fr_9) "Ere," old English for a
sandy spit of land; from the Icelandic *eyri*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Soursops Abroad](gto10)
