[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gto10)  [Next](gto12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

#### CHAPTER VI.

#### GISLI AND THORKEL PART.

THORKEL the Soursop was very fond of dress and very lazy; he did not do
a stroke of work in the housekeeping of those brothers; but Gisli worked
night and day. It fell on a good drying day that Gisli set all the men
at work hay-making, save his brother Thorkel. He alone of all the men
was at home, and he had laid him down after breakfast in the hall, where
the fire was, and gone to sleep. The hall was thirty fathoms long and
ten broad. Away from it, and to the south, stood the bower of Auda and
Asgerda, and there the two sat sewing. But when Thorkel wakes he goes
toward the bower for he heard voices, and, lays him down outside close
by the bower. Then Asgerda began to speak, and said:

"Help me, Auda dear; and cut me out a shirt for my husband Thorkel."

"I can't do that any better than thou," says Auda; "nor wouldst thou ask
me to do it if thou wert making aught for my brother Vestein."

"All that touches Vestein is a thing by itself," says Asgerda; "and so
it will be with me for many a day; for I love him more

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

than my husband Thorkel, though we may never fulfil our love."

"I have long known," said Auda, "how Thorkel fared in this matter, and
how things stood; but let us speak no more of it:'

"I think it no harm," says Asgerda; "though I think Vestein a good
fellow. Besides I have heard it said that ye two--thou and
Thorgrim--often had meetings before thou wert given away in marriage."

"No wrong came of it to any man," said Auda, "nor has any man found
favour in my eyes since I was given to Gisli. There has been no
disgrace. Do pray stop this idle talk."

And so they did; but Thorkel had heard every word they spoke, and now he
raised his voice and said:

"Hear a great wonder,  
Hear words of doom;  
Hear matters mighty,  
Murders of men!"

After that he goes away indoors. Then Auda went on to say:

"Oft comes ill from women's gossip, and it may be so, and much worse,
from this thing. Let us take counsel against it."

"Oh," says Asgerda, "I have bethought me of a plan which will stand me
in good stead."

"What is it, pray?" says Auda.

"I will throw my arms round Thorkel's neck when we go to bed this
evening, and be as kind to him as I can; and his heart will turn at
that, and be will forgive me. I will tell him too that this was all
stories, and that there is not a word of truth in

 

<span id="img_03000"></span>

[![THORKEL AT AUDA AND ASGERDA'S BOWER.](tn/03000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03000.jpg.md)  
THORKEL AT AUDA AND ASGERDA'S BOWER.  

 

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

what we chattered. But if he will be cross and hold me to it, then tell
me some other plan; or hast thou any plan?"

"I will tell thee my plan in the twinkling of an eye," says Auda. "I
will tell my husband Gisli all that gives me any trouble, whether it be
good or ill. He will know how to help me out of it, for that will be
best for me in the end."

At even Gisli came home from the hay-field. It was Thorkel's wont to
thank his brother Gisli every day for the work he had done, but now he
did not, and never a word said he to Gisli.

Then Gisli went up to Thorkel and said: "Does aught ail thee, brother,
that thou art so silent?"

"I have no sickness," says Thorkel; "but this is worse than sickness."

"Have I done aught, brother," says Gisli, "that displeases thee?"

"Thou hast done nothing of the sort."

"That makes me glad at once; for the last thing that I wish is that
anything should come between our love. But still I would so like to know
what is at the root of thy sadness."

"Thou wilt know it soon enough," says Thorkel, "though thou dost not
know it now."

Then Gisli goes away and says no more, and men go to bed when night
came. Thorkel ate little that night, and was the first to go to bed. But
when Asgerda came to his bedside and lifted the bed-clothes, then
Thorkel said to her:

"I do not mean to let thee sleep here to-night."

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

"Why, what is more fitting," she said, "than that I should sleep by my
husband? Why hast thy heart so soon changed, and what is the matter?"

"Thou knowest very well, and I know it. It has been long hidden from me,
but thy good name will not be greater if I speak it out."

"What's the good of talking like that?" she said. "Thou oughtest to know
better than to believe the silly talk of us women, for we are ever
chattering when we are alone about things without a word of truth in
them; and so it was here."

Then Asgerda threw both her arms round his neck, and was soft and kind,
and bade him never believe a word of it.

But Thorkel was cross, and bade her be off. -

"Then," says Asgerda, "I will not strive with thee any longer for what
thou wilt not grant. But I will give thee two choices: the first is, to
treat all this as if it had been unspoken--I mean all that we have joked
about, and to lay no faith on what is not true; the other is, that I
take witness at once and be parted from thee. Then I shall do as I
please, and maybe thou wilt then have something to tell of true hatred;
and as for me, I will make my father claim at thy hand my dower and
portion, and then surely thou wilt no longer be troubled with me as thy
bed-fellow."

Thorkel was tongue-tied for a while. At last he said:

"My counsel to thee is to creep in on the side of the bed that belongs
to thee. I can't waste all the night in keeping thee out."

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

So she goes to bed at once, and they make up their quarrel as though it
had never happened. As for Auda, when she went to bed with her husband
Gisli, she tells him all that she and Asgerda had said just as it
happened, and begged him not to be wroth with her, but to give her good
counsel if he saw any.

"For I know," she said, "that Thorkel will wish to see my brother
Vestein dead, if he may have his way."

"I do not see," says Gisli, "any counsel that is good; but I will throw
no blame on thee for this, because when things are once doomed, some one
must utter the words that seem to bring them about."

Now that half-year passes away, and the flitting-days come. Thorkel
tells his brother Gisli that he wishes to share all their goods between
them, for he is going to join housekeeping with his brother-in-law
Thorgrim.

"Brothers' goods are fairest to look on when they lie together, brother.
Many things I see which whisper, 'Do not part.' It gladdens my heart to
let things bide as they are. Do not let us part."

"Things cannot go on as they are," says Thorkel. "We cannot keep house
together any longer, for there is great harm in this, that thou
shouldest have all the toil and trouble about the farm, while I turn my
hand to nothing which brings in any gain.

"Do not thou talk about that," says Gisli, "so long as I say never a
word. I am well pleased with things as they are. Besides, we have gone
through much together. We have been good

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

friends and bad friends. We have borne bad luck and good luck as
brothers. But we were always best off when we stood shoulder to
shoulder, Do not let us change now."

"Well," says Thorkel, "there's no use in talking. I have made up my mind
to share our goods, and they shall be shared. As I ask for them to be
shared, thou shalt have the house and heritage, and I the goods and
chattels.'

"As for that," says Gisli, "if it must come to that, and we are to part,
do as thou likest--share or choose. I care not what I do."

The end of it was that Gisli shared; and Thorkel chose the goods and
chattels, and Gisli kept the land. In their household were two poor
children whom they had taken in, the offspring of their kinsman
Ingialld, and these two they parted: the boy's name was Geirmund, and
the girls Gudrida. She stayed with Gisli, but Geirmund went with
Thorkel. So Thorkel went away to his brother-in-law Thorgrim, and took
up his abode with him; but Gisli had the farm at Hol to himself, and the
household lacked nothing, but went on as well as before. And now the
summer slips away, and the first winter night was nigh at hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Vestein Comes Back to Iceland](gto12.md)
