[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg19)  [Next](hchg21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII

#### THE PAGEANTS IN THE QUESTS

The presence of the Holy Vessel signified the Divine Presence. The Life
of Life had remained in the Precious Blood. The Voice of the Angel of
Great Counsel, the Voice of the Son and the Voice of the Holy Spirit
abode therein, or spoke as if from behind it. The Presence was
sacramental, but the Presence was also real, and through the soul it was
one which sustained the body itself at need. So far as regards the
Lesser Chronicles, and in those which I call Greater, there was a
reservation which continued through centuries, an arch-natural
Mass--said from time to time and not, as we may suppose, daily--an
unfailing ministry to body and soul alike. In a word, the Last Supper
was maintained for ever and ever. It was the sacramental side of the
eternal festival of the followers of Bran, and those who say that the
roots of the mystery are in folk-lore say only the most negligible part
of the truth concerning it; for if I accomplish by a

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

secret science the transmutation of lead into gold, it will be useless
for any scholarship of science to depose that the important fact is the
lead. The latter is the antecedent, and as such is, of course,
indispensable, but the great fact is the conversion; and I say the same
of the Graal literature.

On this and all other considerations, it will be understood that the
Mystic Castle was a place of the highest reverence, and that all things
concerning the Sacred Vessel were done with ceremonial solemnity,
following a prescribed order. In this way it comes about that all the
quests present the pageant of the Graal on its manifestation within the
hall and the shrine of the Castle. There are instances in which it is
exceedingly simple, and others in which it is ornate. It is the former
in the Lesser Chronicles, and demands scarcely the express name of a
pageant; in the Greater Chronicles it is decorative, and this term will
apply to some of the manifestations which are described in the *Conte
del Graal*. The section which is referable to Chrétien offers, however,
nothing to detain us. The procession enters the hall in single file, and
consists in succession of a page, or squire, who carries the mysterious
Sword which will break in one danger only, of another squire who bears
the Sacred Lance from which the blood issues, and then of two squires
together, each supporting a ten-branched candlestick. Between these
there walks the gentle and beautiful maiden who lifts up the Holy Graal
in her two hands; she is followed by another maiden, who carries the
Silver Dish. The procession passes twice before the couch on which the
King of the Castle reclines, and it is to be noticed that whatever
efficacy and wonder may reside in the objects which are manifested thus,
the office of the bearers is as purely ceremonial as that of the
acolytes and thurifers at any High Mass in the world. When the questing
knight pays his first visit in the *Didot Perceval*, the offices are
transposed partially and the Sword is missing from the pageant. He who
upraises

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

the Lance enters in the prescribed manner, but he carries it with both
hands and is followed by a maiden with two silver plates and a napkin on
her arm, while the vessel containing the Precious Blood of our Saviour,
as if it were a phial or reliquary, is in the charge of a second squire.
On the occasion of the later visit, it is said, still more tersely, that
the Graal and the other venerable relics come out from a chamber beyond,
but we do not learn who carries: them. It is a characteristic of all the
versions that, even in telling the same story, it is done always with
respect to a certain genius of difference and a variant intervening in
the text. Gautier de Doulens recounts in two versions the visit of
Gawain to the Graal Castle, in the more important case under
circumstances of unexplained mystery, for no one was less on the quest.
This is comparable to the reception of a neophyte who is neither
introduced nor prepared, but is mistaken at first for another. The
pageant is also dismembered, for the Dish does not appear, the Hallow of
the Broken Sword is placed upon the breast of a dead body, which lies on
a rich bier. As if it were a subsidiary Hallow, a stately clerk carries
an enormous cross of jewelled silver, and the only procession described
is of canons in silken copes, who celebrate the office of the dead
amidst thuribles and golden candlesticks. The Graal itself does not
appear till the supper is served in the hall, but it is held by no
visible hand and no other sacred object is seen in connection therewith.
At a later stage of the episode, the Lance manifests and the blood which
distils from its point is received, as we have seen, in a silver cup;
the Broken Sword, in fine, reappears at the close; it is a very curious
and piecemeal pageant. When Perceval revisits the Castle, the account of
Gautier is in better conformity with what may be termed the conventional
or authorised ceremonial type.

Passing to this point at the term of the continuation by Gautier de
Doulens, there is again a very simple pageant, in which the Graal comes
first--a Holy and

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Glorious
Vessel--under the charge of a maiden, who issues from the secret chamber
and passes before the royal table, carrying the Hallow exalted. There
follows a second maiden, than whom none is fairer, clothed in white
drapery, and bearing the Lance from which flows the mysterious blood. In
fine, there enters the squire exposing a naked sword broken in the
middle thereof. It is at this point that, abruptly enough, the
continuation reaches its term and is taken up by Manessier, who causes
the Graal and the Lance to pass for a second time before the King and
his guest, together with the noble Silver Dish, which is carried by a
third maiden--a procession of vestals only, seeing that the work of the
Sword--which has been partly resoldered by Perceval--has no longer its
place in the pageant. When the questing hero pays his third visit to the
Graal Castle, under the auspices of the same poet, the Lance and Graal
are carried by two maidens, and a squire holds the Silver Dish,
enveloped in his rich amice of red samite. The sacred objects pass three
times, and return as they issued into the secret chamber, the mystery of
which is never disclosed fully by the makers of this romance. In fine,
when Perceval is crowned--and this is his fourth visit--a gentle maiden
exalts the Holy Vessel, the Lance is borne by a squire, while another
maiden holds the Silver Dish. It will be seen that on each occasion
there is some variation in the offices, as if these were determined by
accident. The alternative of Gerbert--which seems interposed before the
partial resoldering of the sword by Perceval in the Gautier
version--some few verbal modifications notwithstanding, gives the same
account of the Graal procession.

In the prose *Lancelot*, which prefaces the great and glorious *Quest*,
the pageant has this characteristic--that it is preceded invariably by a
dove which enters through a window bearing a golden censer in its beak,
and the palace fills thereupon with the eternal sweetness of the
Paradise which is above. The bird passes through

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

the hall and from sight into a chamber beyond. Out of that chamber--as
if at a concerted signal--almost as if the dove had suffered
transformation--there issues the maiden of the Graal, carrying the
Precious Vessel. The manifestation in the prose *Lancelot* is at first
on the occasion of Gawain's visit, and he sees nothing of the other
Hallows till the Lance at a later stage issues from the chamber beyond
and smites him between the shoulders. In the middle of the night of
terror which follows this episode, he beholds another pageant preceded
by a choir of voices. Once more the maiden issues from the hidden
chamber carrying the sacred vessel, with lights and thuribles before
her, and the service of the Graal is performed on a silver table in the
middle place of the hall, but there are no other Hallows. When Lancelot
comes to the Castle--from which event follows the conception of
Galahad--the manifestation of the Graal is identical; but because of
that which must be consummated he suffers no infliction, and he does not
therefore behold the avenging Lance. It can be said scarcely that there
is a pageant; the dove enters and vanishes; it passes within the secret
chamber that the maiden in charge of the Vessel may come out therefrom;
she appears accordingly, bearing the Holy Palladium, a vessel of gold,
"the richest thing that any man hath lyving." She issues from the secret
chamber, and again she returns therein, but not before Lancelot--also
for that which must follow--is dazzled by her surpassing beauty.

In the time of the great Quest there are, strictly speaking, no pageants
in the sense of the other romances, for the Graal is going about. Its
apparition at the Court of King Arthur is heralded by a sunbeam only,
and it is borne by no visible hand. In Corbenic, when all things draw to
the holy marvel of their close, there is a solemn procession of angels
to the secret shrine of the Graal, two of them bearing wax lights, the
third a cloth, and the last the Sacred Lance, because heaven has

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

come down at the removal of that which is meant for earth no more. In
Sarras, at the last scene of all, which ends the strange, eventful
mystery, there is a great cohort of angels; but this is the choir above
descending to witness that which must be done in fine below. There is no
passing between intermediate spaces.

In the *Longer Prose Perceval* two damosels issue together from a chapel
which is attached to the banqueting-hall, one of them carrying the most
Holy Graal and the other the Lance, the point of which distils its blood
therein. It is suggested also, but as if by a dream within a dream, that
there are two angels, bearing two candlesticks of gold filled with wax
lights. The damosels move through the hall and pass into another chapel;
again they come forth, and it seems then that there are three maidens,
with the figure of a child in the midst of the Holy Graal. They pass for
a third time, and then above the Vessel there is a Vision of the
Crucified King.

In the *Parsifal* of Wolfram a Squire enters hurriedly bearing the
Lance, which bleeds profusely into his sleeve--an uncouth and
ill-begotten symbol. Two gracious maidens, wearing chaplets on their
heads, follow with flowing hair; they bear up golden candlesticks. Two
other women, of whom one is described as a duchess, carry two stools of
ivory, which they place before the king. Next in order are four maidens
having as many tapers, and four other maidens who sustain between them
an oblong slab of jacinth. There are then two princesses carrying knives
of silver, and these also are preceded by four maidens. The princesses
are followed by six additional maidens, holding tall glasses filled with
rare perfumes. There is, in fine, the queen of all, with the Graal in
the hands of her, and behind is the squire who carries the Sword of
Legend. When we come at the proper time to see how much and how little
on the surface sense of things follows from this cumbrous display, we
shall turn with the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

more relief to versions that are less decorative, though we can
understand and excuse also the influence of the oriental mind reflected
in the *Parsifal* from the prototype of Guiot de Provence. Relief at the
moment will come from the poem of Heinrich, though it is the idlest of
all the quests. Here the procession is in two parts. In the first there
is a beautiful youth of highest mien, holding the Sword in one hand, and
followed by cupbearers who serve wine at the feast. When this is over
there enter two maidens carrying golden candlesticks; behind them come
two youths, who lift up the Lance between them; they are followed by
other two maidens, in whose charge is a salver of jewelled gold, borne
upon a silken cloth. Behind these there walks the fairest of women
holding the Precious Reliquary of the Graal, and after her the last
maiden of all, whose hands are empty, whose office is weeping only--a
variation which will be found also in the Montpellier codex of the
*Conte del Graal*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. The Enchantments of Britain, the Times Called Adventurous and
the Wounding of the King](hchg21.md)
