[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg84)  [Next](hchg86.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_615">p. 615</span>

# BOOK X

## THE SECRET CHURCH

### I

#### THE HERMENEUTICS OF THE HOLY GRAAL

Two things follow from the considerations of the ninth book: (*a*) That
there are or there have been custodians of secret knowledge in Christian
times, but I express only my personal view if I say that they remain to
this day; (*b*) that the term of their purpose does not differ in kind
from that of the external Churches; but (*c*) by their claim they had
carried the Great Experiment further. Their testimony offers therefore
(1) deeper intimations of Church doctrine; (2) a contribution in
concealment to the annals of the life of sanctity; (3) by the
remembrance--in perpetuity of dedication--that there is one thing
needful; (4) and this is to partake, if it be possible, of Divine
Substance--that is, spirit and life--of which the impermanent
consubstantiation with Divine Humanity in the official Eucharist is the
vestige in symbolism only. The way of attainment must have had its
doctrinal correspondence in the Descent of the Paraclete. It does not
follow that the custodians celebrated what we understand by a Mass, but
it is impossible to delineate their process by a stricter, analogy.
After exhausting all other considerations we can speak of it only in
this manner. I suggest that it was said in the heart, and that Christ
came down into the heart. It follows that for those unseen masters, as
for us also, the *Mysterium Eidei* was the Eucharist. The Greek

<span id="page_616">p. 616</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Epiclesis* clause
may pass, therefore, among official things as the nearest approach to a
rite above all things valid, that is, manifesting supernaturally. Its
history is one of the most interesting in the wild garden of liturgical
formulæ. It should be understood, in this connection, that during the
earlier days of the Church there was not a method of consecration which
prevailed everywhere; the Latin rite held, with certain variations, to
the canonical words of institution, as I have shown in a previous
section; but there are traces of instances in which it was performed by
the recitation of an *Oratio Dominica*--possibly the *Pater noster* over
the elements, thus by the hypothesis converting the daily bread into
heavenly manna. By the hypothesis also, the *Epiclesis* clause brought
down upon the elements the influence and even the presence of the Holy
Ghost, and it must be admitted that this contains, ritually speaking, a
very high suggestion. At the Council of Florence the Latins required the
Greeks to expunge the *Epiclesis*, with all forms of invocation, and
there can be no doubt that they were doctrinally and technically
correct, within the convention of their own order, because it was
admitted on all hands that the words of institution produced a valid
Eucharist, and the principle of invocation was to give the officiating
priest within the range of the convention an express and personal part
in the mystery of consecrating, which, by the same hypothesis, must be
regarded as superfluous, though we can--on our own part--discern a
deeper reason. The clause remains to this day in the Greek Church, and
for those who lay stress on its efficacy that Church has therefore the
words but not seemingly more than the outward sign of that life which
should be resident therein.

If it be said that in these considerations the Churches are impeached
collectively, and because the literature of the Graal creates exactly
the same contrast in the same manner exactly, that it therefore concurs
in the impeachment, the conclusion on the surface may seem

<span id="page_617">p. 617</span>

almost irresistible, but that it is untrue is my whole contention. The
facts which here follow must be held to silence any voices of dissent.
We have seen that there are three literatures which testify concerning
the voided House of Doctrine. (*a*), The first is the Graal literature,
and in no uncertain way does it bear witness that the official Church
has the efficacious means. (*b*) The second is Zoharic Kabalism, with
all its connections, but while it tells of the cloud on the official
sanctuary of Israel, this also bears witness (1) that Israel is of God;
(2) that the Church in Israel contains the Words of the Mystery, with
the reflection at least of the cohabiting glory, and (3) that the way of
salvation is that Law by which the world was made in Mercy. (*c*) The
third is Masonry, and in the dual schools thereof--which are the Craft
and High Degrees--it bears the same witness: (1) that the Symbolic
Temple is the Holy Place, but the Spiritual Temple is to come; (2) that
the Lord has risen truly, and though at the present time we do not know
certainly where we shall find Him, we are on the Quest which does not
fail. I say therefore again that there has been no more faithful
testimony throughout the centuries. It does not concern a competitive
orthodoxy or a distinct process, but the development of the same
doctrine and the extension of the same process to what is called in
Masonry the *ne plus ultra* degree. It is not that anything exists
outside the Church, but that more subsists within it than is
comprehended by the lower grades. The equivalent is that the Law of
Nature reflects the Law of Grace, and the perfect paradox that Nature
imitates Grace.

The external Church is therefore, and so it remains, that body in which
the first work of regeneration takes place--and this, as one may say, of
necessity; it is the reflection of life everlasting projected on the
perishable plane. It is in this sense the condign and legitimate
governor of all holy external places. The Church is the good husbandman
who prepares the ground and tills

<span id="page_618">p. 618</span>

the earth of humanity. It fertilises that earth after various manners,
as, for example, by the laws of moral conduct, by the great literatures,
by the high consecration of the seven sacraments, by the water, the oils
and the wine. In all these ways it sows with a generous hand the seeds
of secret life. But the earth is hard and the earth is also
unresponsive. The seed will germinate in many directions, and the earth
will therefore be irradiated by a certain undeclared presence of the
secret life; but it issues above the ground only in a few cases, and
then the individual enters into the manifested life of sanctity. It is a
question thereafter of the particular quality of the earth and the
environment of the life. Generally the growth is stunted and too weak to
put forth its powers. It is only on rare occasions that they spring up
into the high light and the clear air, lifting the radiant glory of a
perfect head amidst their peers.

The hidden life of the soul is well known to the doctors of the soul,
and the Church has also its hidden life, wherein it communicates with
all things nearest to the Divine in the higher consciousness. Official
doctrine is, however, in the same position as normal consciousness; it
covers a part of the field only. There is therefore, on both sides, a
certain sense of the incommensurate, and assuredly it is for this reason
that the Churches are desolate; such desolation is, however, on account
of that which is in hiding, not of that which is withdrawn. The offices
are not abrogated and the sacraments are still administered, being also
efficacious up to a determined point. Perhaps indeed the desolation is
not less especially in ourselves, so that it is we who individually and
collectively have helped to make void the House of Doctrine. The fact
that the external Church is from this point of view in widowhood makes
its desertion a grave offence against the high unwritten code of
chivalry, just as a dereliction of masonic good conduct is implied in
forsaking one's mother lodge. At the same time the great work can
sometimes be done

<span id="page_619">p. 619</span>

from without as well as from within, but in this case that work is an
approximation towards a higher side of the Church.

It follows that the official Church can act only up to the extent of its
consciousness, and the side on which it has derogated has been the side
of policy and conduct. We can account in this manner for all its
imperfections, for that which we term its abuses, but there will remain
the glories of its doctrine as things which, in their proper
understanding, emerge apart and unaffected. These are the treasures
which it was instituted to preserve, and if it has added some things to
the jewel-house which are of secondary or even dubious value, our part
is to wait for its wakening in the higher mind. The Greek Rite has slept
over-long therein, and the Roman Rite has had nightmares, but the happy
Prince, who is a true Son of the House, will arrive one of these days
and will ask the unspelling question. Meanwhile, the individual man must
be appraised at his highest only, so far as that highest has been
indicated, and it is the same with the Church. The lower standards are
deceptive, and it is for this reason that conduct--as we understand it
conventionally--is comparatively of less importance; it is that which
maintains the world and not that which renews it. There is also the
irrefutable consideration of all those unhappy sects which exist for the
dissemination of a contracted symbolism under the guise of pure
doctrine, thinking that the situation can be ameliorated by taking in
their fairyland. The undue multiplication of symbols tends, of
necessity, to attenuate their force by spreading it over too large a
surface, but it is not to be compared with the malefic dismemberment of
symbolism, which produces its paralysis, for the loss of so many limbs
causes the body to decay and puts an end to the office of the Wardens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Good Husbandman](hchg86.md)
