[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg18)  [Next](hchg20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

### VII

#### THE KEEPERS OF THE HALLOWS

Such was the Abode of the Halloo, s; and those who dwelt therein, the
succession of Graal Keepers, belong to that Order which we should expect
in such precincts. It should be noted that in the poem of Chrétien the
Keeper is called the Fisher King, but his other name and his lineage are
not disclosed. It is, however, the beginning only of a very long story,
and though it is difficult to say how the poet would have carried it to
its term, personally I do not question that he would have borne no
different witness to the rest of the Graal cycle in Northern French. By
this, without exception, Joseph of Arimathæa is the first guardian of
the Sacred Vessel, but either he passes from the scene before it has
found a sanctuary or he assumes a secondary position in his son's
favour. According to the metrical romance of De Borron and the Lesser
Chronicles generally, he was succeeded by his son-in-law, Brons; but
according to the Greater Chronicles, as I have termed them, he was
succeeded by his own son, the second Joseph, who is unknown to the other
cycle. The Lesser Chronicles bridge the centuries between that
generation which saw the Ascension of Christ and that which was to
behold the Flower of Chivalry in Arthur, by means of a single keeper,
who was to remain on earth until he had seen his grandson, Perceval, and
had remitted into his hands the secrets and Hallows of which he had been
in charge so long. Perceval is the third who counts in the line of
election to complete the human trinity of Graal guardians, reflecting,
after their own mystic manner, those Three who bear witness in heaven,
namely, the Divine Trinity. To accomplish the hero's geniture, Alain,
the son of Brons, although he had accepted celibacy, married in some
undeclared manner, and it was as his issue that

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perceval was born
in the fulness of the adventurous times. For the *Early History of
Merlin* the Keepers are those who have the Holy Vessel, and the
reticence in this case may seem like that of Chrétien, but it is not so
exactly, because the prose romance of Merlin follows directly from the
metrical romance of Joseph. We infer further that the promise of union
with the Keepers is like *la joie perdurable*.

Gautier's continuation of the *Conte del Graal* offers no materials for
the identification of the Fisher King, but the variants or interpolated
passages in the Montpellier MS. follow the Lesser Chronicles,
representing him as the father of Alain le Gros who married Enigea, the
sister of Joseph. Manessier and Gerbert, on the other hand, reflect the
Greater Chronicles, and apparently some early draft of the *Book of the
Holy Graal*, for they know nothing concerning the younger Joseph.

From one point of view, the succession, in respect of the Greater
Chronicles, involves fewer difficulties, because it exhibits a
rudimentary sense of chronology and develops in consequence a long line
of successive custodians. They are, however, quite shadowy, and exist
only to bridge the gulf of time in the order following: (1) Joseph of
Arimathæa and Joseph II.; (2) Alain, the son of Brons; (3) Eminadap, the
son of Joshua, who was himself a brother of Alain; (4) Carceloys; (5)
Manuiel; (6) Lambor: the last four were kings, holding from Calafas of
Terre Foraine, called Alphasan in baptism; (7) the King Pelles.

So far as regards the *Book of the Holy Graal*, and it is difficult to
say what version or prototype of this text was before the authors of the
*Vulgate* and *Huth Merlin*, but whatever it was they seem to have drawn
from the same source. The Graal Castle, as we have seen, is Corbenic; it
is situated in the realm of Listenoys, and the Keeper is King Pelles. As
much and no more may be said concerning the prose *Lancelot*.
Enumerations of this kind serve very little purpose, and I will

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

speak, therefore, only of the alternative keepers who were in evidence
during the days of quest. On the one side, there is Brons, to whom
succeeded Perceval at the close of a life of search; on the other, there
is King Pelles, of the Castle Corbenic, whose daughter, Helayne, gave
Galahad as issue to Lancelot, himself the lineal descendant of the king
reigning at Sarras in the days of Joseph of Arimathæa and the first
flight of the Graal. Galahad was the last Keeper recognised by this
cycle, except in the *Longer Prose Perceval*, and he seems to have been
appointed only for the purpose of removing the Vessel. It was: *Ite,
missa est*, and *est consummatum*, when he died and rose to the stars.
As the *Longer Prose Perceval* is extra-lineal and thus stands by
itself, though its antecedents and certain characteristics have involved
its inclusion among the Greater Chronicles, I will say of it only in the
present place that the King's title is that adopted by Chrétien, or the
Rich King Fisherman, and that his name is not otherwise declared. His
successor is Perceval, but he enters into the secret royalty after an
interregnum only, and his stewardship also is with a view to the
withdrawal of the mystery. As regards the German cycle, which will be
dealt with elsewhere, the succession of Graal Keepers are Titurel,
Frimutel and Amfortas, to whom succeeds Perceval. Titurel at the
beginning was a holy hero of earthly chivalry, to whom a divine voice
brought the strange tidings that he had been elected to guard the Holy
Graal on Mont Salvatch. His progenitor was a man of Cappadocia who was
attached to the Emperor Vespasian, and received for his services a grant
of land in southern France.

The hereditary stewardship of the Holy Graal was the most secret of all
mysteries, and never initiated any one outside the predestined family.
There is seclusion in all cases, but that of the Brons keepership is
greater beyond comparison than that of Alain and his successors. One
explanation of this may be sought in

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

the simple fact that, as regards the first case, several intermediate
texts are or may be wanting, and that transparently. This is true so far
as it goes, but in the most proximate pre-Arthurian period, and in the
time of the king, we find still the same concealment, though it is not
quite so unvaried in the records of the *Conte del Graal* as it is in
the *Early History of Merlin* and in the *Didot Perceval*. The
comparative position seems as another line of demarcation between the
Lesser and Greater Chronicles, but always on the understanding that the
allocation of the *Longer Prose Perceval* to the second series, though
it cannot be placed otherwise, and apart especially, is not fully
satisfactory in the nature of things. Speaking generally, the
distinctions between the two branches will be appreciated most clearly
by a comparison between the *Early History of Merlin* and the later
*Vulgate* and *Huth* texts. The sanctuary is shrouded in the first, and
we know only that those who have the Sacred Vessel are somewhere in
Northumbria. In the second, the keeper, King Pelles, is in continual
evidence. He is also a king in warfare, and it is by no means certain
that he is always on the side of the over-lord Arthur.

It would be easy to extend this section very much further than I purpose
doing, in view of all that is to follow; my intention here is a
schedule, or this mainly; and the specific summary is as follows. There
are two prototypes of the Early History versions, and they are
represented, firstly, by the original draft of De Borron's metrical
romance, which is much earlier than any other historical account; they
are represented, secondly, by the speculative prototype of the *Book of
the Holy Graal*. About this book there are two things certain: (*a*)
that it is very much later--or at least that it is later certainly--than
the first recension or transcript of the book which in some undeclared
manner had come into the hands of Robert de Borron; (*b*) that it is a
good deal earlier than the *Quest of Galahad* as we

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

know it, which involves also an antecedence in some form of the prose
Lancelot and the *Later Histories of Merlin*. We are left therefore with
two claims which appear to be at the root of the Mystery of the Holy
Graal, as it is manifested in the French literature of the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries: these are the claim of an Eucharistic formula, the
validity and efficacy of which transcended the words of institution
known by the official Church, and the claim of a priesthood which did
not draw from the official apostolate, though it did not question its
authority. These two are one probably in their essence, and it is out of
these respectively that we come to understand why Perceval is withdrawn
into the innermost seclusion by the Lesser Chronicles, and why in the
Greater Chronicles Galahad is assumed into heaven--both carrying their
warrants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. The Pageants in the Quests](hchg20)
