[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg75)  [Next](hchg77.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V

#### THE CLAIM IN RESPECT OF TEMPLAR INFLUENCE

I suppose that there is no one at this day, even on the outermost
fringes of the wide world of books, who willed to be acquainted with the
fact that the old chivalry

<span id="page_556">p. 556</span>

of the Temple was instituted as a protection to the Christian pilgrims
who visited the Holy Places of Jerusalem in the first quarter of the
twelfth century. It was a military and religious organisation *ab origin
symboli*, differing as such from the Hospital of St. John, which at its
incorporation was a healing fraternity, and only assumed arms following
the example of the *Militia Crucifera Evangelica* which had arisen
suddenly at its side. Templar history is a great storehouse of
enchanting hypothesis and also of unreclaimed speculation repeated from
writer to writer. I know no greater sea on which ships of imagination
and fantasy have launched more boldly; if they have reached no final
harbour, they have paused to take in further stores at innumerable
"summer isles" of an imaginary Eden "lying in dark purple spheres of
sea," and if in some undemonstrable way they have slipped their cables
and eluded sporadic hostile vessels, this has been because the equipment
of the latter has not been better than their own, white as regards
credentials the letter of marque carried by the unwelcome visitor would
often not bear much closer inspection than their own unchartered
licence. Now, an Order which was established in the East for a specific
Christian purpose, which embodied ideas of devotion that were
ecclesiastical as well as religious, which accepted monastic vows--even
those counsels of perfection that qualified for the Quest of the
Graal--yet, in spite of these, which became wealthy in the corporate
sense beyond the dreams of avarice, insolent and haughty beyond the
prerogatives of feudal royalty, and had darker charges looming against
it, does assuredly offer a picture to research the possibilities of
which are likely to be exploited in all directions. The story of the
brotherhood and the things implied therein have been therefore
approached from many points of view, enforced by many considerations and
by much which passes for evidence. I speak--as it will be
understood--here of the things recognised or divined beneath its
external

<span id="page_557">p. 557</span>

surface, for on that side there is nothing more direct and more simple.
We know that the Latin Church has a heavy account to balance in respect
of the Order, and by the characteristics of the charges preferred it is
also responsible for having brought it--whether warrantably or
otherwise, but at least all unwittingly--within the dubious circle of
the Secret Tradition in Christian times, for a considerable proportion
of those who recognise the fact of the Tradition. It remains, however,
that from this standpoint the story has never been told at all by any
one who spoke with knowledge on so involved a subject. Here there is no
place to attempt it, but the Mystery of the Temple in a minor degree
interpenetrated the Mystery of the Graal, and something must be said
concerning it in this connection. There is at the present time in
England (*a*) an extending disposition to appreciate remotely and dimly
an imbedded evidence that the romance-literature did somehow shadow
forth an initiatory process--but this I have hinted previously; and
(*b*) that in some manner not yet understood the Knights Templars and
the Graal legend grew up together, and will answer with strange voices
if set to question one another across the void which intervenes between
an externalised chivalry in fact and an ideal knighthood in books. In a
word, the literature has been held sometimes to represent, within clouds
and under curious veils, something of the imputed Templar subsurface
design, or alternatively certain Graal texts do at least indubitably
reflect in their own manner, on their own authority, the Knighthood of
the Morning and of Palestine raised from the world of reflections into
the world of the archetype. The *Longer Prose Perceval* is not only a
work with an allegorical and also a mystic motive; it is not only the
story of a suppressed word, of the sorrow and suffering which were
wrought by that suppression, and the joy and deliverance which followed
the recovery of the word; it is not only the prototypical correlative of
the legend of

<span id="page_558">p. 558</span>

the Royal Arch and the eighteenth degree in a form not less clear
because it can be traced only by a specialist; but--at least in
adventitious ways--it has ever-recurring characters of Templar
symbolism. But that which wears herein--and so through the French
cycle--little more than the aspect of accident, passes in the *Parsifal*
of Wolfram into the appearance of a preconceived plan. Herein is the
story of a confraternity, partly military but in part also religious,
connecting by the legend of its lineage with a kind of secret history in
Christendom written under the guise of knight-errantry; it is the
romance of an Order of the Holy Graal whose members are chosen out of
thousands, dedicated, set apart, and sometimes terrible in power, almost
"like Cedron in flood." I do not wonder that before the face of this
picture the criticism of the Graal literature has been haunted here and
there with the dream of Templar intervention, and the only question
which concerns us is the extent to which such an hypothesis can be
justified. Even in the least illuminated circles the possibility is
regarded with increasing respect, and apart from any claims on its own
basis it would be difficult for this reason to pass it over entirely.
The imputed fact, or the likelihood, that the literature was a vehicle,
officially or otherwise, of some mystical tradition, without depending
for any one on the merits of this hypothesis, would in certain minds be
enhanced substantially thereby. But it is desirable to note, in the
first place, that it is now an old speculation; secondly, that recent
years have not brought to light, that I am aware, any new facts on the
subject; and, lastly, that in so far as the contention is put freshly
there is a disposition to dwell on the *Templeisen* depicted in the
*Parsifal* as not only a militant body but also a governing theocracy,
and one which above all things was not ecclesiastical. It is just this
which impresses me as perhaps a little exaggerated in tone: I do not
know that Amfortas and his chivalry can be called a governing power any
more than the

<span id="page_559">p. 559</span>

company over-ruled by King Pelles of Lytenoys, of whose warfare we hear
in the *Vulgate Merlin*. If Mont Salvatch was anything of the kind, it
was obviously a secret kingdom, and as much might be said of Corbenic
and the realm to which it belonged. Seeing also that the keepers of the
Graal and the cohort of their ministers had at no time a sacerdotal
aspect--some express claims notwithstanding as to their geniture and
their ministers--the ecclesiastical note therein is wanting through all
the cycles; the distinction in chief between the *Templeisen* and the
other knights of the Graal is that in Wolfram the former are elaborately
organised, while the latter are either an inchoate gathering or they are
merely the retinue which would be attached to a feudal castle. In one
case, which is that of the *Didot Perceval*, the House Mystic is perhaps
a simple tower, which, from all that we learn by the context, might be
little more than a hermit's hold.

It is obviously one thing to say that Wolfram modelled his chivalry on
the prototype of the Knights Templars--which is an interesting fact
without consequence--and another that the modelling was inspired by a
familiarity with Templar secret intention, and it is on this point,
which is obviously the hypothesis in its motive, that reasonable
evidence is wanted. The next step is to recognise *tendances suspectes*
in the poem of Wolfram, to predicate them of Guiot, his precursor, and
to regard the Templar design--whatever otherwise it was--as
anti-Catholic in its spirit. With the first ascription I have dealt in
discussing the German cycle in general; of the second we can divine
little, and then but darkly; while in respect of the third I recur to
that canon of criticism which has served me well already: in so far as
the Templar Order is held to be anti-Catholic, it is antecedently and
proportionately unlikely that any evidence will connect it with the
Graal literature. Whatever the origin of that literature, as we now have
it, in one and all its forms, it is not merely a Catholic

<span id="page_560">p. 560</span>

legend, but it seems so to have issued from the heart and centre of
Catholicity that it is almost in the likeness of an exotic, as if from
some sanctuary behind the external and visible sanctuary of the
universal Church. If this is the heart of romance going out in its
yearning towards God, there was never a heart in Christendom "which
warmer beat and stronger." It is like the voice of that ideal city, the
first city, the spiritual city, of which Wagner spoke, and it is seldom
heard on earth; it seems to speak from the pictured home of the soul,
the place of pre-existence, with all the mystery and wonder of enchanted
Hud and of Irêm in the Land of the Morning. And in the melody of that
voice, within the verbal message thereof, we know that the country deep
in Asia is not to be found in any Highlands beyond the Himalayas, or in
the fabled Sarras. Again, it is the country of the soul and of the
soul's legend; it is the Kabalistic place of the palaces at the centre
of the dimensions, sustaining all things. We know also that we shall
look vainly for Corbenic on the wild coast of Wales, and for the local
habitation of the Graal Castle of Mont Salvatch at any of the grand
passes of the Pyrenees into Spain; for this also is like the Rosicrucian
mountain of Abiegnus and the mystic Fir-Cone, a mystery enfolded within
and without by many meanings.

But if such is the position in respect of the Holy Graal, and if it
follows therefrom that in some hands it has rested under a serious cloud
of misapprehension, there is something to be said on the same subject,
though not in the same sense, in respect of the Knights Templars. The
eye which has turned from the Graal literature to the records of the
great chivalry has been drawn in that direction because of the charge of
heresy which was preferred of old against it. I am not designing to
suggest that the side of criticism which is prominent in the open day is
interested--or much less concerned seriously--in heresy as such, though
I confess--if it be fitting to say so--that next to the truth which is
of God

<span id="page_561">p. 561</span>

and the deeps therein, whereof simple minds dream nothing, I am
conscious of few things more fascinating than the story of the bad old
doctrines and of those who loved, followed and honoured them. It draws
the mind for ever with vague and preposterous hopes; and seeing further
that I am on the side of the orthodox faith only in so far as the old
mule which carries the mysteries can be shown to be on God's side--as
the *High History* testifies--I do not doubt that many are the *choses
suspectes* which might be gleaned from this book, and many there may
still be who could wish to include its writer in the annals carried
forward of Smithfield or Tyburn and those who went thither in the days
of Mary or Elizabeth.

Here is cleansing confession; but scholarship, as I have intimated, is
detached, subject to its inoculation by the notion of pagan faiths
perpetuated through Christian centuries--the stilettos of which virus
have pierced me also in both arms. But I believe, apart from such
images, that I carry a lamp which enlightens these obscure ways, and
much as I may love their crookedness, they do not deceive me. It is on
this account precisely that the heresy of the Temple, so far as it
concerns the Graal, can be dealt with shortly here, for which purpose I
will go back as early as my knowledge of the criticism extends along
these lines.

The summary of the particulars in chief may be grouped together as
follows: (1) In the year 1825, Von Hammer, an orientalist of the period,
identified certain baptismal fonts or vases--which he included among
antique memorials of the Templars--as examples of the true San Graal
vessels, and as he connected Templar secret doctrine with that of the
Gnostics, he remembered that, according to Epiphanius, the Marcosians
made use of three large vases in their celebration of the Eucharist.
These were filled with white wine, which was supposed to undergo a
transformation of colour and other magical changes. (2) In the year
1828, the Abbé Grégoire

<span id="page_562">p. 562</span>

expressed a conviction that Christ transmitted to St. John the
Evangelist a secret doctrine which descended ultimately to the Templars.
(3) In the year 1834 Gabriele Rossetti affirmed that the Templars
belonged to secret societies, and that they professed doctrines inimical
to Rome; but though much has been hazarded concerning their opinions,
nothing has been ascertained conclusively. He held further that they
were of Egyptian derivation and that from them the Albigenses emanated.
Here I am reminded of a rumour regarding a manuscript said to be in the
Louvre, but of which I know nothing, either as to title or claims; it is
reported to state that the Templars originated from a more ancient
Order, called the Magian Brothers. (4) In the year 1854 it was sustained
by Eugene Aroux that all the archaic romances of the Holy Graal were
written to glorify the Order of the Temple and to present its doctrine
in the form of romance. (5) In the year 1858 the same writer went
further and suggested that the Templars were parties to a concealed
programme for the creation at Jerusalem of a religious and military
rival of the power and orthodoxy at Rome. (6) In the year 1842 Dr. K.
Simrock expressed an opinion that the doctrine and tradition of the
Templars were based on the tradition of the Graal; that Christ had been
instructed by the Essenes; that he confided a secret knowledge to some
of his disciples; and that this was imparted subsequently to the priests
of the Temple chivalry. (7) In 1844, writing on the influence of Welsh
tradition, it was hazarded by A. Schulze that the symbols and doctrines
of the Templars might have been borrowed from the Graal. (8) In 1865
Louis Moland in his *Origines Littéraires* considered that the Graal
legend and the Templar Order were expressions in literature and life of
the same ideal, being the union of knighthood with sanctity, and he
further stated (*a*) that there was a strange Templar reflection in a
literature which was unquestionably and closely related

<span id="page_563">p. 563</span>

with the principles of that Order; (*b*) that the Roman Curia
interdicted the Graal romances coincidently with the suppression of the
knightly Order. It will be seen that the root of this thesis is
identical with that of Schulze.

The summary above has of necessity omitted many allocations and many
hazards of hypothesis which might have been collected from other
sources. Our next step is to ascertain from the charges against the
Templars in the course of the processes instituted by the ecclesiastical
Courts of France, and elsewhere, what were the heresies of doctrine and
practice imputed to the chivalry. Setting aside those which constituted
infringements of the Decalogue and sins crying to heaven for vengeance,
the major accusations were two--that candidates for reception into the
Order were required to deny Christ and offer a ceremonial outrage to the
Cross, as the symbol of his Passion. The minor accusations were many,
but after disentangling the alleged cultus of the Baphometic head and
some other things which I rule outside our concern, they are reducible
also to two, being (1) the secular absolution from sin which was said to
be given by the Grand Master in open chapter, or alternatively, I
believe, by the preceptors of local commanderies and encampments; (2) a
practice in respect of the Eucharist which did not involve exactly a
denial in doctrine, but exhibited hostility thereto. The first is
important because in a qualified form it was the only charge which was
held proven against the Templars as a result of the examinations in
England; but it is on the second that the whole thesis with which we are
concerned breaks down. The accusation was that in consecrating the
Blessed Sacrament, the necessary and efficacious words were omitted. The
evidence adduced on this question included that of an English priest who
had once officiated for the Templars and who was forbidden to recite the
Clause of Institution.

I do not propose to report upon the validity of the

<span id="page_564">p. 564</span>

charges in whole or in detail; those who are concerned must be
referred--if they can summons such patience for their aid--to the Latin
process of the trial, which was published many years since in France.
The Templars have been accused by learned people of Gnosticism,
Manichæanism, Albigensianism, on the authority of those memorials; but
there is no evidence for such charges; it is wanting also for the other
speculations which are included in my summary above; and, in fine, there
is none also for the suggested Graal connections, though I confess that
my researches were begun in an expectation of the kind. The Templars, if
guilty, as affirmed of old on the worst of all possible authority, were
in the position of the heresies in Southern France; they reduced,
denied, derided, or stood in fear of the Eucharist, and therefore the
abyss intervenes between them and a literature which existed to exalt
it. As regards the German *Parsifal*, it possesses the putative
*tendances suspectes* to which I have referred in more than one
connection. It may be said that the Host which came from heaven was a
designed antithesis to the Host consecrated on earth, but I believe that
this is fantasy, because to hear an ordinary Mass was as much a duty of
knighthood according to Wolfram, as we find it in the *Quest of
Galahad*, the *Longer Prose Perceval* and any of the other romances. I
believe in my heart that the instituted analogy between the *Templeisen*
of Mont Salvatch and the great Order of Chivalry was natural and
irresistible in the mind of the poet who conceived it--whether Wolfram
or Guiot; I believe that it is the only connection and, as I have said,
that nothing follows therefrom. I believe that the sole Eucharistic
privilege enjoyed by the Templars was a decree which permitted them to
celebrate one Mass annually in places under interdict; that they were
militantly papal; that there were next to no instances in which they
renounced their faith, much as they may have dishonoured it by their
lives; and that their foundation under the patronage of

<span id="page_565">p. 565</span>

*la doce mére de Dieu* represented their ecclesiastical ideal. I believe
in fine that their first principles were expressed on their behalf in
the Epistle of St. Bernard *ad Milites Templi*. It was written at the
instance of Hugo, the first Commander, and this fact is all that need be
derived from the prologue. The text itself exhorts the new institution
to strive with intrepid souls against the enemies of the Cross of
Christ, because those to whom death is a reward and life is Christ need
fear nothing. Let them stand for Christ therefore, rather desiring to be
dissolved, that they may be with Him. Let them live in good fellowship,
having neither wives nor children. A later section concerns that
external Temple from which their particular title was taken, and it
compares the glories of the House built by Solomon with the inward grace
of that to which the Order was attached in the spirit. In other words,
this was for St. Bernard a house not made with hands, since the chivalry
was itself a Temple, and, like that of Masonry, the edifice was erected
in the heart. The brethren are in fact described as a Holy City; they
are connected with the idea of the Church itself; and the enumerated
details of the Holy Place are used for spiritual exhortation addressed
to the knighthood. The promise to Zion that its wilderness shall become
an abode of all delights, its solitude a garden of the Lord echoing with
joy and gladness, with thanksgiving and the voice of praise, is said to
be the heritage of the Order, and to watch over their heavenly treasure
should be their chief care--so acting that in all things He should be
pleased Who guides their arms to the battle and their hands to the
warfare.

Whether it profits to add more I question, but this I will say at
least--that I am sacrificing all my predilections and making my task in
the next book much harder by throwing over the Templar hypothesis, not
alone in its connection with the Graal on the historical side, but as
one of the channels through which the Secret Tradition may have passed
in Christian times. I cannot say even

<span id="page_566">p. 566</span>

that I speak under correction, for I question that correction is
possible. I have searched many of these byways with an anxious eye for
the evidence, and I have been haunted with the dreams of those who went
before me in the way, but I have returned so far with hands empty. I can
therefore say only: *magis amica veritas*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Graal Formula in the Light of Other Gleanings from the
Catholic Sacramentary](hchg77.md)
