[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg30)  [Next](hchg32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

##### § *C*.--THE EXTENSION OF GAUTIER

It is certain that the poet who took up the thread of the story which
was left by Chrétien had antecedent texts to go upon outside the work of
his predecessor, and that one at least of these is not to be identified
with purely folk-lore materials. It is considered that the metrical
romance of De Borron was not one of his documents, and on the
hypothesis--or perhaps I should say on the theory--of a primordial
non-Graal Quest--as reflected into the Welsh *Mabinogi* and the English
*Syr Percyvelle*--it would follow that he had seen this. Now, there are
traces in the *Mabinogi* of an intention which might have led up to the
marriage of Perceval and Blanchefleur, if his enchantment by the empress
had not extended over a period which put such a possibility out of the
question. In the English metrical story the marriage is a natural
conclusion, and we have seen that it takes place accordingly. In
Chrétien there are the same traces, and they reappear more strongly in
Gautier, but the term of his intention is unmanifest because he failed
to conclude. The common consent of scholarship would hold probably that
the prototype of both poets celebrated a bridal at its end. It contained
also the widely diffused story of the maiden and the hound, or
*brachet*, which I have held over from the Welsh story to speak of in
this place. Finally, in some form it had the curious episode of the
chessboard. But, fully developed as they are in the long extension of
Gautier, these things are of his accidents only, while of the essence is
his zeal of the Graal Quest, which overrules all things else in his
ingarnering of diverse memorials. Of that quest he has practically two
heroes, and though a superior success attends the search of Perceval the
adventures of his alternate Gawain are recounted at still greater
length. This latter part, taken over from the first poet of the *Conte*,
at once so extended

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

and so important in its Graal elements, is postponed for consideration
separately, registering here the bare fact only that in the section of
Gautier and in the *additamenta* thereto belonging, Gawain appears most
expressly as one of the heroes connected with the vision of the Holy
Vessel. Of their comparative merits there need be no question, as the
grace of sanctity had not entered into the heart of the poet who began
or of him who extended the Graal story. The Sacred Vessel was *glorieus*
and the Sacred Vessel was *sains*, but the election thereto was that of
the best Knight in the world, or his nearest co-heritor in chivalry, and
not of him who was resplendent in the arms of spiritual achievement.
Gawain was therefore, in this sense, scarcely less eligible than
Perceval, and the ground of his comparative failure was either an
implied incapacity from the fact that he was not of the Keepership
lineage or that for some reason it had been decided to regard Perceval
as the more elect hero among two exotic flowers of Knighthood.

Of Perceval himself, however, who for the purpose of introducing Gawain
had been left far behind in the narrative of Chrétien, we hear no single
word till nearly half the work has been accomplished by Gautier. His
story is then resumed at the point when the hero has departed from the
hermitage of that uncle who has brought him into a tolerable state of
repentance, purging him by the offices of the Church, and has
communicated, as if it were in secret Mass or sacred Eucharist, the
first mysteries of the Graal. Perceval had been denounced previously for
the omission which he had almost covenanted to make, and no hope had
been extended that he should yet act as repairer in fine, so that from
initial point to term, as he could then perceive it, some blind and
implacable fatality appeared to have been at work alone. Now, on the
other hand, and if not all too plainly, it looked as if there followed
by inference that a high hope of achievement was held out to him by his
uncle's words; he resolved therefore that he would not return to King

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arthur's court
till he had revisited the Fisher King's Castle and inquired concerning
the Graal. But all without that secret fastness was not only beset by
perils and hard encounters, but it turned in a glass of strange vision
and great deception. Once more, I am not concerned in summarising the
story to take in all its details, because, as usual, several of its
episodes are idle and extrinsic in respect of our proper purpose. The
Castle of all Desire moved near or far upon the confused horizon of
adventure, and at a certain point Perceval reached a river, beyond which
he was assured that the bourne rose up grandly, in a rich and peopled
land; but he could find no means of crossing. The day passed from noon
to vespers, and still on the further side he came to a vacant palace,
beautiful exceedingly in situation, *moult bien séant*, but now standing
drearily in ruins. There he found a maiden who was prepared to show him
a place of crossing and mounted her mule for the purpose, but her
intention was only to drown him. Unless we can connect this incident
with something which will follow presently, I find nothing therein
except an unmeaning hindrance, and the same may be said of an episode
which occurs hereabouts in certain manuscripts, being the meeting
between Perceval and a huntsman who reproached him for the fatality of
the unasked question at the Graal Castle. It shows only that the rumour
of the ill-starred visit had gone about the district, which was
acquainted otherwise, and too well, with the sorrows of the Holy House
and their effects beyond the precincts. As regards the maiden and the
mule, I would note further that in the *Conte del Graal* there is a
curse on Logres which occupies a middle term between times of adventure
and times of enchantment, and one inference may be  that Perceval had
fallen into the hands of a water-fairy, belonging to the kelpie type, as
the malice of an earthly maiden could be assumed scarcely in connection
with such a meeting between complete strangers; or--that which is still
more probable--the brief occurrence may be

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

due only to the sporadic invention of the writer. In any case, the
Knight, having been better counselled, learned of a ford, and so entered
presumably on the direct road which led, by the hypothesis, to the
desired House of Great Hallows. Yet he was still far from his term, and
many adventures in the vicinity intervened without him reaching the
goal. First among these was a visit to another deserted castle--such
desolation being perhaps a part of the curse--and therein he found the
chess-board of which we have heard something in the metamorphoses and
adventures of the Welsh *Peredur*. Here it was no hideous damosel who
came in to upbraid him, but a maid of great beauty, who rose from the
midst of the lake into which Perceval had proposed to cast the board and
pieces. The fact that she held his hands substituted another quest for
that of their recovery in the alternative story. A white stag ranged in
the park of the castle, and if the knight would receive those favours
which her beauty led him to demand he must bring her the head of this
animal, to facilitate which she lent him a hound with express
injunctions to return it. I do not propose to follow the adventures
which arise out of this undertaking. The favours involved by the
covenant had unhappily been granted to Perceval in the case of
Blanchefleur, though not perhaps when her distress, at their first
meeting, had brought her to his bedside, and into his arms afterwards,
through the whole night. Her true love was to follow her liberation by
him from the violence of an undesired suitor. But it was granted
indubitably in the plenary sense when he reached her castle unexpectedly
for the second time. Still it was under circumstances which do not occur
commonly in romances of chivalry unless the consummation of marriage is
intended at the close of all. That she was a bride elect is clear beyond
all in the poem, and in yielding, it was to her husband that she yielded
only, which makes one later episode in Perceval's story the more
iniquitous for this reason. That Perceval was self-devoted to

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Blanchefleur
follows from the episode of the love-trance, but his inclinations are
variable in the *Conte*, as they are in the Welsh story; for the love of
the Lady of the Chess-board he goes through long-enduring quests which
so end that at length he attains his desires. In all this there are only
two points that concern us--firstly, that the attainment involves the
desertion of Blanchefleur under circumstances that for the knight are
disgraceful; and, secondly, that the prolongation of the adventures
which follow the slaying of the stag are due to the daughter of the
Fisher King, or at least in part, and are designed to punish Perceval
for not having asked the question.

I have said that the locality of the Graal Castle is as if it were a
place in flux; there is nothing in the opening of the story to lend
colour to the supposition that the Sacred Vessel and the Mystery and the
House of these were close to the manorial residence and rural retreat
wherein Perceval passed his childhood; hence it is doubtless by reason
that the Castle was here to-day and gone to-morrow that they are brought
suddenly into comparative proximity. Perceval was still in the course of
his stag adventures and still seeking the prize which was to follow
their completion; still also he was hearing casually concerning the
Graal, or at least was in occasional speculation regarding its
whereabouts; when he found himself, without expectation and without
intention, at the door of his old home, for the first time only in ten
years. There he entered, there he tarried but too briefly, and there he
met with his sister--of whom Chrétien knows nothing, even as Gautier
elects to ignore entirely the cousin-german of the earlier poet. He
seems, however, to have been following some earlier stage of the legend,
to which the *Longer Prose Perceval* and the Great Quest also conform,
and in that last and glorious text the personality of the sister is
exalted to a high grade of sanctity, of which we find nothing but the
first traces--for the first traces are present--in the account of
Gautier.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Herein she is a
spirit of recollection and a meditative recluse--

"Une moult très cointe pucièle,  
Blanc com flours en may novele."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But she is clothed
richly withal and encompassed by a fair retinue, so living sad and
unfriended in the woodland, lamenting the loss of her brother, of whose
fate she had heard nothing. When Perceval declared himself there was
great joy between them, and of her he learned the particulars of their
mother's death, through the love and the loss of him. Together they
visited a hermit uncle who is not to be identified with the former,
being on the father's side; to him Perceval made his confession--though
of all prayers he knew only the *Pater noster*--heard at his celebration
a Mass of the Holy Ghost, knelt at the tomb of their mother, and of his
uncle prayed piteously that he might learn concerning the Graal and the
other Hallows. But his uncle would tell him nothing at that time, though
he gave him high instruction regarding holy mysteries of religion. That
the heart of Perceval was not reached, his reverence notwithstanding,
was too soon made evident by the fact that he bequeathed his sister to
renewed isolation, with a mere promise to return which is never
fulfilled, and soon or some time afterwards he was in a position--as we
shall see--to claim and receive his dues from the Lady of the
Chess-board.

Neither sin of concupiscence nor sin of desertion have disqualified him
for the Quest of the Graal in the opinion of Gautier, and he was still
less or more on that Quest when he came to a Castle of Maidens, who were
reputed to have raised the beautiful edifice with their own hands--

"Ains le fisent . IIII . pucièles,  
Moult avenans et moult très bides."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Of these things he
heard the story, though he was weary and looked rather for rest. So was
he delivered to his

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

slumber, but the place was all work of faerie, and he reposed in
enchantment that night. Faerie houses are, however, like faerie
gold--dead leaves and dry in the morning, or mere shadow and rainbow
semblance which dissolve in the eastern light. So Perceval woke in a
meadow with an oak murmuring above him. From all this there follows
nothing, but it is designed that the next adventure should take him a
further step in the direction of his term. It seems that in the
neighbourhood of the Graal Castle there was always a river to cross, and
as on the first occasion he met with a lady and a mule from whom
followed his destruction almost, so now there was another maiden with a
similar beast in her charge, thus creating a kind of equilibrium between
false and true assistance. The story is very long, and much of it is
outside the object, but it may be reduced under three heads: (1)
Perceval was riding with the lady, whom he lost at night in the forest.
Alone and so lost, he beheld a great light--very clear and very
resplendent--but it was followed by tempest. (2) In the morning he
recovered the damosel, who said that it was the light of the Graal,
which the Rich King Fisher was accustomed to carry in the forest, so
that no infernal temptation should have power over him. In the *Conte*
therefore, as in the *Quest of Galahad*, the Graal goes about, but it is
not for the same reason. (3) The maiden described the Vessel as that
which contained the glorious blood of the King of Kings which was
received therein as He hung upon the cross. This is rather the account
of the *Vulgate Merlin* than of Robert de Borron, but the distinction is
one of detail, and it follows that the Early History which was known to
Gautier was that of a relic of the Passion. (4) More than this the lady
would not reveal, because it was a thing too secret for dame or damosel
to recount; it was also a tale of terror, though a man of holy life
might express the marvels. (5) That which she could do she would do,
however--namely, lend him her white mule--the beast which another
romance declares to be on God's

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

side--and she would lend him also her ring, by which the mule was
governed. Thus assisted, he would be able to cross a certain bridge of
glass, from which he might travel direct to the King's Castle.
Thereafter the mule would return of itself. He was not all the same
destined to continue the journey far beyond the waterside. He was riding
the mule, and leading his horse by the bridle, when he encountered a
knight who gave him news of a tourney about to be held by King Arthur,
and--ignoring his original resolve--he turned aside from the straight
path to attend it. The digression delayed his achievement, but it left
him the best knight of the world, and this was a condition of the
achievement. It did not, however, meet the views of the damosel who was
owner of the mule and the ring, for she reappeared and demanded their
return, on ascertaining that his Quest was not achieved. They were both
delivered, and thereafter--without salutation or farewell--he was left
to shift as he might on the way, now all unknown, to the Holy House. It
was at this time, as if once more without God in the world, that his
road took him to the Castle of the Chess-board, for during all these
scenes and times he had carried the stag's head and the dog of the
damosel. The term of this foolish business should have increased the
difficulties of his Quest, but--on the contrary--the lady was to a
certain extent his conductress in place of the maiden of the mule, for
she it was who took him again to the waterside and to a great boat there
at hand which carried him--horse and all--to the opposite shore, beyond
which stretched that broad way which led to the Court of King Fisher.

The subsequent occurrences are all intended to connect intimately with
his arrival thereat and with the Rite of Questioning which is his prime
object, but we shall see in their later understanding that they are
fantastic rather than important, which also appears on their surface. He
found a child of apparently five years old, clothed in rich vestments
and seated on a branch of a tree

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

higher than any lance could reach. Of him Perceval, now full of his
mission, inquired concerning the Fisher King but was told only that if
he would learn news which might prove good and pleasant he must go to
the Mount Dolorous, after which the speaker put a period to further
questioning by ascending higher in the tree and thence vanishing.
Perceval reached the mountain and met with a maid coming down on a
palfrey who counselled him against the adventure, but he began the
ascent and at the summit found fifteen crosses, of which five were
white, five red and five blue. These encircled a pillar, to which he
must fasten his steed. To fail was to lose reason. The achievement seems
childish, but it was a proof of valour devised of old by Merlin in order
that the flower of chivalry should alone serve King Arthur, and the maid
who told this story was Merlin's daughter, of whom we find nothing
otherwise in the canonical romances of the Graal. Seeing that very few
knights of the Round Table ever heard of Mount Dolorous and much less of
the testing, the account seems an idle invention, but it is regarded as
important for early Arthurian history. Perceval being still on his
journey, at the conclusion of this adventure, came next to a great tree
which was illuminated by innumerable candles, like a high altar at the
exposition of the Most Holy Sacrament. It was the spectacle of a moment
only, for the lights vanished on his approach, and he found himself at a
wonderful chapel, where a dead knight lay in repose on the altar and a
black hand, appearing behind the altar, extinguished one great light
thereon. The significance of these things appears in the sequel and does
not signify especially. In fine, Perceval arrived at the Graal Castle,
wherein he found the King and told him of his latest adventures, namely,
those on his way to the Castle. The Hallows appeared, and for the first
time in the poem the expression *Saint Greal* is used in connection with
the actual vision of the object. When the procession had passed

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

and repassed, Perceval asked, as we know, the required questions,
whereat the King told him that these were great matters, and in the
first place he recounted the meaning of the child seated on the branch
of that tree which the knight passed on his way thither. Perceval did
not learn what he wanted, because of his sins, and the episode as a
whole indicated that the thought of man should be raised towards his
Creator--an allegorical trifle which is after the manner of Masonic
teaching, as this appears on the surface, or much ado about little.
Before he could hear further Perceval was invited to piece the broken
sword together, which he did, apparently by the power of his magnetism
as the best knight in the world. He left only a slight crevice at the
point of junction, which I should account for as signifying that other
point in time at which the sin of sense entered into his life--but this
is without prejudice to the explanation provided in one of the sequels
which stand over for consideration. The partial success led the Keeper
of the Hallows to hail Perceval as one of the lords of the House, though
he was told at the same time that the Quest was yet unfinished. As
Gautier dwells more especially on the resoldering of the Broken Sword,
it may be inferred that what still remained was the perfect completion
of this work. The next teller of the story will be found, however, to
import another element, which so far may have been an implicit of the
poem but has not been explicated. For the rest, Gautier explains nothing
concerning that withdrawn and abdicated king, of whom we hear something
in Chrétien, nor does he make more than the one reference, which I have
cited, to the daughter of the Rich Fisher, except that to all appearance
she continued her office as Bearer of the Holy Graal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § D.--The Conclusion of Manessier](hchg32)
