[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg78)  [Next](hchg80) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII

#### THE ANALOGIES OF MASONRY

##### § *A*. THE ASSUMPTION OF THE BUILDING GUILD

The interpretation of doctrine is good, but the thing which is essential
is life, and thereafter those measures of experience which are proper to
the degree of life. In like manner, there is the study of the symbolism
which is outside doctrine but gives evidence of its inward sense;
herein, as I believe, there are the keys of many sanctuaries, or at
least of many gates leading to the holy places; but again it is a
certain quality of life--and this only--which sheds light upon
symbolism, or by which there is an entrance effected beyond the
threshold or artificial and corporate part of secret knowledge and much
more therefore into the Holy of Holies. It is in this sense that it is
said in the old Scriptures: "He is not the God of the dead but of the
living."

As regards the keys and the secrets, it is necessary also that we should
distinguish between life and its records. The latter remain as examples,
as traces, as evidences, and no one should presume to affirm that they
are not of high value. It is, however, after their

<span id="page_577">p. 577</span>

own manner, and although the bodies of the dead may be embalmed, though
they may be laid under all consecrations in the places of rest, and
though there is a certain very true and very high manner in which we
should look for their glorious resurrection, they remain dead bodies
until the Word shall pass above them, crying: "Let these bones live."

It is especially over the place and importance of certain literatures
which contain a hidden meaning, and over certain unmanifested
confraternities which communicate mysteries other than political in
their complexion, that the memorials of the past sometimes prove to be
as lavender laid among linen--fragrant, as it may perhaps be, but dead
as the past which has buried them. So long, for example, as our great,
authorised scholarship--holding, though it does, all warrants of textual
research--has recourse only to pre-Christian Celtic records for an
explanation of the Graal and its literature, so long it will have
nothing to give us but the dry bones of things antecedent in semi-savage
folk-lore, and not the essence which is alive. Again, while other
experts in research seek among the trade guilds of the Middle Ages for
the sources of that which is termed Masonry, they will find nothing that
will communicate to them either life or the life of life. Of the latter
it should be added that scholarship is not in search, and at its sudden
manifestation the old students might be perplexed, and that certainly. I
am writing, however, for those who in literature and in secret
association would look indifferently for some signs of that quest which
they are themselves pursuing--I mean, the Divine Quest. To these I can
say plainly that out of the mere things of genealogy there is nothing
that can rise again. It is only under high light and guidance that the
gift of interpretation, acknowledging all antecedents which have been
demonstrated in the historical order, can relegate them to their proper
sphere, and can say at need to others, as they have said long since to
themselves:

<span id="page_578">p. 578</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Seek not the
living among the dead; this has risen; it is not here."

I have bracketed for the moment the external history of the Holy Graal
with that of Freemasonry, because although the analogy between them is
of one kind only it is an analogy of great importance. As a time came
when the old Celtic folk-tales were taken over in a Christian and indeed
in a mystic interest, as it is only subsequently to this acquisition
that the literature of the Holy Graal can be said properly to exist, so
also came that hour when the mystery--such as it was--of the old
building guild was assumed by another mystery, as a consequence of which
it was re-expressed with a different intention, and it is thus, and so
only, that, as a shadow of things beyond it, there came into being the
association which we understand as symbolical Masonry. So far as we can
regard it under the aspect of a succeeding or co-incident witness, the
epoch of Kabalism was prolonged by the scholiasts of the *Zohar*, until
that period when the next witness was beginning to emerge. After this
manner I return to my initial statement that the gift of interpretation
is good, but that which is essential is life. It is only the spirit of
life which can account, in whatever form it was manifested, for the
assumption either of the romance-literature or the particular craft.
Without it we have indeed interpretations, as we have also hypotheses of
origin, but they are devoid of true roots. As a species of
extra-illustration in the first case, there have been various hypotheses
put forward which are neither countenanced by the records of the past
nor characterised by a gift of understanding; while in the second case
we have had simply the romance of archæology or that alternative gift
which fills gaps in history by arbitrary suppositions masqued thinly in
the guise of fact. Official authorities may be sometimes short of sight,
as they are, outside their horizon, but these unaccredited
intermediaries have brought their subjects

<span id="page_579">p. 579</span>

into something approaching disdain, though a sense of justice inclines
me to add that creators of wild hypothesis, with all their distracted
material, sometimes make shots in the dark which come nearer to the true
goal than the more sober skill which aims only in one direction, but at
what happens to be a false object.

The historical side of Masonry has at this day its expositors and
students who are characterised by the same patient and untiring spirit
which supports other branches of research. They have done valuable work
in the past and again will do so in the future, but at present all zeal
is held in suspension by the exhaustion of materials--I speak here of
the things which are or would be of living and high importance, not of
those which are subsidiary or accidental. These too serve their purpose,
but they have little or no office in the larger issues; they keep green
the spirit of inquiry, which takes into its field the things that
signify little and so keeps its hands on the plough. It is better for
that spirit to investigate at need the memorials of local lodges than to
perish of enforced inanition. It is excusable also, and in a sense it is
even good, to exaggerate in one's mind the importance of such tasks, to
make much of the little till the great comes in our way, and then to
make more of that. But some things--and these vital--which exceed the
sphere understood as that of research, pass out of sight in this manner,
because, excepting for very gifted, very keen--may I say?--illuminated
minds, a dry stick in the hand, though it has no probability of blooming
like Aaron's rod, is for some practical purposes more convenient than a
live sapling at the top of an inaccessible hill. This is rather the
position of those things out of sight which I have at the moment
mentioned; the lesser memorials and their aspects tend to keep them
where they are--in remote and unnoticed distances. It is not my design
to impeach the historical sense--to which all exaltations and
crowns!--but there is a dual difficulty in the path of

<span id="page_580">p. 580</span>

the perfect term, for the heart of imagination--and those orders--is
inhibited by this sense, while imagination, in the excess of its
enthusiasm, takes the heart out of history and sets in its place I know
not what spirit of fantasy. Between these gulfs on either side of the
prudent way, to be an historian is hard.

For myself--if I may be permitted to say so--I present the first
consideration of the Holy Graal from a mystic standpoint, which, so far
as I am aware, is founded on the requisite knowledge of every existing
text. It is such knowledge or its result that enables me to take the
*via prudentiæ* which I have mentioned, and to find that, accepting most
statements made by official scholarship with any show of evidence, all
the important points remain in my hands unaffected. In exactly the same
way we can afford--and that gladly--to let the Masonic authorities
prosecute their search for still earlier records of the building guilds,
while in the absence of fresh materials we can sympathise with their
sorrow and aspiration. If things much more archaic than have been so far
found should in fine reward their vigilance, it will be all honour to
their industry, but it will be also small concern of ours. Let us make a
ceremonial obeisance before anything of this kind which may yet
transpire, as we do--and also gladly--before the records of Mary's
Chapel. I know beforehand the best that can be said about those which
are possibly to come, as I know of those which are among us. They will
be, as these others are, excellent and valuable within their own degree,
but they will not signify beyond it, and they will not serve any purpose
which I can claim to cherish in common with those to whom my appeal is
made herein. The Elohim may have formed Adam of the dust of the earth,
but it is useless to question that dust concerning man who was created
male and female, as the sign of life and its perpetuity. It is useless
equally to question the old craft guild concerning symbolical Masonry,
since it was not by a natural development

<span id="page_581">p. 581</span>

that the one was transformed into the other; the seeds of the
transformation were brought from very far away, or, to express it more
correctly, the craft, as we have it, is not an example of growth after
the ordinary kind but of an exceedingly curious grafting. The ground of
contention is not that things of handicraft could never have developed
by possibility into allegory and symbolism, but that they could not, as
the result of that process, have produced the synthesis and summary of
all past initiation which we find in the symbolical degrees. Now, it is
at the point of grafting, or taking over, and this because of the
results which I have just specified, that we, as transcendentalists or
mystics, become concerned--and then only--in Masonry.

For the better illustration of my purpose let me now make a short
distinction concerning three classes: (1) There are those who have a
love for the *minima* of instituted mystery; who, if they are carefully
sifted, would be found to attach some importance to the possession in
common with B and C of certain titles, signs and passwords which are
unknown to X and Y; (2) there are those who believe, and this in all
honesty, that morality is enhanced when expressed, let us say, in
parables; when materialised by analogical representation; when decorated
by a ceremonial pageant; (3) there are, in fine, those who are looking
for the real things, among whom we ask to be inscribed--at least as the
lovers of truth, if we cannot with the same boldness demand to be
classed among those who love God. This lesser--or is it an
equivalent?--nomenclature we require on the faith that our certain
criteria enable us at least to know in what directions, and under what
circumstances, it is useless to go in search of real things.

It will be agreed that the first class does not call for our serious
attention; they are children, with full licence to take all joy in their
play. The second class is entitled to a measure of our respect, for they
are at

<span id="page_582">p. 582</span>

least on the side of the natural goodness, and they recognise in their
own mode that it is not exactly in a position to stand alone. At the
same time they mistake a means for an end, and they do not know where to
turn for the only efficacious consecrations; so that these also signify
only in the lesser degree. I have indicated already that it is to the
third class that all my thesis is addressed; its members are in a
position to appreciate the historical aspects at their proper value,
giving to this natural Cæsar all that belongs to Cæsar, yet confessing
to some great reservations, which are not less than the things that
concern God.

Speaking therefore in the interests of this class, and in terms which
they will understand, there is a sharp alternative as follows: Masonry
is either consanguineous by the root-meaning of its symbols and legends
with schools of real experience; either it shows forth the one thing
about which we have been in labour from the beginning, or it returns in
the last resource into the category of the Worshipful Company of
Vintners, of Cardmakers, of Fishmongers, and so forth. These are
admirable institutions, and to be free of them, which is not easy, is no
less than a civic distinction. So also are the friendly societies, in
their way, excellent, including that Order of Buffaloes which, perhaps
because it is late in its series, is termed antediluvian; but if we are
incorporated by these it is for much the same reason that we may be
members of a Ratepayers' Association, namely, for benefit and protection
in common. These are good reasons, but it is not on account of eternal
life that they move us in a given direction.

Eternal Life--initiates, companions and brethren of all the
sodalities!--I know well that from the mere reference there will follow
the irresistible question: What is there in Masonry, or in any of the
allied Orders, which can justify us in suggesting that they might or
could be taken up in conjunction with a quest after eternal life? Now,
the most pertinent questions are those

<span id="page_583">p. 583</span>

which have replied to themselves already in the mind of the speaker,
and, in this case, the persons who would ask might answer: Masonry is
obviously the remanent of a trade guild, which once had its trade
secrets and covenanted those whom it received to divulge nothing in
respect of its mystery to any who were outside the particular craft of
building. They would not conclude at this point, but we may intervene
for a moment with an observation on our own part. Assume that, so far as
it has proceeded, this is a correct answer, and what then follows? It is
not now a building guild; it has no longer any trade secrets; there is
perhaps no class of society which would be more utterly discounselled by
the suggestion that it should design edifices, or should even dig
foundations and lay bricks. To this extent therefore, as the inheritors
of a building guild, the Order is apparently stultified. It has as
little part in its antecedents and precursors as had the Christ of the
fourth gospel in the coming Prince of this world. The proper answer of
symbolical Freemasonry as to the operative art might well be: In me it
hath not anything.

Those even who are acquainted merely with the rituals of craft
Masonry--and they may be numerous enough outside the ranks of the
brotherhood--will here intervene and say, in continuation of that answer
which I have so far given in part: That is true, or at least in a
certain sense; but the old craft guild became symbolised, and its
instruments, and ritual procedure, were taken over--since, you emphasise
the term--by the genius of allegory, so that things which were
originally physical were exalted into the moral order, and thus they
remain till to-day, as the rites, teachings and documents prove
indubitably. This is estimable and convincing in its way; it so happens,
however, that an appeal of the kind is going to prove too much; and yet
it is by such a clear issue that we shall reach one term of our subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § B. Masonry and Moral Science](hchg80)
