[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg02)  [Next](hchg04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

# BOOK I

### THE ROOTS OF THE HOUSE OF MEANING

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### THE ARGUMENT

*Heads of a General Summary of the whole subject, with the analysis
thereof, including:--*I. SOME ASPECTS OF THE GRAAL LEGEND*.--The word
which came forth out of Galilee--The sacramental vessel--Its history and
the quests thereof--The Graal in the books of chivalry--The Graal in
modern poetry--The composite elements of the Legend--The Graal as a
reliquary.* II. EPOCHS OF THE LEGEND*.--The higher understanding of the
Quest--The outlook of romanticism--The attitude of poetry--The direction
of archæology--The prospect which is called spiritual--The consideration
of the present thesis--The hidden motives of the literature--Its
critical difficulties--Concerning the interpretation of Books.* III. THE
ENVIRONMENT OF THE GRAAL LITERATURE*. The Catholic Doctrine of the
Eucharist--The passage of Transubstantiation into Dogma--The Cultus of
the Precious Blood--Relics of the Passion, and, in the first place,
concerning those of the Precious Blood--The discovery of the Sacro
Catino--The invention of the Lance at Antioch--The Sword of St. John the
Baptist--The state of the Official Church--The Church in Britain--The
Holy Wars of Palestine--The higher life of Sanctity and its annals in
the Graal period--The sects of the period.* IV. THE LITERATURE OF THE
CYCLE*.--Its various modes of classification and that mode which is most
proper to the present inquiry--The places of the Graal Legend--The Welsh
Peredur and the English Syr Percyvelle--The Conte del Graal--The Lesser
Chronicles of the Holy Graal--The *

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Greater
Chronicles of the Holy Graal--The German cycle--The question which is
posed for consideration.* V. THE IMPLICITS OF THE GRAAL MYSTERY*.--The
first consideration concerning a concealed sense of the literature--The
Secret Words of Consecration and what follows therefrom, namely, that a
true Mass has never been said in the world since the Graal was taken
away--The super-apostolical succession, the peculiar Divine Warrant and
ecclesiastical pre-eminence claimed for the Graal Keepers--That these
claims must be distinguished from errors of doctrinal confusion and
theological ignorance, of which there is evidence otherwise--That any
concealed sense must be held to co-exist with manifest insufficiency,
even within its own province, and more especially regarding the
Eucharist--That there is no intention to present the Graal Mystery as
that of a secret process at work outside the Church--The Lesser
Implicits of the literature*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Some Aspects of the Graal Legend](hchg04)
