[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg51)  [Next](hchg53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

# BOOK VI

## THE GERMAN CYCLE OF THE HOLY GRAAL

### I

#### THE PARSIFAL OF WOLFRAM VON ESCHENBACH

THOSE who in recent times have discussed the poem of Wolfram with titles
to consideration on account of their equipment have been impressed not
alone by the signal distinctions between this German poem and the
Perceval legends as we know them in Northern France, but by a
superiority of spiritual purpose and a higher ethical value which are
thought to characterise the knightly epic. For the moment, at least, it
can be said on my own part that we are in the presence of a poet whose
work is full of gorgeous pictures, all rude diction notwithstanding, and
all contemporary reproaches made upon that score. To me--but as one who
on such subjects speaks with a sense of remoteness--the traces of
Oriental influence seem clear in the poem, partly in its decorative
character and partly in its allusions to places--after every allowance
has been made for geographical confusions. Such traces are allowed, and
they are referred to the source of Wolfram, about which I must say
something in this section to introduce the separate inquiry which will
follow hereafter. But we are asked in our turn to recognise that the
*Parsifal* is the most heterodox branch of the whole Graal cycle, though
it

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

is said to be the work of an ecclesiastic. This idea is represented by
authoritative statements on the part of scholars who have scarcely
produced their evidence, and by sporadic discursive remarks on the part
of some other writers who could have been better equipped. In this
manner we have (*a*) the negative inference drawn from a simple
fact--as, for example, that the *Parsifal* does not exhibit that
hostility towards Mohammedan people and things which characterised
Crusading times--but as much might be said about other texts of the
Graal; (*b*) the positive opinion that the chivalry of the Graal Temple
resembles an association formed without the pale of the Church rather
than within--which on the authority of the poem itself seems untrue, and
this simply. Those who expound these views look for an explanation to
the influences exercised theoretically by Knights Templars and the sects
of Southern France--which possibilities will be considered in their
proper place in respect of all the literature. As a preliminary, by way
of corrective, I desire to record here that if the *Parsifal* is
heterodox, its elements of this order have been imbedded below the
surface, and then, deeply, but whether it implies in this manner any
secret religious claims which are not of sect or heresy is another
question. On the surface it would be easy to make a tabulation of many
points which manifest an absolute correspondence with Church doctrine
and ordinance; but it will be sufficient for the moment to say that Mass
is celebrated and heard as it is in the other romances; that confession
is not less necessary; and so far as there is allusion in particular to
dogmatic teaching, that it is of the accepted kind, as of the conditions
and day of salvation: Mary is the Queen of Heaven, and the Lord Jesus
dies as man on the Cross; the Divinity of Three Persons is included in
one God. Sometimes there is an allusion which looks dubious, but it is
mere confusion, as when a hermit speaks of a soul being drawn out of
hell, where the reference is of course to the purgatorial state.

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

The story of the Quest in Wolfram may be considered in the interests of
clearness under two heads, the first of which is designed to develop the
specific analogies with other romances of the Perceval cycle, while in
the second there are exhibited the specific points of distinction. As
regards the analogies, it is to be understood that I reserve the right
to omit any or every episode which does not concern my purpose. It is to
be understood further that all analogies are under their own reserve in
respect of variation. Let it be recalled, in the first place, that the
historical side of the Perceval legend in the *Conte del Graal* of
Chrétien is in a certain state of confusion. That poet left so much to
be desired on the score of clearness about the early life of his hero
that another poet prepared some antecedent information, but he spoke
according to tradition and forgot that the matter with which he
intervened was not in complete accordance with Chrétien's own account,
so far as he had one. All continuations of the *Conte* were either too
late for Wolfram or were for some other reason unknown by him; but it
may be said that Gautier and Manessier produced their romantic
narratives following several prototypes, not of necessity connected with
their character-in-chief *ab origine symboli*. Gerbert, who was
evidently under the obedience of a prototype which was peculiar to
himself in the Northern French cycles, had perhaps some lost Perceval
Quest, if not that actually which we connect with the name of Guiot.
With the *Didot Perceval* Wolfram has only those points of concurrence
which belong to the common primordial source, and with the *Longer Prose
Perceval* his features of likeness are in so far as both texts stand
together by themselves. Under these qualifications, the salient lines of
correspondence by way of likeness with the French cycle may be collected
as follows.

The genealogy in the *Parsifal* is simple; it is the triad, which is
permanent on earth as the Holy and Undivided Trinity is eternal in
Heaven. But in most

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

texts the Trinity of the Graal Keepership is by way of succession and
therefore feeble; Wolfram, on the other hand, ends with a perfect symbol
in the union of those who have reigned with him who shall reign
henceforward, whereas all other quests of Perceval leave him alone in
his kingdom at the end absolute of the great adventure. The German Kings
of the Graal are Titurel, Frimutel and Amfortas. The first is the
founder of the dynasty--in respect of the Graal Keepership--and he
remains alive, like Brons in Robert de Borron, the maimed King Pellehan
in the *Quest of Galahad*, and that nameless hidden sovereign who
anteceded King Fisherman in the *Conte del Graal*. The second has died
in war, which was not in the cause of the Graal, and it is partly for
this reason that Perceval must intervene to renew the triad. The nearest
analogy to this is in the *Didot Perceval*, which after the achievement
of the Graal pictures the questing knight abiding in the place of the
Hallows with Blaise and Merlin as two substituted keepers, though at the
close it detaches the prophet and puts him into mystic retreat, as if at
the term of the ages--when Avalon gives up its exiles--he might again
manifest and testify. There is also another analogy, but this is of the
implied kind, for in the *Parsifal* and the *Didot Perceval* he who has
achieved the Quest remains, and the Sacred Vessel--in apparent
perpetuity--that is to say, in the House of the Hidden Hallows. Both
elect knights--shadows of a single personality--arrived, that they might
stay in fine.

The father of Parsifal was a king's son--as he is occasionally in the
other romances--and it is said in more than one place that he came of
the fairy lineage. It was on the mother's side that the youth was by
generation a son of the house, and therefore entitled, supposing that he
was otherwise prepared, to return therein. She was Herzeleide, sister of
the Graal King and Queen, in her own right, not only of Wales but Anjou.
The father was named Gamuret, but in the course of

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

knightly adventure he was slain shortly after his marriage and the birth
of his only son in respect of this union. That he may be saved from the
fatal knowledge which in those days was involved by the life of
chivalry, there follows--with many variations--the concealment of
Parsifal by his mother in the wild places and woodlands. It does not
appear what she did to insure the rule of the kingdoms, but her result
was that the two countries fell into other hands. She who had been born,
as one may suppose, in that secondary light which is the shadow of the
Holy Graal--since she does not seem to have been an inbred Daughter of
the House--might have acted better and more wisely to have reared her
son--in the spirit and intention at least--as a child of the Sacred
Talisman instead of a wild boy of the woods. Far otherwise than she did
the twice-born Hermit Nasciens, who had Galahad in his keeping; far
otherwise did they of the White Abbey, among whom Galahad was found by
Lancelot. But the fatality was working with greater power because she
strove the more; Parsifal met all the same with the knights of King
Arthur's Court, and rode forth as usual--not with her consent indeed,
but with the dangerous folly of her cautions--in search of the Grade of
Chivalry. Almost immediately after her parting with Parsifal, she died
in the grief of his loss. He, as in other stories, reached the pavilion
of the Sleeping Lady, and he took not her ring only but also a buckle.
In this instance she seems to have been unwilling throughout, and the
youth behaved brutally.

Before reaching the Court of King Arthur he met with his cousin Sigune,
and it should be noted here that there is no sister in this version of
the Quest. Of her he learned his proper name and so much of his
genealogy as was requisite to assure him that he was the legitimate King
of Wales, in the defence of which right there perished her own lover,
whose body remained in her charge after the mad manner of the romances.

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

As geographical names signify little or nothing, the court of King
Arthur was held at Nantes, and on his arrival thither the old episode of
the dwarfs was exchanged for that of a maiden who could not laugh until
she beheld the best knight in the world. She was struck and insulted by
Kay for paying this honour to one of Parsifal's outlandish appearance,
and a considerable part of the story is concerned incidentally with the
youth's resolution to avenge her and a certain silent knight who, after
the manner of the dwarfs, found speech to hail his advent and was also
chastised. The Red Knight appeared as usual and Parsifal obtained his
armour, the grievance being that the knight had taken a cup from the
Round Table and spilt wine upon the robe of the Queen. But the secondary
detail was a matter of accident and one regretted deeply, for in this
story only the Red Knight is a hero after the true manner; he is also
the youth's kinsman, and his death--which occurs as usual--is a stain on
Parsifal rather than to the glory of his prowess.

So proceeds the story, and so far as it follows the long weariness of
the worn way, even its decorations can lend it only a secondary
interest. I think also, and it must be said, that even in his exaltation
the hero kindles little sympathy, whereas Galahad enthrals for ever. The
next incident in our scheme is Parsifal's instruction in chivalry, which
took place at the castle of Gurnemanz, who was the brother of the Graal
King, but this relation was not declared to his pupil. As in the
*Peredur*, he is responsible for the fatality of the unasked question,
and in both cases there is the same want of logic on the surface which
probably covers A a secret intention. The result otherwise of the
instruction was that Parsifal ceased from his folly.

This experience completed, he asked his teacher at their parting to give
him his daughter when he had done something to deserve her; but it
appears to have been more in conformity with her father's implied wish

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

than through a keen desire of his own, and we hear nothing further of
either. His next task brought him to Belrepaire--in siege by sea and
land and wasted by famine. There he succoured the Queen Kondwiramour,
who corresponds to Blanchefleur, and there also he married her. We are
now in that region which we know to have been travelled by Gerbert, and
as for him the espousals left the lovers in virginity, so, according to
Wolfram, the marriage was not consummated till the third night.
But--whereas a high motive actuated the two parties in the French
romance--in the German poem there was no mutual concordat but a kind of
spurious chivalry on the hero's side which he overcame in the end.
Parsifal, however, was still espoused only to the notion of adventure,
on which he again set forth, this time to meet with the Fisher King and
to learn that the Graal Castle was close at hand, like all things that
are greatest. As regards his qualifications for the visit, it would seem
that, even in the Holy Place, he thought chiefly of knightly combats and
wondered how he should find them in such surroundings. The Fisher King
was Amfortas, the Maimed King, and the procession was that which I have
described previously and at needed length. The Castle was full of
splendour and chivalry, but it was also full of sadness: the story is
one of suffering and sorrow. The relation between host and guest was
that of uncle and nephew, but as usual it did not transpire on this
occasion. Parsifal also failed to ask the vital question, but it should
be noted that, although grievous sin was attributed to him on this
account, he had not been warned so distinctly--either here or in the
*Conte del Graal*--that there would be a question to ask as he was in
the *Didot Perceval*. He went forth unserved from the Castle, but there
is no suggestion of any external enchantment, nor did he find that the
whole country had been laid under a mysterious interdict which had
rendered it utterly waste, or that the inhabitants were abandoned to
various forms of

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

distress. On account further of the normal offices of Nature, it is to
be understood that he left the Castle as a knight who has finished his
visit--that is to say, he rode away; it was not the Castle which left
him by a sudden process of vanishing. In the world outside he was
reproached by his kinswoman Sigune, who still had the body of her lover.

The familiar pursuant adventures must be mentioned briefly. The Lady of
the Pavilion was fairly exonerated by Parsifal and sent with her
vanquished lord to the woman who could not laugh at the court of King
Arthur, where she proved to be the knight's sister, so that Kay was put
to shame. Arthur rose up and set forth on the quest of Parsifal, who was
found in the love-trance and brought to the royal tent. There he was
made a Knight of the Round Table, and thither came the laidly
Kundrie--that baleful messenger of the Graal, who was also God's
minister--to curse and denounce him for his ill-fated course at the
Castle. She told him much which belongs to the second branch of our
subject, but also of his mother's death, by which news he was
overwhelmed, and by the shame of the messenger's wrath tempestuous. He
departed from that court as a man who had lost his faith, yet he went
*pro forma* at least--on the Quest of the Graal. After long wanderings
he met again with his cousin Sigune, whose lover had found a sepulchre,
near which she lived as an anchoress and received food from the Graal
which was brought her by the sorceress Kundrie. At a later period,
Parsifal, being still in his sins, and cherishing no thought of God, met
with the pageant of pilgrims on Good Friday, but his better nature did
not return to him so quickly as in the other stories. In due course he
reached the hold of a hermit, who--here as there--was his uncle, to whom
he confessed everything and from whom he learned--subject to certain
variations--the story of the Graal in full.

When he is heard of next in the poem, the chance of war had brought
Parsifal in collision with Gawain,

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

and they failed to recognise each other until the latter suffered
defeat. The victor was restored in this manner to the court of King
Arthur, passing henceforth to and fro between that world and the more
external world of adventure. To the court on a certain occasion, with no
preface or warning, there again came Kundrie, sorceress and messenger,
carrying the news of Parsifal's election to the Holy Kingdom of the
Graal. Thereat he rose to his feet and recited the secret story of the
great Palladium, as he had learned it from the lips of the hermit; he
told how none could attain it unless he were called thereto; and in
virtue of that calling, in his own case, he took leave of the chivalry
for ever. He reached the Consecrated Castle, beheld the Hallows therein,
and asked the necessary question, to the king's healing and the joy of
those who were delivered from the thrall; of his long suffering.

I have left out of this consideration all reference to Gawain, who
occupies a third part of the whole story, and whose marriage is
celebrated therein. He undertook the Quest of the Graal, and though much
followed thereupon in the matter of high adventure he did not attain the
term. To say this is to indicate in one word an important point of
difference between this text and the stories which have been studied
already. There are other variations, but I will mention one of them
only, that I may have done with this extraneous matter; it concerns the
character of Gawain, which is one of knightly heroism and all manner of
courtesy and good conduct. Wolfram knew nothing apparently of that later
fashion of calumny which was set by the *Romance of Lancelot*.

The reader is now in a position to understand how far this summary
corresponds with the general outline of Chrétien and with the brief
quest in the *Didot Perceval*. He will also trace the salient analogies
with the *Welsh Peredur*, and, in a lesser degree, with the English *Syr
Percyvelle*. In fine, he will see that so far as the schedule reaches,
it has no correspondence in adventure with the *Longer Prose* 

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Perceval*, which
is the second part only of the knightly Quest. I have mentioned,
however, that the last text has vague reminiscences of a source which
may have been that of Wolfram, and the two romances converge in the path
of their greatest divergence from other texts. We have now to consider
the points of distinction in the *Parsifal*--which are a much more
serious question--and I shall do so under three subdivisions, the first
of which will deal with the romantic episodes, the second with the Graal
itself, including its concomitants in symbolism, and the third with the
source of Wolfram, thus leading up to the considerations of my next
section.

A morganatic union was contracted by the father of Parsifal, prior to
his marriage with Herzeleide, as one consequence of a journey eastward
in search of adventure. He was the means of salvation to a heathen Queen
Belakané, whose throne he shared for a period, and although no rite of
wedlock is mentioned, she is described as his wife invariably. The
inference is that this union was not one which the Church would
recognise; but Gamuret is not exculpated, because it is quite clear that
he had every opportunity to convert her and to lay the Christian
religion like a yoke on the neck of her kingdom. He would be, therefore,
responsible for not making the attempt, an episode which does not
correspond to a very high sense of honour, while his subsequent
marriage--which is not challenged by the poet--would be thought little
less than disgraceful if the hypothesis of scholarship had not allocated
the poem of Wolfram to so high an ethical level. The fruit of the first
union was the pagan prince Feirfeis, who, being born in the East under
such circumstances, is harlequined--that is to say, is represented as
half black and half white, to indicate his dual origin. The death of
Gamuret was the result of a second visit to the East. He heard that the
King of Bagdad was beset by the princes of Babylon, and having served
him in his youth he was impelled to go forth to his rescue. In one of
the ensuing battles he took off his

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

helmet and laid it down for a few moments on account of the heat. A
pagan knight poured thereon the blood of a he-goat, and that which was
previously like diamond in its hardness became soft as sponge. The
result was that the King of Alexandria cut with his spear through the
helmet and penetrated the brain.

I have mentioned here the first point of distinction between the more
narrative part of the poem and the other quests of Perceval; the second
concerns Kundrie, who acts as the messenger of the Graal. She is
described as faithful and true, possessing all knowledge--according to
the institutes of the period--and speaking all tongues. But she was
repellent in appearance beyond the physical issues of Nature, as a
combination indeed of gruesome symbolic animals. She was a sorceress
also, as we have seen, though this is perhaps a technical description of
the period, expressing only the sense of her extraordinary knowledge.
She is not, however, to be identified with the evil side of the powers
of Avalon, concerning which we hear so much in the *Lancelot* and later
Merlin texts, nor is she exactly a fay woman--that is to say, the
Daughter of a School of Magic--as conceived by the French romancers,
since she does not practise magic or weave enchantments. Her impeachment
of Parsifal at the Court of King Arthur turned wholly on his failure at
the Graal, and was interspersed with prophecy which future events made
void. I must say that her discourse reads only as the raving of one
distracted, and that by which she was distracted was the sorrow in the
House of the Graal. As Parsifal might have disarmed her by the simplest
of all explanations--being that which he gave subsequently to the Round
Table itself--and as thus he had at least his personal justification
reposing in his own heart--it is curious, and particular to the story,
that he should take her reproaches so deeply into his inward nature that
he held himself shamed almost irretrievably, though the court did not so
hold him. The effect was greater than this, for it hardened his heart
against God

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

and converted one who had never been ardent in faith, who had never so
far experienced a touch of Divine Grace, into an utterer of open
blasphemy. Other stories say that he had forgotten God, but in Wolfram
he remembers and rebels.

The *Parsifal* does not give us an intelligible history of Kundrie; it
does not explain why the messenger of the Graal was or had become
unlovely; or why it connects, however remotely, that sacred object with
one whom it terms a sorceress. We only see that she comes and goes as
she pleases, or is thereby commissioned, in and about the Holy House:
she carries the palliatives administered to the wounded King to a place
where they become available for Gawain, and she brings the food of the
Graal to Parsifal's cousin, Sigune.

The intervention of the magician Klingsor in the story leaves us also in
doubt as to what he represents in the scheme. He came of the race of
Virgil--whom mediæval tradition presents as a potent enchanter--and was
originally a duke of noble life till he was ensnared by unholy passion,
for which he was heavily visited, being deprived of the instruments of
passion. Those who know anything of occult traditions will be aware that
this affliction would have been an almost insuperable barrier to his
success in magic, but Wolfram, who knew only by hearsay, and then at a
very far distance, says that he was made a magician by his maiming,
meaning that he visited the secret city of Persida, the birthplace of
magic--on its averse side apparently--and received initiation in full,
so that he could work all wonders. He erected *Chateau Merveil*, which
is a sort of contradiction, in terms of diabolism, to the Castle of the
Holy Graal, as his own life is an analogy by travesty of that of the
King of the Graal, who had also sinned in his senses, at least by the
desire of his heart. *Chateau Merveil*, however, seems to lack
intention, for the magic which built it was not proof against the
personal bravery of Gawain, who put an end to the enchantments and

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

became the lord of the fortress. It should be added that Klingsor
himself does not appear in the poem, so that he is a king in hiding.

I have little cause to delay over the history of Feirfeis, the brother
of Parsifal, who came with a great host westward in search of chivalry
and his father, only to learn that the latter was dead when he and
Parsifal had nearly slain each other. Feirfeis married before leaving
his native land, but as Wolfram von Eschenbach begins his knightly epic
with one cruel adultery, so he ends it with another, eclipsing his
previous record by uniting Feirfeis, within the sacred walls--after his
baptism--to the pure and wonderful maiden who through all her virgin
days had carried the Holy Graal. Now, I pray that God may preserve us
from these high ethical values which we have known under rougher names.
To make bad worse, when the wedded pair proceed on their journey
eastward, the news of his first wife's death was brought to Feirfeis,
which caused him to rejoice in the journey, though it seems an indecent
satisfaction. I have read some weird criticisms which are designed to
depreciate it, but--while God continues willing--I set my own heart on
the *Quest of Galahad*. In fine, as regards this marriage the issue was
a son, who received a name the equivalent of which was *Jean le
prêtre*--that is to say, Prester John, the great, legendary, sacerdotal,
Christian King of the furthest East, the rumour concerning whom went
forth over Europe at the end of the twelfth century.

After the union of all the characters of the story--who are within the
sphere of election--at the Castle of the Graal, which, as in Chrétien so
here also, is never the *Holy Graal*, the poet passes to the history of
Lohengrin--the son of Parsifal and Kondwiramour. He became the Knight of
the Swan, whose legend was transferred by Wolfram from what is termed
the Lorraine epic cycle. We shall hear further concerning him and the
transmission of the Sacred Talisman to Prester John in the *Younger
Titurel* of Albrecht von Scharfenberg. Kardeiss, the

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

second of Parsifal's twin sons, was crowned in his infancy as King of
those countries which were the more earthly heritage of his father.

A few matters of lesser importance may be grouped here together: (1)
There is an account of the mother of King Arthur which is the reverse of
the other legends; it is said that she fled with a clerk who was versed
deeply in magic--one would have thought a reference to Merlin, who
otherwise at least is unknown to Wolfram. Arthur is said to have pursued
them for three years. (2) There is no Siege Perilous and no reference to
Lancelot. (3) Parsifal is elected to his kingdom by the fiat of the
Graal itself. (4) The mystic question in Wolfram seems to be the most
natural and ineffective of the literature, its words being: What aileth
thee here, mine uncle? (5) It is essential that this question should not
be prompted, but Parsifal's uncle on the mother's side gives him the
information in full and so makes void the condition; yet Parsifal asks
in the end, and all is well with the King.

I pass now to the matter of the Graal itself, to the Hallows--imputed,
or otherwise--connected therewith, and the subsidiary subjects, in so
far as they have not been treated in the considerations of the second
book. It will clear the important issues in respect of implicits if I
say that in the German cycle there are no secret words, there is no
strange sacerdotal succession, while the religious side of the mystery
is distinct, and so utterly, from that of the French romances. The Graal
is not a chalice--and much less a chalice containing the Blood of
Christ: it is a stone, but this is not described specifically when it is
first beheld by Parsifal. It is carried on a green cushion and is laid
on a jacinth table over against the Warden. It is called the crown of
all earthly riches, but that is in respect of its feeding properties, of
which I shall speak presently. It is not termed a stone, which is the
current account regarding it, till the Knight hears its history from the
lips of his uncle Trevrezent. The names which are then applied to it are
Pure and Precious,

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Lapis exilis*
(literally, *Lapis exilix*, but this is a scribe's mistake and is
nonsense), and it is also that stone which causes the phoenix to renew
her youth. No man can die for eight days after he has seen it,
and--although this virtue is forgotten in the case of Titurel, who is
described as an ancient of days--those who can look on it daily remain
in the appearance of youth for ever. It is subject, apparently, to a
periodical diminution of virtue, and it is re-charged like a talisman
every Good Friday by the descent of a dove from heaven carrying a Sacred
Host: she deposits it thereon, and so returns whence she came. It
follows that the mystery of the *Parsifal* is certainly an Eucharistic
mystery, although at a far distance, seeing that it never communicates
supersubstantial bread. What it does distribute actually we have learned
elsewhere, for at the supper-table in the Castle it acts as an
inexhaustible larder and superb hotch-pot, furnishing hot or cold, wild
and tame, with the wine-cups of an eternal tavern. As a peace-offering
to the rational understanding, there is a vague suggestion that the
stewards of the Castle provide the salt, pepper and sauces. Wolfram von
Eschenbach describes this abundance as (*a*) earthly delight in the
plenary realisation thereof, and (*b*) joy which he is justified in
comparing with the glories of heaven's gold bar. Long researches dispose
the heart towards patience--perhaps because of their weariness; let me
be satisfied therefore with registering the bare fact that this story is
supposed, by those who know, to be the high spiritual quest of all, on
which authority I am casting about me for the arch-natural side of an
alderman's dinner. The writing on the Graal Stone might well be:
*esurientes implevit bonis*. I note also that in the pageant a stone is
put upon a stone, but those who remember *super hanc petram ædificabo
ecclesiam meam* may be asked to desist.

The sacred character of this wonderful object--which solves for those
who are called the whole difficulty of getting a material living--is
explained by the antecedent

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

part of its history. It was brought to this earth by a company of
angels, who gave it into the charge of certain baptized men, the first
of whom was Titurel. In the Northern French cycle the origin of the
Sacred Vessel is explained in a manner which, within its own limits, is
quite intelligible; it may be almost said to begin in Nature, though it
ends in the Great Mystery. To the Cup used by Christ at the Last Supper
no unusual qualities attach; Robert de Borron says that it was *mout
gent*, but it is only in the sense of an utensil at the period. This is
probably the earliest description which we have, and it is left by most
of the later texts in similar comparative simplicity. The arch-natural
character resided solely in the content. To sum up, the chalice of the
French cycle began on earth and was taken to heaven, but the history of
the German Hallow is the converse of this; its origin is celestial, but
in the end it is left on earth. Let it be remarked in conclusion that
there is no reason assigned for the bringing of the Graal to earth, nor
do we hear of its purpose or nature prior to this event.

The Lesser Hallows of the story have scarcely a title to the name, as
they have no connection with the Passion of Christ or any other sacred
history. The Graal King was wounded in ordinary warfare by a poisoned
spear, and this was exhibited in the Castle, but not as a memorial or a
symbol of vengeance to come, for the heathen who smote him died at his
hands in the joust. We know already that the Lance has a prodigal
faculty of bleeding, but it is to no purpose. The Sword seems to be
merely an ordinary weapon of excellent quality and temper; it was used
by the King before he fell into sickness; it is given to Parsifal as a
mark of hospitality apparently; it will break in one peril, but somehow
the poet forgets and the event does not come to pass. No Dish is
specified as part of the official procession; and the two silver knives,
though they have a certain history, for they were made by the smith
Trebuchet, serve only some or, dubious purpose in connection with the
King's sufferings.

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As regards these,
we know that the sin of Amfortas, for which he has been punished full
long and in which he awaits the help of the mystic question, was a sin
of earthly passion. The Graal is an oracle in Wolfram, as it is in
Robert de Borron, but according to the latter it spoke, while here it
writes only. In this manner it calls maidens and men from any place in
the world to enter its service, but the maidens it calls openly and the
men in secret. It also appoints the successor of the reigning King and
the wife whom he must take unto himself. With his exception, the life of
celibacy is imposed on all the chivalry of the Castle. With the women it
seems to have been different, but those who married went out into the
world. The sin of Amfortas, which led to his grievous wound, was--as I
have just said--a sin of earthly passion, but not apparently of that
kind which is consummated in shame. The Graal had not announced that
this keeper should take a wife, and he had gone before its judgment by
choosing a lady for his service, in whose honour he went beyond the
precincts of his kingdom in search of knightly deeds. She was the
Duchess Orgeluse, who became. subsequently the wife of Gawain. In
accepting the service of Amfortas, as later that of her future husband,
she was pursuing only a mission of vengeance on one who had destroyed
the prince to whom her love had been dedicated from the first days of
desire. The King of the Graal was abroad on these ventures when he met
in a joust with a heathen, who had come from the region about the
Earthly Paradise with the ambition of winning the Graal. We have seen
that the unqualified aspirant after the secret knowledge died in the
tourney, but Amfortas went home carrying the poisoned spear-head in his
flesh, and thereafter he abode as the King in suffering and even in
punishment. It follows that the cause of battle was true and righteous,
but the motive which created the place was, I suppose, the root of
offence, and for that he was bruised grievously. All the resources of
healing were sought in the world of

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nature and that of
magical art: the Graal itself in vain; in vain the waters of Paradise;
the blood of the Pelican, the heart of the Unicorn, that bough which the
Sybil gave to Æneas as a palladium against Hades and its dangers, and
the magic herb which springs from the blood of a dragon--but these too
in vain. Finally, the appeal was referred to the Sacred Talisman by
offices of prayer, and a writing which appeared thereon announced the
condition of healing--to wit, the visit of a knight who should demand
knowledge concerning the woe of the Castle. It is the only version in
which this Mystic Question is shown to originate from the Graal itself.
It is also the only version in which sin enters the Sanctuary, and it is
therefore important to show that it is a sin of sense in the lowest
degree; it is rather a transgression of obedience. There are stated
periods in the story for the increase of the King's suffering, being the
close of the wandering of Saturn, causing frost and snow in summer on
the heights where the kingdom is situated. The cold is agony to the
Keeper, and it is then that the poisoned spear is used to pierce him
again; it re-opens the wound, but it keeps him alive, for it draws out
the frost in crystals--which crystals are removed apparently from the
weapon by the silver knives of Trebuchet.

The Castle in Wolfram is supposed to have been situated on the northern
slope of the mountains of Gothic Spain, while on the southern side, or
in Moorish Spain, was the Castle built by Klingsor--that is to say,
*Chateau Merveil*, containing the *Lit Merveil* of the other romances.
The name allocated to the first was that of the eminence itself--Mont
Salvaage, Salväsch, or Salvatch. There is no account of the building or
of the incorporation of the chivalry; but (*a*) the Graal Knights are
chosen, as we have seen, by the Graal itself as opportunity offers or
circumstances seem to require; (*b*) they may be elected in childhood;
(*e*) they constitute an aggressive military order, going sometimes on
long missions; (*d*) they cannot be regarded as a perfect nor

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

yet as an invincible chivalry, for one of them is overthrown by Parsifal
in combat, when on his quest of the Castle; and here, as in other
respects (*e*) they recall and are practically identified by Wolfram
with the Knights Templars, having also the same order name. Scholars who
have investigated this part of the subject trace a distinct connection
between the House of Anjou and the Graal Brotherhood; it should be added
that the lineage of Anjou is the subject of continual reference in
Wolfram's poem, and Parsifal is of that legitimacy.

At the beginning of his chronicle Wolfram testifies to a single
prototype from which alone he drew; he cites its authority continually
in the course of his poem; in one place he gives a very full account of
it; and he testifies concerning it at the end. He knew otherwise of
Chrétien's version, but he suggests that it was the wrong story, with
which the fountain-head might be reasonably indignant. The authentic
text was the work of Guiot de Provence, and from that region it was
brought into the German fatherland. It was not invented by Guiot, but
was found by him under circumstances the account of which is in one
respect a little out of harmony with itself. It lay rejected or
forgotten in the city of Toledo, and being in the Arabic tongue, the
first task of Guiot was to learn that language. This he accomplished by
the sacramental grace of baptism and the holy illumination of faith.
Without these aids to interpretation the tale would have remained in
concealment, for, according to its own testimony, no pagan talents could
have expressed the great mystery which reposes in the Graal. This is so
far clear, but the difficulty is that it was written in the first place
by one who ranks as a heathen for Wolfram--that is to say, one who on
the father's side was a worshipper of idols, though on the mother's,
apparently, of the royal line of Solomon. This was in the days which
preceded Christ, and the Jew was the first in this world who ever spoke
of the Graal. That which enabled him to do so was his gift of reading

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

the stars, wherein he saw wondrous secrets, for the story of the Graal
was written in a celestial galaxy. On this basis the scribe wrote more
especially concerning the descent of angels to earth carrying the sacred
object and concerning certain baptized men who were placed in charge
thereof. This being the record attributed to a Jew before the first
dispensation had suffered supersession, no one will. be surprised to
learn that his name was Flegetanis; but here ends the account concerning
him. Guiot may have been, reasonably or not, dissatisfied with the
transcript from the starry heavens, but he confesses only to anxiety
about the identity of those who had been appointed the wardens, and
after consulting old Latin works, he went in quest of them through
France, Britain and Ireland, but did not attain what he wanted until he
arrived in Anjou, where he found the story of the Keepers faithfully and
truly registered--that is to say, concerning Titurel, Frimutel and
Amfortas. It is clear therefore that the Jew of Toledo told the early
history of the Graal but gave no version of the Quest. I deduce from
these data two conclusions, one of which is speculative and personal to
myself at the moment: (*a*) The appeal of Guiot, like all the other
romancers, is to an antecedent authority and, like some of them, to a
primordial text; (*b*) the story of Flegetanis has suffered what is
termed contamination by the introduction of extraneous matter, being all
that which was not included in the record of the starry heavens, for
which reason I set down as a tolerable presumption that neither Guiot
nor Wolfram told the true story, however ample the evidence on which the
version of Chrétien was condemned. I suppose that I shall be accused of
fooling or alternatively of preternatural gravity, but I mention these
matters because of what will be said hereafter concerning a lost book of
the Graal. Three points remain to be mentioned here: (1) Guiot seems to
have cautioned those who reproduced his story to hide the chief matters
until the end thereof, and this is cited by Wolfram,

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

though it can be said scarcely that he carried out the injunction; (2)
if Wolfram followed Guiot, and him only, it seems certain that Guiot
himself recounted several adventures to which his translator alludes
merely in passing; however, they do not concern us; (3) the authority of
Guiot, though often held to be an invention of Wolfram to conceal his
indebtedness to Chrétien, has of late years been demonstrated.

The consideration of the Graal as a stone belongs to a later book of my
experiment, but that the coming event may cast its shadow on these
particular pages, I will add here a few subjects of reflection; they
will prepare the ground for those who have ears to hear me, even if they
are as a rock of offence to some others who are impatient of ways in
thought which they have not sought to enter. (*A*) For *Lapis
exilis*--in any higher sense--I should read only *Lapis angularis*, but
this is put forward rather by way of interpretation than of alternative
or amendment. We have seen that the term exilis is the speculative
construction of a nonsensical word, and as such it does not help towards
understanding; if there were authority to support it, one would recall
that passage in Wolfram's Quest which says that in the hands of her who
was qualified by grace to carry it, the Graal was a light burden, but it
was heavy beyond endurance for those who were unworthy. In this respect
it was like the *Liber exilis*, which was held by the hermit of the
*Book of the Holy Graal* in the hollow of his hand, but this unrolled in
his rendering till it grew to be a goodly folio. (*B*) Whosoever says
*Lapis angularis* in this connection should add *super hanc petram*.
(*C*) It is true also that he who wrote *Lapis exilis*--if indeed he
wrote it--implied as its complement: *nobis post hoc exilium ostende*.
(*D*) This stone is the head of the corner and the key of the Royal
Arch. (*E*) The Stone which tinges is also the Stone which burns; if
not, the Phœnix would fail of rebirth. (*F*) There is another form of
the Graal Mystery in which men ask for Bread and are given a Stone,

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

but this is *Lapis exilii*--a healing nutriment, and it is designed to
restore the Banished Prince on his return home. (*G*) It can be well
understood that the stars over the Graal speak in a strange language.
(*H*) I rule therefore that much remains to be said for the clear sight
of that Son of Israel and Paganism who found the Graal-record in a
galaxy of stars, and though the method by which that record is decoded
will not be found in the course of a day's reading at any observatory, I
am quite sure that the stars still tell the same story, that it is also
the true story, which owes nothing to the Chronicles of Anjou. (*I*)
When the Jew of Toledo read in the great sky, as in a glass of vision,
it does not mean that he arranged the fixed lights into conventional
forms, but that he divined as a devout astronomer. (*J*) The Mystery
which the stars expressed is that by which, in the last consideration,
all the material planets are themselves ruled.

Let those who will chide me on the ground that I "sit and play with
similes," but this is the kind of symbolism which Guiot de Provence
might have brought over from the place which he terms Toledo, and this
the imputed Jew of that city might have read in the starry heavens. In
the chronicles of Anjou, or their substitutes, Guiot might have found
the remanents of the Bowl of Plenty and even some far-away fable
concerning a certain Stone of which Templar initiation could speak to
the higher members of that Order of Chivalry; but the two notions do not
stand even in the remote relation which subsists between Aleph and Tau.

Lastly, and that I may act on myself as a moderator, if there or here I
should seem to have suggested that an enthusiasm has exaggerated the
*Parsifal*, I have spoken of things as they appear on the surface and as
they have been understood thereon by those who have preceded me. We
shall see in its place whether there is another sense, and the readers
to whom I appeal may have marked enough in my bare summary of the text
to conclude that there is. I place it at the moment only as a tolerable
inference.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Gleanings Concerning the Lost Quest of Guiot de
Provence](hchg53)
