[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg73)  [Next](hchg75.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

#### THE LATIN LITERATURE OF ALCHEMY AND THE HERMETIC SECRET IN THE LIGHT OF THE EUCHARISTIC MYSTERY

It will be understood that the sects of Southern France, holding various
offices of protestation, testified by act and word that the gates of
hell had prevailed against the Latin Church and that the efficacious
doctrines, the plenary rights, were in their hands. In other words, they
had a special office in religion, and, I must add, the fatality of a
superior process--all which instructs us precisely and fully why the
Mystery of the Holy Graal was beyond their horizon and why they form no
part of the Secret Tradition in Christian times. Their exponents--it is
all as you please--were kings or rebels in warfare; they were
unaccredited and disputatious doctors; they were errant preachers of a
new-fangled scheme for the improved spiritual housing of priest-ridden
classes. They trafficked--if you please otherwise--in Brummagem wares of
apostolic Christianity; they were pedlars, and they carried no licence;
their goods were either contraband or they were put forward under false
marks. But if you prefer an alternative--since nothing in respect of
them carries the least consequence--they handed down, diluted or
otherwise, the remanents of some earlier heresy, gnosis, or occult
confection of dogma, and if in respect thereof they concealed their real
beliefs, nothing which signifies in respect of our

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

proper concern reposes behind the evasion. If I have any view on the
subject--and honestly I have next to none--they were perhaps the
Protestants of their period, dealing in poisonous nostrums of pure
doctrine, simple faith, Bible Christianity, and they circulated
uncorrupted interpretations of the Word of God--all horrors of that
spurious simplicity which takes the wayfaring man into the first pit. We
who know that *omnia exeunt in mysterium* have recited long since our
*Asperge* and have turned aside from such blasphemous follies.

Outside these sects, there were two great concurrent schools of secret
thought which were developing in Europe at the period of the Graal;
there was the wonder and the rumour of alchemy and there was the great
sacred mystery of Kabalistic Jewry. The first was scattered all over the
western countries, and its reflection at the period in England was Roger
Bacon, though, as it so happens, he signifies nothing for our purpose.
The chief seat of the other was in Spain, but it had important academies
coming into being in the South of France. I shall take my first
illustration from Alchemy, and it must be understood that on the surface
it claims to put forward the mystery of a material operation, behind
which we discern--but this is not invariably--another subject and
another intention. Speaking generally, the evidences of a Secret
Tradition are very strong in alchemy and they are strong also in other
schools of thought which will remain subsequently for our consideration.
But seeing that it may strike the unversed student as not less than
fantastic that I should choose the old and dubious science of metallic
transmutation to cast light upon the Eucharistic side of the Graal
Mystery, I must in the first place explain that two governing motives
will actuate the whole inquest which follows hereafter: (1) To ascertain
whether the concurrent or succeeding schools of secret thought, which
appeared in Europe before or after the canon of the Graal was closed,
offered any analogies to the notion of

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

an arch-national Eucharist, or--in other words--to the existence,
prosecution and success of the Great Experiment; and (2) whether they
offered anything which corresponds with the alternative notion of a
voided House of Doctrine. The concurrence or competition which may
subsist between the two theses will be mentioned at the term of the
research. It is obvious, meanwhile, that we shall not expect to find
secret words of consecration or some concealed form of the Mass, because
we are investigating the analogies of intention which may be imbedded in
distinct literatures. If we came across, for example--as we might, if we
cared to seek--an occult requiem for the soul of a dead alchemist, we
should set it aside simply as impertinent rather than relative. It will
prove--and quite naturally--that such literatures will contain many
secret verbal formulæ but not those which we should require if our zeal
went before our discretion and we sought after secret words--as, for
example, a super-efficacious version of the *Epiclesis* clause. The same
counsels of prudence will teach us not to expect in the other schools a
replicated claim regarding super-apostolical succession; it is
sufficient--and it does not concern us either--that the epopts of these
imbedded Christian and cognate mysteries were ordained specially and
strangely in the paths which they followed for the proper term
thereof--but this is of election to the mysteries. Lastly, we shall not
look to find a plainer expression than we have met with already in the
rumours of the Graal sanctuary, but though we are dealing in some cases
with the most cryptic of all literatures and in others with elusive
forms of initiation, we shall find as a fact that there is less room for
misconception than--all things considered--might be expected. I premise,
therefore, that the great Eucharistic experiment, concealed under the
supposition of a secret consecration formula, has its strict analogy in
the second sense attributed to the doctrines and processes of alchemical
transmutation; while the loss of the Graal--or its

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

counterpart, the loss of the gracious and piteous words--has its analogy
in the loss of the word in Kabalism and in the symbolical science of
Masonry. We have seen already that the analogies of the Graal Quest are
in the annals of sanctity and the present researches are the other side
of the same annals. It follows that there is a super-incession between
all the schools, but it is of the ideological order only and of the
experience thereto belonging, and not of successive derivation. Perhaps
I ought to add that the true interpretation of alchemy depends upon a
construction of symbolism which has not entered previously into the
heart of criticism.

At the period of the Holy Graal the books of the Hermetic Adepts were in
a state of transition, or alternatively they corresponded to the
elements of folklore before the Great Christian Hallow reigned in the
Kingdom of Romance. In other words, the Secret School of alchemy began
in an experimental operation pursued on material things, but the school
was taken over subsequently, though at a time when the Graal literature
was only a sacred memory. It is this mystery which was the next witness
in the world.

Alchemy may not have originated much further East than Alexandria, or,
alternatively, it may have travelled from China when the port of
Byzantium was opened to the commerce of the world. In either case its
first development, in the forms with which we are acquainted, is
connected with the name of Byzantium, and the earliest alchemists of
whom we have any particulars and any remains in literature constitute a
class by themselves under the name of Byzantine alchemists. The records
of their processes went further eastward, into Syria and Arabia, where
they assumed a new mode, which bore, however, all necessary evidence of
its origin. In this form the texts do not appear to have had a specific
influence upon the *corpus doctrinale* of later days. The records were
also taken West, like other mysteries of

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

varying importance, and when they began to assume a place in western
history this was chiefly in France, Germany and England. In other words,
there arose the cycle of Latin alchemy, passing at a later date, by the
way of translation, into the vernaculars of the respective countries,
until finally, but much later, we have original documents in various
almost modern languages. It follows--but has not been noticed so
far--that the entire literature is a product of Christian times and has
Christianity as its motive, whether subconsciously or otherwise. This
statement applies to the Latin Geber and even the tracts which are
ascribed to Morien and Rhasis. The dubious and the certain exceptions
which prove the rule are the colloquy of the *Turba
Philosophorum*--about which it is difficult to speculate in respect of
its source--and the Kabalistic *Æsh Mezareph*--which we know only by
fragments included in the great collection of Rosenroth. I suppose that
there is no labyrinth which it is quite so difficult to thread as that
of the *Theatrum Chemicum*. It is beset on every side with pitfalls, and
its clues, though not destroyed actually, have been buried beneath the
ground. Expositors of the subject have gone astray over the generic
purpose of the art, because some have believed it to be (*a*) the
transmutation of metals, and that only, while others have interpreted it
as (*b*) a veiled method of delineating the secrets of the soul on its
way through the world within, and besides this nothing. We have on our
part to realise that (*a*) there were two schools making use of the same
language in a distinct sense, the one branch seeking the transmutation
of metals and the art of prolonging life, the other branch investigating
the mysteries of arch-natural life; and that (*b*) more than one
text-book of physical alchemy would seem to have been re-edited in this
more recent, exotic interest. It is to the latter that I refer when I
speak of an intervention in alchemy by which it was assumed, and--while
preserving the same veils of language--was transformed in

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

respect of its purpose. I deal therefore with the *corpora spiritualia*
of the mystic school; we can leave to the physical alchemists those
things of Cæsar which belong to them, retaining the things which concern
the mysteries of divine symbolism.

The true philosophers of each school are believed to have taught the
same thing, with due allowance for the generic difference of their term,
and seeing that they used--as I have said--the same language, it would
seem that, given a criterion of distinction in respect of the term, this
should make the body of cryptogram comparatively easy to disentangle.
But as one of the chief problems is held to reside in the fact that many
text-books do not begin at the same point of the process, this advantage
of uniformity is cancelled largely. There are affirmed to be
experimental schools still existing in Europe which have carried the
physical work much further than it is ever likely to be taken by an
isolated student; but this must be accepted under some notable reserves,
or I can at least say that, having better occasions than most people of
knowing the schools and their development, I have so far found no
evidence. But there are known otherwise to be--and I speak here with the
certainty of first-hand acquaintance--other schools, also experimental,
also existing in Europe, which claim to possess the master-key of the
mystical work. How far they have been successful in using that key, and
whether it opens all locks, I am not in a position to say, for reasons
which those who are concerned will regard as obvious. It so happens,
however, that the mystery of the process is one thing and that which
lies on the surface, or more immediately beneath the externals of
concealed language, is fortunately another thing. And, as in this case
it occurs for our salvation, the enlightening correspondences are
offering their marks and seals, if not at our very doors, at least in
the official churches. Among all those places that are holy there is no
holy place in which they do not abide, *a mane usque ad vespertinum*,

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

and the name of this correspondence is the Holy Eucharist.

Before entering further into this matter, I propose to tabulate certain
palmary points of terminology which are common to all the
adepts--including both schools indifferently, though we are dealing
here, and this is understood fully, with the process of one school. By
the significance of these terms we shall see to what extent the
symbolism of the Higher Alchemy is in conformity with mystic symbolism
and with the repose of the life of the Church in God. We shall see
further in respect of the operations that some are in correspondence
with that High Mass which was once said in Corbenic. It should be
realised, however, that there is nothing so hard and so thankless as to
elucidate one symbolism in the words of another, and this
notwithstanding the identity which may be indicated as the term of each.
It should be understood further, and accepted, that all alchemists,
outside the distinctions of their schools, were actuated by an express
determination to veil their mystery, and that seemingly they had
recourse for this purpose to every kind of subterfuge.

At the same time they tell us that the whole art is contained,
manifested and set forth by means of a single vessel which, amidst all
manner of minor variations, is described with essential uniformity
throughout the multitude of texts. This statement constitutes a certain
lesser key to the art; but as on the one hand the alchemists veil their
*vas insigne* by reference, in spite of their assurance, to many
pretended vessels, so has the key itself a certain aspect of subterfuge,
since the alleged unity is in respect only of the term final of the
process in the unity of the recipient. This unity is the last reduction
of a triad, because, according to these aspects of Hermetic philosophy,
man in the course of his attainment is at first three--body, soul and
spirit--that is, when he sets out on the Great Quest; he is two at a
certain stage--when the soul has conceived Christ,

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

for the spirit has then descended and the body is for the time being
outside the Divine alliance; but he is in fine one--that is to say, when
the whole man has died in Christ--which is the term of his evolution. So
in the Graal Mystery there are three seekers who attain after their own
measure--Perceval, Bors and Galahad--who are distinguished from the
hereditary incapacity of Gawain, from the particular inhibition of
Lancelot, and from the external election of the King.

The black state of the alchemical matter, on which the process of the
art is engaged, is the body of this death--"the dedeley flesshe"--from
which the adepts have asked to be detached. It is more especially our
natural life. The white state of the Stone, the confection of which is
desired as a chief term of the art, is the vesture of that immortality
with which the epopts are clothed upon.

The Salt of the Philosophers is that savour of life without which the
material earth can neither be salted nor cleansed. The Sulphur of the
Philosophers is the inward substance by which some souls are saved, yet
so as by fire. The Mercury of the Sages is that which must be fixed and
volatilised--naturally it is fluidic and wandering--but except under .
this name, or by some analogous substitute, it must not be described
literally outside the particular circles of secret knowledge. It is
nearer than hands and feet.

Now, the perfect correspondence of these things in the symbolism of
official Christianity, and the great mystery of perfect sanctification,
is set forth in the great churches under the sacramentalism of the Holy
Eucharist, behind which we see in the liturgies and ritual of the Graal
a high rendering of the same subject under the same terms, as if there
were secret wardens who were aware of certain insufficiencies and of the
way in which they might be rectified. The same exalted mystery which
lies behind the symbols of Bread and Wine, behind the undeclared
priesthood which is according

<span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

to the Order of Melchisedech, was expressed by the alchemists under the
guise of transmutation; but it is understood that I refer here to the
secret school of adeptship which had taken over in another and
transcendent interest the terminology and processes of occult
metallurgy. The confusion of distinct symbolisms signifying the same
thing makes for no illumination; but because of the identity in the
term, because both schools deal with the same thing, and because the
same thing is everywhere, the natural analogy of these symbolisms,
distinct as they are, can, by maintaining their distinction--that is,
without mutation of the accidents--be made to elucidate each other. In
the last resource, therefore, the physician heals himself; but I am
speaking here of that which wise men have termed the Medicine.

The vessel is consequently one, but the matter thereto adapted is not
designated especially, or at least after an uniform manner; it is said
to be clay by those who speak at times more openly in order that they
may be understood the less, as if they also were singing in their
strange chorus:

"Let us be open as the day  
That we may deeper hide ourselves."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is most
commonly described as metallic because on the surface of the literature
there is the declared mystery of all metals, and the concealed purpose
is to show that in the roots and essence of these things there is a
certain similarity or analogy. The reason is that the epopt who has been
translated again finds his body after many days, but under a great
transmutation, as if in another sense the *panis quotidianus* had been
changed into the *panis vivus et vitalis*, but--as I have just
said--without mutation of the accidents. The reason is also that in
normal states the body is--here and now--not without the soul, nor can
we separate readily, by any intellectual process, the soul from the
spirit which broods thereover,

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

to fertilise it in a due season. There is, however, one vessel, and this
makes for simplicity; though it is not by such simplicity that the art
is testified to be a *ludus puerorum*. The contradistinction hereto is
that it is hard to be a Christian, which is the comment of the man born
blind upon the light that he cannot see. It is the triumphant
affirmation of the mystical counter-position, that to sin is hard indeed
for the man who knows truly. The formula of this is that man is born for
the heights rather than the deeps, and its verbal paradox is: *facilis
ascensus superno*. The process of the art is without haste or violence
by the mediation of a graduated fire, and the seat of this fire is in
the soul. It is a mystery of the soul's love, and for this reason she is
called "undaunted daughter of desire." The sense of the gradation is
that love is set free from the impetuosity and violence of passion, and
has become a constant and incorruptible flame. The formula of this is
that the place of unity is a centre wherein there is no exaggeration.
That which the fire consumes is certain materials or elements which are
called *recrementa*, the grosser parts, the superfluities; and it should
be observed that there are two purgations, of which the first is the
gross and the second the subtle. The first is the normal process of
conversion, by which there is such a separation of components seemingly
external that what remains is as a new creature, and may be said to be
reborn. The second is the exalted conversion, by which that which has
been purified is so raised that it enters into a new region, or a
certain heaven comes down and abides therein.

It is not my design in this place to exhaust the sources of
interpretation, because such a scheme would be impossible in this
sub-section, and I can allude therefore but scantily to the many forms
of the parables which are concerned with the process up to this point.
The ostensible object--which was material in the alternative school--was
the confection of a certain Stone or Powder,

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

which is that of projection, and the symbolical theorem is that this
powder, when added to a base metal, performs the wonder of transmutation
into pure silver or gold, better than those of the mines. The Stone
transmutes what is base, but in its own elements it has undergone
transmutation itself, from what is base to what is perfect. In another
form it prolongs life and renews youth in the adept philosopher and
lover of learning. In this case it is spoken of usually as an elixir,
but the transmuting powder and the renewing draught are really one thing
with the spiritual alchemists. As it is certain that under any light of
interpretation the Stone of the Graal is not actually and literally a
stone--nor found in the nest of the phoenix--it may be held to follow as
a reasonable inference that the Cup or Chalice is not a cup actually or
literally, much less a vessel which contains blood, *sang réal* or
otherwise. In like manner, if there is one thing which appears than
another more clearly in the books of the Philosophers, it is that the
Stone of alchemy is not a stone at all, and that the Elixir of alchemy
is not a brew or an essence which can be communicated in ewers or
basins. The Stone, on one side of its symbolism, represents more
especially the visible sign of the mystery, and it is spoken of as
offering two phases--of which one is white and the other red.

It must be affirmed further that in virtue of a very high mysticism
there is an unity in the trinity of the stone--or powder--the metal and
the vase. The vase is also the alchemist, for none of the instruments,
the materials, the fires, the producer and the thing produced are
external to the one subject. At the same time the inward man is
distinguished from the outward man; we may say that the one is the
alchemist and the other the vessel; it is in this sense that the art is
termed both physical and spiritual. But the symbolism is many times
enfolded, and the gross matter which is placed within the vessel is the
untransmuted life of reason, motive, concupiscence, self-interest and
all that which

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

constitutes the intelligent creature on the normal plane of
manifestation. Hereof is the natural man enclosed in an animal body, as
the metal is placed in the vessel, and from this point of view the
alchemist is he who is sometimes termed arrogantly the super-man. But
because there is only one vessel it must be understood that herein the
Stone is confected and the base metal is converted. The alchemist is
himself finally the Stone, and because many zealous aspirants to the Art
have not understood this they have failed in the Great Work on the
spiritual side.

The schedule which now follows may elucidate this hard subject somewhat
more fully, if not indeed more plainly: There are (*a*) the natural,
external man, whose equivalent is the one vessel; (*b*) the body of
desire which answers to the gross matter; (*c*) the aspiration, the
consciousness, the will of the supernatural life; (*d*) the process of
the will working on the body of desire within the external vessel; (*e*)
the psychic and transcendental conversion thus effected; (*f*) the
re-action of the purified body of desire on the essential will, so that
the one supports the other, the will is again exalted, and therefrom
follows this further change--that the spirit of a man puts on a new
quality of life, becoming an instrument which is at once feeding and
itself fed; (*g*) herein is the symbol of the Stone and the Great
Elixir; (*h*) the spirit is nourished from above by the analogies of
Eucharistic ministry--that is to say, the Dove descends from Heaven
carrying the arch-natural Host to renew the virtues of the Stone; (*i*)
the spirit nourishes the soul, as by Bread and Wine--that is, the Bread
is taken from the Graal; (*k*) the soul effects the higher conversion in
the body of desire; (*l*) it comes about thus that the essence which
dissolves everything is still contained in a vessel, or alternatively
that God abides in man.

This process, thus delineated exhaustively in the parables of alchemy,
is put with almost naked simplicity

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

by Eucharistic doctrine--which says that material lips receive the
super-substantial Bread and Wine, that the soul is nourished and that
Christ enters the soul.

The Eucharistic Bread signifies the super-substantial sustenance, and
the Wine is arch-natural life. It is for this reason that the Alchemical
Stone at the red has a higher tingeing and transmuting power than the
Stone at the white. The first matters of the alchemical work, to make
use of another language of subterfuge, are Sulphur, Mercury and Salt;
but these are the elements of the Philosophers and not those of the
ordinary kind. In other words, common Sulphur and Mercury correspond to
the Bread and Wine before consecration, and the philosophical elements
are those which have been transubstantiated by the power of the secret
words. That which is produced is called *Panis Vivus et Vitalis* and
*Vinum Mirabile*, instead of the daily meat and drink by which we ask to
be sustained in the Lord's Prayer. The Salt is that which is called the
formula of consecration; it is that which salts and transmutes the
natural earth. When Christ said: "If the Salt lose its savour, wherewith
shall it be salted? "this can be understood of the super-excellent and
extra-valid consecration; the removal of the Graal signifies that of a
certain arch-natural salting, yet the salt of sufficing grace remains,
like that of nature, and in its way also it communicates. Christ further
said: "You are the salt of the earth"--and this is the true priesthood.

That which the text-books have agreed from time immemorial to term a
Stone is that also which we find in greater Gospel books, where it is
described as a Stone not made with hands, and the transmutation
performed thereby is the work of inward conversion, resulting in the
condition which one of the adepts recommends to his disciples when he
exclaims: "*Transmutemini, transmutemini à lapidibus mortuis in lapides
vivos philosophicos*." The possession of the Stone is, in other words,
the possession of the tingeing Christ.

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

It should be understood, therefore, that the First Matter in
transcendence--that is, in the state of the Stone--must be taken to
signify the elements after conversion has been operated by the secret
words of consecration. But the words signify here the Divine Life, and
the process which really takes place is represented by the most
sacramental of all words: *Et verbum caro factum est* (And the Word was
made flesh). In this new light of alchemy we may continue, if we please,
to regard the elements of the Graal as the communication of the
Eucharist in exaltation, of which our own Eucharist is only a shadow and
substitute or we can do what is the same thing and is preferable in
respect of finality, that is, we can transfer the entire symbolism to
man who is the recipient of the Eucharist, the vessel of reception, the
subject of conversion, the container which in the outward order is less
than the thing contained, the life which receives the life above all
life that is manifest and known. Without man the conversion and
transmutation of elements would be void of all office, since there would
be no *terminus ad quem*.

Prior to the efficacious consecration we may assume that the simple
elements are those substances, or, if we prefer it, are that one
substance variously manifested, which, as the alchemists tell us so
expressly, may be found everywhere. It is of no account till the Wise
have introduced their mystical ferment therein. Having concealed it
under a thousand names, they say in their strange manner that it is
known by these; and so also some of them have declared in their
derision, as against all the untutored material operations which involve
a prodigal outlay, that he who spends upon the Great Work more than
thirty thalers--not including the cost of personal maintenance--has
already passed aside from the whole truth of the process. It follows
from these elucidations that the higher understanding of the Eucharist
and the mystic side of alchemy are concerned with the same subject, that
is to say, with man, his

<span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

conversion and transfiguration: the implicits are therefore the same,
and of these things alchemy was the next witness in the world after the
epoch of the Holy Graal.

But though it seems therefore within all reason and all truth to testify
that the *panis vivus et vitalis* is even as the transmuting Stone and
that the Chalice of the New and Eternal Testament is as the renewing
Elixir, the witness is subject to the reserve of my previous indication;
the closer the analogies between distinct systems of symbolism the more
urgent is that prudence which counsels us not to confound them by an
interchangeable use. The priest as priest neither dealt in the symbolism
of alchemy nor assumed its external offices; the alchemist as alchemist
did not celebrate Mass. It is true notwithstanding that all Christian
mysticism--whatever its vestures--came out of the Mass-Book, and it is
true that it returns therein. But the Mass-Book in the first instance
came out of the heart mystic which had unfolded in Christendom. The
nucleus of truth in the Missal is: *Dominus prope est*. The Mass shows
that the Great Work is in the first sense a work of the hands of man,
because it is he, officiating as a priest in his own temple, who offers
the sacrifice which he has purified; but the elements of that sacrifice
are taken over by an intervention from another Order, and that which
follows is transfusion.

Re-expressing all this now in a closer summary, the apparatus of
mystical alchemy is indeed, comparatively speaking, simple. The first
matter is myrionymous and is yet one, corresponding to the unity of the
natural will and the unlimited complexity of its motives, dispositions,
desires, passions and distractions--on all of which the work of wisdom
must operate. The vessel is also one, for this is the normal man
complete in his own degree. The process has the seal of Nature's
directness; it is the graduation and increasing maintenance of a
particular fire. The initial work is a change in the substance of will,
aspiration and desire, which is the

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

first conversion--or transmutation in the elementary sense. But it is
identical, even to the end, with the term proposed by the Eucharist,
which is the modification of the noumenal man by the communication of
Divine Substance. Here is the *lapis qui non lapis, lapis tingens, lapis
angularis, lapis qui multiplicatur, lapis per quem justus ædificabit
domum Domini, et jam valde ædificatur et terram possidebit per omnia*,
&c. When it is said that the Stone is multiplied, even to a
thousandfold, we know that this is true of all seed which is sown upon
good soil.

So, therefore, the Stone transmutes and the Eucharist transmutes also;
the philosophical elements on the physical side go to the making of the
Stone, which is also physical, and the sacramental elements to the
generation of a new life in the soul. He who says *Lapis Philosophorum*
says also: My beloved to me and I to him. Christ is therefore the Stone,
and the Stone in adept humanity is the Union realised, while the Great
Secret is that Christ must be manifested within.

Now, it seems to me that it has not served less than an useful purpose
to establish after a new manner the intimate resemblance between the
higher understanding of one part of the Secret Tradition and the fuller
interpretation of one Sacrament of the Church. We are not dealing in
either case with the question of attainment. The analogy would remain if
Spiritual Alchemy and Christian Sacramentalism abode in the intellectual
order as theorems only which have been never carried into experience.
And further it is not affirmed that the Hermetic symbolism has attained
a grade of perfection. When Christian symbolism took over the old
legends and created out of them the literature of the Holy Graal, the
work was not done perfectly, and it is the same with alchemical books.
It remains that the doctrine of sanctity offered a Divine Experience, to
those who entered the pathway of sanctity, as a foretaste in this life
of the union which is consummated in eternity, or of that end

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

beyond which there is nothing whatever that is conceivable. We know from
the old books that "it hath not entered into the heart of man," but the
heart which has put away the things of sense may at least conceive it by
representations and types. This is the great tradition of that which the
early alchemists term Truth in the Art; the experience is representation
after its own kind rather than felicity, but the representation is of
that grade which begins in ecstasy and ends in absorption. Let no man
say therefore that he loses himself in experiences of this order, for
perchance it is then only that he finds himself, even in that way which
suggests that after many paths of activity he is at length coming into
his own.

The alchemical maxim which might be inscribed on the gate of the *palais
espiriteus* or any Castle of the Graal should be:

"*Est in Mercurio quicquid quærunt sapientes*."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Eucharistic
maxim which might be written over the laboratory of the alchemist, in
addition to *Laborare est orare*, is:

"*Et antiquum documentum  
  Novo cedat ritui:  
Præstet fides supplementum  
  Sensuum defectui*."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The maxim which
might be written over the temples of the official churches is *Corporis
Mysterium*--that the mystery of the body might lead them more fully into
the higher mystery of the soul. And in fine the maxim which might and
would be inscribed over the one Temple of the truly Catholic Religion
when the faiths of this western world have been united in the higher
consciousness--that is assuredly *Mysterium Fidei*--the mystery which
endures for ever and for ever passes into experience.

Within the domain of the Secret Tradition the initiations are many and
so are the schools of thought, but

<span id="page_550">p. 550</span>

those which are true schools and those which are high orders issue from
one root. *Est una sola res*, and they whose heart of contemplation is
fixed upon this one thing may differ but can never be far apart.
Personally I do not believe--and this has the ring of a
commonplace--that they will be found to differ widely. I know not what
systems of the æons may intervene between that which is imperishable
within us and the union wherein the universe will in fine repose at the
centre. But I know that the great systems--aye, even the great
processes--of the times that are gone, as of those which now encompass
us, do not pass away, because that which was from the beginning is now
and ever shall be--is one motive, one aspiration, one term of thought
remaining, as if in the stillness of an everlasting present. We really
understand one another, and our terms are terms over which our
collective aspirations are united world without end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Kabalistic Academies](hchg75.md)
