[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg56)  [Next](hchg58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI

#### THE DUTCH LANCELOT

The quest undertaken in our work of high research is long enough, and it
is also toilsome enough, to spare us from the consideration in full of
any extraneous issues, though these are yet of our kinship; but I am
speaking of a great literature to those who are unversed therein, albeit
they are not otherwise unacquainted with the mysterious

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

ways in which God declares Himself. I am called upon therefore to say
something of all the branches, but must touch lightly where we are not
concerned deeply. The *Dutch Lancelot* is a compilation which is known
only by a single text, and this is incomplete, unfortunately, the first
part out of four original parts being now wanting. The authorship is
unknown and so is the date of composition; but, by those who are
competent to speak, the extant manuscript has been assigned to the early
part of the fourteenth century. Were it otherwise, it might be said with
greater certainty than is now possible that it had taken the chief field
of Graal romance for its province. The missing first volume must have
contained indubitably the earlier life of Lancelot, and it may have
included by inference some part of the quest and initial failure of
Perceval at the Graal Castle. The second book contains the adventures of
Agravain, the brother of Gawain, a knight of pride and violence; but
this is already late in the history of the hero-in-chief, and it is in
the so-called Agravain section that Lancelot pays his first visit to
Castle Corbenic and that the conception of Galahad is encompassed. The
poem reverts thereafter to dealings with Perceval, and has traces of a
tradition which is not extant in the romances of Northern France. There
are variations, for example, in the development of the tasks proposed by
the messenger of the Holy Graal to the knights of King Arthur's Court.
Correspondences are traced: (*a*) with the variations in the Montpellier
MS. of the *Conte del Graal*; (*b*) with the Vatican German Perceval;
and (*c*) at a distance, with Wolfram's *Parsifal*. The *Quest of
Galahad* occupies the third book, and the fourth brings all to its term
in the *Morte d’Arthur*. The Dutch romance is a poem, and even in this,
its present dismembered form, it is a work of vast extent. As in respect
of my own province I have not assumed all languages, I know the original
only by the collation of available channels of research. That which has
impressed me concerning it is the important, though

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

fluidic, analogy which it offers to the poem of Heinrich in its judgment
on Perceval. Therein the Lord of the Hallows and those by whom he was
engirded had great hopes of the latter, but because he had entered the
Castle and did not ask the question he was discarded once and for all.
Now, the *Dutch Lancelot*, at the conclusion of the second book, has a
text of unknown origin which I have held over in my previous enumeration
to speak of more adequately here. This is the episodic or biographical
romance of Morien, the son of Agloval and the nephew of Perceval, a
black knight, corresponding to Feirfeis, who is Perceval's half-brother
in the romance of Wolfram. Morien is, however, a Christian when he
arrives in the realms of the West, and he is in search of his father, to
whom he is in fine united. It is in the course of his story, which is
otherwise unimportant to our purpose, that we learn as follows
concerning the Holy and Sacramental Mystery:--

\(1\) King Arthur--who here, as otherwhere, manifests his unfailing love
and anxiety for Perceval--is represented lamenting his loss because he
had gone in search of the Graal and the Sacred Lance, but there were no
news concerning him. Now, the text states--and this is on the part of
the King, by the way of foreknowledge or prophecy--that he will never
find them--that is to say, upon earth. (2) The same conviction may have
entered into the proper heart of the Son of the Widow Lady; but Sir
Gareth, the brother of Gawain, is he who announces the reason, which is
not on account of his failure but because Perceval sinned in leaving his
mother to die of grief at his absence. On this account he might search
till the Kingdom which is above descends on the Kingdom which is below
but his pains would be his only meed. We see here that a responsibility
which is of right made transient only becomes permanent and insuperable
for a moment--but this is in appearance solely. (3) Perceval, on his
part, has been convinced of his sin and has embraced the life of a
hermit as the proper path of

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

atonement. (4) But Arthur and Gareth notwithstanding, the intention of
the tale is to restore Perceval forgiven to the higher life of chivalry,
and we have accordingly (5) the vision of Sir Agloval, the brother of
Perceval, who speaks of a Golden Staircase seen therein, which, by
interpretation, is more than the sunbeam whereon the Graal enters in the
Great Quest, for it symbolises the Sacred Vessel as another ladder of
Jacob leading to the Throne and the Kingdom, and this is also for
Perceval as the days of the life of him. It followed that he should yet
have his place in the Quest, and it was foretold that in such high
service he should pass to his reward on high. That which is here
foretold is of course fulfilled to the letter in the part which follows
thereafter--that is to say, in the *Quest of Galahad*.

The *Dutch Lancelot* is in some respects that which I indicated at the
beginning, an attempt to harmonise all the cycles by dealing (*a*) with
the Quest of Perceval and its initial failure; (*b*) with that of
Gawain, corresponding to the Montpellier intercalation of the *Conte del
Graal*; and (*c*) finally with the union of Galahad, Perceval and Bors,
according to the plenary inspiration of the Great Quest. I recur now to
the point which I made at the close of the third section. The *Dutch
Lancelot* offers the position of a text which had every opportunity to
profit in universals and not in particulars only by the poem of Wolfram;
but, though it is under the obedience of the prototype created by the
*Parsifal* and the *Conte del Graal* for the early history of Perceval,
it redeems him only at the close, by a kind of *tour de force*, in its
adaptation of the story of stories.

The conclusion of all this inquiry into the German cycle of the Holy
Graal is that the hand of Guiot is traceable, at whatever distance,
through all its length; at times it is the ruling hand, at others it
intervenes for a moment. He seems also reflected into the Greater
Chronicles in Northern French; for, setting aside those almost
accidental connections which are found in

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

the *Book of the Holy Graal*, there are the similitudes, which I have
termed haunting, in the *Longer Prose Perceval*. The King of Castle
Mortal is drawn in much darker colours than Klingsor, the magician of
Wolfram, but they derive from the same root.

It is obvious that in such a summary account of the German cycle there
are points, and they are indeed manifold, which have been omitted from
the foregoing sections. Those who have preceded me in England with
valuable and extended monographs on individual texts and with studies of
particular groups will be the first to dispense generosity towards a
work which embraces the whole literature in a single volume, more
especially if they are able to realise that I am not addressing their
audience, but rather a school set apart and among whom no knowledge of
the subject can be presupposed safely. It is for this reason that I have
had to recover the same ground on several occasions, increasing the
difficulty of my task, as it was not less important to avoid verbal
repetition in devotion to the high canons of literature than to spare my
readers the weariness of continual reference to anterior sections or
books. Before leaving the German cycle, I will embrace in a brief
schedule certain accessory matters, belonging to its several parts,
which--without being essential thereto--are of sufficient interest to
demand inclusion.

*The Parsifal of Wolfram*.--It should be noted (1) that there is no
passage of Hallows from East to West; there is no enchantment of
Britain; and there are no times which are termed specially adventurous;
(2) that Parsifal's uncle, Trevrezent, confessed to having tampered,
with the truth in respect of his Graal history, so as to dissuade the
hero from the Quest, and that this is possibly the root-reason of the
uncle's misdirections in all the romances.

*The Lost Quest of Guiot*.--(1) There was a great movement of literature
from Southern to Northern France and through Northern France to England
at the period

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

of Henry II. He married Eleanor of Guienne, who is said to have brought
Provençal poets in her train. If therefore we can suppose that Guiot de
Provence and his poem antedated all other Graal literature, they may
have become known in this manner, and it will then seem at first sight
that we have accounted for the appearance subsequently of Graal
literature in Northern French. But this is an explanation with the
disadvantage of a fatal facility, because Guiot, as we can divine
concerning him, is incapable of accounting for Graal romance outside the
one text that we know him to have influenced in Germany. (2) It was on
an illusory assumption of this kind that the Perceval legend was classed
as Celtic by Schulze, but the Graal, on the other hand, as Provençal.
The first statement is true obviously, but the Graal of Guiot is not the
Graal of Northern France. The marriage of Schulze's two classes is said
to have been contracted about 1150; but I do not believe that any
sacramental mystery was incorporated by southern romance; only the
shadow of the Eucharist is found in Wolfram. (3) The test of such a
possibility is the affirmed traditional hostility to the Church of Rome
on the part of most troubadours. Northern French romance had no such
implicit: it is a literature written round the great heart of Christian
catholicity. (4) The analogy of troubadour poetry with Graal literature
is slight after all. If we set aside the *Conte del Graal*, love, for
example, is only an accident of the cycle, and it is totally absent from
two of the highest texts. The mystic side of human love in poetry and
its Provençal reflections are a light of Moslem ecstasy. (5) Scholarship
holds that Wolfram and Chrétien drew from the same source, more
especially as regards the adventures of Gawain. This raises a question
respecting the identity, language and real locality of Guiot. It is
acknowledged on all sides that if he had written in the *langue d’oc*,
he would not have been understood by Wolfram. One speculation identifies
him with the author of the *Bible Guiot*, but this

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

person was of Provins in the Alsace-Lorraine district. The suggestion, I
suppose, is that Provins was mistaken for Provence by Wolfram. Had Guiot
promulgated in the South so wonderful a legend as that of the Graal, it
is incredible that his name should never have transpired among his
contemporaries; though his poem is now lost, his memory should at least
have lingered.

*The Spanish Cycle*.--(1) We have seen that Spain has no indigenous
literature of the Holy Graal; it has only accidental reflections by way
of translation, and with all deference to the curious implicits
connected with the Jew of Toledo, I think that this is final as to
anything of prototypical matter of the Graal having come out of the
Peninsula. (2) This notwithstanding, if ever the missing Guiot should be
discovered in fine, it will be probably in a Spanish monastery. Whatever
language he wrote in, the poet had evidently Provençal sympathies,
interests and erudition, and we know that in 1820, on the evidence of
Fr. Jay me de Villanueva, there were large collections of unedited
Provençal poets in the archives of Spanish churches. This is readily
explained (*a*) by the intimate union between the court of Provence and
that of Barcelona; (*b*) by the union of the crown of Provence and the
crown of Aragon in the person of Alphonso the Second, and it is Aragon
that once at least was especially rich in such manuscripts; (*c*) by the
popularity of Provençal poetry in Catalonia during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. A poem breathing the Provençal atmosphere and
inspired by the Provençal spirit, though not actually in the *langue
d’oc*, may well have drifted into Spain from Provence without leaving
traces behind it at either point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument](hchg58)
