[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg87)  [Next](hchg89) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV

#### THE MYSTERY WHICH IS WITHIN

On the historical side the Secret Church is then the shadow of an
hypothesis at best; on the spiritual side of the intellect it is an
implicit, but it is that irresistibly; mystically it is a truth which is
not less than obvious, but it should be understood--and I repeat
therefore--that it is apart from all forms, conventions and instituted
existence. When in our highest moments we conceive with least
unworthiness of the Church on the ideal plane, we approximate, but still
under the reserves of our own insufficiency, to the Holy Assembly. It is
the unity of arch-natural minds. It is that in which, by the mediation
of the creeds, we confess our beliefs daily--the communion of saints. If
we like to express it in such words--and they are excellent apart from
their unhappy associations--it is the choir invisible. It is even like
the priesthood of the Graal sanctuary, as we judge by the romances
concerning it; it does not ordain or teach; it fulfils its office
sufficiently because, speaking symbolically, it is "in the foremost
files of time." It is like Saint-Martin--its feet are on earth and its
head is in Heaven.

The Secret Church has said therefore: "*Introibo ad altare Dei*," and it
has entered and gone in. When it comes out, in the person of one of its
members, it carries bread and wine, like Melchisedech. The conditions of
its membership correspond to the conditions of finding

<span id="page_640">p. 640</span>

the Holy Graal, as described in the German *Parsifal*. If it were
possible to regard it as an Order, it might be said that its device is:
"Behold, I am with you always, even unto the consummation of the world."
It is the place in which Mary conceived in her heart before she
conceived in her body. As already indicated, it has not issued
manifestoes, or we should be in a better position to judge regarding it;
it has not had its documents abstracted, or we should not have had the
Graal romances extant in their present form. But things have transpired
concerning it, and thus we have the *Characteristics of the Interior
Church* by Loupoukine, the *Cloud upon the Sanctuary* by Eckartshausen,
Werner's *Sons of the Valley*, the Eucharistic side of Alchemy and the
rumour of the Holy Quest. It gives to those who can receive it a full
answer to the question: "Art thou He that is to come, or do we look for
another?" In a word, the natural Graal is everywhere but the
supernatural Graal is in the Secret Church.

So far as there has been any evidence offered on the hypothesis
concerning it, this has gone entirely astray, because it has assumed
that we are concerned with some corporate and organised body, whereas we
are concerned only with the course of experience in the higher
consciousness. Now, if there is no such experience, the claim of the
official Church is at once voided.

The presence of the Secret Church is like that of angels unawares. In
the outer courts are those who are prepared for regeneration, and in the
*adyta* are those who have attained it: these are the Holy Assembly. It
is the place of those who, after the birth of flesh, which is the birth
of the will of man, have come to be born of God. It is in the persons of
those who are regenerate that the gates of hell cannot prevail against
the Church. The place of the Holy Assembly is the place of Eden and
Paradise; it is that whence man came and whither he returns. It is also
that place from which the Spirit and the Bride say "Come";

<span id="page_641">p. 641</span>

or it is the place of the Waters of Life, with power to take freely. It
is like the still, small voice; it is heard only in the midst of the
heart's silence, and there is no written word to show us how its rite is
celebrated. Its work upon things without is a work of harmony, wherein
is neither haste nor violence. There are no admissions--at least of the
ceremonial kind--to the Holy Assembly, but in the last instance the
candidate inducts himself. There is no sodality, no institution, no
order which throughout the Christian centuries has worked in such
silence. It is for this reason that it remains an implicit in mystic
literature rather than a formal revelation; it is not a revelation but
an inference; when it is not an inference it is an attainment. It is
neither an interference nor a guidance actually; it is better described
as an influence. It does not come down; more correctly it draws up, but
it also inheres. It is the place of those who have become transmuted and
tingeing stones.

The mystery in chief of the Secret Church is that of Divine
communication, of which it has the sanctifying sacraments; but, once
more, so far as these are typified symbolically it can have no more
efficient and unspotted outward signs than the bread and wine for
oblation. It is in this sense that it connects more especially with the
Eucharist. Christian temples are oriented to show that there is a light
behind, and by all previous considerations churches with open doors are
the thresholds of the Church which is not entered by doors because it
has not been built with hands. The Secret Church is the manifest Church
glorified and installed in the spiritual kingdom, as this was first set
over the kingdom of the visible world. It is therefore the withdrawn
spirit of the outward Holy Assembly, and it would be unreasonable for
those who acknowledge the visible body to deny that which transcends it.
But to speak of a spirit which thus transcends a body is still to say
that, because the lesser is contained by the greater, the latter is
until

<span id="page_642">p. 642</span>

now not exactly without the former nor apart therefrom, and its mode of
manifestation, in so far as it can be said to manifest, is not otherwise
than from within. There is, no separate incorporation. It has no
ambassadors nor *chargés d’affaires* at any court of the hierarchies,
nor does it send out visible physicians and healers, for it has no
conventional offices either in the interests of things above or even of
those below. If some have spoken of it as leading the official Church,
there is here an imperfection of expression, because it is speaking
after a formal manner concerning modes which are apart from all
whatsoever that we understand by convention. Without in any sense
representing and much less exhausting the process, I have indicated that
it draws rather than leads, and if I may attempt one further definition,
as the synthesis of all my statements--echoing and reflecting all--I
would describe the Secret Church as the integration of believers in the
higher consciousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Secluded and Unknown Sanctuary](hchg89)
