[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg77)  [Next](hchg79.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII

#### THE LAPIS EXILIS

According to Wolfram von Eschenbach, the Graal was the crown of desire
understood on the material plane, but it would also respond to the title
which was given by Heinrich to his independent version of the legend,
for it was certainly the crown of adventure, and on more planes than
one. It was borne aloft on a green cushion by the maid who was chosen
for the office, and this suggests that the object was, speaking
comparatively, small--that is to say, portable. There is nothing in the
whole poem to make us connect it with a jewel in the conventional sense,
and it is nowhere described actually: it is simply that, object of
wonder to which the name of Graal is given. It was light as wool, as we
have seen, in the hands of its licensed bearer, but an unprepared person
could not move it from the place of its repose.

<span id="page_572">p. 572</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is rather,
however, a question of magic than of variation in specific gravity. *Ex
hypothesi*, it was large enough on one specific occasion to hold a
considerable inscription on its surface--that is to say, when the King's
healing was promised as the reward of the mystic question. At the same
time its possible dimensions were restricted by the counter fact that it
could and did repose in the nest of a bird which tradition describes as
about the size of an eagle. Indeed, the stone which renewed the phoenix
recalls the *Lapis Aquila*, which, according to another, tradition, was
sought by the eagle and used to assist the hatching of its eggs.

This enumeration is made to preface some reflections upon the Latin term
which Wolfram applied to his talisman. What he wrote--or his scribe
rather--we have to divine as we can from the choice of impossibilities
which are offered by the extant manuscripts, and that which has received
most countenance among the guesswork readings is *Lapis exilis*, meaning
the slender stone. The *scholia* of lexicographers on the second of
these words indicate some difference of opinion among the learned on the
question of its philology--*de etymo mire se torquent viri docti*--and
as an additional quota of confusion one of them has placed the
significance of slender upon the word exile as it is used in English. I
do not know of such an adjective in our language and still less of one
bearing this interpretation; but this apart it would seem that the
slender stone connecting with the conception of the Graal is even more
disconcerting than any philological difficulty. Further, the word
*exilis* suffers the meaning of leanness, and this in connection with a
stone of plenty which paints in the *Parsifal* an eternal larder, *à
parte ante et à parte post*, is not less than hopeless. It may be said
that Wolfram's intention was to specify by Lapis exilis that his
talisman was least among stones in dimension yet great in its efficacy,
even as the Scriptures tell us that the mustard seed is least among
grains and yet becomes a great tree.

<span id="page_573">p. 573</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There is a certain
plausibility in this, and students of another school will know that
*Lapis exilis* is a term which corresponds wholly to the great talisman
of metallic transmutation, for no adept experienced any difficulty when
he carried the powder of projection--which, as we have seen, was in fact
the Stone--in his wallet, or even his girdle, yet this was also great in
its efficacy, as there is no need to insist. The explanation is shallow
notwithstanding, when we know that the true description of the Graal
Stone on the historical side, or rather the accurate statement of fact,
would be *è cœlo veniens*. But it is understood of course that this does
not enter the lists as a construction of the chaotic readings found in
the manuscripts. Their only possible rendering to preserve the verbal
similarity with a reasonable consonance in the root-idea of the subject
is *Lapis exilii* = the Stone of Exile, or *Lapis exsulis* = the Exile's
Stone. The correspondence is here twofold, for in the first place there
is the exile of Lucifer, who--if the jewel was once in his crown--lost
it on expulsion from heaven, and in the second place there is the exile
of humanity, which is *ex hypothesi* a derivation from the fall of the
angels. It was given to men as a palladium--perhaps even as a gage of
their final exaltation to the thrones vacated above. It so happens that
there are some curious lights of symbolism which illustrate a reading
that I put forward under every reserve and tentatively. No one will
believe at first sight that the Graal Stone and the Graal Chalice can
have any affinity between them, unless indeed the cup was hewn--let us
say--out of jasper or chalcedony. This notwithstanding, we shall find
the analogy rather in unlooked-for places. Let us recur for a moment to
the *Lesser Holy Graal* and its comparison of the Mystic Vessel to the
Stone in which Christ was laid--an imputed analogy which is put into the
mouth of the Master when He discourses to Joseph of Arimathæa,
delineating the purport and perfection of the whole mystery. It seems
assuredly the most extraordinary analogy which it is

<span id="page_574">p. 574</span>

possible to institute, and I do not pretend that it assists us to
understand the substitution of a Stone for a Chalice in Wolfram's
version of the legend, which is devoid of any connection between the
Graal and the Passion of Christ--almost as if the Repairer had returned
to the heights after the institution of the Eucharist and henceforward
Himself--as *Pontifex futurorum bonorum*--sent down the efficacious
sacrament for the sustenance of his chosen people. In the ordinary
Eucharistic Rite one would tolerate the comparison in respect of the
Pyx, though the elucidation of things which *ex hypothesi* are alive by
means of things which are dead is scarcely in the order of
enlightenment. One thing at least seems to follow from all the texts,
and this is that the sacramental Chalice in the Graal Mass was rather
the receptacle of the Consecrated Bread than of the Consecrated Wine.
The Chalice, which corresponds to a Stone, and this Stone the Rock in
which Christ was laid, must symbolise the Vessel of the Bread. In the
*Book of the Holy Graal* and in the *Quest of Galahad*, Hosts were taken
from the Chalice; in the *Parsifal*, Bread in the first instance was
taken from the Talismanic Stone; in Heinrich, that Reliquary which was
itself the Graal had a Host reposing therein; Chrétien is vague enough,
but his undeclared Warden in prostration seems to have been nourished
after the same manner as Mordrains and Heinrich's ghostly Keeper.

The analogy of these things, by which we are helped to their
understanding at least up to a certain point, is Scriptural, as we
should expect it to be; it connects with that other Stone which followed
the people of Israel during forty years in the wilderness, and the
interpretation is given by St. Paul. "Our fathers . . . did all eat the
same spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for
they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was
Christ." It will be inferred that the root-idea of the story is based
upon the natural fact that torrents or streams flow occasionally through
rocky ground, but the masters

<span id="page_575">p. 575</span>

in Israel knew of the deeper meaning, or divined it at least in their
subtlety, seeing that their whole concern was with a spiritual
pilgrimage. It is said in the Zoharic tract entitled *The Faithful
Shepherd*, that a Stone or Rock is given, and yet another Stone is
given, the Name of which is the Name of Tetragrammaton. Now, this is a
reference to the Prophecy of Daniel which says that the Stone which
struck the statue became like a mountain and filled the whole earth. It
is applied to Messias and his Kingdom by the preface to the *Zohar*,
which says further that the Israelites, during their exile in Egypt, had
lost the Mystery of the Holy Name. When, however, Moses appeared, he
recalled this Name to their minds. It follows herefrom that we are
dealing with another legend of the Lost Word, and of course if Christ
was the Rock or Stone which supplied sustenance to the Jews, we can
understand in a vague manner not only the correspondence between the
Graal and a Mystic Stone but also the manner--otherwise of all so
discounselling--in which the cycle ascribes to its Great Palladium,
whether Stone or Cup, a marvellous power of nourishment. The allusion is
therefore to the Corner Stone, which is Christ and which became the head
of the building. It is the old Talmudic and Kabalistic tradition that
the *Lapis fundamentalis* was set in the Temple of Jerusalem under the
Ark of the Covenant, even as the Rock of Calvary, by another legend, is
called the centre of the world. All these stones in the final exhaustion
of symbolism are one Stone, which does not differ from the white cubic
stone which the elect receive in the *Apocalypse* together with the New
and Secret Name written thereon. This stone in its symbolic form would
no doubt be the least possible in cubic measurement--that is to say, in
the correspondence between things within and without, even as that which
is given, strangely inscribed within, to the recipient in one of the
most deeply symbolic of the Masonic High Grades.

<span id="page_576">p. 576</span>

Analogies are subtle and analogies are also precarious, but those which
I have traced here are at least more in consonance with the spirit of
the Graal literature than (1) The Sacred Stone, called the Mother of the
Gods, which is mentioned by Ovid and of which Arnobius tells us that it
was small and could be carried easily by a single man; (2) the Roman
*Lapis manalis*, which brought rain in drought, as it might have brought
food in famine; (3) the *Bœtilus* or Oracular Stone which gave oracles
to its bearer, speaking with a still small voice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § A. The Assumption of the Building Guild](hchg79.md)
