[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg21)  [Next](hchg23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X

#### THE SUPPRESSED WORD AND THE MYSTIC QUESTION

It is agreed that the essential and predominant characteristic of the
Perceval literature is the asking and answering of a question which
bears on its surface every aspect of triviality, but is yet the pivot on
which the whole circle of these romances may be said to revolve. On the
other hand, the question is absent from the Galahad story, and in place
of it we have a stately pageant of chivalry moving through the world of
Logres to find the high mystery of sanctity. But that finding is
destined only to dismember the Arthurian empire and to pass, in fine,
leaving no trace behind it, except the sporadic vision of a rejected
knight, which is mentioned but not described, and occurs under
circumstances that justify grave doubts as to its existence in the
original texts.

Now, the entire critical literature of the Graal may be searched in vain
for any serious explanation as to the actuating motive, in or out of
folk-lore, concerning the Graal question. On the part of the folk-lore
authorities there have been naturally attempts to refer it to something
antecedent within the scope of their subject, but the analogies have
been no analogies, and as much extravagance has resulted as we have yet
heard of in the connection which some scholars have vaguely termed

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

mysticism. The symbolical and sacramental value of the Graal Quest,
outside all issues in folk-lore, is from my standpoint paramount, as it
is this indeed without any reference to the opinions which are founded
in folk-lore or to the speculations thereout arising; and the fact
remains that the palmary importance of the mystic question lapses with
the pre-eminence of the Perceval Quest. Initiation, like folk-lore,
knows many offices of silence but few of asking; and after many
researches I conclude--or at least tentatively--that in this respect the
Graal romances stand practically alone. It is therefore useful to know
that it is not the highest term of the literature.

In the *Conte del Graal* of Chrétien, the law and order of the Quest is
that Perceval shall ask the meaning of those wonders which he sees in
the pageant at the Castle of the Quest. The references are many in the
poem, but they are merely repetitions. Perceval did not ask (1) how such
things came to pass; (2) nor anything whatsoever; (3) he did not dare to
ask about the Graal, *qui on en servoit*, because his teacher in
chivalry had cautioned him against idle curiosity and such impertinence,
for which reason he reserved his speech. It is understood that through
the oppression of the centuries the keeper of the Holy Graal is,
according to the *Didot Perceval*, in a state of distress, longing for
his delayed release. Before he can go in peace he must pass on the
divine tradition of the Secret Words, but before he can so transmit them
he must he asked a question. That question is: *De quoi li Graus sert*.
It will perform a twofold office, firstly, to heal the king, and,
secondly, to liberate his speech. Perceval reaches the Castle, but
notwithstanding that the voice of one who was invisible had announced at
the Court of King Arthur, in Perceval's presence and in that of all the
knights, both the nature and effect of the question, he entreats nothing
for fear of offending his host. Hence he departs in disgrace, and the
king remains unhealed.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

Within the limits of the Gautier section of the *Conte del Graal* there
are not less than three versions of the visit of Gawain to the Graal
Castle, representing specific variations of different manuscripts.
Without exercising any discrimination between them, but rather by a
harmony of all, it may be said that he does ask concerning the Lance and
Graal, but as he cannot re-solder the sword, he can learn nothing
regarding the Sacred Vessel, or, if there is a sign of willingness on
the part of the Keeper, he goes to sleep and so escapes the story. The
result is that the enchantment is in part only removed from the land.
When the same poet recounts the second visit of Perceval, the knight on
beholding the Hallows does not know where to begin, but at length prays
that he may hear the whole truth concerning the Graal, the Sword and the
Lance. The condition of the answer, as in the case of Gawain, is that he
shall re-solder the Sword, and we have seen already that in this task
Perceval is successful partly, but the king's healing does not seem to
be effected, though the path thereof is open, and the knight has not yet
achieved the Quest. The result on external nature is not stated by
Manessier.

At the beginning of the *Longer Prose Perceval* it is said that the
reticence of the questing Knight at the Graal Castle caused such
mischances in Greater Britain that all the lands and islands fell into
sorrow. There appeared to be war everywhere, no knight meeting another
in the forest without running on him and slaying him, if he could. The
King Fisherman himself passed into languishment. The question which
ought to have been asked was: "Unto whom one serveth of the Graal." Many
penances will be ended, it is said, when he who visits the Graal Castle
demands unto whom it is served; but this event never comes to pass in
the story. The desire to ask questions seems to have been rare therein,
for Gawain when conversing with a wandering damsel, who was formerly the
bearer of the Graal, fails to inquire why she carries her arm slung

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

on her neck in a golden stole, or concerning the rich pillow whereon her
arm reposes. He is told that he will give no greater heed at the court
of King Fisherman. The King himself always dwells on the misfortune
which overtook him through the failure of Perceval. When Gawain actually
reaches the mystic Castle, he sees the Graal and the Lance, but he is
lost in a joy of contemplation and he utters no word.

It has been said that there is a question in the Romance of Galahad, and
it might have been added that there is one in the prose *Lancelot*; the
second illustrates the first, and we shall find that they are both mere
traces and survivals, as the prologue to the *Conte del Graal* has the
shadow of the secret words, peculiar to the cycle of De Borron, when it
affirms that the Graal secret must be never disclosed. I do not think
that, as regards the later instance, I should be justified in assuming
that he who wrote this prologue was in touch direct with the implicit of
the De Borron cycle, and I do think alternatively that if people were
disposed to lay stress on such remanents of the question as I am citing
here, they are likely to find that it will work rather in a reverse
direction. The fact remains that Lancelot saw the Graal in one episode
of the great story dedicated to him, that he asked the question which is
so important in some other romances, that he asked it quite
naturally--as who would have failed to do?--that he was answered also
naturally, and that nothing depended therefrom. He cried in his wonder:
"O Jesu! what does this mean?" He was told: "This is the richest thing
in the world." In the Galahad romance, when he beheld, by the Stone
Cross in the wild, a sudden passage of the Graal and the healing of a
certain knight, it is hinted by some texts that he ought to have asked
something, despite the lesson which he had in the voiding of things
previously; but he was so far right on the fact that his imputed
omission carried no consequence.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

The hindrance to the question in the *Parsifal* is the same as we have
found in Chrétien; at all that he saw the knight of the Quest was agaze
with wonder; he thought also that if he refrained from asking he would
be told eventually. That which followed herefrom was sorrow to the host,
with continued suffering, and woe also to the guest. For this silence he
is always represented in the romances as earning reproach and contumely
from persons outside the Castle, but in the German poem there is no
suggestion of an external enchantment. It is to be noted further that
Parsifal has not received a prefatory warning regarding the question, as
he has in the *Didot Perceval*.

In *Diu Crône* by Heinrich, when the questing knight has beheld the
Reliquary and the Spear, he does the opposite exactly, for he can no
longer contain himself, and so asks his host, for the sake of God, to
tell him what the marvels mean and who also are the great company whom
he beholds. Even as he speaks, all present spring from their seats with
a loud cry and the sound of great rejoicing. The host tells them to sit
down again, and then he explains to the knight that he has seen the Holy
Vessel of which he may say nothing, except that joy and consolation
supervene upon his saving question. Many are liberated from the bondage
which they have endured so long, having little hope of acquittance.
There was a time when they trusted in Perceval, as in one predestined to
enter into the knowledge of the Graal, as if through everlasting
portals, but he fell away like a knight of no spirit who dared and
demanded nothing. Had he done otherwise, he would have released many
from their toil who remain in the semblance of life and are yet dead.
The woe came about through the strife of kinsmen, "when one brother
smote the other for his land." For this disloyalty the judgment of God
descended upon him and his consanguinities, so that doom overtook them
all. The living were expatriated, and the dead, under greater disaster,

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

remained in the shadow of life. To end their woe it was necessary that a
man of their race should seek an explanation of their sad, long-enduring
prodigies. It does not appear that the Graal or the Spear have any
connection with the Passion of Christ, and there is no secret
communicated, for the history of the Sacred Vessel is not recounted?

From the consideration of this subject we may come away therefore,
confirmed in our reasonable certainty that the question with which we
have been dealing is unlike anything in literature. We shall see
ultimately how it is accounted for by expert knowledge of
folk-lore--connected or otherwise with quests and vengeance missions--in
Welsh or English literature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. The Healing of the King](hchg23)
