[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg36)  [Next](hchg38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

#### THE LESSER HOLY GRAAL

The first and only editor of this text put it forward as the original
prose romance from which the poem was produced subsequently by some
unknown hand, not so much writing ostensibly under the name of Robert de
Borron as reflecting in rhymes and measures the actual words of the
original. This view did not obtain at its period any special acceptance
and has been long abandoned. The codex as it stands is an accurate
rendering of the poem, plus certain variations and expansions, of which
some are important to our purpose and must be recited briefly. But any
literary or other distinction between the metrical story and its
disposition in another vesture leaves the narrative untouched, both
versions working from the same beginning to the same term, so that any
general description of the *Lesser Holy Graal* would be superfluous in
this place.

The circumstances under which certain secret words were communicated
originally, their transit westward, and the scheme designed for their
perpetuation, constitute the

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

mystery-in-chief of the metrical romance, and we have brought away from
it an irresistible inference that these words were a formula of
Eucharistic consecration. The negative proof is that they were not used
by Joseph when he had occasion to appeal for guidance to the Divine
Voice which spoke from within or about the Sacred Vessel, or when he
separated the grain from the tares in his band of pilgrims. The proof
which assumes some aspect of a positive kind is that wonderful analogy
which the text indicates between the Sacrament of the Altar and the
Vessel, with its antecedents and environments. But the Eucharistic
character of the Secret Words is made much more explicit in the *Lesser
Holy Graal*, for it is said, speaking of the Discourse in the tower:
"Thereupon did Christ Jesus teach him those words which cannot be spoken
or written, should any one wish to do so, except he have read the great
book wherein they are recorded, and this is the secret which is uttered
at the great sacrament performed over the Graal, that is to say, over
the chalice, and I--Robert de Borron--do, for God's love, pray all those
who shall hear this present book in the reading thereof that they ask no
further herein concerning the said matter, for he who should try to say
more might well lie concerning it, since more he could in nowise tell,
and such falsehood would profit him nothing." That the Secret Words were
therefore committed to writing follows from both versions, and the
suggestion of the *Lesser Holy Graal* is that the Great Book was written
by Joseph himself. The additional light which is gained concerning the
Holy Vessel is (1) that it was the blessed and very object wherein
Christ sacrificed; but this is less express than the words *feisoit son
sacrement*, which I have quoted more than once from the poem; (2) on the
other hand, the prose version makes it plainer than the poem that the
Vessel brought by the Jew was given to Pilate after the death of Christ,
or coincidently therewith, for which reason it could not have been used
by the procurator to wash his hands before he pronounced

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

sentence; (3) the Vessel is described by Christ as *la sénéfance de ma
mort*.

Among points left dubious in the poem we have seen that there is the
question whether Joseph of Arimathæa remained where he was, not
proceeding further westward than the point of separation determined for
the whole company. It would follow in this case either that one legend
concerning the evangelisation of Britain was unknown to Robert de Borron
or that it was by him ignored. Now that which is left doubtful in the
poem is carried into triple confusion by the prose version. One of its
codices says that Joseph went into that country wherein he was born;
another says that he departed and came to his term in the land whither
he was sent by Jesus Christ, yet it seems to follow from this second
text that the whole company was already in *la bloie Bretagne* and that
Joseph had converted it newly to the belief in Jesus Christ.

It will serve no purpose of mine to enlarge upon minor debatable points
which occur in the prose version, as, for example, on the doubt which it
creates whether (*a*) the third keeper of the Graal will be the son of
Brons, by which we should understand Alain; (*b*) whether he shall be
the son of his son, as in the metrical romance; and (*c*) whether the
triple guardianship, corresponding to the Holy Trinity, should be
enumerated after Joseph has surrendered the symbol of his mission, which
is the r fading of one codex and follows also from the metrical romance.
It is sufficient to state in conclusion that as regards the second
table, and the reason why it was established, the texts in verse and
prose are both in agreement that whatever the needs of the company there
was (*a*) no miracle in the multiplication of food; (*b*) only a
spiritual refection; (*c*) the essence of which was to fill the
participants with grace; (*d*) one proof being that the fish of Brons
becomes wholly symbolical and figures continually at the service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Early History of Merlin](hchg38)
