[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg12)  [Next](hchg14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV

#### THE GRAAL VESSEL CONSIDERED AS A BOWL OF PLENTY

The incidental allusions which have been made already to certain
physical properties which are ascribed to the Holy Graal in several
branches of the literature seem to call at this point for some further
explanation, without anticipating what will be said at the close as to
any higher aspects of this tradition or exhausting specifically its
connections with folk-lore, which remain to be stated separately. The
conception itself seems so repugnant to all that we attach to the Graal
that it is at least desirable to ascertain its scope in the texts. As it
is acknowledged to embody a reversion from old non-Christian fable, we
should expect it to be most prominent in those texts which are nearest
to the transitional stage, and m ore especially in the Chrétien portion
of the *Conte del Graal*. It should be understood in the first place--as
indeed it follows sufficiently from previous sections--that in the
Perceval quests--one version excepted--and in more than one of the
Gawain quests the visit to the Graal Castle is followed by a banquet or
supper, at which the questing knight is treated for the most part as an
honoured guest.

The exception as regards Perceval is in the longer prose romance or
*High History*, the action of which is subsequent to the first visit of
the hero, and he does not enter it a second time till he has taken it by
force of arms out of the hands of God's enemy and the enemy of Holy
Church. In other cases, where the ceremonial meal is
described--sometimes at considerable length--it is nearly always at

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

the table and before or in the midst of the festival that the Graal and
the other Hallows make their processional appearance, and there are
certain texts which say that the Sacred Vessel serves the high
company--sometimes with rarest meats, sometimes also with wine. In these
specific instances the manifestation is that which occurs first after
they are seated at table. It was to be expected, as I have said, that we
should hear of this material efficacy in Chrétien, but though the
courses of the banquet are described fully, and are rare and precious
enough, it is only a high reverence in a lordly castle of this world,
and it is precisely from this text that it proves wanting. The wonder
resides in the Hallows, but they dispense nothing to the body. It
follows from this that the metrical romance of De Borron was not written
to explain Chrétien. It follows also that Gautier had no precedent in
the poet who was his precursor, and it was therefore from other
antecedents that he derived his notion of the Feeding Dish and from yet
others his knowledge of early Graal history which does not appear in
Chrétien. When Gautier brings Gawain to the Graal Castle, he says that
the Sacred Vessel served seven courses, but the wine was served by the
butlers. His idea of the Sacred Vessel must therefore have corresponded
rather to the Paschal Dish than to a Reliquary of the Precious Blood. On
the other hand, his account of Perceval's second visit contains no
allusion to this side of the festival. Manessier, in continuation of the
same visit, offers no suggestion; but when the time comes for him to
tell the story of Perceval's third arrival, the Hallows appear in their
order and all are filled at the table. At the fourth and final visit,
and the coronation of the questing knight, Manessier recounts how the
Graal feeds the whole company with costliest meats. On the other hand,
Gerbert, preoccupied by far other matters, gives no indication of the
kind.

Except in so far as the *Early History of Merlin* reproduces one episode
from the *Lesser Holy Graal*, it has no allusion to the properties under
consideration, and they

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

have passed out of all recollection in the *Didot Perceval*. On the
other hand, the Greater Chronicles, represented by the *Book of the Holy
Graal* and the *Quest of Galahad*, embody a marked development of this
particular tradition. Between them there is the later *Merlin* without
any reference whatever, the prose *Lancelot*--to which we shall see that
it is a foreign element--and the *Longer Prose Perceval* into the
consciousness of whose author it has never once entered and by whom it
would, I think, have been repudiated. Its recurrence, on a single
occasion, in the presence of Galahad, and in connection with his story,
may seem un-searchable, having regard to the claims which inhere in this
romance, but in the order of the texts it is explained by the
antecedents in the first form of the first document of the cycle. We
must recur, therefore, to the root-matter of the early histories.

The poem of Robert de Borron narrates that among those who accompanied
Joseph westward a certain number departed from grace through the sin of
luxury, but the spiritual mind of the minstrel has spared us all
particulars. The result was a famine in the company; it does not appear
that it fell upon all without exception, for the fact that there was
want among the people had to be notified to the leaders; but, these
apart, good and bad seem to have suffered indifferently. An appeal was
made to Brons that he should take counsel with Joseph, which was done
accordingly, and Joseph invoked the Son of God on his knees in the
presence of the Graal, reciting the petition of his people, who were in
need of bread and meat. He was told in reply to expose the Sacred Vessel
openly in the presence of the brethren, on a table similar to that of
his own Last Supper,--by which means the sinners will be discovered
speedily. It is Christ Himself who was speaking, and He ordained further
that Brons should repair to a certain water and there angle for a fish.
The first which he caught must be brought straightway to Joseph, who, on
his part, should place it upon the Graal table over against the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sacred Vessel. The
people were then to be summoned and informed that if they were true
believers, who had kept the commandments and followed out the teachings
of Christ, as given through Joseph, so that they had trespassed in
nothing, they would be welcome to sit down at the table. These
instructions were followed, with the result that a part only of the
company accepted this invitation. The table was arranged duly, and
whosoever was seated thereat had the accomplishment of his heart's
desire, and that entirely. Petrus, who was one of the recipients, asked
the crowd who stood about whether they did not experience anything of
the good which penetrated those at the table, and they answered that
they felt nothing. Thereupon Petrus denounced them as guilty of the
vile, dolorous sin, and they went forth out of the house of Joseph
covered with shame. The poem says:--

"La taule toute pleinne estoit,  
Fors le liu qui pleins ne pooit  
Estre;"

but the experience of the sitters, thus collected together, seems to
indicate that they were fed from within rather than from without. It
will be seen and we must always remember that the chief necessity and
often the chief privation of early quests and ventures in the voyages of
romance was that of food in season, but in this case what I have called
the spiritual mind of the poet could not clearly connect the idea of
physical refreshment with the sacramental powers of the Relic. As
regards the elect who were present, when the service was finished each
of them rose up and went out among the rest, Joseph commanding that they
should return day by day to partake of the grace administered. Thus was
the vessel, says the poem, proved for the first time. In the speech of
Petrus to the people who were rejected there is further evidence that
the sustenance was more especially of the spiritual order, and it is
important

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

to establish this point from the earliest of the Graal histories. He
speaks of the great delight experienced in the *Grace* and of the great
joy with which the communicants were penetrated. They were filled as the
Psalmist was filled and she who sang the Magnificat: *Esurientes
implevit bonis*. What was filled was the heart of man, and what was
[reflected](errata.htm#0.md) was the entire soul. My contention is
therefore that Robert de Borron had the idea of the Feeding Dish present
to his mind when he made the scarcity of food for his company an
opportunity for the discriminating test of the second great table of
refection, but in place of bodily meat and bread, symbolised by the
single fish, as something intentionally placed out of all reasonable
proportion, he administered *extasis*. That question of Petrus to the
unworthy crowd about him: Do you experience nothing? is so evidently
impossible, in their case, as a reference to eating and drinking that
there is no need to dwell thereon. It left no opportunity to the prose
editors whose versions complete the trilogy, and they lose all touch
with the notion.

As regards the Fish, by which we shall be brought at a later stage to
another form of symbolism found in the poem, the text offers a
comparison which, although a little cryptic, seems also significant. It
says that in the sight of the Graal, in its company and the service
thereof, true believers experience as much satisfaction as a fish,
which, having been taken by a man in his hand, has contrived to escape
therefrom and again go swimming in the sea. The specific fish of the
story was placed before the Sacred Vessel exactly in the middle of the
table, and was covered with a cloth. There is no suggestion that it was
eaten, and it appears to have remained as a kind of fixed dish whenever
the service was celebrated.

The noticeable point about the poem is that the material sustenance
provided once only by the sacred vessel, as something *nihil ad rem*, is
passed over so slightly and lightly that on the face of the text it is

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

a matter of inference whether the Company partook (*a*) of anything
physical at all, except the broken meats which remained in the
stewardship of the camp; or (*b*) alternately of anything except the
Eucharist, which certainly provides bodily sustenance in the most
material of the sacramental texts. On the other hand, all processes of
language are enlisted by Robert de Borron to show that they were
sustained spiritually. Further, the palmary miracle accomplished by the
vessel on this occasion was not any kind of refreshment, spiritual or
corporeal, but that of discrimination between the good and evil among
the people: for this kind of judgment the table of Joseph was set up and
the goats were separated from the sheep. There was, I suppose, in the
poet's mind no question that what could nourish the soul, which is
vital, could at need refresh the body, which is accessory only. It is
therefore small wonder that when the fountain text says so little, those
which derive therefrom are content to leave it thereat, and they add
nothing. For Joseph and his brethren it remained that the Lord was the
part of my chalice, and perhaps in the last understanding the famine
which fell upon the companions was the scarcity of grace in the soul
rather than of food in the stomach.

Now, on the other hand, the *Book of the Holy Graal* is in one sense the
legend of the Feeding Dish consecrated and exalted, and seeing that as
the texts stand it is that from which the greatest of all quests and the
most wonderful version of all the quests which are accessory must be
supposed to derive *ex hypothesi*, it is essential that we should
understand its position clearly, and I will tabulate the references as
follows:--

\(1\) The people on their way to Britain are fed marvellously with all
manner of viands, both meat and drink, as, for example, at houses by the
way and at lordly castles. (2) In this primary allusion the Graal is not
said to feed them. (3) They receive nourishment from the table of the
Graal, but this is

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

the Eucharist, and it is expressly stated that the company had nothing
else on that day. (4) At a later stage, a second instance is given of
this super-substantial refreshment. (5) It is not till we are
approaching comparatively the close of the chronicle that we reach
something more definite. The company are already in Britain, and through
the persecution of their heathen enemies they are hungry. Twelve loaves
are obtained; they are broken by Joseph, are placed in the Dish, and
they feed 500 people, more than the twelve loaves being left
subsequently. (6) It does not prove food of spiritual life, for those
who were filthy before are filthy still. (7) At yet a later stage, the
heathens test the feeding powers of the Vessel by the imprisonment of
the Christians. In Wales the Vessel again furnishes all manner of
viands, and one fish is a superabundant provision for the whole company.
After a similar manner, they are fed with all possible delicacies in
Scotland.

Passing over the later Merlin romances, which are neither exactly Graal
histories nor quests, and offer nothing to our purpose, we find that the
shadow of the Quest is projected into the prose *Lancelot*, though there
is no questing intention, and the visit of Gawain to the Graal Castle is
the one example of indignity offered to a guest therein. The
responsibility, however, does not rest with the royal and saintly host,
whose high-erected thought "is seated in a heart of courtesy." There is
the flight of the mystical dove from casement to inmost Shrine, as if
the bird went to renew the virtues of the Holy Graal; there is the
apparition of the unattended damozel, bearing that which itself bore the
likeness of a chalice; there is the genuflection of all knees before the
Holy Vessel; and there are sweet odours with all delicacies lavished
upon the great table. But in the feast which follows, the peer of the
Round Table alone has an empty plate. It was the discrimination and
forejudgment of the Hallow in

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

respect of that Knight, who, in the days of Galahad, would indeed
propose the Quest but would not persevere therein.

In the *Longer Prose Perceval*, after the restitution of all things,
there is abundance everywhere in the Castle, "insomuch that there is
nought wanting that is needful for the bodies of noble folk," even as
for noble souls. But the source of all this plenty is in a river which
comes from the Earthly Paradise and not in the Holy Graal. On the
occasion of Gawain's visit, the table is garnished richly, but it is
with game of the forest and other meats of this world; it is the same on
the arrival of Lancelot; and then even the earthly food does not vary.

In the *Quest of Galahad* the manifestations of the Graal are as
follows: (1) In the banqueting-hall of King Arthur, and it is the only
record of its appearance in any castle of the external world, the reason
being that the Graal is "going about." On this occasion--yes, even in
the presence of Galahad--"every knight had such meats and drinks as he
best loved in this world." As the table was dight for the festival, it
seems to follow that what was otherwise provided already underwent
transformation, probably in the minds of the participants. (2) At the
stone cross in the forest and in the waste land, where stood the old
chapel and where in the presence of Lancelot the sick knight was made
whole by the Precious Vessel. (3) To Lancelot in the Graal Castle, where
there was, firstly, a Mass of the Graal, and, secondly, a banquet at
which all were fed by the Vessel. (4) To Galahad and his elect
companions at the consummation of the Quest, but the sweet meats were
those of the Eucharist exalted to the arch-natural degree. (5) In Sarras
at the close of all, "when the deadly flesh began to behold the
spiritual things," and Christ's transcendence was manifested in Christ's
immanence. Of these five changes in the exposition of the Holy Graal,
the first

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

only and the lowest was that of earthly food; it was communicated by a
special indulgence, in the palace of a lord of the world, as an
encouragement to the quest of Heaven.

If we turn to the German cycle, we shall find that the feeding qualities
are before all things obvious in Wolfram. At the first visit of
Parsifal, what is taken from the Graal is bread, but other dishes stand
before it in right great plenty, both rare and common. Some say that
there are no such riches on earth, but to the poet this is a word of
foolishness, since the Graal is the crown of all. The wine also was the
gift of the precious object, and the cups on the table were filled by
the power thereof. In the great and high festival, when the questing
Knight was crowned as King and Warden of the mystery, even the ordinary
fowl of the forest were taken from the Graal. I am afraid that such
ministry in the *Parsifal* is comparable to the procession therein,
somewhat indiscriminate in method and "like a tale of little meaning,
though the words are strong." In the curious chronicle of Heinrich, the
service of the table is after the manner born of this world, but the
host does not partake till he is served from the sacred Reliquary with
something which, by its description, bears the external semblance of the
symbolical Bread of Heaven. The poem, however, has otherwise no
sacramental connections, nor has the Vessel, strictly speaking, what is
understood here by feeding properties.

It remains now to sum up and to ask in our hearts--though the answer is
remote in our quest--what is the meaning of all this disconcerting
medley, which out of the Holy Graal, as an issue in time and place,
brings now the voice of an oracle, like the classical *Bætylus;* now a
certain Βασανος or touchstone, a criterion of judgment which separates
the good from the evil; now a suspended viaticum, which keeps the sick
alive and the dead in a false life, but offers no relief in suffering;
now manifests the corporeal changes in the growth of

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the Divine Body; now shows Christ crucified; and now out of all
reason--like a coarse Talmudic allegory--provides the game of the
forest--all commonest and rarest meats; yet in all and through all is
(*a*) the Mystery of the Eucharist, and (*b*) a simple reliquary
containing *ex hypothesi* the Precious Blood of the Redeemer. At the
moment let us note further--and this only--as a little curious, that two
out of the three express texts of transubstantiation are texts of the
Feeding Dish, but the third in the series has spiritualised all its
houses and acknowledges not the flesh or its ministry except in the
Eucharist. The Chrétien portion of the *Conte del Graal* is a pagan
wonder-book tinctured thinly with Christianity, but it is not nearly so
gross regarding the service of the Sacred Vessel as the *Book of the
Holy Graal* or the Great Quest itself. There is more in Gautier than in
Chrétien, and very much more in Wolfram than in the putative Walter Map.
But those who continued and those who finished the *Conte* are fitful in
their introduction of the feeding element, and the romance of Galahad
puts the disconcerting ceremonial outside the holy places of the mystic
Castle.

I think, in conclusion, that the intention of the Greater Chronicles
concerning the Feeding Dish is to be taken in another sense of the
*Quest of Galahad*, which says of Lancelot: "Yf ye wold aske how he
lyved, he that fedde the peple of Israel with manna in deserte, soo was
he fedde. For every day when he had sayd his prayers, he was susteyned
with the grace of the Holy Ghoost." And, as the Welsh version has it,
"so that he thought himself to be full of the best meats."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § A.--The Summary of These Matters](hchg14.md)
