[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg60)  [Next](hchg62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

#### IN WHAT SENSE THE PLEA MUST BE HELD TO FAIL

It is indubitable, and we have seen in the plenary sense, that folk-lore
provided its elements as the crude matter of the scheme of the Holy
Graal. It is true, and also indubitable, that many accidentals of the
Celtic Church became accidentals of the literature; they were worked
into the Graal cycle as well as the pre-Christian elements, the process
arising in the most natural of all possible manners. It was not exactly
that the most early romancers took the matter which was nearest to their
hands, but

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

rather that there was no other; the external aspect of religion was of
necessity therefore a reflection of the Celtic Church. But as folk-lore
does not explain the Christian Graal and the high experiments of
sanctity therewith connected, so the contributory memorials on the
Celtic ecclesiastical side do not explain it either. Behind all there
lies the secret tradition of the epoch, and it is this precisely which
makes the whole research so remote and intractable in respect of its
final issues. I need hardly say that the secret tradition had no claim
to put forward in respect of super-apostolical succession in the form
belonging, as we find, to the Graal literature, though it had--*ex
hypothesi*--its own Divine Warrants. This claim may represent therefore,
by a hazardous ascription, the ecclesiastical political programme of the
Anjou dynasty in England, and it would be in this way a separable
element in the literature. There is no other sense than this in which a
Britannic Church shows any true correspondence with Graal subsurface
intention, because that intention had neither hostility to Rome nor a
plea to put forward in respect of religious independence and the
institution of an autonomous pan-Britannic Church. It follows that the
secret tradition and the glimpse which we obtain thereof in the Graal
books are either a mere dream, or the point of departure for this
sub-section must be a total denial of all that has been put forward
previously in regard to St. David's legend. As it is premature, however,
to make it a point of departure, I must lead up to it from other
considerations, and I will therefore say a few further words concerning
the Church itself in Britain, not that they are essential to the subject
but for the information of those of my readers who may have had no call
to consider it.

Brief as it is, the following schedule will, I think, be sufficient for
the purpose, and I note: (*a*) that Christianity existed in Britain
during the Roman occupation, and that three British bishops were present
at the council of Arles, about 350 A.D.; (*b*) that the extent of its
diffusion is

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

doubtful, but it was probably the religion of Romans and Romanised
Britons in and about the garrison towns; (*c*) that it became universal
early in the fifth century, which was the beginning of the age of
Saints; (*d*) that it is doubtful whether the Celtic Church at this
period was a descendant of the Roman-British Church or a colonisation
*de novo* from Gaul, but it may have combined both sources; (*e*) that
an episcopal mission from Gaul into Britain is certain, and its object
is supposed to have been the extinction of Pelagian heresy, or Pagan, as
it has been suggested alternatively; (*f*) that the derivation *ab
origine symboli* was possibly from Ephesus through the Johannine Rite
into Southern Gaul, and thence into Britain; (*g*) that, also possibly,
there were other Oriental influences, and particularly from Egypt, in
the fifth century, the evidence being: (1) The derivation of Celtic
ornament from Egyptian ornament; (2) the commemoration in ancient Irish
books of "Holy Egyptian hermits" buried in Ireland; (3) the
correspondences between the Celtic monastic system and that of Egypt;
(4) the practice, attributed to St. Columba, of removing his sandals
before entering the sanctuary, a practice known otherwise only in Egypt.

As regards the hypothesis put forward in the previous sub-section, it is
observable that we have not been invited to consider in the Celtic
Church any traces of a particular theological or doctrinal
tradition--such as might, for example, be inferred from the Johannine
Rite--or of an evasive or concealed claim; it is not suggested that in
Wales, Scotia or Ireland there is any trace of an ecclesiastical legend
concerning a relic which at any distance might be held to offer a real
correspondence with that of the Holy Graal or its companion Hallows,
because the essential condition of the analogy must be indubitably the
existence of memorials of the Passion of our Lord. Of these it is
certain that there were none, because otherwise it is certain that they
would be adduced. We are asked, on the contrary, to assume that a
variant liturgical

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

reading, the legend of an historical apostle after passing under a
specific transmutation, and the mythical restitution of a Welsh King are
the first matter in combination of the complex cycles of literature
which are comprised in the Graal legend. If this hypothesis can be taken
with such high seriousness that we may suppose it put forward--shall I
say?--as an equivalent by analogy for that which has offered St. Dominic
and the enchanting fable of a question which should have been put to the
Pope as a real explanation of the Perceval-Graal myth, it will be
sufficient, I think, to deal with it on general lines rather than by an
exhaustive process of criticism in detail. Let us put aside, in the
first place, all that part which is purely in the region of supposition,
and take the actual facts as things for valuation in the schedule.
Question of *Epiclesis* or question--as we shall see presently--of a
particular tense, it is obvious that the oriental terms of consecration,
when those prevailed in the West, were the secret of no particular
sanctuary as distinguished from all other holy places in Britanny,
Britain and Wales. They were catholic to these countries and also to a
great part of that which we understand by Scotia, Ireland and Gaul. They
connect in themselves with no keepership and with no Hallows. We know
that the Roman rite colonised all these countries, and that in the
course of time it prevailed. But the period between the public use of
the words now in question and their final abrogation was one of
centuries, and although during a portion thereof--*ex hypothesi*--they
may have been perpetuated in concealment, there is no doubt that they
had fallen into complete desuetude long before the third quarter of the
twelfth century. It is impossible to suppose that there was at that time
any one concerned in their perpetuation sufficiently to put them forward
as a great mystery of sanctity inherent in the heart of Christianity,
and it is impossible, mystically speaking, that they should carry this
significance. The secret words do not appear in the

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

metrical romance of Joseph as in any sense the material of romance; they
appear with all the marks of a particular claim advanced for a special
reason and maintained through more than one generation by the successive
production, firstly, of a prose version of the early metrical *Merlin*,
and, secondly, by the similar derivation or independent invention of the
*Didot Perceval*, which carried on the same tradition, though it seems
left unfinished, perhaps from the standpoint of narrative and assuredly
of the term of its intention. In the second place two concurrent claims
appear, and the second--which is stronger than the first--abandons the
claim in respect of secret words. It does this so explicitly that it
makes public the words of consecration, by which we are enabled to see
at once how little they could have ever signified, if indeed it were
possible to suppose that these are the lost words of Graal literature.
Moreover, by a particular fatality, they do not happen to contain the
*Epiclesis* clause. In its place, as we know so well already, we have
the claim to a super-apostolical succession--as I have said, a much
stronger claim and one for which there is little precedent in the
dubious history of the Celtic Church. It is out of this pretension that
the Galahad Quest arises, though at a period when the claim itself
appears to have lapsed. We are agreed that, so far as there is a true
story at all, it is that of Galahad, and the question of secret words
never entered into the heart thereof. It is, therefore, useless to put
forward the assumed fact of their existence in the Celtic Rite of
Institution as something which is explanatory of the literature. In this
connection it is of importance to remember (*a*) that the only prose
*Perceval* which is of any importance mystically is that which depends
from the *Book of the Holy Graal*, not from Robert de Borron; and (*b*)
that the only metrical romance of Perceval which mystically may be also
important is that of Wolfram. The first has abandoned the words and the
second nearly all Eucharistic connection. The first puts the Roman dogma

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

of transubstantiation in its most materialised possible form. It will be
seen, therefore, that the Celtic hypothesis fails along what must be
regarded as the most important line. I submit, therefore, that the
pretension to a super-apostolical warrant is either part of a fraudulent
scheme of pre-eminence as an argument for autonomy on the part of the
British Church, with the advisers of a King for its spokesmen, or it
belongs to another order of concealed sentiment and event, the details
and motives of which are wanting on the historical side of things. In
the former case it is not of our concern, and it is explanatory only of
one branch in a large literature; in the latter, we must go much
further, and, if we can supply the missing events and motives, from
certain hidden sources, we shall be in possession, for the time being at
least, of a provisional explanation concerning things which are most
important in the literature, and--*donec de medio fiat*--it must be
allowed to hold.

The distinctive note of the Latin Eucharistic Rite is that, like the
gospels of St. Matthew and St. Mark, it gives the first words of
institution thus: *Accipite et manducate ex hoc omnes. Hoc est enim
corpus meum* ("Take and eat ye all of this. For this is My body").
Hereto certain oriental rites added other words which should read in
Latin: *Quad pro multis confrangetur* ("Which shall be broken for
many"). The *Book of the Holy Graal* gives: *Venés, si mangiés et chou
est li miens cors qui pour vous et pour maintes autres gens sera livres
à martire et à torment*--the substantial equivalent of *pro multis
confrangetur*. Compare the gospel of St. Luke in the Latin Vulgate,
which uses the present tense: *quod pro vobis datur*.

So far as regards the really trivial question of tense. The mode of
consecration by *Epiclesis*, or the Invocation of the Holy Spirit, may
be unknown to some of my readers, and I extract it therefore from the
*Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom*.

THE PRIEST (saith).--Blessed art Thou, Christ our God, who didst fill
the fishermen with all manner of wisdom, sending down upon them the

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy Ghost, and by
them hast brought the whole world into Thy net, O Lover of men: Glory be
to Thee.  
B. Both now and ever, &c.  
THE PRIEST (saith).--When the Highest came down and confounded the
tongues, He divided the nations; when He distributed the tongues of
fire, He called all to unity; and with one voice we praise the Holy
Ghost.

*The Deacon, pointing to the Holy Bread, saith in a low voice:*

DEACON.--Sir, bless the Holy Bread.

*The Priest standeth up, and thrice maketh the sign of the Cross on the
Holy Gifts, saying:*

PRIEST.--And make this bread the Precious Body of Thy Christ.  
DEACON.--Amen. Sir, bless the Holy Cup.  
PRIEST.--And that which is in this Cup the Precious Blood of Thy
Christ  
DEACON.--Amen. (*And pointing with his stole to both the Holy Things*)
Sir, Bless.  
PRIEST.--Changing them by Thy Holy Ghost.  
DEACON.--Amen, Amen, Amen.  
PRIEST.--(*after a pause*) So that they may be for purification of soul,
forgiveness of sins, communion of the Holy Ghost, &c.

I believe that in the Mozarabic Rite, which is thought to be in near
consanguinity with the Celtic, the *Epiclesis* formula is used on
occasions only. It is missing altogether from the so-called *Liturgy of
St. Dionysius*, which only survives in the Latin. I should add that the
existence of the clause in the Celtic Rite--whatever the strength of the
inferences--is a matter of speculation, for the simple reason that no
such liturgy is extant.

The other analogies and possibilities are a little attractive on the
surface, and are of the kind which are caught at rather readily; but
they seize upon a single point where they can be made to apply, and the
other issues in a long sequence are ignored. The name Cadwaladr
naturally suggests that of Galahad, and on the appeal to certain laws of
permutation, it seems for a moment justified; but it is not justified in
the legends. The last King of the Britons had indeed the hallows of his
family by the right of inheritance, but there was no antecedent keeper
whom he was required to heal, and there was no

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

quest to undertake in order that he might secure his own. But this
healing and this quest inhere in the Graal legend, and are manifestly at
the root of the design, so that there is no connection possible between
the two cases. Moreover, Cadwaladr is destined by his legend to return,
while it is of the essence of that of Galahad that he comes back no
more. The same remarks will apply to all traceable instances of
hereditary Keepership in Celtic families, whatever the object reserved.
It is even more certain that any comparison of St. David the Waterman
with the Rich Fisherman who is wounded is highest fantasy; neither
physically nor symbolically did the Saint suffer any hurt, but, again,
one of the foremost Graal intentions resides in the King's wounding. The
symbolical term Fisherman signifies the guardian of the Holy Mysteries;
it can have nothing to do with DEVERUR = Waterman. We do not know why a
great fish is said to have heralded the birth of the Welsh Apostle. To
help out the argument, we may affirm that he was a guardian of the
Christian Mysteries in the land to which he was commissioned, but we do
not in this manner account, either in the historical or symbolical
sense, for the fishing of Brons or Alain in the lake, or for the title
of Rich Fisherman applied to the Wardens of the Graal. It is true that
they also were Guardians of Mysteries, but this is an instance of
concurrence and not of derivation. The *Lesser Holy Graal* may create a
comparison between the Sacred Vessel and the Sepulchre in which Christ
was laid; but it does not for this reason institute any analogy between
that vessel and St. David's altar, nor is the appeal to Wolfram useful
except in the opposite sense, for the Graal stone of the Parsifal,
whether or not it was once in the crown of Lucifer, can tolerate still
less the institution of its likeness to "a sepulchre that was hewn in
stone, wherein never man before was laid." The altar of St. David is an
interesting fable of its type, as preposterous as that of Fécamp, and
between

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

the tomb of Christ, *ex hypothesi*, transported to Wales, and the
sacramental *ciborium* likened to the Holy Sepulchre there is no analogy
in any world of correspondences.

It remains therefore that in this literature we have shown how evil fell
upon the House of the Doctrine; how it overtook also the Keeper of
secret knowledge; after what manner he was at length healed; how the
hidden treasures passed under the care of his saviour; and how at the
term of all they were removed because of a fell and faithless time. That
would be a very pleasant scheme of interpretation which could say that
the House of Doctrine was the Celtic Church and that the wounded Keeper
signified the Church in desolation, but it remains that we must go
further in our search for a key to these mysteries.

If the legend of the Holy Graal were the last light of the Celtic Church
before it expired in proscription, one would confess that it was
glorious in its death. But the most that we can actually say is that it
left elements which in fine served a better purpose. The *Longer Prose
Perceval*, the poem of Wolfram, and the sacred and beautiful *Quest of
Galahad*, these are three records which bear witness on earth of the
secret things which are declared only in the heavens. There are three
tabernacles wherein transfiguration takes place.

In the extrinsic Celtic remains, the only substitute which offers for
the great legend of the Holy and Sacramental Cup is an obscure and
nameless vessel which is subject in its latest history to the
irreverence of a pedlar, and this it was .deemed worth while to avenge.
From such inefficiencies and trifles it is certain that we must have
recourse, even if for a moment only, to the Glastonbury legend, which
did invent high fictions to glorify the British Church. This resource
must however in its turn fail us, because Glastonbury is (*a*) of very
small moment throughout the Graal literature; (*b*) is never the place
of the sacred vessel, for even its most mythical allocations

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --as, for example,
Corbenic--cannot be identified therewith; and (*c*) it knows nothing of
the second Joseph. The *Book of the Holy Graal* does, in one of its
codices, speak of Glastonbury as the burial-place of the elder Joseph,
but it only says *Glas* in England, for which other texts substitute
Scotland. I doubt very much whether the Glastonbury legend was intended
for more than the praise of a particular monastery; it represents Joseph
of Arimathæa as the chief among twelve apostles sent by St. Philip to
Britain, and they carried a phial or phials containing the Precious
Blood. The Graal notion may have gratified Henry II., who concerned
himself with things Arthurian, but beyond this we have only romance of
history. It is certain in any case that St. David was not transformed
into Joseph of Arimathæa, so far as Glastonbury is concerned. He and his
*apostoli coadjutores*, his staff and his relics, belong to another
story brought over from the Continent when St. David had passed into
desuetude. Even so, of the Joseph claim, as we have it in the Graal
romances, there is little enough trace in the historical writers of the
time. The abbey of Noirmoutier in France laid claim to the original
possession of Joseph's body, but it disappeared, or was stolen--as some
said--by the monks of Glastonbury. If it be affirmed that the second
Joseph, who is a creation of the *Book of the Holy Graal*, signifies
some move in the strange ecclesiastical game which was played by Henry
II., the evidence is in the opposite direction, so far as it can be said
to exist; it is obvious that any game would have worked better with the
original apostolical Joseph than with his imaginary son.

It is time to close these reflections, and there are only two points
which remain, as I have not covenanted to deal with the minima as a
whole. If King Arthur was enabled to make chalices for ordinary
sacramental uses in official churches from the prototype which he saw in
his vision, being a chalice that was arch-natural wholly, this occurred
after the same manner that the Pilgrim Masons

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

who discovered the body of the Master Builder were enabled to bring away
certain things in substitution for the secrets that were lost at his
death, and there are thus other analogies than the natural and
reasonable gifts of the Welsh Apostle, but there is no need to dwell
upon them in this place.

The quotation which I have given from the *Lesser Holy Graal* raises an
interesting point, and, without being versed in the ecclesiastical side
of things, we can all of us believe that a church so strange as that
which once ministered in Wales had also some curious things belonging to
the liturgical world; but the extract in question must be read in
connection with the original metrical romance, where the symbolism is
expressed differently.

"Aussi sera representée  
Cele taule en meinte contrée.  
Ce que tu de la crouiz m’ostas  
Et ou sepulchre me couchas,  
C’est l’auteus seur quoi me metrunt  
Cil qui me sacrifierunt.  
Li dras où fui envolepez,  
Sera corparaus apelez.  
Cist veissiaus où men sanc méis  
Quant de men cors le requeillis,  
Calices apelez sera.  
La platine ki sus girra  
Iert la pierre senefiée  
Qui fu deseur moi seelée,  
Quant ou sepulchre m’éus mis."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Blood is
therefore mentioned and the analogy is complete; it is also gracious and
piteous, as the poem might say itself; and, in fine, it is a true,
catholic and efficacious comparison, which exhibits for those who can
read in the heart one other side of secret Eucharistic symbolism--even
the deep mystery of that mystical death which is suffered by the Lord of
Glory in the assumption of the veils of bread and wine, that He may
arise into a new life in the soul of the reborn communicant.

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

I do not propose to speak of the original Graal book, because this is
for another consideration, but if there was a secret liturgy or missal
at the root of the legend, I know that it was not especially Celtic and
still less Welsh especially. Behind the hypothesis of the *Epiclesis*
clause there lies a deeper speculation, for there are traces of a very
wonderful and super-efficacious Office of the Holy Spirit here and there
in the Graal literature, and I believe that this is one of the keys as
to its source in doctrine. We shall open hereafter another gate which
may bring us back to the Johannine Rite.

I have indicated already that if we accept the hypothesis of a
Pan-Britannic Church, it has no operation outside the *Book of the Holy
Graal*. Of Chrétien's intention we can discern little, nor does it
signify; it seems fairly clear that he had no religious, much less
ecclesiastical, implicits. Gautier is in the same position; Manessier
was merely a story-teller; Gerbert offers few allusions, but we cannot
tell where he began, and his end is a thing frustrated. There is nothing
so remote from all ecclesiastical programme in the official order as the
Lesser Chronicles, and the *Parsifal* of Wolfram--which renders to God
all that can be offered in ethics--like another Cain, though not of
necessity rejected, offering the fruits of the earth--and to the
spiritual Cæsar seeming to deny nothing--if the *Parsifal* has an
ulterior motive, it is not of the Celtic Church nor yet of the House of
Anjou, about which methinks that it protests too much, either for the
Provençal Guiot or the lord of Eschenbach. There remain therefore only
the Greater Chronicles and outside the primary text in place, which
happens to be last in time--here, for the hypothesis in question, a
moment surrendered formally--I know that of God moveth the *High
History* and the *Galahad* of the King of all.

I do not much care on what materials the makers of the Graal romances
may be agreed to have worked, since it is clear that they imported
therein a new spirit.

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If any one should
like still to say that Cadwaladr who went to Rome or Jerusalem is to be
identified with Galahad who went to heaven, they can have it that way
since they so please, understanding that, on my part, I may reserve my
judgment. I know that the one has suffered a high change before he has
passed into the other. I know that every literature has its antecedents
in some other literature, and that every religion owes something to a
religion that preceded it. Sometimes the consanguinity is close and
sometimes it is very far away. Only those who affirm that the one
accounts for the other, and this simply and only, seem to be a little
unwise. Christianity arose within Jewry and doctrinally out of Jewry,
but this fact only brings their generic difference into greater relief.
So also the Graal literature rose up in the Celtic Church; its analogies
are many therein; they are many also in folk-lore; but there are also as
many ways in which the one, as we know it, does not account for the
other, as we have it actually.

The Celtic Church has, however, assisted us to see one thing more
plainly, though we know it on other considerations, namely, that in fine
there is but a single quest, which is that of Galahad. We must make
every allowance for the honest findings of scholars, for whom the Holy
Graal, as it was and it is, has never spoken, for whom it is only a
feeding-dish under a light cloud of imagery, and by whom it is thought
perhaps in their hearts that the intervention of Christianity in the
wild old pagan myth is on the whole rather regrettable. They turn
naturally to those quarters whence issue the voices of purely natural
life, and therefore they prefer Gawain and Perceval in his cruder forms,
because these speak their own language. It is to be trusted, and this
devoutly, that they will find more and more evidences for the
maintenance of their particular view. Unmanifested now but still
discerned darkly, if the true proto-Perceval should be at length found,
that which went before the *Peredur* and the English metrical romance,

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

and if, as there is no doubt, it should be devoid of all elements
belonging to Graal or quester, our case will be the better proved which
is (1) the natural succession of the Galahad Quest after the Graal
history in its longer recension; (2) the succession of Perceval in the
sequence of Robert de Borron, but rather as the scion of a dubious
legitimacy; (3) the introduction of the late prose *Perceval le Gallois*
as a final act of transmutation in the Anglo-Norman cycle, which so far
assists our case that it manifests the unfitness, realised at that
period, of Perceval as he was known by the earlier texts; (4) the
derivation of the Wolfram *Parsifal* in part from Celtic elements, in
part from some which are, or may have been, Teutonic, but also with
derivatives through Provence from Spain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Victory of the Latin Rite](hchg62)
