[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg76)  [Next](hchg78.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI

#### THE GRAAL FORMULA IN THE LIGHT OF OTHER GLEANINGS FROM THE CATHOLIC SACRAMENTARY

The Secret Orders illustrate the realised life of sanctity on the plane
of symbolism, but if it were tolerable to suppose that the literature of
alchemy was put forward by an instituted confraternity, then that would
be the one association which *per doctrinam sanctam* had gone apparently
beyond symbolism and reached the catholic heart of all experience. On
the question of fact, I believe that the Hermetic adepts had a *via
secretissima* which was communicated from one to another under
self-enforcing covenants--because it was *Sacramentum Regis*--and that
at least the best among them were not incorporated formally. The adepts
of the physical work had successive fellowships--and so also had the
seekers thereafter--which we can trace at different periods; but these
do not concern us. The others exchanged the watchwords of the Night and
the vision of Aurora breaking in the soul; they left their memorials in
books as guides one to another, saying what they best could about that
which was never expressed openly and caring little, except under God's
will, whether there were any listeners, since it could not fail that the
light should remain somehow in the world. Outside the wisdom of the very
Church itself, they are the greatest witnesses in the age of Christ to
the truth of its greatest experiment.

<span id="page_567">p. 567</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The literature of
the Holy Graal--in some of its aspects--is also a witness, and chiefly
to the depth and wonders of the Catholic Mass. After all the worlds of
language have been exhausted, I conceive that we have approximated only
to those wonders and have sounded, here and there, only with short lines
and unadapted plummets those immeasurable deeps. The keyword of the
whole Mystery is *sacramentum mirabile*. *O mirabile* indeed and
*sacramentum* in all truth, but because of the words that fail us, we
must perforce fill the great intervening breaks even with the little
books of popular devotion; and when the dark sayings of Paracelsus in
*De Cœna Domini* have failed to satisfy us, we must even see whether the
learned Dr. Ralph Cudworth on *The Lord's Supper*--demonstrating many
follies--may not have a chance word there or here in his pages which
will open, outside all knowledge of his own, some gate that we had
passed without thinking! Here therefore are a few gleanings from the
Catholic Sacramentary as further sidelights on the most catholic of all
experiments--the Quest of the Graal.

If ever there was a verbal formula of Eucharistic consecration concealed
by some school in the Church--if ever a time came when there was
something missing from any Mass, Celtic or another--I believe that God
has filled the vacant space with channels of sufficing grace, and that
grace efficacious is not so very far away from any illuminated heart.
The fact however remains that it is not ready to our hands, and that
though we say *Introibo* we do not enter and go in, except into the
outer sanctuary. For this reason we feel a divine and loving envy when
we hear what Galahad and Perceval saw after the material visions had
passed away, when there was no longer any doctrine of transubstantiation
made sensible, but only *les esperitueus choses*. So also the gracious
and piteous legend haunts us for ever, and we are aware that we have
dwelt overlong in Logres and know the loss thereof.

<span id="page_568">p. 568</span>

It has been said, I believe, by a certain school of interpretation,
which has not so far satisfied the other schools in respect of its
titles, that the Graal vessel is that which contains the universe. There
is unfortunately some disposition to put forward suppositions on the
basis of research in other fields, and without specific acquaintance
with the field covered by the speculation taken thus lightly in hand.
The statement in question is not true in the sense that is intended,
though it is exhaustive in its accuracy from another standpoint, and
this in a dual manner: (*a*) because those who receive that Eucharist of
which it is the symbol, in the highest grade and manner of reception, do
behold the beginning and the end; and (*b*) because man in this manner
enters into the consciousness of himself as being actually the vessel of
reflection which testifies of everything without to the *centrum
concentratum* within. In such sense we may all pray that the time shall
come when man will reflect in his universal glass of vision that truth
which is within the universe and not only its external impressions. When
this comes to pass it can be said of him, as it was said once of
Perceval: *Et li seintimes Gréax ne s’aperra plus çà dedanz; mès vos
sauroiz bien trusqu’à brief là où il ièra*--And the most Holy Graal
shall appear herein no more, but in a brief space shall you know well
the place where it shall be.

The age which saw the production of the Graal literature was, in all the
public places, far from this goal like ourselves; the communication of
Him who is *Alpha* and *Omega*, who brings with Him the knowledge of the
beginning and the end, took place in the symbol, not in the life
essential, and the first-hand revelation of Mysteries was therefore
wanting. That which doctrine and ordinary devotional practice contrived
to impress upon men's memories and to impose on their faith offered an
exercise to their intelligence, but in the activity intelligence was
baffled. The sword of the spirit broke upon the ineffable mystery of the
Kingdom

<span id="page_569">p. 569</span>

of Heaven, as the symbolic sword of Perceval broke upon the gate of
entrance to the Earthly Paradise. The hermit-priest who tells his
wonderful story at the inception of the *Book of the Holy Graal* is in
labour with the problem of the Trinity, and when his praying and longing
have carried him to the Third Heaven, it is this secret of the Eternal
Sanctity which is unveiled before the eyes of his soul. Many noble and
learned clerks, hermits and anchoresses innumerable, did not toil less
hard, but without reaping so high a reward. They also who wrote of these
wonders in the best sense thereof had their limitations, and keenly
defined enough. It is so that we must account for certain grave
confusions in respect of the Divine Personality of Christ, and perhaps
not differently for those vague traces of doctrine belonging to a very
early period and abandoned as the mind of the Church grew clearer in the
comprehension of her own dogmas.

It is so also that I account personally for the material side of the
Graal wonders; to say that they have come over from folk-lore is a
statement of fact simply, and does not explain their toleration not only
by side and by side therewith but as a part of the Mystery of Faith. Yet
there was also a superincession of the gross old pagan myth and the
recognised implicit of Eucharistic doctrine that the nourishment of the
soul has a reflex action by which it contributes to physical welfare.
The man who attends Mass, prepared suitably thereto, profits in all
degrees, and for him who communicates in the higher state of grace it
must be remembered that the consecrated symbols of Bread and Wine,
through which the Divine is conveyed to the man within, pass through the
mouth and the reins and may, as tradition and experience have testified,
convey to the natural humanity some part and reflection of that grace
which is declared abundantly in the other side of his being. It is in
this sense that the body as well as the soul can testify at the altar
rails that it is good to be here. A very subtle

<span id="page_570">p. 570</span>

point is developed in this connection by the mystic and theologian
Görres, who affirms that in ordinary nourishment he who eats being
superior to that which is eaten assimilates the elements which he
receives, but in the Eucharist the transmuted nourishment is more potent
than is he who partakes, and instead of being assimilated by him, it is
the nutriment which assimilates the man and raises him to a superior
sphere. Because of the solidarity between body, soul and spirit, I say
therefore that the *salus, honor, virtus quoque* which descend upon our
higher part have also their operation below. The food-giving powers of
the Graal are not therefore a reflection of the *epulum ex oblatis* but
a *reductio ad fabulam* of the spiritual truth that Grace sustains
Nature, and a guarantee in perpetuity that the Quest of the Kingdom of
God will never fail for the want of external taverns carrying a full
licence at all points of the way. The Dish of Plenty is therefore the
simulacrum of *Manna abscondita*, and the priest who says Mass in his
chapel carefully and recollectedly, and with illumination, by word and
by word, turning at the due time to utter his *sursum corda* in the
right sense, is doing more in the fellowship of humanity than all the
corporal works of mercy pressed down and overflowing. He will be
assuredly inspired in his reason to organise charity, so that his people
shall be fitly prepared to receive the Eucharist worthily, that he may
give it freely with open and venerable hands. As regards the lesser and
material side of charity, the broken meats and the garlic, with the
tokens of Cæsar, he will probably adopt some rule of relaxed observance,
as it is good enough in these minima for God to find out His own, and He
will give anywhere.

In respect further of the Manna itself, the *Longer Prose Perceval*
gets, sacramentally speaking, nearest of all to the Mystery when it
indicates the exaltation of the recipient by five in the five manifested
changes. The text indeed is like a prolonged *Hosannah* or a *Gloria in
excelsis* chanted

<span id="page_571">p. 571</span>

from scene to scene in a great cycle of questing. The same note runs
through all the legends, and its last echo is heard faintly in the late
Lohengrin romance. In this Swan story, the chain of one of the Swans was
made into two chalices, and, Mass being said therein, the bird was
restored to his proper and human form. This is an Eucharistic allegory
concerning the deligation of the body by Divine Substance communicated
to the soul, putting a period to the enchantments and sorceries of the
five senses.

I conclude therefore with St. Dionysius that the Eucharist is the first
of the Divine Mysteries which now are; with the *Paraphrase* of St.
Maximus, that it is the consummation of all other sacraments; and with
official doctrine in the Latin Church, that it operates by intrinsic
efficacity, *ex opere operato*, in virtue of its institution by Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Lapis Exilis](hchg78.md)
