[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg74)  [Next](hchg76.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV

#### THE KABALISTIC ACADEMIES

We have now dealt with the testimony of the chief witness to the
perpetuity and perfection of the Great Experiment, and if it be
necessary--as it is at times and seasons--to conceal or re-express
things in an artificial and evasive language, I do not know of a more
convincing substituted terminology than that of transmutation by alchemy
as a high analogy of God's work in the soul. Other analogies there are,
but for the most part unrealised, as, for example, the sublime clause of
the Apostle's Creed: "*Et expecto resurrectionem mortuorum et vitam
venturi sæculi*," which, as it stands, is a testimony to the prospect
and not the attainment. The motives which lead to the adoption of
artificial language and the circumstances which may help to justify it
belong to the term of our inquiry, of which

<span id="page_551">p. 551</span>

this is the penultimate stage only. We have now finished for the present
with the Mystery of Attainment--or why it was necessary to seek and find
the Holy Graal in order that the spiritual knight might in fine be
assumed into Heaven, carrying the Palladium with him into those stars
whence it first descended; and we have next to determine whether there
are other traces which may help us to understand better the Mystery of
Loss, or the meaning of the Voided Sanctuary. It is admitted out of hand
that the first indications are placed here in respect of the order of
time, and that they are introductory and subsidiary only--a place of
sidelights and incidental correspondences. The reason is that, although
the root-matters must be identical when the term in finality is one, we
are dealing in respect of the Graal with a manifestation in Christendom
but here with a manifestation in Israel.

The schools of Kabalism can scarcely be said to have done more than
emerge partly into public existence when the canon of the Graal
literature had already closed; in these schools there were great masters
of mystic thought, though more especially on the intellectual side. Now,
in its own way, the theosophical scheme of Jewry in exile is a story of
loss like the Graal, though it is one which ends in expectation--or, as
I should say, in certainty. The loss in external history and in national
life was counterpoised by a loss in the sanctuary, as if the
arch-natural Eucharist, the Graal which is of all things holy, had been
taken therefrom. It was that which of old was written not only in one
galaxy of stars but by the power of which the worlds themselves were
made. The substitution which, according to the Graal legends, was left
with the Christian Church in place of the living sanctities is
paralleled closely by that other legend which tells how the stress and
inhibition of Israel is because the Divine Word has been withdrawn from
the Holy Place, and instead of the true Tetragram, the voice of the
priest only pronounces now the name

<span id="page_552">p. 552</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Adonai. But the
Eucharist, as I have said, is still the Eucharist, the House from which
the Graal has departed is still the Holy House, and all sanctity
attaches in like manner to the substituted sacred Name and to the cortex
of those letters which now represent the Tetragram--‏יהוה‎. There was a
time when this name in its true form was pronounced by the High Priest
once annually in the sanctuary; it restored the people of God and
maintained the Inmost Shrine, keeping open the channels of grace, even
as the heavenly dove, descending on Good Friday, renewed the virtue of
the Graal. Afterwards, as I have indicated, there came another time when
disaster fell upon Israel, with the result that the essential elements
of the Name, in which its true pronunciation was involved, became lost
even to the sanctuary.

It should be scarcely necessary to say that I am not putting forward the
hypothesis of a channel of communication by which something was derived
into romance literature from implicits which about the same time or
subsequently were developed into Zoharic books. I know that behind the
Graal Castle--according to the *Longer Prose Perceval*--there was the
Earthly Paradise, and that the House of the Holy Vessel was also the
Castle of Souls. I know that, according to the *Zohar*, the Garden of
Eden is placed in a position which corresponds to that of the Graal
itself. I know that both were removed--the Graal into the heavenly
regions and the Garden of Eden into that which is no longer manifest.
The latter place was connected nearly in Kabalism with the Great
Sanctuary--truly a Castle of Souls--wherein all those who are to come
await incarnation in turn, for, according to Jewish theosophy, the
creation of souls is not successive, or dependent on earthly generation,
but eternal in the heavens. I know that there is nothing in literature
so like the departure of Galahad as that of R. Simeon ben Jochai; and in
spite of great divergences, of distinctions in the root-matter,

<span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

the Mystery of the Holy Graal has its subsurface analogy with the
Mystery of the *Lesser Holy Assembly*. I know that the Greater and
Lesser Sanhedrim sound like oracular voices speaking in an unknown
tongue concerning the Holy House, and we feel that behind the outward
offices of religion there was an Inner Church of Israel. I know that,
according to the involved scheme of the *Sephiroth*, the Waters of Life
are in Knowledge, which is also the place of the Cup, and this is
reserved always for those who are athirst. But these things, with others
and many others, do not constitute the lightest shadow of transmission.
No French poet could be expected to know thereof; no exponent of
Christian legend, even when interpreted mystically, ever looked to
Israel for light and leading in those internecine days--however much the
name of Provence may suggest a certain difference in mind from the
prevalent orthodoxy of the age. That there may be no mistake on this
subject among those whom I address more especially, I note further that
the peculiar presentation of Graal symbolism which is connected with the
name of the reputed Provençal Guiot--who of all only might confess to
some curious memories from a course of study at Toledo--is precisely
that presentation in which the sanctuary is not voided and the Graal is
not taken away.

It is a matter of common knowledge that at the period in question Spain
was one place in the world where the Jews were not merely free from
raging persecution but where worldly positions of importance were open
to their competition. We know further that a great light of Moslem
learning shone forth in some Spanish academies. We know finally or may
learn that another light had kindled therein among the chosen people
themselves. Palestine and the East generally thereabouts may have
contributed its portion, and did indeed do so, but the heart and marrow
of Kabalism was in Spain. The Jews of Cordova, the Jews of Toledo

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span>

and of other places in the Peninsula look great figures in the
literature, and so also do certain academies of Southern France, though
there the Jews did not find the same peace in their abodes. For them the
asylum was Spain, and that indeed must have been little less than a
Terrestrial Paradise realised. And as between the South of France and
Spain the channels of communication stood wide open, as Provence is the
legendary place of the first Graal quest, as the Ideal Castle, the Holy
Place, Mont Salvatch, had its abode unapproachable in the Pyrenees, so
the imaginative mind may perhaps incline to say that behind the strange
legend of the Jew of Toledo there is something undemonstrable of a lost
Graal connection; yet this is the stuff only of which dreams are made,
and it is well for my own case. The analogy between all the schools in
succession is the testimony which they bear in common, and if after
other manners they reflected one into another the witness would be
weaker in proportion. There is no concert, there is no debt in
literature, there is no result in fine, as by a course of development
from cycle to cycle of books. The scheme of theosophical Kabalism is
distinct, and absolutely, from that of metaphysical alchemy; it is the
evidence of two schools which did not know one another, and, although at
the root their evidence is of the same kind, the relation between them
is that of the pairs of opposites. So also when another and no less
noteworthy voice began to speak within the body-legendary of symbolical
Masonry, it said what Kabalism had said, but it was not Kabalism
speaking behind a later mask. As I must look to be challenged in the
gate over the thesis of this book, I assume at this point so much
harness as will suffice to dissuade the gentlemen of the counter-guard
from considering that I am open to attack as one who seeks to explain
that generic literature A is the concealed father of generic literature
B, though I speak more seriously as a counsel to some of the
confraternities with which I am affiliated

<span id="page_555">p. 555</span>

in thought and the pursuit of a term in common. When it is said that God
so loved the world, the counterpart in Kabalism is that the *Kingdom* is
in no sense apart from the *Crown*, and that the progression from
*Aleph* to *Tau* is complete without break or intermission; but St. Paul
is not for that reason a precursor of the *Zohar*. So also when the
Arabian Academies of Spain became the resort of Christian scholars--"men
of curious inquiry," as one has said concerning them--it does not mean
that from such schools they brought back Sufic mysticism and translated
it into romance. It does not mean that there also they met with the
*corpus materiale* of the Kabalah, a final receptacle of the *dèbris*
and drift of all the old theogonies, theosophies and occult knowledge of
many places and periods, or that learning there how the Daughter of the
Voice was withdrawn from the sanctuary of Israel, they told in another
tongue how, after the departure of the Graal, the dwelling of King
Fisherman "began to fall," though the chapel thereto belonging never
"wasted nor decayed." The voices say one thing, but they do not speak in
concert. We know only and realise that Israel is waiting by the waters
of Babylon, and it has come to pass that, though we draw from far other
places, we are also beside her, remembering, perhaps more dimly and yet
with deeper yearning, the glory that once was in Zion.

Of such was the mind of Kabalism, its appanage, its baggage and its
quest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Claim in Respect of Templar Influence](hchg76.md)
