[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg00)  [Next](hchg02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE

IF deeper pitfalls are laid by anything more than by the facts of
coincidence, it is perhaps by the intimations and suggestions of
writings which bear, or are held to bear, on their surface the seals of
allegory and, still more, of dual allusion; as in the cases of
coincidence, so in these, it is necessary for the historical student to
stand zealously on his guard and not to acknowledge second meaning or
claims implied, however plausible, unless they are controlled and
strengthened by independent evidence. Even with this precaution, his
work will remain anxious, for the lineal path is difficult to find and
follow. Perhaps there is one consolation offered by the gentle life of
letters. In matters of interpretation, if always to succeed is denied
us, to have deserved it is at least something.

Among our aids there is one aid which arises from the correspondences
between distinct systems of allegory and symbolism. They are important
within their own sphere; and it is by subsidiary lights of this nature
that research can be directed occasionally into new tracks, from which
unexpected and perhaps indubitable results may be derived ultimately.
When the existence of a secondary and concealed meaning seems therefore
inferentially certain in a given department of literature--if ordinary
processes, depending on evidence of the external kind, have been found
wanting--its purpose and intention may be ascertained by a comparison
with other secret literatures, which is equivalent to saying that the
firmest hermeneutical ground in such cases must be sought in evidence
which inheres and is common to several departments

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

of cryptic writing. It is in this way that the prepared mind moves
through the world of criticism as through outward worlds of discovery.

I am about to set forth after a new manner, and chiefly for the use of
English mystics, the nature of the mystery which is enshrined in the old
romance-literature of the Holy Graal. As a literature it can be
approached from several standpoints; and at the root it has a direct
consanguinity with other mysteries, belonging to the more secret life of
the soul. I propose to give a very full account of all the
considerations which it involves, the imperfect speculations included of
some who have preceded me in the same path--writers whose interests at a
far distance are not utterly dissimilar to my own, though their
equipment has been all too slight. I shall endeavour to establish at the
end that there are certain things in transcendence which must not be
sought in the literature, and yet they arise out of it. The task will
serve, among several objects, two which may be put on record at the
moment--on the one hand, and quite obviously, to illustrate the deeper
intimations of Graal literature, and, on the other, certain collateral
intimations which lie behind the teachings of the great churches and
are, in the official sense, as if beyond their ken. Of such intimations
is all high seership. The task itself has been undertaken as the initial
consequence of several first-hand considerations. If I note this fact at
so early a stage as the preface, it is because of the opportunity which
it gives me to make plain, even from the beginning, that I hold no
warrant to impugn preconceived judgments, as such, or, as such, to set
out in search of novelties. In my own defence it will be desirable to
add that I have not written either as an enthusiast or a partisan,
though in honour to my school there are great dedications to which I
must confess with my heart. On the historical side there is much and
very much in which some issues of the evidence, on production, will be
found to fall short of demonstration, and, so far as this part is
concerned, I offer it at

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

its proper worth. On the symbolical side, and on that of certain
implicits, it is otherwise, and my thesis to those of my school will, I
think, come not only with a strong appeal, but as something which is
conclusive within its own lines. I should add that, rather than sought
out, the undertaking has been imposed through a familiarity with
analogical fields of symbolism, the correspondences of which must be
unknown almost of necessity to students who have not passed through the
secret schools of thought.

It will be intelligible from these statements that it has not been my
purpose to put forward the analogies which I have established as a
thesis for the instruction of scholarship, firstly, because it is
concerned with other matters which are important after their own kind,
and, secondly, as I have already intimated, because I am aware that a
particular equipment is necessary for their full appreciation, and this,
for obvious reasons, is not found in the constituted or authorised
academies of official research. My own investigation is designed rather
for those who are already acquainted with some part at least of the
hidden knowledge, who have been concerned with the study of its traces
through an interest proper to themselves--in other words, for those who
have taken their place within the sanctuary of the mystic life, or at
least in its outer circles.

In so far as I have put forward my thesis under the guidance of the
sovereign reason, I look for the recognition of scholarship, which in
its study of the literature has loved the truth above all things, though
its particular form of appreciation has led it rather to dedicate
especial zeal to a mere demonstration that the literature of the Graal
has its basis in a cycle of legend wherein there is neither a Sacred
Vessel nor a Holy Mystery. This notwithstanding, there is no scholar now
living in England whose conditional sympathy at least I may not expect
to command from the beginning, even though I deal ultimately with
subjects that are beyond the province in which

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

folk-lore societies can adjudicate, and in which they have earned such
high titles of honour.

After accepting every explanation of modern erudition as to the origin
of the Graal elements, there remain various features of the romances as
things outside the general horizon of research, and they are those
which, from my standpoint, are of the last and most real importance. A
scheme of criticism which fails to account for the claim to a
super-valid formula of Eucharistic consecration and to a
super-apostolical succession accounts for very little that matters
finally. I have therefore taken up the subject at the point where it has
been left by the students of folk-lore and all that which might term
itself authorised scholarship. *Ut adeptis appareat me illis parem et
fratrem*, I have made myself acquainted with the chief criticism of the
cycle, and I have explored more than one curious tract which is adjacent
to the cycle itself. It is with the texts, however, that I am concerned
only, and I approach them from a new standpoint. As to this, it will be
better to specify from the outset some divisions of my scheme as
follows: (1) The appropriation of certain myths and legends which are
held to be pre-Christian in the origin thereof, and their penetration by
an advanced form of Christian Symbolism carried to a particular term;
(2) the evidence of three fairly distinct sections or schools, the
diversity of which is not, however, in the fundamental part of their
subject, but more properly in the extent and mode of its development;
(3) the connection of this mode and of that part with other schools of
symbolism, the evolution of which was beginning at the same period as
that of the Graal literature or followed thereon; (4) the close analogy,
in respect of the root-matter, between the catholic literature of the
Holy Graal and that which is connoted in the term mysticism; (5) the
traces through Graal romance and other coincident literatures of a
hidden school in Christianity. The Graal romances are not documents of
this school put forward by the external way, but are its rumours at a
far distance. They are not authorised, nor

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

are they stolen; they have arisen, or the consideration of that which I
understand with reserves, and for want of a better title, as the Hidden
Church of Sacramental Mystery follows from their consideration as
something in the intellectual order connected therewith. The offices of
romance are one thing, and of another order are the high mysteries of
religion--if a statement so obvious can be tolerated. There are, of
course, religious romances, and the Spanish literature of chivalry
furnishes a notable instance of a sacred allegorical intention which
reposes on the surface of the sense, as in the *Pilgrim's Progress*.
Except in some isolated sections, as, for example, in the *Galahad
Quest* and the *Longer Prose Perceval*, the cycle of the Holy Graal does
not move in the region of allegory, but in that of concealed intention,
and it is out of this fact that there arises my whole inquiry, with the
justification for the title which I have chosen. The existence of a
concealed sanctuary, of a Hidden Church, is perhaps the one thing which
seems plain on the face of the literature, and the next fact is that it
was pre-eminent, *ex hypothesi*, in its possession of the most sacred
memorials connected with the passion of Christ. It was from the manner
in which these were derived that the other claims followed. The idea of
a Graal Church has been faintly recognised by official scholarship, and
seeing, therefore, that there is a certain common ground, the question
which transpires for consideration is whether there is not a deeper
significance in the claim, and whether we are dealing with mere legend
or with the rumours at a distance of that which "once in time and
somewhere in the world" was actually existent, under whatever veils of
mystery. Following this point of view, it is possible to collect out of
the general body of the literature what I should term its intimations of
sub-surface meaning into a brief schedule as follows: (*a*) The
existence of a clouded sanctuary; (*b*) a great mystery; (*c*) a
desirable communication which, except under certain circumstances,
cannot take place; (*d*) suffering within and sorcery without, being

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

pageants of the mystery; (*e*) supernatural grace which does not possess
efficacy on the external side; (*f*) healing which comes from without,
sometimes carrying all the signs of insufficiency and even of
inhibition; (*g*) in fine, that which is without enters and takes over
the charge of the mystery, but it is either removed altogether or goes
into deeper concealment--the outer world profits only by the abrogation
of a vague enchantment.

The unversed reader may not at the moment follow the specifics of this
schedule, yet if the allusions awaken his interest I can promise that
they shall be made plain in proceeding. But as there is no one towards
whom I shall wish to exercise more frankness than the readers to whom I
appeal, it will be a counsel of courtesy to inform them that scholarship
has already commented upon the amount of mystic nonsense which has been
written on the subject of the Graal. Who are the mystic people and what
is the quality of their nonsense does not appear from the statement, and
as entirely outside mysticism there has been assuredly an abundance of
unwise speculation, including much of the heretical and occult order, I
incline to think that the one has been taken for the other by certain
learned people who have not been too careful about the limits of the
particular term to which they have had recourse so lightly. After
precisely the same manner, scholarship speaks of the ascetic element in
the Graal literature almost as if it were applying a term of reproach,
and, again, it is not justified by reasonable exactitude in the use of
words. Both impeachments, the indirect equally with the overt, stand for
what they are worth, which is less than the solar mythology applied to
the interpretation of the literature. My object in mentioning these
grave trifles is that no one at a later stage may say that he has been
entrapped.

It is indubitable that some slight acquaintance with the legends of the
Holy Graal can be presupposed in my readers, but in many it may be so
unsubstantial that

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have concluded
to assume nothing, except that, as indicated already, I am addressing
those who are concerned with the Great Quest in one of its departments.
There is no reason why they should extend their dedicated field of
thought by entering into any technical issues of subjects outside those
with which they may be concerned already. I have returned from
investigations of my own, with a synopsis of the results attained, to
show them that the literature of the Holy Graal is of kinship with our
purpose and that this also is ours. The Graal is, therefore, a rumour of
the Mystic Quest, but there were other rumours.

In order to simplify the issues, all the essential materials have been
so grouped that those for whom the bulk of the original works is, by one
or other reason, either partially or wholly sealed, may attain, in the
first place, an accurate and sufficing knowledge of that which the
several writers of the great cycles understood by the Graal itself, and
that also which was involved in the quests thereof according to the mind
of each successive expositor. I have sought, in the second place, to
furnish an adequate conversance with the intention, whether manifest or
concealed, which has been attributed to the makers of the romances by
numerous students of these in various countries and times. In the third
place there is presented, practically for the first time--*pace* all
strictures of scholiasts--the mystic side of the legend, and with this
object it has been considered necessary to enter at some length into
several issues, some of which may seem at first sight extrinsic. In
pursuance of my general plan I have endeavoured in various summaries:
(*a*) To compare the implied claim of the Graal legends with the
Eucharistic doctrine at the period of the romances; (*b*) to make it
clear, by the evidence of the literature, that the Graal Mystery, in the
highest sense of its literature, was one of supernatural life and a
quest of high perfection; (*c*) to show, in a word, that, considered as
a mystery of illumination and even of ecstasy, the Graal does not differ
from

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

the great traditions of initiation. Whatever, therefore, be the first
beginnings of the literature, in the final development it is mystic
rather than ascetic, because it does not deal with the path of
detachment so much as with the path of union.

It must be acknowledged assuredly that the first matter of the legend is
found in folk-lore, antecedent, for the most part, to Christianity in
the West, exactly as the first matter of the cosmos was in the TOHU,
BOHU of chaos; but my purpose is to show that its elements were taken
over in the interest of a particular form of Christian religious
symbolism. That advancement notwithstanding, the symbolism at this day
needs re-expression as well as the informing virtue of a catholic
interpretation, showing how the Graal and all other traditions which
have become part of the soul's legends can be construed in the true
light of mystic knowledge.

I have demonstrated at the same time that among the romancers, and
especially the poets, some spoke from very far away of things whereof
they had heard only, and this darkly, so that the characteristic of the
Graal legend is, for this reason, as on other accounts, one of
insufficiency. Yet its writers testify by reflection, even when they
accept the sign for the thing signified and confuse the flesh with the
spirit, to a certain measure of knowledge and a certain realisation. It
is only in its mystic sense that the Graal literature can repay study.
All great subjects bring us back to the one subject which is alone
great; all high quests end in the spiritual city; scholarly criticisms,
folk-lore and learned researches are little less than useless if they
fall short of directing us to our true end--and this is the attainment
of that centre which is about us everywhere. It is in such a way, and so
only, that either authorised scholar or graduating student can reach
those things which will recompense knowledge concerning the vision and
the end in Graal literature, as it remains to us in the forms which
survive--in which

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

forms the mystery of the Holy Cup has been passed through the mind of
romance and has been deflected like a staff in a pool.

I conclude, therefore, that the spirit of the Holy Quest may be as much
with us in the study of the literature of the Quest as if we were
ourselves adventuring forth in search of the Graal Castle, the Chalice,
the Sword and the Lance. Herein is the consecrating motive which moves
through the whole inquiry. So also the mystery of quest does not differ
in its root-matter, nor considerably in its external forms, wherever we
meet it; there are always certain signs by which we may recognise it and
may know its kinship. It is for this reason that the school of Graal
mysticism enters, and that of necessity, into the great sequence of
grades which constitute the unified Mystic Rite.

If there was a time when the *chaos magna et infirmata* of the old
un-Christian myths was transformed and assumed into a heaven of the most
holy mysteries, there comes a time also when the criticism of the
literature which enshrines the secret of the Graal has with great
deference to be taken into other sanctuaries than those of official
scholarship; when some independent watcher, having stood by the troubled
waters of speculation, must either say: "Peace, be still"; or,
indifferently, "Let them rave"--and, putting up a certain beacon in the
darkness, must signal to those who here and there are either acquainted
with his warrants by certain signs, which they recognise, or can divine
concerning them, and must say to them: "Of this is also our
inheritance."

So much as' I have here advanced will justify, I think, one further act
of sincerity. I have no use for any audience outside my consanguinities
in the spirit. As Newton's *Principia* is of necessity a closed book to
those who have fallen into waters of confusion at the *pons asinorum* of
children--and as this is not an impeachment of the Principia--so my
construction of the Graal literature will not be intelligible, or
scarcely, to those who have not

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

graduated in some one or other of the academies of the soul; it is not
for children in the elementary classes of thought, but in saying this I
do not impeach the construction. The *Principia* did not make void the
elements of Euclid. I invite them only for their personal relief to
close the book at this point before it closes itself against them.

I conclude by saying that the glory of God is the purpose of all my
study, and that in His Name I undertake this quest as a part of the
Great Work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](hchg02)
