[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg25)  [Next](hchg27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

# BOOK III

## THE EARLY EPOCHS OF THE QUEST

### I

#### THE ANTECEDENTS OF THE LEGEND IN FOLK-LORE

THE beginnings of literature are like the beginnings of life--questions
of antecedents which are past finding out, and perhaps they do not
signify vitally on either side, because the keys of all mysteries are to
be sought in the comprehension of their term rather than in their
initial stages. Modern scholarship lays great and almost exclusive
stress on the old Celtic antecedents of the Graal literature, and on
certain Welsh and other prototypes of the Perceval Quest in which the
Sacred Vessel does not appear at all. As regards these affiliations,
whether Welsh, English or Irish, I do not think that sufficient
allowance has been made for the following facts: (*a*) That every
archaic fiction and every legend depends, as already suggested, from
prior legend and fiction; (*b*) that the antecedents are both explicit
and implicit, intentional or unconscious, just as in these days we have
wilful and undesigned imitation; (*c*) that the persistence of legends
is by the way of their transfiguration. We have done nothing to explain
the ascension of the Graal to heaven and the assumption of Galahad when
we have ascertained that some centuries before there were myths about
the Cauldron of Ceridwen or that of the Dagda, any more than we have
accounted for Christianity if we have ascertained, and this even

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

indubitably, that some ecclesiastical ceremonial is an adaptation of
pre-Christian rites. Here, as in so many other instances, the essence of
everything resides in the intention. If I possess the true apostolical
succession, then, *ex hypothesi* at least, I do not the less consecrate
the Eucharist if I use the Latin rite, which expresses the words of
institution in the past tense; or some archaic oriental rite, by which
they are expressed in the future, and to which there is added at some
point the *Epiclesis* clause, being the invocation of the Holy Spirit.

There is, in any case, no question as to the Graal antecedents in
folk-lore, and I should be the last to minimise their importance after
their own kind, just as I should not abandon the official Church because
I had been received into the greater Church which is within. I believe
personally that the importance has been magnified unduly because it has
been taken by scholarship for the all in all of its research. But there
is plenty of room for every one of the interests, and as that which I
represent does not interfere with anything which has become so far
vested, I ask for tolerance regarding it. My position is that the old
myths were taken over for the purposes of Christian symbolism, under the
influence of a particular but not an expressed motive, and it was
subsequently to this appropriation that they assumed importance. It is,
therefore, as I have said, simply to clear the issues that I place those
of my readers who may feel concerned with the subject in possession of
the bare elements which were carried from pre-Christian times into the
Graal mythos, as follows:--

1\. We hear of an Irish legend concerning the Cauldron of the Dagda,
from which no company ever went away unsatisfied. It was one of the four
talismans which a certain godlike race brought with them when they first
came into Ireland. As the particular talisman in question, though
magical, was not spiritual, it is useless to our purpose; but it
connects with the palmary

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hallow of the
Graal mystery, because that also is reputed to have been food-giving,
though this property was the least of its great virtues, just as the
stone of transmutation by alchemy was classed among the least
possessions of the Rosicrucian Fraternity.

2\. There is the Cauldron of Bendigeid Vran, the son of Llyr, in one of
the old Welsh *Mabinogion*, the property of which, says one story, is
that if a man be slain to-day and cast therein, to-morrow he will be as
well as he ever was at the best, except that he will not regain his
speech. He remains, therefore, in the condition of Perceval when that
hero of the Graal stood in the presence of the mystery with a spell of
silence upon him. It follows that the Druidic Mysteries, as we find them
in Welsh legend, are like other initiations: the candidate is passed
through the experience of a mystical death and is brought back, as, for
example, by the Cauldron of Ceridwen, to a new term of existence; but
although in this sense the dead are raised, they are not, or at least in
this case, restored with the gift of tongues--life, but no word of life.
In other language, the silence of the great pledges is henceforth
imposed upon them. The dead rise up, but they do not begin to speak.
Except in so far as the Cup of the Graal legend concerns a mystery of
speech and its suppression, it is difficult to trace its correspondence
with this cauldron, which I should mention, however, came into Wales
from Ireland. If these things can be considered as so much raw material
out of which the Graal legend in fine issued, the fact extends rather
than reduces the transformation which so operated that the Holy Vessel
of Christian symbolism was brought forth from a Druidic cauldron, which
is sometimes that of Ceridwen and sometimes of Bendigeid, being at once
the fountain of Bardic inspiration and the provider of a feast of good
things. In this connection we may remember further that the chief mystic
hero of Wales was not so much King Arthur as Cadwaladr Fendigeid. Paulin
Paris was the first who attempted to identify this

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

chieftain with Galahad, but one essential distinction is that in the
Welsh myth Cadwaladr is destined to return, whereas in the romance
Galahad comes no more.

It so happens that institutions of analogy are made occasionally by
scholarship on warrants which they would be the first to repudiate if
the object, let us say, were to establish some point advanced by a
mystic. I do not reject them exactly, and I do not intend to use similar
comparisons on evidence which appears so slight; but I must place on
record that the derivations here mentioned, if true, are unimportant,
even as it is also unimportant that Adam, who received the breath of
life from the Divine Spirit, had elements of red earth which entered
into his material composition. The lights which shine upon the altar are
not less sacramental lights because they are also earthly wax; and
though the externals are bread and wine, the Eucharist is still the
Eucharist.

In addition to analogies like those which I have just cited, there are
two versions of the quest or mission of Perceval into which the mystery
of the Graal does not enter as a part. In their extant forms they are
much later than any of the Graal literature in Northern French. One is
the story of Peredur, the son of Evrawc, in the Welsh *Mabinogion*, and
the other is the English metrical romance of *Syr Percyvelle*. Scholars
have compared both to the *Lay of the Great Fool*, and I think that the
analogy obtains not only in the Welsh and English fables, but even in
such masterpieces of nature-born poetry as the work of Chrétien de
Troyes. On the other hand, the English poem is a thing of no importance
except in respect of its connections, its perfect form as a narrative,
and its high literary value. These claims notwithstanding, it will be
sufficient to say that even scholarship values it chiefly for its
doubtful traces of some early prototype which is lost.

The scholarship of Dr. Evans is thought to account for certain opinions
which he holds regarding the high importance of the *Longer Prose
Perceval*, but he is correct

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

at least in his instinct by the consequence of its comparison with other
quests outside the *Parsifal* of Wolfram and the *Quest of Galahad*. The
Welsh *Mabinogi* is like the wild world before the institution of the
sacraments, and from any literary standpoint we shall see that it is
confused and disconcerting; the poem of Chrétien is like the natural
world with its interdict just beginning to be removed; it is also like
the blind man in part restored to sight, seeing all things inverted and
devoid of their normal proportions. The *Longer Prose Perceval* occupies
a middle position between the Great Quest and Wolfram; the enchantment
of Britain--as if Logres were this visible Nature--has dissolved partly;
Grace is moving through Nature; the Great Mystery is being declared and
testified to everywhere. In the *Parsifal* the things which are without
have suffered a certain renewal, and yet the German epic is not the
nearest correspondence and equivalent of the Galahad Quest.

It follows from these considerations, so far as they have now proceeded,
that the folk-lore antecedents of the Graal are Celtic; but I should
mention that it has not been determined finally by scholarship whether
we should look to Wales through Norman-French poets or to Armorica
through poets of Northern France for the primordial matter of romance in
respect of the literature. Such a question, except as a preliminary
gleaning leading up to another concern, is a little outside our horizon,
but the concensus of opinion in England and France favours the first
alternative. To direct our attention thither is by no means to set for
our consideration a clear vista or to open an easy pathway. It happens,
unfortunately, that as regards Wales there is as yet no certain canon of
criticism to distinguish the genuine memorials of archaic literature
from the vast mass of false seeming which wears only the vestures and
mask of antiquity. It is now many years since M. Villemarqué, the
Breton, illustrated what it was possible to do in the production and
extension of Armorican remains, and in

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

the Principality there have been more than one Villemarqué *fabulatores
famosi*--whose results obtained, if they have not been calculated to
deceive even the elect, have at least made the specialist wary,
sometimes about rejecting, but always of accepting anything in the
definite and absolute degree. Having regard to my own limitations as one
who has observed the strife scarcely, much less shared therein, I seek
only to note a single question of parallel. The antecedents of folk-lore
passed into the literature of the Graal undergoing great transmutations,
and so also did certain elements of old Druidism merge into
Christianity; Rite and Myth and Doctrine were tinged by Tradition and
Doctrine and Rite; for things which co-exist tend to dovetail, at least
by their outer edges; and there are traces, I think, of a time when the
priest who said mass at the altar was not only a Druid at heart, but in
his heart saw no reason also for the Druid to be priest any less. Long
after the conversion of the Celt, enigmatical fables and mystical Rites
lingered in Gaul and Britain, and if one could say that the Cauldron of
Ceridwen was a vessel of pagan doctrine, then in an equal symbolical
sense it became a vessel of hotch-potch under the strange ægis of the
Celtic Church. There were masters of mysteries and secret science, whose
knowledge, it is claimed, was perpetuated under the shadow of that
Church and even within the pale thereof. The Bardic Sanctuary, by the
evidence of some who claimed to speak in its name, opposed no precious
concealed mysteries, and perhaps on its own part the Church received
into its alembic much that was not of its matter expecting to convert it
therein and turn it out in a new form. In the fourth century there were
professors at Bordeaux who had once at least been Druids, and for the
doctrines of their later reception the heart of their old experience may
have been also an alembic. St. Beuno in his last moments is recorded to
have exclaimed: "I see the Trinity and Peter and Paul, and the Druids
and the Saints!"--a choir invisible,

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

the recognition of which would, if known, have imperilled his
canonisation, supposing that its process had been planned in Rome. At a
much later period, even in the twelfth century, we have still the
indication of perpetuated mysteries, and there is no doubt that the
belief in these was promoted generally by the bards. The twelfth century
saw also the beginning of a great revival of literature in Wales. There
are certain Iolo manuscripts which are late and of doubtful
authenticity, but accepting their evidence under all necessary reserves,
they refer the revival in question to Rhys ap Twdur, who assumed the
sovereignty of South Wales, bringing with him "the system of the Round
Table, as it is with regard to minstrels and bards." And when the time
came for the last struggle between the Celtic and Latin Rites for the
independence of the British Church, I can well believe that all which
remained, under all transformations, of that old mixed wisdom of the
West was also fighting for its life. When pseudo-Taliesin prophesied the
return of Cadwaladr, who had passed into the unmanifest, like Arthur,
and, like Arthur, was destined to return, I believe also that this
allegory of rebirth or resurrection, if it referred on one side to the
aspirations of the Celtic Church, did not less embody on another the
desired notion of a second spring for the mysteries which once dwelt in
Wales, which even after many centuries were interned rather than dead.

We can imagine--though perhaps at a far distance--what kinds of medley
resulted from such interpenetration of mysteries as I have here
indicated: the sacrifice of human victims in the ceremonial rites, on
the one side; the eternal sacrifice of the Victim who was divine and
human, on the other; the renovation of the candidate as the term of
symbolical ritual, and the Resurrection of Christ as the first-fruits of
the redeemed in the signal degree. With these as the analogies of
opposites, there were meeting-points and enough in the Lesser Mysteries,
while encircling all as an atmosphere there were, on the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

one hand, the presages, the signs, the omens, the vaticinations, the
inspirations, dark and strange, of seers and bards; but, on the other,
there were the great consecrations, the holy objects, the sacred
traditions, the inspired writings and all the annals of sanctity. In
fine, against the solemn pageants of pagan ceremonial performances there
was the Great Mystery of the faith of Christ, the white sacrifice and
the clean oblation of the Eucharist. I confess that if there were
otherwise any evidence, I can imagine that secret words, exceeding *ex
hypothesi* all words of institution in the Ordinary of the official
Mass-Book, and strange claims of a priesthood which had never been seen
at Rome, might well issue from so enigmatic and dubious a sanctuary.

From all this matter of fact, matter of speculation and high matter of
dream, we can infer that wherever the cradle may be of the true legend
of the Graal--Gaul, Armorica, or Wales, but the last as a probability
apart--there was at work, less or more everywhere in the Celtic world,
what I have called the alembic of transmutation. I care not what went
therein--Cauldron of Ceridwen, Cauldron of the Dagda, head of Bran and
poisoned spear which smote him, *Lay of the Great Fool*, Expulsion and
Return Formula, Visitations of the Underworld, and so forward for ever
and ever--but that which came out was the Mystery of Faith manifested
after a new manner, and the search for that sanctuary wherein, among all
waste places of the world, the evidence of things unseen became palpable
to the exalted senses of the great Quest. Little and less than little it
matters how that began which ends at this high point, and for us,
therefore, who "needs must love the highest when we see it," we can only
bless the beginning which brought the term we find; but its work is
done, and it is not a concern of ours.

In our childhood we passed through the realm of fables from Bidpai to
Lafontaine, but these were not everlasting dwellings. In our youth there
may still have been some

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

of us who looked to see great lights in *L’Origine de tous les Cultes*
and in *The Ruins of Empires*, but again there was no abiding place. At
this day it seems weariness, as it is indeed idleness, to go back to the
solar mythologies, or otherwise than with great caution to folk-lore,
when in far different flights we have touched the hem of His garment. I
do not propose to include the study of folklore in the same category as
the imaginings of Dupuis, Volney and Godfrey Higgins; but unless we can
presuppose a certain enlightenment, it proves a morass sometimes rather
than a pathway. However this may be regarded, in establishing a new
scheme of interpretation, it is perhaps necessary rather than desirable
that a beginning should be made by doing justice to old schemes, the
office of which is at once recognised and reduced by the entrance of an
overlord into his proper patrimony. I wish, therefore, to say that the
appeal of scholarship to the derivation of the legends from folklore and
the anxious collection of fresh data from this source have acted in the
past upon several groups of students like the head of Braid's
lancet-case on his hypnotic subjects. They are pretexts which have
entranced them. There was never an occasion in which folk-lore was more
important at the beginning and mattered in finality so little; it is a
land of enchantment, withal somewhat dreary, and through it the
unspelling quest passes laboriously to its term.

An old metaphorical maxim of one of the secret sciences once said: "The
stone becomes a plant, the plant an animal, and the animal a man"; but
it did not counsel its students to consult the stone that it might
better understand a man, though the stone remains a proper subject of
investigation within its own limit. I leave it to readers who are after
my own heart and within the classes of my proper school to apply this
little parable to the question which is here at issue in respect of the
Graal in folk-lore. It remains to be said that one field of Celtic
research has been so far neglected

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

by scholarship, and it is that precisely which throws light on the
Christian aspects of the Graal legend apart from the aspects of old
non-Christian myth. If there are analogies in the root-matter between
the Hallows of Cup and Lance and folk-lore talismans, there are others
which are far more intimate between the lesser matters of the literature
and Celtic Christian hagiology. But this is a point which I note only,
because it belongs to the close rather than the beginning of our
research. It seems a commonplace to add at the moment that particular
Christian tradition has for its environment the general traditions of
Christianity, and, for explanatory purposes, that may be best which lies
the nearest to hand, but at least it enters reasonably into the full
consideration of the whole subject.

Apart from the fixed purpose in the direction which I have
specified--that purpose which having exhausted, and this too easily, the
available fields of evidence, begins to imagine new--apart from the
thousand and one things which, by the hypothesis, would be referable to
folk-lore if the wreckage of that world had not been disintegrated so
thoroughly by the mills of the centuries, the antecedents of the Graal
legend in folk-lore have been a wide field for patient research, nor is
that field exhausted; it has also offered an opportunity for great
speculations which go to show that the worlds of enchantment are not
worlds which have passed like the Edomite kings; but as I know that
there was a king afterwards in Israel, I have concluded at this point to
abandon those quests which for myself and those whom I represent are
without term or effect, and to hold only to the matter in hand, which is
the development of a sacramental and mystical cosmos in literature out
of the strange elements which strove one with another, as in the time of
chaos so also in pre-Christian Celtic folk-lore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Welsh Perceval](hchg27)
