[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg10)  [Next](hchg12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

#### THE INSTITUTION OF THE HALLOWS, AND IN THE FIRST PLACE GENERAL INTRODUCTION CONCERNING THEM

Having thus indicated after what manner the Graal legend and its
literature is tinged with mystery and symbolism *à parte ante et à parte
post*, the next matter of our inquiry is concerned with the Institution
of the Hallows. In all its forms indifferently, the Legend of the Holy
Graal depends upon powers and offices ascribed to certain sacred
objects. Those texts which it has become customary to term the Early
Histories, equally with those which present the various versions of the
Quest, revolve about these Hallows, showing how they were instituted,
how they came into Britain, in whose hands they were preserved at first,
to whom

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

they were transmitted successively, why and by whom they were sought,
and what, in fine, became of them.

Among the general characteristics of the French cycle we shall find that
there is the passage of these Hallows from East to West. They are in
hereditary keeping, and in the end, according to certain versions, they
are again taken East. There are, however, numerous phases of the legend,
important variations in the Hallows, while claims which are manifest in
certain texts are in others non-existent. The cycle in Germany took over
the legend of the Swan Knight and imported the Templar interest
expressly; on the other hand, the introduction of certain highly ascetic
elements is thought to be characterised by the coming of Galahad into
the Graal Quest. The peculiar ecclesiastical claims which are the
subsurface warrant of the cycle written in Northern French were never
put forward ostensibly, and in the Galahad legend there remains only the
shadow of those earlier designs which might be constructed as in
dissonance with the Latin rite.

The Quest of the Holy Graal and of the other Hallows which were from
time to time connected therewith is followed by many knightly heroes,
most of whom are unsuccessful; the preliminary conditions of attainment
are purity and sanctity, but there is nothing to show that these were
sufficient in themselves, and as there were other qualifications, so in
some signal instances a partial success was not impossible in the
absence, or at least comparatively, of those warrants which in given
cases were claimed as essential. Once more, therefore, the cycle of
Northern France may be regarded as falling into four divisions:--

(*a*) The Institution of the Hallows, and more especially that which
concerns the origin of the Sacred Vessel.

(*b*) The circumstances under which the Hallows were carried into
Britain, or alternatively were found therein, and the later
circumstances of their partial manifestation.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

(*c*) The details of the search for the Hallows, and other things within
and without which led to their removal or recession.

(*d*) The occasion of their final departure.

The texts, therefore, purport to provide the complete History of the
Graal, including whence it came, where it abode for a while, and whither
it has gone. This is not to say that there are express books treating of
each section only. The metrical romance of De Borron does, however,
stand simply for the first part, and the same applies to its prose
rendering in the *Lesser Holy Graal*. The second part is found in the
*Book of the Holy Graal*, and the third in the *Didot Perceval*, the
*Conte del Graal*, the *Parsifal* of Wolfram, the *Longer Prose
Perceval* and the *Great Quest of Galahad*. The German *Perceval*
excepted, all these stories of research give an account of the
withdrawal--some at considerable length, and some briefly.

Again, the later romances may be divided into two sections: (*a*) those
which speak of an enchantment fallen on Britain, and (*b*) those which
are concerned with the termination of certain adventurous times. If the
literature follows any set purpose, a definable importance must be
attributed to the meaning of that enchantment and those adventures. In
this manner, the chief questions may be summarised alternatively as
follows:--

(*a*) The sacramental claim and its connections, so far as these appear
in the Quests.

(*b*) The qualifications for the Quest.

(*c*) The Hereditary Keepers of the Graal.

(*d*) The King's Wounding and the King's Healing.

(*e*) The enchantments of Britain in connection with the Wounded Keeper.

(*f*) The removal of the Graal and the close those times which the texts
term adventurous, since when there has been silence on earth in respect
of the Holy Graal.

The sacramental claim is introduced, among other documents, in (*a*) the
De Borron poem; (*b*) the *Lesser* 

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Holy Graal;*
while its shadow is projected as a secret which cannot be told in (*c*)
the proem to the *Conte del Graal*. It seems to be found by a vague and
remote inference in the *Longer Prose Perceval*, and it may be gathered
by brief allusions in the early prose *Merlin*. In the Great Quest it
has been expunged, while it is outside the tradition as represented by
Wolfram. The Quest qualifications are vague in Chrétien and exceed
reason. They are perhaps what might be termed ethical--but in the high
degree--in Wolfram, who presents the marriage of Perceval. The so-called
ascetic element appears fully in the *Book of the Holy Graal*, in the
*Longer Prose Perceval*, and in the *Quest of Galahad*. The King's
Wounding is accounted for differently in every romance; the withdrawal
of the Graal is also told differently; sometimes it passes simply into
deeper concealment; sometimes it seems taken away utterly; in one
version there is another keeper appointed, but of the realm apart from
the Hallows; it is carried to the far East in another; in two texts it
remains where it was.

If there is a secret intention permeating the bulk of the literature,
again it must partly reside in those epochs into which the literature
falls; their consideration should manifest it and should enable us to
deal, at the close of the whole research, with the final problem, being
that which is signified by the departure of the Sacred Vessel.

Each of the Hallows has its implied enigma, besides that which appears
openly in its express nature, and as we know that the mysteries of God
are mysteries of patience and compassion, we shall be prepared to find
in their reflections through the Graal Legend that even some offices of
judgment are formularies of concealed mercy. They are therefore both
declared and undeclared--that is to say, understood; and as there are
certain Hallows which only appear occasionally, so there are suggestions
and inferences concerning others which do not appear at all. That which
was always in evidence is that to which the distinctive name of Graal is
applied in

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

every text, but enough has been said concerning it till we come to its
exhaustive consideration in the next section. The second and third
Hallows are the Lance and the Sword. The Lance is that which was used by
the Roman soldier Longinus to pierce the side of Christ at the
Crucifixion, or it is this at least according to the more general
tradition. Of the Sword there are various stories, and it is this which
in some cases serves to inflict the wound from which the Enchantments of
Britain follow. It is (*a*) that which served to behead St. John the
Baptist, in which connection we can understand its position as a sacred
object; (*b*) that of the King and Prophet David, committed by Solomon
to a wonderful ship, which went voyaging, voyaging throughout the ages
till it should be seen by Galahad, the last scion of the royal house of
Israel; or (*c*) it is simply an instrument preserved as a token
belonging to a legend of vengeance, in which relation it was brought
over from folk-lore and is nothing to the purpose of the Graal.

The Dish, which is the fourth and final object included among the
authorised Hallows, is more difficult to specify, because its almost
invariable appearance in the pageant of the high processions is
accompanied by no intelligible explanation respecting it; and although
it has also its antecedents in folk-lore, its mystic explanation, if
any, must be sought very far away. Like the rest of the Hallows, it is
described with many variations in the different books. It may be a
salver of gold and precious stones, set on a silver cloth and carried by
two maidens; it may be a goodly plate of silver, or a little golden
vessel, and this simply, except in the *Longer Prose Perceval*, which as
it multiplies the Hallows so it divides their ministry; but here, as
elsewhere, the Dish does not embody apparently the feeding properties
which are one aspect of the mystery.

In summary therefore: subject to characteristic variations which are
particular to each text, it will be found that the several romances
follow or forecast one general

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

process, exhibiting a general secret intention, manifested though not
declared, and it is for this intention that my study has to account.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Institution of the Hallows, and, Secondly, the
Variations of the Cup Legend](hchg12)
