[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg83)  [Next](hchg85) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_609">p. 609</span>

# BOOK X

## THE SECRET CHURCH

<span id="page_610">p. 610</span> <span id="page_611">p. 611</span>

### THE ARGUMENT

I. THE HERMENEUTICS OF THE HOLY GRAAL.--*A summary of previous
considerations--The way of attainment in the Secret Schools--Of the
Interior Mass--Other gleanings concerning the Epiclesis clause--That the
Secret Tradition does not impeach the official Church--Position of the
several schools on this subject--There is no competitive orthodoxy--The
eulogy of the external Church--Of what is to be understood by its
desolation--Of its restrictions at this day--The sects and the Church.*
II. THE GOOD HUSBANDMAN*.--The Graal legends and the Divine
Alliance--That there is one Sanctuary--That the House of Doctrine is
one--Of that which is behind the risible Church--Graal literature as the
spiritual emotion of the Church--Its high texts as products of
monasticism--The maiming of the outer Church--The inner priesthood and
the secret Mass--The universal experiment--One of its
concealments--Further concerning its rumours--Peculiar use of
Eucharistic transubstantiation--The official Church and the seat of its
power--Testimony of certain prelates in respect of Papal Rome--The yoke
and the burden--Strictures on altered procedure in respect of the
Eucharist--Traces of a school of patience and a school of higher
experience--Of its connection with the life of the world within and
without the Church.* III. THE CATHOLIC SECRET OF THE
LITERATURE*.--Question as to the Custodians of the Secret Tradition--The
Consensus Spiritus Sancti--The two apparent* 

<span id="page_612">p. 612</span>

*schools of the Secret Tradition--Further concerning spiritual
alchemy--The Quest of the Graal--Of Kabalism and Masonry--The proper
understanding of a doctrine of loss in the Church--The Church as the
House of Souls--Orthodoxy of the Graal literature--Its branches from
this point of view--That its rumours and implicits are not the voice of
a rival Christian conclave working in the hidden places--The same is to
be said of Kabalism and Masonry--The position of Alchemy--Removal of a
certain interdict on speech and thought--Councillor Karl von
Eckartshausen--*The Cloud on the Sanctuary*--Loupoukine--His*
Characteristics of the Interior Church*--The conception of a Holy
Assembly--The sodality of a consciousness in common--The rise of a more
express witness--A confusion in respect of the evidence--An illustration
from the natural world--The Visible Church in connection with the
doctrine of a Holy Assembly--Comparison of the Secret Church to a School
of the Prophets--Inferences from secret fraternities--Testimony of the*
Sons of the Valley*--Specific claim put forward by* The Cloud on the
Sanctuary*--Its reduction into a complete schedule--The similar evidence
of Loupoukine--Errors of expression in both witnesses--That the Secret
Church is an arbitrary name--Definition of the mystic life--Of certain
elements in the hands of the Graal romancers--That the Secret Church
recognises the external Church--The consensus of sanctity--That the
Secret Church is not an instituted Assembly--Of Mass in the Secret
Church--Of certain limits to expression--The Graal literature as a
rumour of Sanctuary Doctrine--Mystery concerning the rumour--How the
official Sanctuary is made void.* IV. THE MYSTERY WHICH IS WITHIN*.--The
Secret Church as an hypothesis, an implicit and a truth--Conditions *

<span id="page_613">p. 613</span>

*of its membership--That it has not issued manifestoes--In what sense
the evidence is misleading concerning it--The silence of its work--Its
chief mystery as that of Divine Communication--Its connection with the
Eucharist--The Secret Church as an integration of believers in the
higher consciousness.* V. THE SECLUDED AND UNKNOWN SANCTUARY*.--An
alternative for the romances of the Graal--A further summary concerning
the Secret Tradition--The mystery of love and the world of
grace--Another reconsideration of the literature--A new comparison from
alchemy--The Graal romances as an implied impeachment of Rome--Whether
the Graal Church stood for official Christianity--The Rich Fisherman
from this point of view--Difficulties of this assumption--Conclusion
that the Hidden Sanctuary could not represent the Visible Church of
Rome--Evidence of the literature itself on this subject--Whether the
literature was, in some other sense, hostile to Rome--Assumption that
the Graal sanctuary was really the Celtic Church--Evidence of the
literature from this standpoint--The claim of the Lesser Chronicles is
in conflict with the assumption--The Greater Chronicles are in some
respects militantly Roman--One text only may be concerned with the
aggrandisement of British Christianity--A note on the German cycle--Of
certain plain stories told by the Graal texts--The mystery of the Graal
Sanctuary--The makers of the literature did not dream of a pan-Britannic
Church--Clearness of its concern at the highest--A lesson of these
considerations--Its various counsels of caution--The true Question of
the Graal--The literature as a witness of the Church--Of experience in
transcendence--The harmony of all quests and histories outside the terms
of romance--The Hidden Church of the Holy Graal--The hope of Western *

<span id="page_614">p. 614</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Mysticism--The
Secret Tradition in Catholic Experience.* VI. THE TRADITION OF ST. JOHN
THE DIVINE*.--That the Secret Tradition in Christian times was never put
into official language as by one instituted school which stood for the
whole--Eckartshausen approximated only--Loupoukine expressed probably a
strong intellectual sentiment--Were there no traces in the annals of the
Church itself?--The* Disciplina Arcani*--Whether this was imbedded in
the tradition of St. John the Divine--The Eucharist and the beloved
disciple--Traditions concerning St. john--The rumour of his secret
knowledge--In what manner he was assumed by the physical alchemists--The
search after heresy--Some previous speculations--One suggested
alternative--Of so-called Johannine Christians--Traditions concerning
St. John--Traces of a higher Gnosis--An unfinished Quest.* VII. THE
CONCLUSION OF THIS HOLY QUEST*.--Of certain unfulfilled
covenants--Preliminary remarks--The Veil of the Eucharist--The French
and German Percivals--Collectanea Mystica--The Lost Book--The Great
Experiment--The Inner House of Doctrine--The world of attainment--Of the
highest symbols as pretexts--The Mystic Quest--A praise of
scholarship--But of that also which remains after--And this as a
Spiritual Sun--The monastic Graal--Of that which may be superadded to
the official consciousness of the Church--The many voices of
tradition--The one testimony--An end of these pleadings--The colophon*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Hermeneutics of the Holy Graal](hchg85)
