[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg23)  [Next](hchg25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XII

#### THE REMOVAL OF THE HALLOWS

We have now seen that the Rich Fisherman, King and Warden of the Graal,
was healed as the consequence of the Quest, or that, this failing, a
provision was made for his successor after some other manner. Now, this
is the penultimate stage of the mystery regarded as a whole, and the one
question which still remains to be answered is--what became of the
Graal? Subject to characteristic variations which are particular to each
text, it will be found--as I have said--that the several romances follow
or forecast one general process, suggesting a prevailing secret
intention, and it is for this intention that my study will have to
account. At the moment the external answer to the problem above
propounded, resting on the evidence of the documents, is an example of
variation--which tends, however, to one term; this term is that either
the Holy Graal and the other Hallows of the Passion were removed
altogether or they were taken into

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

deeper concealment. The specific testimonies are as follows. After the
death of King Fisher, Perceval inherits his kingdom--in the *Conte del
Graal*--and he reigns for seven years. He appoints his successor, who
does not become the Warden of the Hallows, and he passes himself into
the seclusion of a hermitage, where he remains for ten years, having
been ordained a priest. The Graal follows him, and he is at length
assumed into the joy of Paradise, since which time the Sacred Vessel and
the other precious objects have never been beheld so openly. As a rider
to this, it is added that no doubt they were taken to heaven, which is
an argument from the unworthiness of the world. In the *Didot Perceval*
the Knight of the Quest and a certain hermit, who is a character of
importance in the Lesser Chronicles, become the guardians of the Graal,
and the prophet Merlin also abides with them. Merlin, in fine, goes
away, seeking a deeper seclusion, and neither he nor the Graal are heard
of subsequently. The inference is that the Graal remains in the asylum
of the Holy House, under the charge, of its wardens. The *Longer Prose
Perceval*, after a faithful picture of the Questing Knight in loneliness
and rapture, surviving all his kindred, says that a secret voice
commanded him to divide the Hallows among a certain company of hermits,
after which a mystic ship anchors by the Castle, and Perceval, taking
his leave of all those who still remained about him, entered that vessel
and was carried far over the sea, "nor never thereafter did no earthly
man know what became of him, nor doeth the history speak of him more."
In the *Great Prose Quest* the most holy companions--Galahad, Perceval
and Bors--are conveyed in the ship mystic of Solomon to a place in the
East, named Sarras; the Hallows with which they are charged are the
Sacred Vessel and the Lance, together with the Sword of David, wherewith
Galahad is girded. For a certain allotted period of days that are sad,
consecrated and strange, the companions watch over the Hallows in the
city of Sarras;

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

and then the call comes to Galahad. "There with he kneled doune to fore
the table, and made his prayers, and thenne sodenly his soule departed
to Jhesu Crist and a grete multitude of angels bare his soule up to
Heuen, that the two felawes myghte wel behold hit. Also the two felawes
sawe come from heven an hand, but they sawe not the body. And thenne hit
cam ryght to the vessel, and took it and the spere and soo bare hit up
to heuen. Sythen was ther neuer man soo hardy to saye that he had sene
the Sancgreal." In the German cycle, the *Parsifal* of Wolfram leaves
the Graal where it was always since its first manifestation, but the
*Titurel* of Albrecht von Scharfenberg--a text which is so late that it
is excluded generally from the canon of the literature--narrates the
rise and growth of an evil time, wherein, for its better protection,
Parsifal and the chivalry of the Graal, bearing the Blessed Palladium,
go forth from Mont Salvatch into the far East, where is the kingdom of
Prester John, and there it may remain to this day--most surely in
another kingdom which is not of this world. After these high memorials
it is almost unnecessary to speak of the Quest in Heinrich, at the term
of which the Graal and the ghostly company dissolve before the eyes of
the Questing Knight, and thenceforth the tongue of man cannot show forth
the mysteries.

Seeing now that the great sacraments do not pass away, it must follow
that in the removal of the Holy Graal, as it is narrated in the texts,
we are in the presence of another mystery of intention which appears the
most obscure of all. The cloud that dwelt on the sanctuary, the
inhibition which was on the world without, the hurt almost past healing
which overtook the hereditary keeper, are ample evidence in themselves
that evil had entered into the holy place, despite all the warrants
which it held and all the Graces and Hallows which dwelt therein. With
one curious exception, the Keeper was, in fine, healed; the enchantment
was also removed; and the achievement of the last Warden, at least in
some

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

instances, must have been designed, after a certain manner and within a
certain measure, to substitute a greater glory for the cloud on the
secret sanctuary. All this notwithstanding, the end of the great quests,
the term of the whole mystery, was simply the removal thereof. It occurs
in each romance under different circumstances, and it was not, as we
shall learn more fully, always of an absolute kind. In the *Conte del
Graal* it is said--and we have seen previously--that it was taken away,
possibly to heaven; in the *Didot Perceval* it was seen no more; in the
*Longer Prose Perceval* it was distributed, so far as we can tell, with
the other Hallows, to certain hermits, and it ceased simply to manifest;
in Wolfram the whole question is left open in perpetuity, for at the
close of the poem the keeper remains alive; in the *Titurel* of Albrecht
von Scharfenberg the Vessel was carried eastward into the dubious realm
of Prester John, and there apparently it remains; in the *Quest of
Galahad* it is assumed by Heaven itself, and the last keeper followed;
but, in spite of this, the lost recension, as represented, faithfully or
otherwise, by the Welsh Quest, says that though it was not seen so
openly, it was seen once by Sir Gawain, the least prepared and least
warranted of all the Graal seekers, whose quest, moreover, was for the
most part rather accidental than intended.

Speaking now from the mystic standpoint, the removal of the Holy Graal
has in a certain sense the characteristics of an obscure vengeance. The
destruction of the external order would appear to have been decreed. The
Graal is carried away and its custodians are translated. The removal
certifies the withdrawal of an object which we know, mystically
speaking, is never taken away, though it is always hidden from the
unworthy. In respect of its imputed removal, it is taken thither where
it belongs; it is the same story as that of the Lost Word in Masonry. It
is that which in departing hence draws after it all that belongs
thereto. In other words, it goes before the cohort of election as the
Pillars of Fire

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

and Cloud before Israel in the Wilderness. The root and essence of the
matter can be put shortly in these words: The Graal was not taken away,
but it went to its own place, which is that of every man.

The Galahad Quest closes the canon of the literature. Other romances
have said that the Sacred Vessel was not seen so openly, or that it was
heard of no more, or that it had passed into concealment, and so forth;
but this crowning legend carries it into complete transcendence, amidst
appropriate ceremonial, though otherwise it leaves the Arthurian
sacrament sufficiently unfinished. That is to say, it is still to be
communicated for the last time to the whole world on the return of
Arthur. The Graal is in hiding, like Arthur; but the Graal is, like
Arthur, to return. Meanwhile, the chivalry of the world is broken, and
the kingdom is destroyed. The master of all chivalry has received in his
turn a dolorous stroke and is removed through a mist of enchantment,
under dubious wardens, to the land of the setting sun, even into an
exile of the ages. But he also is to be, in fine, healed and to return,
though at what time we know not, for centuries pass as days, within the
certain knowledge of Ogier the Dane. So much as this may perhaps be
hazarded on the point of time, namely, that the King's rendering shall
be when the King's dark barge, sailing westward, like the lighter craft
of Hiawatha, shall meet with the Graal, which set forth eastward, since
the Graal must heal the King, and these shall meet truly when justice
and mercy kiss. The Graal is not therefore lost, but gone before.

Of such are the mysteries of the Graal, considered in their
manifestation and considered also in their removal. I have passed
through many houses of initiation in literature, but I know of nothing
in suggestion and allusion to compare with the House of the Graal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument](hchg25)
