[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg17)  [Next](hchg19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### VI

#### THE CASTLE OF THE HOLY GRAAL

The true legitimacies are for the most part in exile, or otherwise with
their rights in abeyance. The real canons of literature can be uttered
only behind doors or in the secrecy of taverns. The secrets of the great
orthodoxies are very seldom communicated, even to epopts on their
advancement. The highest claims of all are not so much wanting in
warrant as wanting those spokesmen who are willing to utter them. We
shall not be surprised, therefore, to find that the custodians of the
Holy Graal, which was a mystery of all secrecy, "there where no sinner
can be," despite the kingly titles ascribed to them, sometimes abode in
the utmost seclusion.

Let us seek in the first instance to realise the nature and the place of
that Castle or Temple which, according to the legend, was for a period
of centuries the sanctuary of the Sacred Vessel and of the other
hallowed objects connected therewith. It is in the several locations of
the Hallows that we shall come at a later time into a fuller
understanding of their offices and of the meanings which may lie behind
them. They are not to be regarded exactly as part of the mystery of the
Castle; but at least this is more than a casket, and between the
container and the things contained, distinct though their significance
may be, there are points of correlation, so that the one throws light on
the other.

We have seen that the Vessel itself was brought from Salem to Britain,
and it follows from the historical texts that the transit had a special
purpose, one explanation of which will be found ready to our hands when
the time comes for its consideration. The Castle is described after
several manners, the later romances being naturally the more specific,
and we get in fine a geographical settlement and boundary. In the
Chrétien portion of the

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Conte del Graal*,
Perceval discovers the Castle in a valley, wherein it is well and
beautifully situated, having a four-square tower, with a principal hall
and a bridge leading up to the chief entrance. In some of the other
legends the asylum is so withdrawn that it is neither named nor
described. The *Early History of Merlin* speaks of it not less simply as
the place where they had the Holy Vessel in keeping. According to the
*Didot Perceval*, it is the house of the Rich King Fisherman; it is
situated in a valley; it has a tower, and is approached by a bridge. It
might be a tower merely, for the description is not less vague than many
accounts of the Cup. One of the late Merlin texts says merely that the
Holy Vessel is in the West--that is, in the Land of Vortigern, or that
it abides in Northumbria. Another says that the Castle is Corbenic; but
though we hear a good deal concerning it, there is no description
whatever.

The section of the *Conte del Graal* which is referable to Gautier de
Doulens says that it is situated on a causeway tormented by the sea. The
building is of vast extent and is inhabited by a great folk. We hear of
its ceiling, emblazoned with gold and embroidered with silver stars, of
its tables of precious metal, its images and the rich gems which
enlighten it. In a word, we are already in the region of imaginative
development and adornment, but it is all mere decoration which carries
with it no meaning beyond the heavy tokens of splendour. Manessier
furnishes no special account, and Gerbert, who has other affairs at
heart than solicitude about a material building or desire to exalt it
into allegory, leaves it unsketched entirely.

The *Book of the Holy Graal* is the only French text which contains in a
methodical account the building of the Holy House. The first wardens
have passed from the land of the living, and Alain le Gros is the keeper
of the Blessed Vessel. The actual builder is a certain converted king of
*Terre Foraine*, and there is a covenant between him and Alain, one
condition of which

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

is that the Graal shall remain in his kingdom. The Castle on its
completion is given the mystic name of Corbenic, in obedience to an
inscription which is found blazoned on one of the entrance gates. The
name is said to signify the Treasury of the Holy Vessel. The Graal is
placed in a fair chamber of the Castle, as if on an altar of repose,
but, all his munificence notwithstanding and all the sacramental visions
which he sees in the Holy Place, beating of birds' wings and chanting of
innumerable voices, the king is visited speedily for his mere presence
and receives his death-wound at the very altar: it is the judgment of
the sanctuary on those who desecrate the sanctuary by carrying, however
unwittingly, an unhallowed past therein, and it recalls the traditional
conclusion of the Cabiric Mysteries, wherein the candidate was destroyed
by the gods. Setting aside an analogy on which I am by no means
insisting, the event was the beginning of those wonders which earned for
Castle Corbenic the name of the Palace Adventurous, because no one could
enter therein, and no one could sleep, its lawful people excepted,
without death overtaking them, or some other grievous penalty.

The prose *Lancelot* is in near correspondence with Chrétien,
representing the Castle as situated at the far end of a great valley,
with water encircling it. On another occasion it is named rather than
described, and visited but not expounded, but we learn that it is
situated in a town which has many dwellers therein. In the *Quest of
Galahad* it is a rich and fair building, with a postern opening towards
the sea, and this was guarded by lions, between which a man might pass
only if he carried the arms of faith, since the sword availed nothing
and there was no protection in harness. For the visitor who was expected
or tolerated, it would seem that all doors stood open, except the door
of the sanctuary. But this would unclose of itself; the light would
issue from within; the silver table would be seen; and thereon the Holy
Vessel, covered with drapery of samite. There also on a day

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

might be celebrated, with becoming solemnity, the Great Mass of the
Supersanctified, and this even in the presence of those who were not
clean in their past, so only that they had put away their sin when they
entered on the Quest. It was thus beheld by Lancelot, though he lay as
one dead afterwards, because of his intrusion. So also the welcome guest
had reason to know that the court of King Pelles held a great fellowship
in the town of Corbenic. But there were other visitors at times and
seasons who saw little of all this royalty, like Hector de Marys,
who--brother as he was to my lord Sir Lancelot--found the doors all
barred against him and no warden to open, long as he hailed thereat.

The most decorative of all the accounts is, however, in the *Longer
Prose Perceval*, where the Castle is reached by means of three bridges,
which are horrible to cross. Three great waters run below them, the
first bridge being a bow-shot in length and not more than a foot in
width. This is the Bridge of the Eel; but it proves wide and a fair
thorough-way in the act of crossing. The second bridge is of ice, feeble
and thin, and it is arched high above the water. This is transformed on
passing into the richest and strangest ever seen, and its abutments are
full of images. The third and last bridge stands on columns of marble.
Beyond it there is a sculptured gate, giving upon a flight of steps,
which leads to a spacious hall painted with figures in gold. When
Perceval visited the Castle a second time he found it encompassed by a
river, which came from the Earthly Paradise and proceeded through the
forest beyond as far as the hold of a hermit, where it found peace in
the earth. To the Castle itself there were three names attributed: the
Castle of Eden, the Castle of Joy and the Castle of Souls. In conclusion
as to this matter, the location, in fine, is Corbenic--not as the
unvaried name, but as that which may be called the accepted,
representing the Temple at its highest, and corresponding in French
romance to Montsalvatch, in

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> German--which our
late redaction of the *Book of the Holy Graal* mentions specifically,
and which, all doubtful clouds of mystic adventure notwithstanding,
looms almost as a landmark in the *Lancelot* and the *Quest of Galahad*.

I must speak very lightly of the German cycle, because, through all
these branches, it is understood that I shall deal with it again. In the
*Parsifal* and *Titurel* the Temple is completely spiritualised, so that
it has ceased almost to be a house made with hands, though the
descriptions on the external side are here and there almost severe in
their simplicity. On that side it has the strength of a feudal fortress,
turret by turret rising. In the master-hall of the palace there is
something of Oriental splendour--carpets and couches and cushions,
marble hearths burning strange fragrant woods, and a great blazing of
lights. So far the *Parsifal* of Wolfram, but we must turn to other
texts for the building of the Temple--which is after another manner than
anything told of Corbenic in the Northern French cycle. The building was
the work of Titurel, the first King of the Graal, and in answer to his
prayers the High Powers of Heaven prepared the ground-plan of the Holy
Place and furnished the raw material. Over the construction itself the
powers of earth toiled by day and the Powers of Heaven by night. The
floor was of pure onyx; at the summit of the tower there was a ruby
surmounted by a cross of crystal, and carbuncles shone at the
meeting-points of the great arches within. The roof was of sapphire, and
a pictured starry heaven moved therein in true order.

We are on a different level when we have recourse to the poem of
Heinrich, which presents several anomalies in respect of the literature
as a whole. The road leading to the Graal Castle was one of harsh and
hazardous enterprise--world without end; but it brought the questing
hero at some far point into a plenteous and gracious land, where rose
the Palace of Desire, looking

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

beautiful exceedingly, with a meadow before it which was set apart for
joust and tournament. A great concourse of knights and gentlewomen abode
in the burg, and for the Castle itself we are told that there was none
so fair. Though it will be seen that there is nothing distinctive in
this account, as it is here reduced into summary, the design is among
many things strange, for if it is not the Castle of Souls it is that of
a Living Tomb, as the story concerning it will show at the proper time.

So did the place of the mysteries, from a dim and vague allusion, become

"A wilderness of building, sinking far  
And self-withdrawn into a wondrous depth  
Far sinking into splendour."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We can scarcely
say whether that which had begun on earth was assumed into the spiritual
place, or whether the powers and virtues from above descended to brood
thereon.

I have left over from this consideration all reference to another
spiritual place, in Sarras on the confines of Egypt, where the Graal,
upon its outward journey, dwelt for a period, and whither, after
generations and centuries, it also returned for a period. As this was
not the point of its origin, so it was not that of its rest; it was a
stage in the passage from Salem and a stage in the transit to heaven.
What was meant by this infidel city, which was yet so strangely
consecrated, is hard to determine, but its consideration belongs to a
later stage. It is too early again to ask what are the implicits of the
great prose *Perceval* when it identifies the Castle of the Graal with
the Earthly Paradise and the Place of Souls; but we may note it as a
sign of intention, and we shall meet with it in another connection where
no one has thought to look for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Keepers of the Hallows](hchg19.md)
