[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg52)  [Next](hchg54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

### II

#### GLEANINGS CONCERNING THE LOST QUEST OF GUIOT DE PROVENCE

Astronomers have recognised in the past the influence of certain planets
prior to their discovery, and subsequently this has verified their
prescience. In like manner, the influence of that French poem which is
ascribed to the Provençal Guiot is discernible after several modes in
the German cycle, and the fact is no less important, even if the
providence of books should not in fine lead us to the discovery of the
missing text. It is at present a lost planet which will not "swim into
our ken." I think that there are difficulties in Wolfram's references to
the poem which may be classed as almost insuperable by persons who are
unacquainted with the literature of hidden traditions: to these they are
the kind of difficulties which--as Newman once said in another
connection--do not make one doubt. At the same time the legend of the
lost story occupies a position in the cycles which, without being in any
way abnormal, is in several respects remarkable. In the past, as I have
said, there was one phase of criticism which regarded the whole *crux*
as nothing more than the invention of Wolfram to conceal the real fact
that he borrowed from Chrétien. Being the finding of certain German
scholars concerning the work of their countryman, it was entitled to a
tempered respect antecedently, but it was at no. time tolerable in its
pretension and has been since made void. Wolfram lays claim to nothing
so little as origination, and I know not why his literary vanity should
have been consoled better by a false than a true ascription in respect
of his source, more especially as in either case he would be confessing
to a French poet. The suggestion, in fine, would account only for a part
of the field which he

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

covered, as we know that Chrétien fell far short of completing his task.

The bare facts of the existence of Guiot and his poem were determined,
so far as I am aware, for the first time, and, as it is thought,
indubitably, by the publication of the *Saone de Nausay* in 1902. It has
attracted little attention, but the fact of its existence and the
important evidence which it offers to our particular subject have been
at least stated in England. It is an exceedingly curious text, and in
respect of Graal matters it has weird and scoriated reflections of the
Joseph legend. But one reference to his son as the first consecrated
bishop indicates that cycle of French texts into which it would fall if
there were occasion to class it. The Graal is represented in the light
of a general healing vessel, which we know otherwise to be in a sporadic
sense its office, though it could do nothing within the charmed circle
of its own sanctuary for those who belonged thereto.

Much about the time that this poem was put at the disposition more
especially of German scholarship, there was an attempt in the same
country to show that the reputed Provençal Guiot was a priest of the
Church in Britain, and that he died Bishop of Durham. I do not know how
this opinion may have impressed those who are most qualified to judge,
but at least in France and England it was passed over in complete
silence.

The evidences and speculations with which we have been just
dealing--while, on the one hand, they satisfy us regarding the existence
of Guiot and the poem connected with his name, and, on the other, create
some bare and tentative presumption regarding his identity--are of no
material assistance in respect of the problems which are raised by his
work as it is reflected in the Quest of Wolfram. If we accept the Durham
hypothesis of Dr. Paul Hagan it follows not only that Guiot de Provence
no doubt anteceded Chrétien de Troyes, but--so doing--that he was the
first recorded writer who told the history of the Graal, regarded as a
Christian Hallow, and the Quest

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

thereof. If we set aside this hypothesis, I suppose that it is an open
question as to the succession of the two poets in time, and whether one
derived from another or both from a common source. There is a
disposition--if speaking of it be worth while, when the subject is so
precarious--to regard Guiot as first in the point of time. We know only
that both poets appealed to a source, and that, on the surface at least,
the appeals are exclusive mutually. To his authority Wolfram seems to
refer as if he were an old writer, but in ascriptions of this kind the
years tend to dissolve rather rapidly into generations. If, however, we
assign the superior antiquity to Guiot, it may be thought not
unreasonably that the alleged source of Chrétien--the *mellor conte qui
soit contés en court roial*--was actually the Quest of the Provençal.
Textual scholarship, however, which is much the best judge in these
matters, is tempted, I believe, to conclude that it was not a quest at
all. On the other hand, except for personal predispositions--to one of
which I have confessed--there is little to warrant the supposition that
it was a pious local legend, like that which was produced at Fécamp,
because in Chrétien, as in Guiot, the Graal Hallows are not relics of
the Passion. There is an inclination at the present day to account for
Chrétien's vagueness regarding his central sacred or talismanic object
by assuming that he had heard only vaguely concerning it on his own
part; that he introduced it in an arbitrary manner; and that it was
quite purposeless in his Quest. I do not think that this will bear
examination, more especially in the light of Guiot, who, as we have
seen, counselled those who followed him to hide the tale at the
beginning till it was unfolded gradually in its narration. In accordance
with this, Wolfram is not much more explanatory at the beginning than
his antecedent in Northern France, though the latter falls short at the
point where the German poet himself begins to develop--that is to say,
in the interview between Perceval and his hermit uncle.

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> However this may
be, it is most important to note (*a*) the absence of the Passion-relics
in both poets, and (*b*) the absence of the feeding qualities of the
Graal in Chrétien, thus, in my . opinion, (*c*) disposing of any theory
that he derived from Guiot, supposing that these elements were present
in Guiot's text. On this last point, as the evidences which can be
extracted from Wolfram leave much to be desired in respect of fulness,
the question remains open. While he states in the first place that he
knows of no other witness, the third book seems to speak in the plural
of those who told the story before him and, at the same time, having
regard to his judgment concerning Chrétien, he can scarcely have held
that it was recited to any purpose by him. The Provençal, on the
German's authority, gave it to the very end--which, I suppose, means to
the winning of the Graal by Parsifal. Yet it is certain on the text only
that he is responsible for (1) The Arabian source of the Graal story;
(2) the names of its appointed Keepers; (3) the history of Gawain, or at
least some part thereof; and (4) the kinship of Parsifal and Sigune. It
is difficult in several respects to follow Guiot as he is represented by
Wolfram solely, though *additamenta* gathered from later sources lie
under the suspicion of false and invented ascriptions. The Graal itself
is a case in point; there is a later report that it was originally a
stone in the crown of Lucifer, which I do not find in the *Parsifal*.
Assuming that this account was derived from Guiot, one is inclined to
speculate whether the feeding properties of the talismanic object could
have been a part of his scheme, as the two notions are quite foreign to
each other, and yet the Dish of Plenty looms so largely in Wolfram that
it is difficult to predicate its absence in his palmary source. At the
same time, though Wolfram acknowledged, as I have said, no other
exemplar, he did adopt extrinsic materials, as, for example, the legend
of Lohengrin from the Lorraine epic cycle. To increase the confusion,
the stone is identified in *Parsifal* with the fabulous or

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

symbolic Phœnix, and thus recalls the Phenicite Stone of Dioscorides. In
this connection, it has not been noticed that one of the myths
incorporated by the *Book of the Holy Graal* concerns a bird similar to
the Phœnix, but more extravagantly described. After laying her eggs this
bird is said to make use of a stone called Piratite, found in the valley
of Hebron, the property of which is to burn anything that rubs it, and
it is supposed to consume the bird. It is not the *Lapis Judaicus* or
*Thecolithos*, but apparently the Black Pyrites, which, according to
Pliny, burns the hand when touched. The same fable says that the name
given to the bird is Serpelion, but hereto I find no reference. Neither
on this nor on another consideration can Wolfram's historical account of
the Graal be held to explain its imputed sacred character, and it is not
surprising that no spiritual exaltation seems to follow its presence. If
the vague story does not imply the later legend of the Crown of Lucifer,
there is no explanation of its origin or of its supposed custody by the
fallen angels of the air, though part at least of this story is
repudiated afterwards by the person who relates it to Parsifal. Why it
was sent by God, what purpose was served by its presence on earth, in
what sense the stone which consumes the Phœnix is identical with the
talisman which supplies inexhaustible delicacies ready dressed and
cooked at a banquet--these things remain a mystery, and if any
explanation were possible on the assumption of a subsurface sense, the
presentation would remain and is the worst form of the legend on the
official and extant side.

Fortunately, its mere presentation disposes of the suggestion that Guiot
was heretical in his tendencies. This has arisen in part out of the
Templar element, which is so obvious in the *Parsifal*, and for the rest
out of the Albigensian implications, which may be thought to underlie at
the period any text connected, directly or otherwise, with the South of
France. We have seen that the charge against Wolfram is without
foundation,

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

and utterly. There is no Mass of the Graal in the *Parsifal*, no
priestly character in the Wardens, no kind of competition with Church
claims, no interference with ecclesiastical matters. If it be said that
the arch-consecrated Host brought down from Heaven to renew the virtues
of the Graal constitutes a questionable element, that must depend upon
the general context, and in the light of this it raises no difficulty.
There is a significant absence of suggestion that souls are sustained
through the Graal from a superior channel of grace than can be claimed
by the official Church, for on the surface sense of the text it is the
bodies of the confraternity which, owing to the Graal and its annual
renewal, were fed by the Host, while the recipients, including the
Keepers, were not preserved thereby in a catholic state of sanctity.
This is folly and all confusion, but it is not heresy by intention; it
is a muddled thesis concerning a grotesque object, of all things least
sacred in the world of imaginative writing; it is worse than the Fécamp
reliquary as compared with other legends of Joseph of Arimathæa; in a
word, it is on a due and just level with the moral elevation which is
ascribed spuriously to the epic. The story of Perceval was never written
at all till the task was undertaken by the unknown author of the *Longer
Prose Perceval*, and so far as we can trace the hand of Guiot in
Wolfram, those so-called Chronicles of Anjou must have taken him far
from the term.

Varied and considerable learning is ascribed to Guiot de Provence, and,
among many indirect evidences, this is suggested by the circumstances
under which, in his own turn, he claims to have derived the fundamental
part of his story. We know that his alleged source was written in the
Arabic tongue; that the recipient *in primis*, in far pre-Christian
days, was a Jew who on one side of his parentage was also of pagan
stock; and that in fine the old and old chronicle was lying neglected
and forgotten among the undemonstrable archives of Toledo. We have seen
further that above this story on earth there was an

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

eternal story in heaven, as the last possible antecedent of all records,
and it was therein that the Jew read, while the beating of his own
pulses alone throbbed in the silent spaces. But as it is desirable to
give a certain local touch to these abstruse matters, I have mentioned
that the Jew's name was Flegetanis, to increase the verisimilitude of
which we may memorise the fact that he wrote in Arabic rather than in
Hebrew. The baths of disillusion are colder than those of Apollo, and
from all--if any there be--who can dream that these things were possible
individually before, or collectively after, the manifested Light of the
World, we may well cry with devotion our *Libera nos, Domine*. The fact
which remains is that Flegetanis read in the starry heavens, and that in
the *Book of the Holy Graal* a person of this name, or nearly, was the
mother of Celidoine, who was born under such high stellar auspices and
himself divined by the stars. In such strange ways does one of the
latest histories seem to draw from another which is earliest by the high
imputation of things; only these two texts contain the Celtic name in
question, and these only produce from their hidden source in common the
myth which exceeds explication concerning the Phœnix bird and the ardent
stone. It is in connections of this kind that one occasionally obtains,
out of all expectation, a certain extrinsic light. The suggestion that,
at however far a distance, there may have been the hand of Jewry in the
literature of the Holy Graal might well be a source of scandal. But the
Provençal Guiot was, as we have seen, a man of curious learning, and by
a somewhat precarious induction it is supposed that he was a student at
Toledo in those days when the relations between Southern France and
Northern Spain may be described as intimate. Whatever be the merits or
otherwise of this supposition, it is certain that in one curious respect
he gives evidence of an acquaintance with the secret ways of Israel. One
of the interminable discourses comprised in the collection of the
*Zohar* states that in the whole extent of the heavens, the
circumference

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

of which surrounds the world, there are figures and there are signs by
means of which the deepest mysteries may be discovered. These figures
are formed by galaxies and constellations of stars, which are for the
sage a subject of contemplation and a source of mysterious delights. The
simple indication in the great canon of the Kabalah is the root-matter
of all Hebrew astrology, and the reader who is sufficiently curious may
consult on the whole subject certain *Unheard-of Curiosities* collected
by James Gaffarel, where he will find the celestial constellations
expressed by Hebrew characters and the celestial Hebrew alphabet. It
follows that all mysteries resident in the letters and their
combinations would be indubitably in the starry heavens, and the
mysterious inspiration which, according to Guiot's story, fell on the
Jew of Toledo represents a mode of divination which in that place was
well known and in practice at that period. It will, I hope, be
understood that nothing follows from this fact except that by a curious
instance I have illustrated the curious learning which must have been
possessed indubitably by the Provençal poet.

The considerations of this section are far indeed from our term, but, as
seen already, something remains to be said, when the pageant draws to
its close, concerning the second sense of Guiot and his German
reflection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Sidelights From the Spanish and Portuguese Quests](hchg54)
