[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg79)  [Next](hchg81) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_584">p. 584</span>

##### § *B*. MASONRY AND MORAL SCIENCE

I must put my first point somewhat roughly and crudely, with an apology
for the frankness which it involves; decoration is here impossible, and
on account of so much that will yet remain to say after, I believe that
I shall be exonerated in the end. The ethical position is then, so far
as Masonry is concerned, a sincere attempt--and this simply--to effect a
sanctification of things which of necessity and essentially are obvious
in moral teachings. No one challenges these teachings, and in the world
about us no one cares anything. It cannot be less than regrettable if
any person should join either one or another confraternity with the idea
of improving his ethical position, not because the design is anything
except highly laudable, but because his most proper incentives are in
himself and his daily life. No association has anything to tell him
which he does not know already, and this from his earliest childhood. If
I may speak my whole mind, after having followed many highways and
byways, I should say that his best and only necessary guides are the
official religions, the gate of which is morality, as I have striven to
make plain elsewhere. It is they that provide the spirit and reason
which--unless he is called to go further, and that journey will be
further within them--should actuate his conduct, just as the laws of his
country take charge of the letter thereof, and see that it shall be
constructed after their manner and not according to his own.

From this view it is impossible to derogate, and it is difficult, in
respect of it, to qualify; but there is one matter over which
misconception may be avoided. Let it be understood therefore that I do
not take exception to the ethical value of Masonic or the other laws--in
those matters which belong to the conduct of life--because it is so
obviously identical with the written or unwritten law of all civilised
conscience; but I

<span id="page_585">p. 585</span>

affirm that a knowledge which is possessed independently by all, which
is mainly derived from unassisted lights of Nature, which no one
disputes seriously, which is withal so simple that there is no
difficulty in teaching it directly, which in fine has been taught us in
our catechisms, even at the knees of our mothers--I affirm that this
knowledge does not require an allegorical and ceremonial system of
considerable complexity to explain or enforce it. There is above all no
evident warrant for secrecy and mystery in the plain basis of individual
and social morality. It must be added that, on the evidence of their own
history, the associations included by my category have not succeeded in
developing a more perfect moral man than has any other system of ethical
discipline which is now at work in the world. They do not therefore
possess a more powerful instrument than are other instruments with which
we may be acquainted independently. When it is said that a Mason, for
example, who abides scrupulously by the rule of his Order, cannot fail
to be a good man, such a statement may be accepted without reserve; but
since the laws of Masonry are simply the expression of an universal
ethical standard, as much may be declared of any person, initiated or
not initiated, who elects to guide his life by the recognised code of
morality and goodwill, more especially as the element of *esprit de
corps* scarcely enters into questions of this nature.

A certain severity will be read into these strictures, more especially
as the majority of Masons have never supposed that their association
could offer a higher light than that of good conduct in exaltation, and
I ought therefore to add that if this were really the limit of its
horizon, so far as they are concerned, the craft as such is--in one
sense--amply justified. That which is desirable for them, that which for
them is the term and aim of goodness may not only be their strong
incentive but a necessity in the lesser degree. Moreover, on broader
grounds it is no matter of pretence, for it has never,

<span id="page_586">p. 586</span>

except in some spurious high grades, which are its burden and not its
possession, offered more than it can give. It is not, therefore, as it
was described by De Quincey, the great imposture of the modern world;
and if it be an error of enthusiasm to put forward an ideal of natural
goodness in the guise of a mystery of knowledge, one can only wish that
the effect had been to make that ideal an actuality over the whole
world.

All this notwithstanding, its success or failure along these lines could
be scarcely a special concern of ours, who know of ways as excellent
after its own kind and of better ways beyond them. I return therefore to
my previous proposition--that Masonry can interest us so far only as it
enshrines something more than an ethical doctrine and instruction. This
other thing is not, however, by way of *additamentum*, but by way of
essence. The recognition of such an essence will enable us to understand
more clearly some of the lesser processes, or at least to tolerate them
more patiently, as first stages in a history of development which have
also the heights as their term. I may alienate the sympathies of some of
my readers, seeing that there are so many listeners, but the explanation
of this last point lies to my mind in the fact that the *raison d’être*
of all natural goodness must be sought in the law of grace. So also it
remains that the churches are still the accredited guides because grace
has its channels therein, or so at least till we transmute the official
beliefs into direct experience and thus enter not into that which is
apart from them, but that which is their wider consciousness. In the
meantime, all that is innocent, all that is blameless, all that is of
fair repute makes in fine for goodness; and if that goodness is natural
in the first degree, it has also a mode of dissolution into the goodness
which transcends Nature. If therefore the laws of brotherly love are
maintained and promoted in a lodge of Masons, as they certainly are, it
is all honour to Masonry, and so much towards the reign of peace on
earth. But it is

<span id="page_587">p. 587</span>

not less true that it is easy, and very easy, to reach those limits
beyond which it has scarcely entered into the heart of Masonry to
conceive--by which I mean as it is so far understood in the lodges; as
it is to be judged by its literature; and as, outside all personal
initiation, we may know it in the life of its members. It is at this
point that some who are on higher quests than those of conduct must part
with it, leaving their benedictions behind them; or that they must find
therein, after all the horizon of ethics has been at last traversed,
some region beyond the ordinary ken which may prove the land of their
desire. Beyond the seven bands which comprise the spectrum of the
corporal works of mercy, there are other rays of light, and in Masonry
also there are rays beyond the violet. We may glean something concerning
them from its history, but we must seek above all in its symbolism and
in the proper meaning of its legends. To conclude as to this part,
Masonry either belongs to the secret tradition or it is for us made
void.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § C. A Theory of Hermetic Interference](hchg81)
