[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg91)  [Next](hchg93.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_688">p. 688</span> <span id="page_689">p. 689</span>

# APPENDIX

## A BRIEF METHODISED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE HOLY GRAAL IN LITERATURE AND CRITICISM

*Comprising a Key to the Study of the Texts and the Several Schools of
Interpretation*

### PART I

#### THE TEXTS

IT is desirable in fairness to myself, but more especially out of
justice to my readers, that the limitations of these sections should be
made plain from the beginning. A complete bibliography of the Holy Graal
in literature and criticism should assuredly include, so far as the
texts are concerned, at least a sufficient study of the chief
manuscripts; and in respect of the critical works it should embrace a
survey of continental periodical literature--chiefly French and
German--wherein a very important part is, and will remain, imbedded. The
large knowledge which is necessary in one of these cases, the
opportunity in the other, and the space in regard to both, would--I must
confess--fail me, were so ambitious a research called for; but it
exceeds the scope of my purpose, as it would have little or no appeal to
those whom I address. I have confined myself; therefore, to particulars
of the printed texts, to the most important of the critical works, and
to a few characteristic essays towards interpretation along independent
lines, because these--whatever their value--will be of interest to
mystic students, if only as counsels of caution. As regards the
intermediate group, I have sought in a few words to indicate, where
possible, certain points of correspondence with my own thesis. If,
therefore, it be inferred that this section is written in the spirit and
exists in the interests of a partisan, I shall neither dissuade nor
protest; but rather--that I may do all things sincerely within my
particular field--I will begin by assuming that the matter of my own
research, having to be judged by unusual canons, would be unlikely, in
any case, to receive the *imprimatur* of the existing schools. In so far
as my book

<span id="page_690">p. 690</span>

has been done zealously and truly, I believe that it will engage their
interest, at whatever cost of disagreement, and my debt of gratitude to
their great, patient and productive research may be a little reduced
should any of them here and there feel that a new vista has been opened.
They also know that although the Graal literature began in folk-lore it
did not end therein; and if its consanguinities--actual, but yet
remote--with secret ways of thought and strange schools of experience
should be naturally outside their sphere, it may even be that the end
which I descry is not so foreign after all but that they have almost
caught at it in dreams.

*A*. EARLY EPOCHS OF THE QUEST, being documents that embody materials
which have been elsewhere incorporated into the Graal legends, but do
not themselves refer to the Holy Vessel; in their extant form these
texts are much later than the rest of the literature.

1\. *Peredur the son of Evrawc*, first printed, with the Welsh text,
translation and notes, in the *Mabinogion*, by Lady Charlotte E. Guest,
3 vols., 1849; a second edition, without the text and with abridged
notes, appeared in 1877. The collection has since been reissued in many
forms, and is available in the Temple Classics and another popular
series. The edition of Mr. Alfred Nutt, first published in 1902, with
notes by the editor, has an appeal to scholars. The *Mabinogion* have
been also translated into French and German.

2\. *The Romance of Syr Percyvelle of Galles*, included in The Thornton
Romances, edited by J. O. Halliwell, and published by the Camden Society
in 1844. The manuscript is preserved in the Library of Lincoln
Cathedral, and Robert Thornton, its scribe, is thought to have compiled
the collection about 1440. The year mentioned is speculative in two
ways: (*a*) because the Thornton volume can only be dated approximately,
and (*b*) because the poem with which we are concerned is almost
unquestionably a transcript from an unknown original. By the evidence of
language and style it is thought, however, to belong to the approximate
period of its transcription. *Syr Percyvelle* is a rhymed poem of 2228
lines.

*B*. LE CONTE DEL GRAAL.--I. *Le Poème de* CHRÉTIEN DE TROYES *et de ses
continuateurs d’aprés le manuscrit de* MONS, being vols. 2 to 6 of
*Perceval le Gallois, ou le Conte du Graal*--*vide infra* for the first
volume, containing the romance in prose. This is so far the only printed
edition, and it was produced wider the auspices of C. Potvin for the
*Sociètè des Bibliophiles Belges*. It appeared from 1866 to 1871, and
copies are exceedingly rare. The text is that of a manuscript in the
*Bibliothèque Communale* 

<span id="page_691">p. 691</span>

*de* MONS, and it is considered unfavourably by scholarship. The
equipment of the editor has been also regarded as insufficient, but the
pains which made the poem available deserve our highest thanks, and the
gift has been priceless. I believe that a new edition is promised in
Germany. It may be useful to mention that the work of Chrétien is held
to have ended at line 10,601; that of Gautier--but here opinions
differ--at line 34,934; while the conclusion of Manessier extends the
work to 45,379 lines, not including the fragment of Gerbert, which
exceeds 15,000 lines. The *excursus* which M. Potvin appended to his
last volume is still pleasant reading, but it represents no special
research and at need is now almost negligible. It seems to look
favourably on the dream of a Latin primordial Graal text; it affirms
that the Conte was called the *Bible du dèmon* by Gallic monks of old,
and that *Lancelot of the Lake* was placed on the Index by Innocent III.

II\. *The Berne Perceval*. Our chief knowledge of this unprinted text is
due to Alfred Rochat, who gave extracts therefrom in *Ueber einen bisher
unbekannten Percheval li Gallois* (Zurich, 1855). It has variations
which are important for textual purposes, but the conclusion only is of
moment to ourselves. In the first place, it is an attempt to complete
the Quest of Perceval practically within the limits of Gautier's
extension, which it does, in a summary manner, by recounting how the
Fisher King dies within three days of Perceval's second visit and how
the latter becomes Keeper of the Graal. The version follows the
historical matter of the Lesser Chronicles, which is of interest in view
of my remarks on pp. 207 and 235. The Fisher King is Brons; he is the
father of Alain le Gros; and his wife is sister to Joseph of Arimathæa.
It will be noted that this is the succession of the *Didot Perceval*,
the Keepership not passing to Alain.

III\. *Trèsplaisante et Recreative Hystoire du trèspreulx et vaillant
chevallier Perceval le Galloys . . . lequel acheva les adventures du
Sainct Graal, &c*.--Paris, 1530. This is the prose version of the *Conte
del Graal*, the summaries of which are given among the marginal notes of
Potvin's text of the poem. It includes, in certain copies, the important
*Elucidation*, which was long thought to exist only in this form. The
object which actuated the edition is stated very simply--namely, to
place a work which had long become archaic in an available form. As
such, it might appeal to some readers who would be hindered by the
difficulties of the original, but it is available only in a few great
libraries.

The *Conte del Graal* is said to have been translated into Spanish and
published at Seville in 1526. We may assume, in this case, that it is in
prose, and the interesting point concerning

<span id="page_692">p. 692</span>

it would then be that it anteceded the French prose version. I do not
think that its existence detracts from my general conclusion that the
Quest of Perceval had little appeal, during that period when the
literature of chivalry reigned, in Spain and Portugal. The full title is
*Historia de Perceval de Gaula, Caballero de la Tabla Rotonda*, but at a
later period it has been suggested alternatively that it is really a
Spanish version of the *Longer Prose Perceval*. No one seems to have
seen it. A Flemish and an Icelandic version remain unprinted.

*C*. THE LESSER CHRONICLES.--It is understood that I have adopted this
title as comprehensive and suitable for my purpose, but there is no
collection of manuscripts which bears the name.

I. *Le Roman du Saint Graal, publiè pour la première fois d’après un
manuscrit de la Bibliothèque Royale, par* FRANCISQUE MICHEL, Bordeaux,
1841. The manuscript in question is unique and the poem which is now
under consideration consists of 3514 lines. There is a lacuna between
lines 2752 and 2753, being at and about that point when destruction
overwhelms the false Moses in the prose version. The metrical romance
was reprinted in the *Dictionnaire des Lègendes*, forming part of
Migne's *Troisième . . . Encyclopèdie Thèologique*, and in this form is
still, I believe, available. It was also included by Dr. Furnivall in
his edition of the *Seynt Graal or the Sank Ryal*, printed for the
Roxburgh Club, 2 vols., 1861-63.

It seems desirable to couple with this text certain archaic English
versions of the Joseph legend: (*a*) The alliterative poem of *Joseph of
Aramathie*, otherwise, the *Romance of the Seint Graal*, known only by
the Vernon MS. at Oxford, which belongs to the middle of the fourteenth
century. It is a summary of the *Book of the Holy Graal*, beginning with
the release of Joseph from the tower and ending with the departure from
Sarras. It is imperfect at the inception, and, of course, breaks off far
from the term. (*b*) *The Lyfe of Joseph of Armathy*, printed by Wynkyn
de Worde and corresponding to the account given by Capgrave in his *Nova
Legenda Angliæ*. It pretends to be founded on a book discovered by the
Emperor Theodosius at Jerusalem. It is evident, however, that this is
really the *Book of the Holy Graal*, though the account of Joseph's
imprisonment follows the Apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus and there is no
reference to the Holy Vessel. (*c*) *The Lyfe of Joseph of Armathia*,
believed to have been written about the year 1502, and first printed in
1520. The authorship is entirely unknown and so are manuscripts prior to
publication. It is, of course, much too late to possess any historical
importance. It is exceedingly curious, and, in spite of

<span id="page_693">p. 693</span>

its rude verse and chaotic manner, is not without a certain pictorial
sense and vividness. In place of the Sacred Vessel of Reception there
are two cruets substituted in which the blood of Christ was collected by
Joseph. These fragments are all included by the Rev. W. W. Skeat in his
*Joseph of Arimathie*, published for the Early English Text Society,
1871.

II\. The *Lesser Holy Graal*, i.e. *Le Petit Saint Graal, ou Joseph
d’Arimathie*, is known by a number of MSS., one of which is called
*Cangè*; it belongs to the thirteenth century and is preserved in the
Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris. Two codices, together with a version in
modern French, are included in the first volume of *Le Saint Graal*,
published by Eugene Hucher, 3 vols., Paris, 1874. This text was regarded
by the editor as De Borron's original work, from which the metrical
version was composed later on by an unknown hand.

III\. *The Early Prose Merlin*. We have seen that the metrical Romance
of Joseph concludes at line 3514, after which the unique MS. proceeds,
without any break, to the life of Merlin, reaching an abrupt term at
line 4018, all being missing thereafter. This fragment is included in
the text of Michel. The complete prose version forms the first part of
the *Vulgate* and the second of the *Huth Merlin*, the bibliographical
particulars of which are given later. It follows from one, and
apparently one only, of the *Early Merlin* codices that Robert de Borron
proposed as his next branch to take the life of Alain, and in so stating
he, or his personator, uses some of the words which occur in the
colophon of his *Joseph* poem. It appears further that the Alain branch
was intended to show how the enchantments fell upon Britain.

IV\. The *Didot Perceval*, i.e. *Perceval, ou la Quête du Saint Graal*,
*par* Robert de Borron. This text is included in the first volume of
Hucher's collection, with a summary prefixed thereto. The date borne by
the MS. is 1301. The root-matter of the romance is, of course, the
non-Graal myth of Perceval, the existence of which is posited on such
excellent grounds by scholarship. Critical opinion is perhaps equally
divided on the question whether the *Didot Perceval* does or does not
represent the third part of De Borron's metrical trilogy. The name of
Gaston Paris must be ranged on the affirmative side, and on the negative
that of Mr. Alfred Nutt.

*D*. THE GREATER CHRONICLES.--It is again understood that this title is
merely a matter of convenience in connection with my particular
classification of texts.

I. *The Book of the Holy Graal*, i.e. *Le Saint Graal ou Joseph
d’Arimathie*. There are several MSS., among which may be

<span id="page_694">p. 694</span>

mentioned that of the *Bibliothèque de la Ville de Mans*, which is
referred to the middle of the thirteenth century. Other codices are at
Cambridge and in the British Museum. It was first edited by Furnivall
(*op. cit.*), from the MSS. preserved in England, and subsequently by
Hucher, forming vols. 2 and 3 of his collection, as described
previously. Dr. Furnivall also included the English rendering called
*The Seynt Graal* or *Sank Ryal*, known by a single MS. attributed to
the middle of the fifteenth century. The work is in conventional verse
of very poor quality, the author being Henry Lovelich or Lonelich,
described as a skinner, but of whom no particulars are forthcoming. It
is a rendering by way of summary extending to nearly 24,000 lines, with
several extensive lacunæ. Outside the testimony of its existence to the
interest in the Graal literature, as illustrated by the pains of
translation at a length so great, it has no importance for our subject.
It was again edited by Dr. Furnivall (1874-78) for the Early English
Text Society, but after thirty-four years it remains incomplete, no
titles or a satisfactory introduction to the text having been produced.

II\. The *Vulgate Merlin*, i.e. *Le Roman de Merlin*, or the *Early
History of King Arthur*. The available French text is that which was
edited, in 1884, by Professor H, Oskar Sommer from the Add. MS: 10292 in
the British Museum. It is ascribed to the beginning of the fourteenth
century. The prose version of Robert de Borron's substantially lost poem
is brought to its term in this edition at the end of Chapter V. With
this the reader may compare, and is likely to use at his pleasure,
*Merlin, or the Early History of King Arthur*, edited for the Early
English Text Society by Mr. Henry B. Wheatley, 1865-99, which during
another modest period of thirty-four years has certainly produced a
satisfactory and valuable edition of the anonymous rendering of the
*Vulgate Merlin* preserved in the unique MS. of the University Library,
Cambridge. This text is allocated to A.D. 1450-60, and as a translation
it is fairly representative of the French original. A metrical rendering
has been edited from an Auchinleck MS. by Professor E. Koelling in his
*Arthour and Merlin*, Leipsic, 1890.

I have spoken of *Les Prophéties de Merlin*, which appeared with no date
at Rouen, but probably in 1520 or thereabouts. It claims to be
translated from the Latin, and contains episodes of Merlin's history
which are unlike anything in the canonical texts. A few points may be
enumerated as follows: (*a*) In place of the faithful Blaise of the
other chronicles, there is a long list of the scribes employed by Merlin
to record his prophecies, being (1) Master Tholomes, who subsequently
became a bishop; (2) Master

<span id="page_695">p. 695</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Anthony; (3)
Meliadus, the brother of Sir Tristram and paramour of the Lady of the
Lake; (4) the sage clerk, Raymon; (5) Rubers, the chaplain. (*b*) The
prophet in this curious romance is unbridled in his amours. (*c*) The
account of his internment by the Lady of the Lake recalls the parallel
story in the *Huth Merlin*, but differs also therefrom. (*d*) There is a
full portrayal of Morgan le Fay, her early life and her transition from
beauty to ugliness through evil arts of magic. (*e*) The sin and
suffering of Moses are also recounted. (*f*) The Siege Perilous at the
Third Table is said to have been occupied, with disastrous results, by a
knight named Rogier le Bruns. (*g*) There is a summary of the
circumstances under which Joseph of Arimathæa and his son Joseph II.
came to Britain for its conversion. (*h*) But perhaps the most
remarkable episode is that of the meeting between King Arthur and a
damosel in the church of St. Stephen. She came sailing over the land in
that ship which afterwards carried Arthur to Avalon.

The early printed editions of the *Vulgate Merlin*, which appeared at
Paris from 1498 and onward, have variations from the *textus receptus*,
representing the ingenuities of successive editors. An Italian *Merlin*
was issued at Venice and again at Florence towards the end of the
fifteenth century. I shall speak later of texts printed in Spain.

III\. The *Huth Merlin*, i.e. Merlin--*Roman en prose du
XIII<sup>e</sup> siècle, publiè avec la mise en prose du poème de Merlin
de Robert de Boron, d’après le manuscrit appartenant à* M. Alfred H.
Huth, *par* Gaston Paris *et* Jacob Ulrich. 2 vols., Paris, 1886. The
position and content of this romance have been dealt with so fully in
the text that, although much rests to be said in a complete analysis, it
will be sufficient for my purpose to enumerate three casual points:
(*a*) The unique portion--which is the great bulk of the story--is
believed to have been composed after the *Lancelot;* (*b*) it is perhaps
for this reason that it shares responsibility for the unfavourable
portraiture of Gawain which characterises most of the Greater
Chronicles; (*c*) in some undecided way the death of a lady who killed
herself over the body of a knight, slain by Balyn in self-defence, is
said by Merlin to involve the latter in dealing "the stroke most
dolourous that ever man stroke, except the stroke of our Lord."

IV\. *The Great Prose Lancelot*. The importance of this romance is fully
recognised by scholarship, and the careful collation of the numerous
manuscripts is desired, but so far it remains a counsel of perfection.
No text has been edited in modern days, and though the reissue of one of
the old printed versions, on account of their great extent, was unlikely
under any

<span id="page_696">p. 696</span>

circumstances, it is singular that not even a satisfactory modernised
rendering has been so far produced. In 1488 the *Lancelot* appeared at
Paris in three folio volumes, and as there were other editions it is
only necessary to mention that of 1533, which bears the imprint of
Philippe le Noir, because great stress has been laid thereon. In his
*Studies on the Sources* of Malory's *Morte d’Arthur*, Dr. Sommer has
taken as his basis the edition of 1513, but without expressing
preference. It appears from this text (*a*) that Galahad was acquainted
with his paternity even in his childhood, and (*h*) that he was sent to
the abbey of white nuns by King Pelles, his grandfather. The omission of
these details by Malory enhances the sacred mystery of the story.

V. The *Longer Prose Perceval*. This text constitutes the first volume
of Potvin's *Conte del Graal*, as described in section *B*. Of its
translation by Dr. Sebastian Evans under its proper title of *The High
History of the Holy Graal*, I have said sufficient to indicate the
gratitude which is due to a new sacrament in literature from those who
are in the grace of the sacraments. The original is known in textual
criticism as *Perceval li Gallois* and *Perlesvaux*. The date of
composition is referred by its first editor to the end of the twelfth
century, but later authorities assign it to a period not much prior to
1225. The manuscript itself is allocated broadly to the thirteenth
century, and is preserved in the Bibliothèque de Bourgogne at Brussels.
The second of the Hengwrt Graal texts, of which we shall hear shortly,
is a Welsh version of the *Longer Prose Perceval* and is a short
recension which abounds in mistranslations, but at the same time it
supplies a missing portion of the manuscript to which we owe the story
in its printed form. If some of its variations were important, they
might lie under a certain suspicion on account of the translator's
defects, but I do not know that there is anything which need detain us
concerning it. I will add only that a Berne MS. contains two fragments,
some account of which has been given by Potvin and Dr. Evans. It should
be noted, however, that since the edition of Potvin appeared in 1866,
several other codices have come to light, but it has not been suggested
that they offer important variations. A French text is also supposed to
have been printed in 1521.

VI\. The *Quest of Galahad*, otherwise *La Queste del Saint Graal*, the
head and crown of the legend, is, in the early printed texts, either
incorporated with the prose *Lancelot*, as in the edition of 1513,
already mentioned, or with the *Book of the Holy Graal*, as in the Paris
edition of 1516, which is called: *L’hystoire du sainct Greaal, qui est
le premier livre de la Table Ronde*. . . .

<span id="page_697">p. 697</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Ensemble la
Queste dudict sainct Greaal, ffaicte par Lancelot, Galaad, Boors et
Perceval qui est le dernier livre de la Table Ronde*, &c. But that which
is available more readily to students who desire to consult the original
is *La Queste del Saint Graal:* Edited by F. J. Furnivall, M.A., for the
Roxburghe Club, London, 1864. Every one is, however, aware that the
great prose Quest was rendered almost bodily into the *Morte d’Arthur*
of Sir Thomas Malory, first printed by Caxton in the year 1485, as the
colophon of the last book sets forth. The full title is worth
reproducing from the edition of Robert Southey, as follows: *The Byrth,
Lyf, and Actes of Kyng Arthur; of his Noble Knyghtes of the Rounde
Table, theyr merveyllous enquestes and aduentures, thachyeuyng of the
Sanc Greal; and in the end* LE MORTE DARTHUR, *with the Dolourous Deth
and departyng out of thys worlde of them all*. Dr. H. Oskar Sommer has
of recent years (1889 91) faithfully reprinted the Caxton Malory in
three volumes of text, introduction and studies on the sources. This
constitutes the *textus receptus*. Other editions, abridgments and
modern versions are too numerous for mention.

VII\. *The Welsh Quest*, i.e. *Y Seint Greal, being the Adventures of
King Arthur's Knights of the Round Table, in the Quest of the Holy
Greal, and on other occasions*. Edited with a Translation and Glossary,
by the Rev. Robert Williams, M.A., London, 1876. This is the first
volume of *Selections from the Hengwrt MSS*., the second appearing in
1892 and containing the *Gests of Charlemagne*, with other texts outside
our particular subject. The *Welsh Quest* is entitled simply *The Holy
Greal* and is divided into two parts, of which the first concerns
Galahad and his peers, the second being that recension of *The Longer
Prose Perceval* to which reference has been made above.

*E*. THE GERMAN CYCLE.--As the French legends of the Holy Graal are
reducible in the last resource to the *Quest of Galahad*, so are those
of Germany summed up in the epic poem with which we are now so well
acquainted and which here follows in my list.

I. The *Parsifal* of Wolfram von Eschenbach was written some time within
the period which intervened between 1200 and 1215, the poet dying, as it
is believed, about 1220, while towards the close of his life he was
occupied with another long composition, this time on the life of William
of Orange. I conceive that in respect of the German Cycle I shall have
no occasion to speak of early printed editions, so I will name only
(*a*) The critical edition based on various manuscripts, by Karl
Lachmann, a fourth issue of which appeared at Berlin in 1879;

<span id="page_698">p. 698</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*b*) the text
edited by Karl Bartsch and published in *Deutsche Classiker des
Mittelalters*, vols. ix.-xi., 1875-9; (*c*) the metrical rendering in
modern German, published from 1839 to 1841 by A. Schulz, under the name
of *San Marte;* (*d*) the modern version by Simrock, 1842; (*e*) that of
Dr. Bötticher in rhyme-less measures, 1880; (*f*) and in fine the
translation into English of *Parzival: a Knightly Epic*, by Miss Jessie
L. Weston, 2 vols., London, 1894.

II\. The poem of Heinrich von dem Türlin, entitled *Diu Crône*. Of this
text there was a servicable edition published at Stuttgart in 1852,
under the editorship of G. H. F. Scholl, who prefixed a full
introduction. The work forms the twenty-seventh volume of the
*Bibliothek des Litterarischen Vereins*. It was again edited in 1879.

III\. The *Titurel* of Albrecht von Scharfenberg--i.e. *Der Jüngere
Titurel*--was edited in 1842 for the *Bibliothek der Deutschen National
Litteratur* by K. A. Hahn. It was also edited by E. Droyran in 1872
under the title *Der Tempel des Heiligen Graal*. In my account of this
poem--but presumably because the particular legend is scarcely within my
subject--I have omitted to mention that the history of Lohengrin is
given in a more extended form than that of Wolfram, and the
catastrophe--which is also different--involves the destruction of the
Swan Knight.

IV\. *The Dutch Lancelot*. Seeing that the extant text of this
compilation exceeds 90,000 lines, it will be understood that the task of
editing and carrying it through the press was not likely to be attempted
on more than a single occasion, the heroic scholar being M. Jonckbloet.
The *Morien* section was subsequently treated separately by M. T.
Winkel. The few to whom it is accessible assign to the whole poem a
place of importance as a reflection in part of materials which are not
otherwise extant. There was also a German *Lanzelet*, by Ulrich von
Zatzikhofen, whose work is usually ascribed to the end of the twelfth or
the beginning of the thirteenth century: in this case he preceded
Wolfram, which theory recent criticism is, however, inclined to
question. Ulrich followed a French model.

*F*. THE SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE CYCLES.--Among the more popular
historians of Spanish literature, it is customary to pass over the texts
of romantic chivalry with the citation of a few typical examples, such
as *Amadis of Gaul*, *Palmerin of England* and *Don Belianis of Greece*.
I speak under all reserves, having no special knowledge of the subject,
but as a comprehensive analysis of the vast printed literature does not
appear to have been attempted, except in Spanish, so it seems reasonable
to speculate

<span id="page_699">p. 699</span>

that there may be many texts in manuscript still practically entombed in
public and monastic libraries, and their discovery might extend our
scanty knowledge concerning Spanish books of the Graal. The same
observation may apply also to Portugal; but in the absence of all
research we must be content with the little which has been gleaned from
the common sources of knowledge.

I. *El Baladro del Sabio Merlin con sus Proficias*, printed at Burgos in
1498, of which there is a single extant copy, preserved in a private
library at Madrid. The analysis of contents furnished to Gaston Paris
shows it to contain: (*a*) The *Early Prose Merlin* of Robert de Borron:
(*b*) the continuation of the *Huth Merlin*, so far as the recital of
the marriage of Arthur and Guinevere, or a few pages further; and (*c*)
three final chapters which are unknown in the extant Merlin texts, but
are thought to be derived from the lost *Conte du Brait* of the
so-called Hélie de Borron.

II\. *Merlin y demanda del Santo Grial*, Seville, 1500. But of this text
I find no copy in English public libraries, and there are few
particulars available. It is mentioned by Leandro Fernandez de Moratin
in his *Origines del Teatro Espanōl*, Madrid, 1830. I suggest, however,
that it may have been reprinted in

III\. *La Demanda del Sancto Grial: con los marvillosos fechos de
Lancarote y de Galas su hijo*, Toledo, 1515. This is now in the British
Museum, but was once in the collection of Heber, who had heard of no
other copy. It is divided into two parts, being respectively the
*Romance of Merlin* and a version of the *Quest of Galahad*. The first
part corresponds to the Burgos *El Baladro*, as we know this by the
analysis of its contents, and I believe the texts to be substantially
identical, though that of Toledo is much longer and is divided into
numbered paragraphs, or short sections, instead of into forty chapters.
But the reference to *El Baladro* in the *Libras de Caballerias* by
Pascual de Gayangos, Madrid, 1857, seems to show that these chapters
were subdivided into sections or paragraphs. The first part is therefore
based on the *Huth Merlin*, and the second seems to represent the lost
Quest attached thereto. It is indeed nearly identical with

IV\. *El Historia dos Cavalleiros da Mesa Redonda e da Demanda do Santo
Graal*, which is the Portuguese *Quest of Galahad*, partly printed from
a Viennese manuscript by Carl von Reinhardstoellner in *Handschrift* No.
2594 der K. K. *Hofbibliothek zu Wien*, 1887. The points concerning it
are (*a*) that it is attributed to Robert de Borron; (*b*) that it
contains things missing from the extant French Quest; (*c*) that it
mentions the promised wounding of Gawain because he attempted to draw
from the block of marble that sword which was intended for Galahad
alone; (*d*)

<span id="page_700">p. 700</span>

that it narrates the murder of Bademagus by Gawain; and (*e*) that
generally it seems to correspond with the indications concerning the
missing *Quest* which were gleaned from various sources by Gaston Paris,
and included in his Introduction to the *Huth Merlin*, § v., *La Quête
du Saint Graal*, vol. i. pp. l-lxii.

*G*. ADDITAMENTA.--The following brief particulars may interest some of
my readers. (1) As regards the *Saone de Nausay*, this Northern French
poem of 21,321 lines was edited by Moritz Goldschmid, and forms the
216th publication *Der Litterarischen Vereins in Stuttgart*. Saone, or
Sone, who is the hero, received the communication of the mystery of the
Holy Graal, and was the means of saving Norway with the help of a sword
which once belonged to Joseph of Arimathæa. He married the king's
daughter, and reigned after him. The Holy Palladium is described as l*i
vaisseau . . . qui jadis fu grëalz nommés*. (2) As Sir Tristram went in
search of the Graal, according to some of the French romances, those,
who are disposed to go further into this side-issue may consult the
extended analysis of the *Roman de Tristan*, which forms Fascicule 82 of
the Bibliothèque de l’Ecole des Hautes Études, Paris, 1890-91. He will
there find Galahad among the other peers of the Quest, but he is no
longer more than a shadow of the perfect Knight. (3) The nearest'
approach to the Perceval question is in the sense of its antithesis, and
perhaps the most express form hereof is in the old Provençal metrical
romance which has been translated into modern French by Mary Lapon as
*Les Adventures du Chevalier Jaufre et de la Belle Brunissende*, Paris,
1856. Violence and contumely befall the hero every time that he asks a
specific question, being why at a certain period of the day every
inhabitant of a given district, from peasant to peer, falls into loud
lamentation. A fatality leads him, however, to go on asking, just as
another fatality prevents the Graal question. The explanation in the
present case is that a knight has been wounded, and that whenever the
hurt heals it is reopened by the cruelty of his enemy. Sir Jaufre, or
Geoffrey, is the son of Dovon, and he is known in the French cycle of
Arthurian romance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II. Some Critical Works](hchg93.md)
