[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg14)  [Next](hchg16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### § *B*.--LEGENDS OF THE SACRED LANCE

In the Gautier section of the *Conte del Graal*, and in the description
of Gawain's visit to the Graal Castle, he sees among the sacred objects
a Lance, which bleeds into a silver cup, but it is not the Cup of the
Graal. The Lance is the weapon which pierced the side of Christ, and it
is said that it will bleed till Doomsday. The body of the arm was of
wood. The blade was white as snow, and the weapon was at the head of the
master dais; it seems to have reposed in the vessel, and two tapers were
burning before it. The stream of blood issued from the point of the
Lance and ran down into the vessel, from which, as it overflowed, it
poured into a channel of gold and ran without the Hall. This extravagant
description is substituted for a much simpler account in Chrétien's
portion of the poem; there only a single drop of blood trickles down to
the hand of the squire who bears the weapon in the pageant. The fuller
historical account is found in Manessier's section, which says that the
Lance is that of the Roman soldier who pierced the side of Christ.
According to a Montpellier manuscript, Joseph of Arimathæa was present
at the foot of the Cross, and seeing, as the spear was withdrawn, how
the blood ran down, he collected it in the Holy Vessel, turning black as
he did so with sorrow. The *Didot Perceval* says only that a squire in
the Graal Castle carried a Lance in his two hands, that it was that of
Longinus, and that a drop of blood flowed from the sacred point. I
believe that this romance represents a primitive state of the Christian
Quest, though it is late in its

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

actual form, the reason being that the Hallows of the Passion are the
only wonder-objects which belong properly to the Quest. The wider field
of vision offered in the Greater Chronicles and the multiplication of
relics are indubitable signs of lateness. In the *Book of the Holy
Graal* the Hallows which are seen in the vision preceding the ordination
of the younger Joseph are a great ensanguined cross, three nails from
which blood seems to flow, a Lance of which the iron point is stained
also with blood, an ensanguined cincture and a bended rod dyed in the
same manner. It will be seen that the writer of this romance knew well
enough that with the Graal itself he could connect only the things
thereto belonging--namely, the other Relics of the Passion, and
realising this fact in later branches of his Chronicle, while he
perpetuates other objects through centuries of hidden life, he is
careful not to locate them in the Graal Castle. The *Huth Merlin* is the
only legend of the prophet which knows of another Hallow than the Sacred
Vessel; and this is the Lance, but the circumstances under which it is
introduced and the account which is given concerning it belong to a
later stage of our research. I may say, however, that it was an
instrument of mystic vengeance, and as such it reappears in the great
prose *Lancelot*. It is seen there by Gawain, who is smitten by its
blade of fire, and afterwards is healed by the Graal. It is seen also by
Sir Bors when he visits Corbenic; an old man carries it in one hand,
while he swings a censer with the other. In the romance of Galahad, as
we know it, the Lance manifests twice, and this is at the end of the
Quest, when it is borne in one hand by an angel, who holds in the other
a box to receive the blood from its point. The *ipsissima verba* of the
*Longer Prose Perceval* are that of the Hallows there are "right great
plenty." Perceval's shield had in the boss thereof some of the Blood of
our Lord and a piece of His garment; they were placed therein by Joseph
of Arimathæa. As regards the Lance itself, the point

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

bleeds into the Holy Graal, and here also the weapon is one of
vengeance, or rather of doom, for he who is elected to the Quest has
something to perform in respect of it, and he fails therein. This
notwithstanding, the Hallow in the romance under notice serves little
purpose, because it does nothing. For, the sake of completeness the
Lesser Hallows of the German cycle may be mentioned with great brevity
in this section, though their history and import must be held over for a
very long time to come. In the *Parsifal* of Wolfram, the ensanguined
head of a Lance is carried round a certain chamber; it has no connection
with the Passion, but once more it is a memorial of vengeance, of
fatality which is long and grievous. In Heinrich's *Diu Crône*, the
Lance is held by two young men, and it sheds three great drops of blood,
which are received in a salver. I should observe in conclusion, for the
time being, as to this Hallow that the French cycle may be classified in
three sections, of which *A* does not mention the Lance, *B* mentions
but does not explain its antecedents, and *C* says that it is the Lance
of Longinus used at the Crucifixion. Late or early, there is no other
history concerning it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § C.--The Broken Sword](hchg16.md)
