[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg90)  [Next](hchg92.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII

#### THE CONCLUSION OF THIS HOLY QUEST

And now, seeing that the end of all is upon the very threshold, that the
keepers of the paths of quest have sounded the horns for our retirement,
and that the hour has also struck when we must turn down the glass of
vision, it remains as a last duty to gather up certain threads which
have been left under a covenant to recur, and these in their turn
involve other considerations which must be treated shortly. The result
of necessity is an attempt to codify things which, for the most part,
are detached and even disjointed, yet some of them will be found to
overlap under any mode of grouping.

*Preliminary and General*.--Setting aside its sacramental part, the
literature, as literature, is Celtic in its elements and atmosphere; but
this is the body and the environment in which the spirit of the mystery
reposes. The Graal itself is in the root a reliquary legend. This legend
was taken over and connected with rumours of secret doctrine concerning
the Eucharist and the priesthood, being part of a tradition handed down
within the

<span id="page_669">p. 669</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Church, but
unconsciously to the Church at large. It passed into romance and
incorporated many folk-lore elements which seemed adaptable to its
purpose. They are naturally its hindrance. In the hands of the Northern
French writers, it got further away from the Celtic element as it drew
towards its term. We cannot therefore explain the French cycles and much
less the German Graal literature by means of the Celtic Church. The
secret doctrine reflected into the literature abode in a secret school.
Out of this school--but not in an official sense--there developed at
later periods spiritual alchemy, symbolical craft Masonry, certain
Rosicrucian institutions and certain Christian high grades of Masonic
complexion, as successive veils. It was a school of Christian mystics,
and it was Latin for a long time on its external side. It is of
necessity catholic at heart. The doctrine concerning it is that there
are High Princes of the Spirit whose experiences surpass not only those
of devout souls but of many of the great saints. Their time was not
"about half-an-hour," but an experience in perpetuity. The school said
that the way of the Church was the true way and not a good one only, but
also that the heights are still the heights. It comes about thus that
the message of the Secret Words and the Super-Apostolical Succession is
that until we enter the paths of sanctity and reach a defined term
therein, we have only the shadow of the real things; but that shadow is
a sacred reflection. On the surface the claim concerning them sounds
like a word written against the Church, but it is really a call to go
forward. Those who are satisfied with the literal sense of sacred things
are not defrauded thereby, but receive ministry therein. Yet the second
sense remains, which is brought from very far away, because it draws
from the sanctuary of the soul. Where there is no consciousness of this
sense, and of the deep implicits of doctrine, the Graal is said to be
removed, yet all things remain and are waiting to manifest. The mystery
which the school celebrated

<span id="page_670">p. 670</span>

corresponded, as I have said, to a Mass of the Beatific Vision. It is
obvious that this was celebrated by the Hermit in the *Book of the Holy
Graal*. He carried its signs on his person; but they were not the badge,
symbol, or token of an instituted Order. The prologue to this book is
the nearest that we are likely to get to the expressed side of the
mystery. The event in history which is parallel to the removal of the
Graal is the entrance of the spirit of the world into the instituted
House of Doctrine. The Mass of the Graal is recoverable, but it is
understood that it is celebrated only in the Secret Church and that
Church is within. When the priest enters the Sanctuary he returns into
himself by contemplation and approaches the altar which is within. He
says: *Introibo*. When he utters the words which are spirit and life,
the Lord Christ comes down and communicates to him in the heart; or,
alternatively, he is taken up into the Third Heaven and enjoys the
dilucid contemplation. But I do not put it in this way because I am
satisfied with the expression: only we must have some expression.

*The Veil of the Eucharist*.--It has been said that, as the supreme
mystery of the Christian Church, the Eucharist was the last ceremony of
initiation and constituted the final enlightenment of the neophyte. The
terms of expression may here be exaggerated, but those who were stewards
of the Christian Mystery had in many cases received the Mysteries of the
Gentiles and may have adapted some of their procedure. The rumour which
came into romance--and this in the natural manner that official religion
permeated romance everywhere--was a mystery of the Eucharist, and in the
minds of external piety it translated itself into memorials of the
Divine Body and the Precious Blood. It would be idle to suggest that any
higher school of religion was concerned with the veneration of relics.
The desire was to behold in the Eucharist that which the faithful
believed to repose in the Eucharist. Beyond the knowledge

<span id="page_671">p. 671</span>

of the outside world there is another knowledge, but it abides in
concealed sources which are outside all reach of the senses, and in
simple Eucharistic terms it is called the communication of Christ. In
the deeper speculation behind the *Epiclesis* clause, it is the Descent
of the Comforter within. The missing events and motives behind
Super-Apostolical Succession are the Great Event and the Divine Reason.
He who has performed the one rigorously scientific experiment and has
opened the Holy Place does go in and celebrate his Mass in virtue of a
warrant which is not necessarily that of the official priesthood, but it
does not set it aside or compete therewith. I say that this
interpretation remains *donec de medio fiat*, but it will not be taken
out of the way. Herein is the experiment which I believe to be performed
even now in the world, because the great mysteries of experience do not
die. I have found that the Graal romances in their proper
understanding--but chiefly because of their implicits--are a great
introduction to the whole great subject. They testify after many ways.
The Graal is a guide of the distressed in the Lesser Chronicles. They
represent that Mystery which is implied in the Hidden Voice of Christ
and of the Holy Spirit. Their Secret Words were words of power, because
that which rules above rules also below. As such the Lesser Chronicles
did not derive from Fécamp, which--like the Greater Chronicles--put
forward the wonder-side of transubstantiation. But the *Book of the Holy
Graal*, which cuts short the discourse between Christ and Joseph in the
tower and so suppresses all reference to the communication of Secret
Words, can derive no more than a reflection from this source, and even
that little may be, alternatively, drawn from general tradition. I
should state in this connection that the insufficiency of
transubstantiation is on the external side mainly; on the spiritual side
the arch-natural body is communicated to the human body and the Divine
Life to the human spiritual part. This is

<span id="page_672">p. 672</span>

the deeper aspect not only of the Blessed Sacrament but of the Bowl of
Plenty. Every text of the French cycles is confused and discounselled by
this extraneous element, for which reason I have called it foreign, for
example, to the *Romance of Lancelot*. I do not mean that the feeding
properties are never introduced therein, but that the writer was dubious
as to their proper place and ministry. The meats and the spicery now
follow the dove--as in the case of Lancelot's visit to the Castle and
that of Sir Bors--but now follow the Vessel--as in that of Gawain. The
*Longer Prose Perceval* hints, as we have seen, at a secret of the
sacrament which was held in utter reserve. It tells us by inference that
it was the revelation of Christ in His own person, behind which there is
another mystery. Only in the texts of transubstantiation do we find
these deep allusions. The *Conte del Graal* has not heard of them; the
*Didot Perceval* is aware of an undeclared mystery, but has no license
to speak; the German *Parsifal* has chiefly an office of concealed mercy
amidst suffering, and hereof is Heinrich a shadow. Yet all of them, in
their several manners, are haunted from far away: Joseph II. began in
priesthood and therein ends the Perceval of Manessier, as if he too
discerned that those who attained the Great Mystery were thereby
*Pontifices maximi*. I think also that the Fish in the Metrical Joseph
has curious sacramental intimations; it is the sign of spiritual
sustenance, of Christ's presence among His faithful, and hence of the
Eucharist. In the *Book of the Holy Graal* it only duplicates one part
of a canonical miracle. The master-key of the Mystery is most surely
provided by the *Quest of Galahad*, where, after the magical marriage of
High Art and Nature has taken place in transubstantiation, the questing
knight bows his head, utters his *consummatum est*, and is dissolved. I
conclude that the Christian and Graal Mystery of the Eucharist was a
veil which could at need be parted by warranted hands, and that behind
it there was then found the path which

<span id="page_673">p. 673</span>

leads to the Union. The knowledge of that path arose within the Church
but led behind it, the Church remaining the gate by which man enters
into salvation. The romance-literature of the Graal worked towards the
consciousness of the path, reaching its term in the last texts of quest.

*The French and German Percevals*.--The notion of an exalted hero is
given in the *Longer Prose Perceval*, but he does not attain the highest
vision, as Galahad does. The return of the Graal to the Castle after his
induction is only like the return of a Reliquary. By the evidence of the
text itself, he saw less than Arthur. Wolfram's *Parsifal* is indeed a
dream of Eden, for that which is likened to the glory of the celestial
height is truly of the supernal Paradise. It is to be
understood--without exhausting the subject--that the poet's religious
claim depends from the genealogy of the Stone, which is that whereby we
are enabled to make the best of both worlds through a participation in
the world which signifies in the absolute degree. I have said that
Wolfram, Chrétien and Heinrich are agreed over the most important of
their concerns, for the wonders of the Feeding Dish in the *Parsifal*
are only a gross exaggeration of miraculous sustenance by the Host. The
point which remains for our solution is after what manner did Wolfram
and his source draw from the Secret Tradition. The answer is that their
Graal is the Stone of Knowledge, and the hidden meaning behind the
non-removal of the Graal is the perpetuity of the Secret Tradition
somewhere in the world. The Mystic Question itself is only, and can be,
the search after knowledge. The Keeper is in travail therewith--he must
communicate, but he must be asked. The sense is that, in the order of
human prudence, the tradition is in danger of perishing, and the Keeper
must remain, like the Master of a Craft Lodge, till his successor is
appointed. The same idea may lie behind the *Questiones Druidicæ*, or
tests of proficiency which were put by the Druids to the Bards. The key

<span id="page_674">p. 674</span>

to the meaning of the Stone of Knowledge--that testimony of main
importance which we know to have existed in Guiot--is that the Graal was
written in the heavens and remains therein; for I do not doubt that the
stars tell the same story. In allegories of this kind the hindrance to
attainment inheres in its necessary conditions. The keeper in Heinrich
must press Gawain to drink, and the brother of the Rich Fisher must
persuade Perceval not to ask questions.

*Collectanea Mystica*.--(*a*) The Lesser Hallows.--The Lance renewed the
Graal in some of the legends, but the places of the Hallows are in
certain symbolical worlds which are known to the Secret Tradition. The
Dish, which, as I have said, signifies little in the romances, has, for
the above reason, aspects of importance in the Tarot. It was never
pretended in any Church legend that the Sacred Lance was in England. The
Sword of St. John the Baptist was not a relic of the Celtic or indeed of
another Church. The subsidiary Hallows of the Lesser Chronicles
therefore arrived later than the Graal in Britain, but we do not know
how or why. In the Greater Chronicles many sacred relics were displayed
at the ordination of Joseph II., and they were evidently brought over in
the Ark of the Graal. (*b*) The Implicits.--Those of the Graal Keepers
are of inheritance by genealogical legitimacy, in or out of marriage.
This is simply the succession of initiation. Masonry recites the order
in the same manner with the same kind of variations. There are three
keepers in the Lesser Chronicles, and there are three archetypal Craft
Lodges. There are nine keepers in the Greater Chronicles and there are
nine Masonic Wardens who preserved the Secret Tradition. (2) Merlin is
the sorcery of the sensitive life, which--because of its mixed
nature--is of the serpent on one side and of Eve on the other, who is a
virgin. The admixture makes therefore for righteousness, and the true
son, after having been nurtured therein, is called out of its Egypt; but
it makes also for delusion,

<span id="page_675">p. 675</span>

and when the spirit of the world intervenes all is withdrawn. (3) Moses
is the intrusion of heretical Christianity into the Holy Place on the
ground that it has the signs. His redemption is promised, but this does
not take place, because it is found afterwards that "the end is
everywhere," and the Church itself is not spared. (4) As regards the
destruction of the Round Table, with all its chivalry and kinghood, I
must register, with some reluctance, that it seems to convey chiefly a
very simple and also obvious lesson, being that of the fatality of
trespass and the poison instilled into those who partake of the evil
fruit; but in so far as in some of the texts it appears predetermined by
Merlin, it is not accounted for so simply. I think that it may be left
at this point, because we have no criterion for distinction between the
enchanter's prophetic foresight and his formal intent. We should
remember, however, (5) that the meaning of the enchantments and
adventures is identified by the *Quest of Galahad* with the prevalence
of an evil time and forgetfulness of the great things. It was for much
the same reason that, according to the *Vulgate Merlin*, the Round Table
was removed to the Kingdom of Leodegan prior to the coming of Arthur.
(6) Sarras was the place of exit on the outward journey, and was thus
the point at which the holy things began to manifest in the world; but
it was this also on the return journey, when they issued forth *in
mysterium*. The transit westward is here of the soul outward. (7) It
must be admitted that the Lesser Chronicles are in some sense a failure:
they seem to hold up only an imperfect and a partial glass of vision.
But they are full testimony to the secrecy of the whole experiment; they
are also the most wonderful cycle by way of intimation. Their especial
key-phrase is my oft-quoted *exeunt in mysterium*. How profited the
Secret Words to the interned Perceval? It is the most ghostly of all
suggestions concerning that which is done in the heart.

*The Lost Book*.--I have said that Chrétien must have

<span id="page_676">p. 676</span>

followed some book which had strange materials. I do not mean that it
was an authorised text of Secret Tradition, but that there were many
rumours oral and written, and that this was one of the latter. The
speculation concerning it is like the warrant of the nine knights--that
is to say, we can speculate, but we cannot find out. The alleged
document which went before the tradition at large may have been the
rumour of the tradition itself. We have seen that the *Huth Merlin*
speaks of a *Book of the Sanctuary*, as of records continued
henceforward, like a Calendar of the Saints; but it is to be understood
that this is romance and not a dark allusion. If I must admit
speculation on my own part and suppose that there was any written legend
of the Graal per se in 1100, *vel circa*, I should say that this was a
Mass-Book and there is a hypothetical possibility of such a document;
but I do not think in my heart that it ever existed. If it did, I have
indicated that it was concerned with such a Mass as might have been
assumed to follow the Last Supper--when Christ gave Himself visibly, and
the priest served like the altar-boy. I conclude that, in or out of such
a text, the epochs of the literature are those of origin, manifestation
and removal in respect of the Graal. As to the first, it was part of the
mystery of the Incarnation; as to the second, there was a manifestation
intended, but it did not take place because the world was not worthy; so
the third epoch supervened, and the Graal was said to be removed. This
is the secret intention, exhibited but not declared.

*The Great Experiment*.--To those who have studied the secret
literatures with something of the spirit in themselves by which those
literatures are informed, it becomes a matter of assurance that the
signs of the Stewards of the Mysteries have never been wanting in the
world. The Masonic High Grades suggest that they became Christian, but
this is an error of expression: it was the Official Mysteries that
became Christian: the Stewards had always known that their Redeemer

<span id="page_677">p. 677</span>

liveth. Again, therefore, it is not surprising that a time came--and it
was in many ways a remarkable time--when the rumours passed into
romance. I speak here of the encompassing circle of wisdom which stands
round the Great Experiment and not of the things which lie too deep for
words. The memorials of that which has never been uttered because it is
entombed in manifestation are about us in all our ways, and for ever and
ever goes out the yearning of the heart in the presence of these silent
witnesses. The genius of romance drew all things from all quarters to
serve its purpose, and there is no question that the *Longer Prose
Perceval* and the *Quest of Galahad* incorporated some of this yearning;
but I refer more especially to the rumours of the Holy Threshold. In
this connection it is most important to understand that their makers
neither were nor could be the spokesmen of a secret school. They had
heard only, and it was but dimly that they grasped what they heard.
Otherwise, they would have scarcely put forward the arch-natural side of
relics. The office of minstrelsy and romance was to collect traditions,
to express the current motive and sentiment. They became the mirror of
their period and had therefore their religious side, which was
accentuated sometimes, as when abbeys like Fécamp kept a court of song
attached to them. A time came, however, when the consciousness of
express intention intervened; it is prominent in the Graal cycles, and
it accounts for the great process of editing, harmonising and
allegorising upon earlier texts. The normal limits of the horizon in
romance were not, however, broken up except by the latest quests. These
had also their restrictions, as I have tried to show previously, and the
complexity of their symbolic machinery has tempted me to add that
alchemy--sealed house of darkness as it is--seems in a manner more
simple. The vessel, the matter and the fire are the three which give
testimony therein on the physical side, and these are one on the
spiritual. Its literature had also restrictions, more

<span id="page_678">p. 678</span>

especially in its use of artificial language to conceal the real sense.
It is high commonplace to say that the device is justified when it is
dangerous to speak openly because the rulers of the Church or the world
are jealous, or when the things which exceed common understanding are
proscribed thereby. I say therefore that concealment is justified when
it is to hide the Secret of the King.

*The Inner House of Doctrine*.--I have promised to show whether there is
commerce or competition between the theory of the Great Experiment and
that of the Voided House, but I believe that it has been made clear
abundantly in much that has preceded. The position is indeed simple, for
the Great Experiment exists, but it is not remembered in the world at
large: it is in this sense that the House is made void. It may well be
that those who said it in romance had imagined an instituted House,
while those others who said in effect: "Lift up your eyes, for your
salvation is both there and here," were aware that the roots of the
House are not in this world. The explanation is that the location of the
Secret Church is in that ineffable region which lies, behind dogma, in
glorious sanctuaries. It is not a repository of relics, and the
reliquary is the husk only of the Holy Graal, which is a mystery of the
Eucharist in its essence and not a legend of the preservation of the
Precious Blood. The location of that Church and the places of the
Hallows therein will be understood by saying that it is entered
sometimes in an ecstasy through the eastern side of the plainest
external sanctuary. It may be thought that on the evidence of the
romances it is the Secret Church which itself is made void. But after
the departure of the Supreme Mystery, what remains is the official
Church. This does not mean that the Graal Castle or Temple signifies the
official Church during an age of perfection. It is the inward mystery of
doctrine. So long as it remained there, however hard of entrance, there
was a way in--as Pausanias tells us that there was a way into the Garden

<span id="page_679">p. 679</span>

of Venus. It died, however, in the consciousness except of a few
faithful witnesses who knew after what manner it was still and is ever
possible to lie, like St. John, on the breast of the Master.

The remembrance of the one thing needful is starred over all the secret
literatures. Their maxim is not so much that God encompasses as that God
is within; and in virtue hereof they could say in their hearts what they
said with their lips so often: *Absque nube pro nobis*. I affirm on the
authority of research and on other authority and on that which I have
seen of the Mysteries and on the high intimations which are communicated
to those who seek, that the Great Experiment subsists, that those exist
who have pursued it, and that behind the Secret Orders which are good
and just and holy, we discern many traces of the Veiled Masters. The
term of quest in those orders is the term of the Graal Quest, and the
sacraments of procedure are not otherwise therein. The path of the
instituted Mysteries, it should be understood, is in no sense the only
path, but it is one of the nearest, because the mind is trained therein,
firstly, in the sense of possibility, and, secondly, in the direction of
consciousness, so that it may be overflowed by the experience of the
experiment. It was carried on in the secret schools; but at this day the
great instituted Rites are like the Rich King Fisherman, either wounded
or in a condition of languishment, and it is either for the same
symbolic reason--namely, that few are prepared to come forward and ask
the required question--the equivalent of which is to beget Galahad on
the daughter of King Pelles--or the consciousness of the Great
Experiment has closed down upon the Wardens of the Rites and they stand
guard over its memorials only. It has been pursued also in the official
Churches, which are permanent witnesses to its root-matter in the world.
The two constitute together a great, holy, catholic and apostolic
Church, which is empowered to say: *Signatum est super nos lumen vultus
tui*. But seeing that it is more

<span id="page_680">p. 680</span>

than all *signatum*, we have to look in the deep places for its hidden
virtue. The key which we must take in our hands is that God is
everywhere and that He recompenses those who seek Him out. But we do not
look to find Him more especially in the Master's chair of a Craft Lodge
or the pulpit of a popular preacher, and hence those who are on the
quest of the Veiled Masters will do well to release themselves from the
notion of any corporate fellowship as a *sine quâ non*. I say now truly
and utterly that the Veiled Master is in the heart of each one of us and
the path to his throne is the path to the Secret Church. Some say that
the Pearl without Price is here, some that it is there, some that it has
been taken into hiding, and some that it is withdrawn into heaven; which
things are true and without let or hindrance of my own testimony;
wherefore I add that if any one can exclaim truly: *Nunc dimittis,
Domine, servum tuum secundum verbum tuum in pace*, it is, and this only,
*quoniam vidit oculus meus salutare tuum*, and he then also has seen the
Graal.

If I have not spoken my whole mind on certain aspects and memorials of
the Secret Tradition which do now repose in the instituted but veiled
sanctuaries, it is because I am conscious of several inherent
difficulties, and I remember many covenants. If, therefore, recognising
this, some voice in the cloud of listeners should intervene and say:
"But again, where are they--the Stewards?"--I should answer, as I could
answer only: "I have brought back from a long and long journey those few
typical memorials which I have interwoven in this book for the
encouragement of some of my kinship, that where I have been they may
enter also in their time--supposing that they are called in truth. If
they see at the end only the trail of the garments of some who elude
them at a distant angle of the vista, they may at least confess with me
that Titans have gone before and have cast their shadows behind. To
whatever such quest might lead in one case or another, be it understood,

<span id="page_681">p. 681</span>

and this clearly, that in assuming the legends of the Holy Graal as a
sacred and beautiful opportunity to speak of the Eucharist and other
divine things connected with and arising therefrom, I have put forward
no personal claim. If I have dwelt in the secret places it has not been
to return and testify that no others can enter; and I, least of all, am
the authorised spokesman of Stewards behind the veil. But that which it
has been given me to do, I have done faithfully, within the measure of
my knowledge: I have indicated the stages of reception, or the golden
links of the chain, from Christian High Grade, of Masonry to the Craft
Grades, from the Rosy Cross to the spiritual alchemists, and from these
to the Graal literature. Behind all this I should look assuredly to the
East, in the direction of that pure catholic gnosticism which lies like
a pearl of great price within the glistening shell of external
Christianity, which is not of Marcion or Valentinus, of Cerinthus and
all their cohorts, but is the unexpressed mystery of experience in deep
wells whence issues no strife of sects.

We know that in its higher grades the spirit of imagination moves
through a world not manifest, and this is the world of mystery; it is
that also in which many are initiated who are called but not chosen
utterly; yet it is that in which the epopt is at last enthroned--that
world in which the Graal Castle, Corbenic or Mont Salvatch, the most
holy temple and secret sanctuary, are attainable at any point, all
points being out of time and place. It is the world of Quest, which is
also the world of Attainment. There in fine, at the striking of a
certain mystic hour, that translation takes place in which the soul is
removed, with the Graal thereto belonging, and it is idle for any one to
say that it is shown henceforth so openly. It is there that the offices
of all the high degrees meet in the term of their unity, and the great
systems also, at which height we understand vitally what now we realise
intellectually--that the great translation of alchemy, the passage from

<span id="page_682">p. 682</span>

kingdom to crown in Kabalism, the journey through Hades to Elysium in
the Greek Mysteries and in Dante as their last spokesman, and lastly the
great *Quest of Galahad*, are the various aspects and symbolical
presentations of one subject.

At this stage of the interpretation I shall not need to point out that
in the final adjustments even the highest symbols are merely pretexts;
they are tokens, "lest we forget"; and this is for the same reason that
neither chalice nor paten really impart anything. They are among the
great conventions to which the soul confesses on the upward path of its
progress, but within their proper offices they are not to be set aside.
The explanation is less that they impart as that through them the high
graces communicate in proportion to the powers of reception. The soul
which has opened up the heights of the undeclared consciousness within
partakes as a great vessel of election, while another soul, which is
still under seals, may receive nothing.

Independently of corporate connections, the Mystic Quest is the highest
of all adventures, the mirror of all knighthood, all institutes of
chivalry. And this Quest is also that of the Graal, but written after
another manner. The makers of the mighty chronicles said more than they
knew that they were saying, but they knew in part and they saw through a
glass darkly. We are "full of sad and strange experience," though we
have not come to our rest, and for this reason we are in a better
position to understand the old books than when they were first drawn
into language. Better than they who wrote them in their far past do we
now know after what manner the highest things go forth into mystery; but
of the gate they knew and of the way also. Chivalry was a mystery of
idealism and the Graal a mystery of transfiguration, but when it was
removed from this world it was not any further away.

We have, on these considerations, and many others, every cause to be
thankful to those learned persons who

<span id="page_683">p. 683</span>

have gone before us, taking such lamps as they have been licensed to
carry; but in the last resource the term of learning is attained, after
which there is only the great light which can be made to enlighten every
man who comes into this world. It is that sun which shines in Mont
Salvatch, in Sarras, the spiritual city, and in the place of rest which
is Avalon. It exhibits the abiding necessity of the sacraments as well
as their suspension; it exhibits that priesthood which comes rather by
inward grace than by apostolical succession, albeit those who deny the
succession are usually far from the grace.

The monks sat in their cells and stalls and scriptoria during the great
adventurous times when the rumour of the Holy Graal moved through the
world of literature; they dreamed of a chivalry spiritualised and a
church of sanctity exalted: so came into being the *Longer Prose
Perceval*, the *Quest of Galahad* and the *Parsifal* of Wolfram. Whether
in the normal consciousness I know not or in the subconsciousness I know
not--God knoweth--that dream of theirs was of the super-concealed
sanctuary behind the known chancel and the visible altar. This is the
sense of all that which I understand concerning the traces of the Secret
Church in the Graal literature. As before, I am not speaking of formal
institutions, of esoteric brotherhoods, or incorporations of any kind;
it is a question of the direction of consciousness and of its growth in
that direction. A man does not leave the external church because he
enters into the spiritual Church; Ruysbroeck does not cease to say Mass
because he has been in those heights and across those seas of which we
hear in his *Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*. At the same time his
language is not exactly that of the official Church in its earliest or
latest encyclical; it is not like that of St. Irenæus writing against
heresies or Pius X. denouncing the spirit of modernism. It is something
the same as, if one may say it, in the brotherhood of Masonry. The craft
degrees are the whole summary of Masonry, but there

<span id="page_684">p. 684</span>

is a certain distinction between him who has taken these only and him
who has added thereto the eighteenth degree of Rose Croix, or the still
more exalted and now almost secret grade of Knights Beneficent of the
Holy City of Jerusalem. Yet the one is a Mason and the other is not more
than a Mason, but there are or at least there may be degrees of
consciousness in the Mysteries. So also the lay member of any one among
the official Churches whose instruction has scarcely exceeded the
catechisms of Christian doctrine is not--or need not be at least--less a
Christian than he who has studied *Summa*, but again there are degrees
of consciousness in the mystery of the faith.

Now the Secret Tradition in Christian times is the rumour of the Secret
Sanctuary, and this tradition has many voices. The voice of spiritual
alchemy, succeeding that of the Graal, is the voice of the Graal
literature under another veil, but it says that He is there; and after
its departure it is known and recorded that many earnest and holy
persons beheld the Vessel of Singular Devotion: yet there is something
wanting in the official sanctuaries. The voice of the Temple, reflected
in its later revival, says that He is risen and gone away. The voice of
Masonry says that the old Temple was not built according to the true and
original plan. The voice of the Rosy Cross says that in places withdrawn
He, being dead, yet testifies. The voice of St. John on Patmos says that
he was given a book to eat, and that in his mouth it was sweet but in
his belly it was bitter--because thenceforward he was in travail with
the Secret Doctrine. The witness of the Graal literature heard something
at a very great distance, and to decorate what they had heard the
artists of the literature gathered from the four quarters of romance and
legend and folk-lore. As such their reflection is a failure. The witness
of alchemical books chose a worse medium, but they made it serve their
purpose more expressly. The voice of Masonry created a great legend to
commemorate

<span id="page_685">p. 685</span>

an universal loss, and testified that the Quest would never end till the
speculative Masons found that which was once among them. The Voice of
the Rosy Cross said that, having found the body of the Master, the
brethren again closed the sepulchre and set their seals thereon, though
they also looked for a great resurrection. The voice of St. John
reflected the last message of the Master: "Behold, I come quickly." And
all Christendom has resounded since with the anthem: "Amen, even so,
come, Lord Jesus." The Hidden Voice of Christ is in the Secret
Literature, and I have therefore written this book as the text-book of a
Great Initiation. Meanwhile, the Churches are not made void, but they
are in widowhood and desolation, during which time our place is with
them, that we may offer them comfort in their sorrow, without being
deceived by their distractions. It is certain also that His reflections
abide with them. Chrétien may have drawn from an episodic romance of
adventure in the possession of the Count of Flanders. Master Blihis, the
great maker of fables, may have recited things, with or without
consequence, concerning *Sanctum Graal*. Neither these nor others that
could be mentioned are the books concerning the Secret Words of the
Eucharist or the text of Secret Ordination. The legends of Welsh saints
may tell us of Sacred Hosts coming down from heaven, but the *Epiclesis*
clause, if the Welsh had it, in their book of the Mass, is not the Lost
Word which we seek like the Mason. They may tell us also of holy
personages who were consecrated by Christ, and the fables may be famous
indeed, but they want the motive which fills the Greater Chronicles of
the Holy Graal with meaning and suggestions of meaning. Therefore I
still hear and listen with all my ears while the voices of many
traditions say the same things differently. The Holy Sepulchre is empty;
the Tomb of C. R. C. in the House of the Holy Spirit is sealed up; the
Word of Masonry is lost; the Zelator of alchemy now looks in vain for a
Master. The traditional book

<span id="page_686">p. 686</span>

of the Graal, by whatever name of convention we may choose to term
it--*Liber Gradalis* or *Sanctum Graal*--is not only as much lost as
that which was eaten by St. John, though it might not be so difficult to
conjecture the elements in the one as in the other case.

And now to make an end of these pleadings: I have chosen to give some
account of the Holy Graal as it was and as it is, that I could lead up
to what it might be, that is to say, how it could be realised in high
literature, because in other respects some things which might be in the
ideal order are those also which are--and God redeems the future as well
as the past. As regards therefore the true theory of this mystery, with
others of the mystic school, we may hope in the Lord continually, even
as one who believes that he will not be confounded unto eternity. Reason
has many palaces, but the sovereign peace rules in a single place.
Dilated in the mystery of cloud and moisture and moonlight, the Graal
appears even now, and that suddenly. It abides in the memory for those
who can live in its light, and it is elevated in the light for those who
can so keep it in the high spirit of recollection that it has become
their guide and their nourishment. For myself it is in virtue of many
related dedications that I have allocated a great experiment in
literature to a great consanguineous experiment in spiritual life. I
have not so much demonstrated the value of a pure hypothesis as
elucidated after what manner those who are concerned with the one
subject do from all points return triumphantly thereto. As a seeker
after the high mysteries, at this last I testify that whosoever shall in
any subject offer me daily bread, I will say to him: "But what of the
*Panis vivus et vitalis?* What of the supersubstantial bread?" And if
there be any one who deals therein, under what rules soever of any
houses of exchange, I will have him know that if he sells in the open
market, even I am a buyer. So therefore the author of this book gives
thanks that he has written concerning the romance-pageants and

<span id="page_687">p. 687</span>

sanctity as of the catholic and eternal secrets of religion. *Quod erat
demonstrandum:* it is written for those alone who in the silence of the
heart and in a sacred suspension of the senses have heard the voice of
the Graal.

In the great desolation of Logres I hear also--I hear and I hear--the
penitent Knight Lancelot singing his twelve-month Mass. So also till he
turns at the Altar saying: *Ite, Missa est*, because the King himself is
coming in the morning tide, I will respect all the findings of
scholarship concerning quests which are not of the Graal and Cups which
contain no sacrament, but I am on the quest of the Graal and, Master of
True Life, after all and all and all, it is not so far to Thee. And even
Gwalchmai saw it.

 

<span id="img_colophon"></span> ![The colophon of this book wishes
Godspeed to all whom it may concern on the Great
Quest](img/colophon.jpg.md)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I. The Texts](hchg92.md)
