[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg39)  [Next](hchg41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

# BOOK V

## THE GREATER CHRONICLES OF THE HOLY GRAAL

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

### THE ARGUMENT

I. THE BOOK OF THE HOLY GRAAL AND, IN THE FIRST PLACE, THE PROLOGUE
THERETO BELONGING.--*The claims and defects of the Text regarded
generally--The secret of this cycle--Its imputed authorship--Its
hypothetical divisions--The Hermit of the Legend--What he read and saw
at a Mass of the Presanctified--Disappearance of the Secret Book--The
Quest of its recovery--The time for the transcript thereof* II. A NEW
CONSIDERATION CONCERNING THE BRANCHES OF THE CHRONICLE AND CONCERNING
ITS MAJOR BRANCHES*.--Divergence of the extant manuscripts--The
incorporation of De Borron elements--The point at which their tradition
is broken, and this completely--The arrival at Sarras--Events which lead
up to the conversion of this city--The Spiritual Palace--The ordination
of Joseph II.--His later life--Of Evalach, the King of Sarras, who was
afterwards Mordrains--Of Queen Sarracinte--Of Seraphe, who was also
Nasciens--Of Celidoine, the son of Nasciens--The Ship of Solomon--The
Building of Corbenic.* III. THE MINOR BRANCHES OF THE CHRONICLE*.--The
Later History of Joseph of Arimathæa--The Life of Petrus in Britain--Of
Brons and Alain--Variations in the History of Moses--Of Simeon and his
Brethren--Concerning the first Galahad--The Genealogies--Conclusion as
to the Book of the Holy Graal.* IV. SOME LATER MERLIN LEGENDS*.--And
firstly as to the scope of these Texts--(A) The Vulgate Merlin--Its
Antecedents in* 

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *History--Merlin
as the chief promulgator of the Graal Mystery--The House of the Holy
Vessel--Of the second Nasciens and his history--King Pelles of
Lytenoys--The Maimed King--The Daughter of the House--A son of King
Pelles--Tidings of the Graal in Britain--(B) The Huth Merlin--Its false
ascription--Its consideration as a stately romance--The intention of the
story--Of secret records--The branches of the story--The Internment of
Merlin--Concerning the father of Perceval--The Institution of the Round
Table--The Vacant Seat--The Hidden Life of the Holy House--The Dolorous
Stroke--The Secret Powers of Avalon.* V. THE GREAT PROSE LANCELOT*.--The
antecedents of the story--An undeclared Mystery of the Graal--Of
Perceval in the Great Quest--Particular Graal traditions--Missing
elements of Quest--The Genealogy of i Lancelot--His life in Faerie--Of
Moses and Simeon--Of Gawain at Castle Corbenic--Of Lancelot and the Lady
of the Bath--Helayne, the Maiden of the Graal--The conception of
Galahad.* VI. A PREFACE OR INTRODUCTORY PORTION APPERTAINING TO ALL THE
QUESTS*.--Claims of the questing Knights--And further concerning
Gawain--A pentagram of chivalry--The Mystery of Divine Providence
manifested in a flesh.* VII. THE LONGER PROSE PERCEVAL*.--Its imputed
antecedents--The initial point which constitutes a departure from
tradition--After what manner the departure is perpetuated throughout--Of
pageants abroad in the land--The Earthly Paradise--The state of King
Arthur--Of Gawain's visit to the Graal--And that of Lancelot The death
of Guinevere--Visions of the King--The King of Castle Mortal--The death
of King Fisherman--The a capture of the Graal Castle--The removal of the
Hallows--The siege and victory by Perceval--The reign of the last
Keeper--The distribution of the Hallows--The departure* 

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

*of Perceval.* VIII. THE QUEST OF THE HIGH PRINCE*.--Of the generation
of Galahad--Of some things which followed thereafter--The circumstances
of his first manifestation--Its mystic environment--Of the Eucharist in
the Quest--Of arch-natural feasting--The Quest in brief outline--The
liberation of Simeon--The release of King Mordrains--The voyage in the
Ship of Solomon--The term of Quest at Corbenic--The Mystery
unveiled--The Ascent of Galahad--The doom of earthly Knighthood.* IX.
THE WELSH QUEST*.--The position of this version--Its variations in
summary--Wanderings of the Graal--The Dolorous Stroke--Specifics of the
last scene--Additamenta to the Greater Chronicles*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Book of the Holy Graal and, in the First Place, the
Prologue Thereto Belonging](hchg41.md)
