[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg72)  [Next](hchg74.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

### II

#### SOME ALLEGED SECRET SCHOOLS OF THE MIDDLE AGES

Perhaps no Christian sect has been the subject of more foolish
misapprehension than the Albigenses, and this on all sides, but more
especially on the part of writers who represent the borderland of mystic
thought. Against the iniquity of Albigensian persecution in the past, we
have later the folly, not unmixed with dishonesty, of the Protestant
apologists; but worse perhaps than the rest is that folly which has
attempted to connect the sect and its exponents in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries with the literature of the Holy Graal. The initial
impulse in this direction is found in speculations, criticisms and modes
of interpretation with which France made us familiar about the middle of
the nineteenth century, and this leading has been followed by a few
writers in England who scarcely know their subject, and offer
reflections of opinion which has risen up in obscure and unaccepted
places. For the purpose of this investigation I care nothing whether the
Albigenses were pure Christians, as pure Christianity is understood
according to sectarian canons, or whether they were Manichæans. The
all-important question is the light under which they presented
Eucharistic doctrine, and from this standpoint it is certain that they
could have had no connection with the development of the Graal cycle. If
they were Manichæans, they had a voided and tinkered Eucharist, from
which nothing follows in connection with that mystery. If, on the other
hand, they were the Protestants of their period, they would as such deny
most of the sacraments, and in respect of doctrine, at least, they would
have tampered doubtless with the Eucharist. Setting aside for a moment
some

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> French
speculations which have nothing to tell us regarding Albigensian
teachings, and deal only, as we shall see later, with a particular
construction of a great body of romantic literature, it may be said--and
is necessary to note in order to clear the issues--that the Protestant
standpoint in all matters of this kind has been naturally one of
opposition to the Latin Church, and to the Church theory that the
Albigensians, including the Paulicians, who were their predecessors,
were Manichæans, while the connected sect of Waldenses, or disciples of
Peter Valdo, were originally Donatists. With these questions in
themselves we have no concern, nor yet with the old egregious contention
that there was a line of succession in perpetuity from Apostolic times
through the Waldensians. There is no reason to suppose that the
hypothesis was true, and it matters little if it was. I place in the
same category one not less preposterous supposition--that the Vaudois
had been located in the Cottian Alps since the times of the Apostles,
and that their system had never varied from the tenets and practices of
primitive Christianity. It is not of necessity a seal or mark of favour
if these facts are undoubted; actually, they are questionable enough,
like the apologetical *pièce de résistance* which accounts for the
smallness of the Vaudois community by inferring from the Apocalypse that
the Church during a certain disastrous period would be reduced within
very narrow limits, and that for this reason--among reasons not less
logical--Vaudois, Waldenses and Albigenses constituted during such
period the sole and truly Catholic Church. If majorities are usually in
the wrong, it is not less true that some minorities are foolish and wild
in their notions, as expressed by those who are their mouthpiece.
Another contention connects the so-called Waldensian Church with the
Church Primitive through the Albigenses, and if the last sect had really
the Paulicians for their ancestors they date back to a considerable
antiquity, while, as regards distribution, it is said that the earlier

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

heresy had its conventicles established all the way from Thrace to
Gascony. They came from the East originally, or this is their legend,
but their traces have disappeared, supposing that the story is true
outside the imagination of apologists. However this may be, the
Paulicians, so far as history is concerned, arose in Armenia, where they
were founded by one Constantine about the middle of the seventh century.
They were mixed up with the Milesians, who made common cause with
Constantine, but they were proscribed by the Emperors of Byzantium and
the heretic was himself put to death. The same Paulicians have been
identified with the Cathari, and these are said to have been in union
with the Waldenses, whose first stronghold was among the Alpine valleys
of Piedmont. On the other hand, the Paterins, whose chain of
dissemination is affirmed to have extended from Bulgaria through
Lombardy to the Atlantic, have been represented as a variety of the
Albigensian sect, if not identical therewith. These views constitute a
cloud upon the dubious sanctuary, in respect of its origin. Other
accounts say that they appeared in Italy during the first years of the
eleventh century, with which may be compared the counter-suggestion that
their most probable founder was Peter of Lyons more than a hundred years
later. Persecution may well have joined distinct elements of sect till
they became merged in one another; it caused them also to move, like the
Graal, westward, and thus they entered Southern France, where those who
had pre-existed under more than one name received the title of
Albigenses--as it is thought, from their headquarters at Albi. Here also
they fell under proscription, and because at that period men
believed--and never more strongly--that they were doing God's work by
annihilating those who worshipped Him under another code of doctrine, we
learn of St. Dominic fighting the heresy with other weapons than the
Sword of the Spirit--in the belief that there also might be either the
Word of God, or its convenient

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

substitute. This was under Innocent III., who proclaimed the first
crusade against the Albigenses, its leader being Simon, Count of
Montfort. The crusade began about 1213, and Folquet--the troubadour
Bishop of Marseilles--was one of its most violent partisans. It was in
the course of this villainous business that the Castle of Montseques--or
Mont Ségur--which a few zealous, indiscriminating minds have sought to
identify with Mont Salvatch--was stormed and burnt with many of the
Perfect Brethren, including the Lady Esclairmonde. So do official
churches illustrate their construction of the mystic paradox concerning
the Prince of Peace, who came with a sword. That the gates of hell do
not prevail against the true Church seems without prejudice to the
counter-fact that there are times and seasons when perdition itself
rises up, as one might say, in the external sanctuary itself, and God
knows that if ever there was a period when the mystery of all iniquity
came from the deeps in its power, the time was the thirteenth century,
and the places were Provence and Languedoc.

If we set aside every thesis of apologists, it is possible to obtain
from documents a certain first-hand impression concerning Albigensian
beliefs. On the basis of their own confessions they denied Manichæan
connections and principles, claiming to follow primitive Christian
teaching as they constructed it from the New Testament or certain parts
thereof, since it does not appear that they accepted all the epistles.
It is possible, however, that their real views were concealed even in
their confessions, and though to us the question does not signify in
either alternative, it is out of this view that the counter-hypothesis
arises, which is that of the accusing voice testifying in the church
that destroyed them. A Dominican missionary and inquisitor, who
recounted, in a poem which has survived, his controversy with an
Albigensian theologian, accuses the sect (1) of denying baptism and
regarding Satan as the creator of this world;

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (2) of rejecting
confession and teaching that those who had sons and daughters were
outside the pale of salvation; (3) of claiming inspiration from the Holy
Spirit and making a traffic therein amongst its disciples; (4) of
denying the resurrection and affirming that the souls of the redeemed
would assume a new body, having a certain resemblance to the old and yet
differing therefrom; and in fine (5) of maintaining that the souls of
men are those of lost angels--the difficulty about this, in the mind of
the Dominican, being apparently that we have no recollection of our
past. The importance of this text is that although it embodies
accusations included in the proscription of the sect it may also have
reflected current fluidic opinions in orthodox circles at the period.
Other accusations affirm (*a*) that the Baptism which was recognised by
the Albigenses was that of Fire or of the Spirit, recalling the
mysterious office of the Paraclete which is often a subject of reference
in the Graal literature; (*b*) that the wandering preachers of the sect
distributed nourishment for the body as well as the Bread of
Angels--here recalling the twofold ministry of the Graal; (*c*) that
they rejected the books of Moses; (*d*) that they regarded this
sublunary world as the only hell; (*e*) that their subsurface working
was that of a new and secret priesthood which was to dispossess and
succeed the papal hierarchy, as if here also there was a special
succession from the apostles having kinship with the super-apostolical
succession of the Graal priesthood.

Such fantastic analogies notwithstanding, it is clear that the sects of
Southern France--as presented by either hypothesis--offer nothing to our
purpose. From eclectic Gnosticism, which took over from Christianity
that which coincided with its purpose, to Vaudois and Lollards, there is
not one which sought to develop or exalt the sacramental teaching of the
ancient Church. I know that, on the authority of Origen, the Marcionites
taught the communication to the soul of man of a

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Divine and
Sanctifying Spirit added by the Redeemer, Who imparted it in the
Eucharist, and if this meant the descent of the Paraclete, the
perpetuation of such a doctrine might help us to understand why the
Voice of the Graal was that of the Holy Ghost and yet in some mysterious
way was that also of Christ. But of such perpetuation there is no trace
whatever. As regards the Albigenses, it is certain historically that
they denied transubstantiation, though they accepted some qualified
sacramental teaching concerning the Lord's Supper, which they
commemorated in the woods and forests on a cloth spread upon the ground.
It is worse than idle to suppose that they had any connection with the
Graal cycle, and this would remain substantially true if, by a wild
supposition, we elected to suppose that Guiot, with his Provençal
connections, was a member of their sect, and--going still further--if we
suggested that his poem conveyed, after some hidden manner, a part of
Albigensian teaching. That it did nothing of the kind is clear on the
evidence of Wolfram. The poem is lost, or at least withdrawn for a
period, like the Graal itself, and though we cannot speak certainly on
most matters which concern it, on this one matter there does not seem
room for doubt.

For the rest, the Albigenses were a sect without a literature, except in
so far as that of the Troubadours at the period may have been--and this
is likely enough--an occasional spokesman among them. Contemporary
chroniclers estimated that all the principal minstrels, except two, were
on the side of the sect; these exceptions were Izarn and Fulke. The
conquest of Toulouse extinguished the literature and even the language
of Southern France, as also its chivalry.

I should now be justified in regarding the whole matter as determined in
the negative sense, but a word must be said to dispose of that other
claim to which I adverted at the beginning. It took, as I have hinted,
all chivalrous romance for its province, and it claimed to

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

have demonstrated that a vast European literature had been written by
Albigenses for the edification of Albigenses and to put forth in a
veiled manner Albigensian doctrine. There are certain precursors who do
not prepare the way, but they open up issues which end either in a *cul
de sac* or take the seeker through by-paths which can be followed
interminably without leading to a true goal. The author of this
demonstration was E. Aroux, who published in 1858 the *Mysteries of
Chivalry and of Platonic Love in the Middle Ages*. Its inspiration in
chief was derived from Gabriele Rossetti and particularly from the
*Antipapal Spirit which preceded the Reformation*. Both works have
exercised an influence on certain schools of occult thought in England;
but Rossetti does not speak of the Graal, and hence there is no call
that here I should speak of him. The monument of M. Aroux was preceded
by other of his works designed to show that Dante was (*a*) heretical,
revolutionary and socialistic; (*b*) connected with an alleged fusion
between the Albigenses, Templars and Ghibellines for the creation of
Freemasonry; (*c*) himself so far implicated in Freemasonry that the
*Divine Comedy* is really Masonic in its purpose. In further support of
these views Aroux had translated the whole *Commedia* into literal
French verse and had commented on it "according to the spirit." Finally,
he had instituted comparisons between Dante and the writers of the Graal
cycle. It thus came about that the products of this cycle were included
by his general ingarnering, but he shows little familiarity with his
subject, and he wrote at a period when the literature was still
practically unprinted. He affirms, absurdly enough, that the Holy Graal
was a mysterious association and that the mission of its initiates was
"to recover the vessel of truth with luminous characters wherein was
received the Precious Blood of the Saviour." According to his peculiar
canon of criticism this signified the design of " leading back the
Christian Church to

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

apostolic times and the faithful observation of the Gospel precepts." M.
Aroux wrote as a defender of the Roman Church, and, after all that has
been said and done upon the whole subject, it has not occurred to any
one--perhaps least of all to him--that the true mission of the Church
may have been to get away from apostolic times and to put aside, like
St. Paul, in its maturity the things which belong to the child. For the
rest, M. Aroux confused in a grotesque manner the Graal knights with
those of the Round Table, and appeared to suppose that the *Parsifal*
and *Titurel* are representative of the entire literature.

As regards chivalry, his thesis can be stated shortly: The actual,
historical, feudal chivalry was an institution more or less savage, and
the chivalry set forth in the romances had no existence on earth. This
is equivalent to saying that the heroes and heroines of Mrs. Radcliffe,
the modes and manners which she depicts, the spirit which characterises
her episodes, perhaps even the scenes which she describes so graphically
at hearsay, are never found in real life, though sentimentalism is
always sentimentalism, mountains are always mountains, and as regards
the Pyrenees in particular they are situated indubitably between France
and Spain. The thing goes without saying in each case, for the romance,
one would say, is--well, precisely a romance. But on the basis of this
transparent fact, M. Aroux builds his theory that the books of chivalry
were the *corpus doctrinale* and literary body-politic of the
Protestantism of its period, reduced to this resource because of the
intolerant powers that were. And this is just what appears to be so
highly ridiculous, not because a literature cannot have concealed
motives, or that of the Graal among them, but because it could be shown
in a still more conclusive manner that the *Confessional of the Black
Penitents* was the final rescript of the followers of Manes. And this
seems to be intolerable.

Speaking generally as to the canon of criticism, it is

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

in all respects like that of the late Mrs. Henry Pott in the Bacon and
Shakespeare controversy: he, as she, proves far too much for his own
credit. If the canons of Mrs. Pott demonstrate that Bacon was the
concealed author of the disputed plays, then the same canons show that
he must have written the works of Marlowe, Massinger, Ford, and nearly
all Elizabethan literature. In the same way, the evidences adduced by M.
Aroux are either insufficient to prove his point, or alternatively a
similar scheme has given us the *Nights* of Straparola, the *Nibelungen
Sagas*, the *Romance of the Rose*, and the entire literature of the
Troubadours, to say nothing of the Welsh *Mabinogion*, *Reynard the
Fox*, and things innumerable of the German Minnesingers. This is indeed
the express thesis of M. Aroux, and the only reason that he omitted the
Latin literature of alchemy is because he had not come across it. There
is no need to outline the nature of his evidences, but, to speak
generally concerning it, the same canons might be applied with the same
success to Mrs. Radcliffe's *Romance of the Forest* and to the
*Mysteries of Udolpho*. The principle, in other words, repeats itself.

I should not have dealt with these fantastic matters except for the
interest which they once raised in schools which draw from my own and
because in the last resource they are an attempt, after their own
manner, to show the hand of supposed secret schools in the development
of the Graal literature. I now conclude as follows: (*a*) That the
chivalry of all the romances was an ideal conception, corresponding as
much and as little to the subject-matter of any other cycle of romance;
and (*b*) that the historical chivalry of the period corresponded to the
idea which we obtain of the period by reading old chronicles, like those
of Froissart. For the rest, M. Aroux's canon of interpretation is simple
exceedingly: (*a*) any heroine of the romances signifies the Albigensian
pseudo-church; (*b*) any hero signifies one of its apostles or teachers;
(*c*) the enemies of both are the dominant,

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

opposing Church; (*d*) the Holy Vase of the Graal is its divine and
hidden doctrine. I can imagine, in byways of literature, the stories of
Captain Macheath, Claude Duval and Richard Turpin interpreted along
analogous lines--for example, as the records of a secret attempt to
re-establish the Roman hierarchy in England.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Latin Literature of Alchemy and the Hermetic Secret in
the Light of the Eucharistic Mystery](hchg74.md)
